{"id": "28198", "revid": "40428319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28198", "title": "Surfing", "text": "Sport of riding waves\nSurfing is a surface water sport in which an individual, a surfer (or two in tandem surfing), uses a board to ride on the forward section, or face, of a moving wave of water, which usually carries the surfer towards the shore. Waves suitable for surfing are primarily found on ocean shores, but can also be found as standing waves in the open ocean, in lakes, in rivers in the form of a tidal bore, or wave pools.\nSurfing includes all forms of wave-riding using a board, regardless of the stance. There are several types of boards. The Moche of Peru would often surf on reed craft, while the native peoples of the Pacific surfed waves on alaia, paipo, and other such watercraft. Ancient cultures often surfed on their belly and knees, while modern-day surfing is most often \"stand-up surfing\", in which a surfer rides a wave while standing on a surfboard.\nAnother prominent form of surfing is body boarding, where a surfer rides the wave on a bodyboard, either lying on their belly, drop knee (one foot and one knee on the board), or sometimes even standing up on a body board. Other types of surfing include knee boarding, surf matting (riding inflatable mats) and using foils. Body surfing, in which the wave is caught and ridden using the surfer's own body rather than a board, is very common and is considered by some surfers to be the purest form of surfing. The closest form of body surfing using a board is a handboard which normally has one strap over it to fit on one hand. Surfers who body board, body surf, or handboard feel more drag as they move through the water than stand up surfers do. This holds body surfers into a more turbulent part of the wave (often completely submerged by whitewater). In contrast, surfers who instead ride a hydrofoil feel substantially less drag and may ride unbroken waves in the open ocean.\nThree major subdivisions within stand-up surfing are stand-up paddling, long boarding and short boarding with several major differences including the board design and length, the riding style and the kind of wave that is ridden.\nIn tow-in surfing (most often, but not exclusively, associated with big wave surfing), a motorized water vehicle such as a personal watercraft, tows the surfer into the wave front, helping the surfer match a large wave's speed, which is generally a higher speed than a self-propelled surfer can produce. Surfing-related sports such as paddle boarding and sea kayaking that are self-propelled by hand paddles do not require waves, and other derivative sports such as kite surfing and windsurfing rely primarily on wind for power, yet all of these platforms may also be used to ride waves. Recently with the use of V-drive boats, wakesurfing, in which one surfs on the wake of a boat, has emerged. As of 2023, the \"Guinness Book of World Records\" recognized a wave ride by Sebastian Steudtner in Nazar\u00e9, Portugal, as the largest wave ever surfed.\nDuring the winter season in the northern hemisphere, the North Shore of Oahu, the third-largest island of Hawaii, is known for having some of the best waves in the world. Surfers from around the world flock to breaks like Backdoor, Waimea Bay, and Pipeline. However, there are still many popular surf spots around the world: Teahupo'o, located off the coast of Tahiti; Mavericks, California, United States; Cloudbreak, Tavarua Island, Fiji; Superbank, Gold Coast, Australia.\nIn 2016, surfing was added by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) as an Olympic sport to begin at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Japan.\nThe first gold medalists of the Tokyo 2020 surfing men and women's competitions were, respectively, the Brazilian \u00cdtalo Ferreira and the American from Hawaii, Carissa Moore.\nOrigins and history.\nPeru.\nAbout three to five thousand years ago, cultures in ancient Peru fished in kayak-like watercraft (\"mochica\") made of reeds that the fishermen surfed back to shore. The Moche culture used the caballito de totora (little horse of totora), with archaeological evidence showing its use around 200 CE. An early description of the Inca surfing in Callao was documented by Jesuit missionary Jos\u00e9 de Acosta in his 1590 publication \"Historia natural y moral de las Indias\", writing:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is true to see them go fishing in Callao de Lima, was for me a thing of great recreation, because there were many and each one in a \"balsilla caballero\", or sitting stubbornly cutting the waves of the sea, which is rough where they fish, they looked like the Tritons, or Neptunes, who paint upon the water.\nPolynesia.\nIn Polynesian culture, surfing was an important activity. Modern surfing as we know it today is thought to have originated in Hawaii. The history of surfing dates to c.\u2009AD 400 in Polynesia, where Polynesians began to make their way to the Hawaiian Islands from Tahiti and the Marquesas Islands. They brought many of their customs with them including playing in the surf on Paipo (belly/body) boards. It was in Hawaii that the art of standing and surfing upright on boards was invented.\nVarious European explorers witnessed surfing in Polynesia. Surfing may have been observed by British explorers at Tahiti in 1767. Samuel Wallis and the crew members of were the first Britons to visit the island in June of that year. Another candidate is the botanist Joseph Banks who was part of the first voyage of James Cook on , arriving on Tahiti on 10 April 1769. Lieutenant James King was the first person to write about the art of surfing on Hawaii, when he was completing the journals of Captain James Cook (upon Cook's death in 1779).\nIn Herman Melville's 1849 novel \"Mardi\", based on his experiences in Polynesia earlier that decade, the narrator describes the \"Rare Sport at Ohonoo\" (title of chap. 90): \"For this sport, a surf-board is indispensable: some five feet in length; the width of a man's body; convex on both sides; highly polished; and rounded at the ends. It is held in high estimation; invariably oiled after use; and hung up conspicuously in the dwelling of the owner.\" When Mark Twain visited Hawaii in 1866 he wrote, \"In one place, we came upon a large company of naked natives of both sexes and all ages, amusing themselves with the national pastime of surf-bathing.\"\nReferences to surf riding on planks and single canoe hulls are also verified for pre-contact Samoa, where surfing was called \"fa'ase'e\" or \"se'egalu\" (see Augustin Kr\u00e4mer, \"The Samoa Islands\"), and Tonga, far pre-dating the practice of surfing by Hawaiians and eastern Polynesians by over a thousand years.\nWest Africa.\nWest Africans (e.g., Ghana, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Senegal) and western Central Africans (e.g., Cameroon) independently developed the skill of surfing. Amid the 1640s CE, Michael Hemmersam provided an account of surfing in the Gold Coast: \u201cthe parents \u2018tie their children to boards and throw them into the water.\u2019\u201d In 1679 CE, Barbot provided an account of surfing among Elmina children in Ghana: \u201cchildren at Elmina learned \u201cto swim, on bits of boards, or small bundles of rushes, fasten\u2019d under their stomachs, which is a good diversion to the spectators.\u201d James Alexander provided an account of surfing in Accra, Ghana in 1834 CE: \u201cFrom the beach, meanwhile, might be seen boys swimming into the sea, with light boards under their stomachs. They waited for a surf; and came rolling like a cloud on top of it. But I was told that sharks occasionally dart in behind the rocks and \u2018yam\u2019 them.\u201d Thomas Hutchinson provided an account of surfing in southern Cameroon in 1861: \u201cFishermen rode small dugouts \u2018no more than six feet in length, fourteen to sixteen inches in width, and from four to six inches in depth.\u2019\u201d\nCalifornia.\nIn July 1885, three teenage Hawaiian princes took a break from their boarding school, St. Matthew's Hall in San Mateo, and came to cool off in Santa Cruz, California. There, David Kaw\u0101nanakoa, Edward Keli\u02bbiahonui and Jonah K\u016bhi\u014d Kalaniana\u02bbole surfed the mouth of the San Lorenzo River on custom-shaped redwood boards, according to surf historians Kim Stoner and Geoff Dunn. In 1890, the pioneer in agricultural education John Wrightson reputedly became the first British surfer when instructed by two Hawaiian students at his college.\nGeorge Freeth (1883\u20131919), American with English and Native Hawaiian descent, is generally credited as the person who had done more than anyone else to renew interest in surfing at Waikiki in the early twentieth century after the sport had declined in popularity in Hawaii during the latter half of the nineteenth century.\nIn 1907, the eclectic interests of land developer Abbot Kinney (founder of Venice of America, now Venice, California) helped bring Freeth to California. Freeth had sought the help of the Hawaii Promotion Committee (HPC) in Honolulu to sponsor him on a trip to California to give surfing exhibitions. The HPC arranged through their contacts in Los Angeles to secure a contract for Freeth to perform at Venice of America in July, 1907. Later that year, land baron Henry E. Huntington brought surfing to Redondo Beach. Looking for a way to entice visitors to his own budding resort community south of Venice where he had heavily invested in real estate, he hired Freeth as a lifeguard and to give surfing exhibitions in front of the Hotel Redondo. Another native Hawaiian, Duke Kahanamoku, spread surfing to both the U.S. and Australia, riding the waves after displaying the swimming prowess that won him Olympic gold medals in 1912 and 1920.\nMary Ann Hawkins, inspired by Duke Kahanamoku's surfing during the late 1920s, developed a lifelong passion for surfing. In 1935, her family relocated to Santa Monica, providing her with opportunities to further immerse herself in surfing and paddleboarding. On September 12, 1936, Hawkins achieved a historic milestone by winning California\u2019s first women\u2019s paddleboard race at the Santa Monica Breakwater. She continued to dominate the sport, winning numerous competitions, including the women\u2019s half-mile paddleboard race and the Venice Breakwater event in 1938, which were held on the same day.\nHawkins was also a pioneer in tandem surfing, a discipline that highlights synchronized surfing between two individuals on a single board. She gained further recognition in 1939 when she performed exhibition paddleboarding and tandem surfing displays at various Southern California beaches, inspiring a new generation of women surfers. \nIn January 1939, Hawkins was appointed head of the women\u2019s auxiliary group of the Santa Monica Paddle Club and rose to vice president by January 1940. Her surfing peers frequently lauded her achievements, with \"Whitey\" Harrison describing her as \"the best tandem rider.\" Throughout her career, Hawkins exemplified grace and athleticism, leaving an indelible mark on the history of women\u2019s surfing and paddleboarding.\nIn 1975, a professional tour started. That year Margo Oberg became the first female professional surfer.\nSurf waves.\nSwell is generated when the wind blows consistently over a large space of open water, called the wind's fetch. The size of a swell is determined by the strength of the wind, and the length of its fetch and duration. Because of these factors, the surf tends to be larger and more prevalent on coastlines exposed to large expanses of ocean traversed by intense low pressure systems.\nLocal wind conditions affect wave quality since the surface of a wave can become choppy in blustery conditions. Ideal conditions include a light to moderate \"offshore\" wind, because it blows into the front of the wave, making it a \"barrel\" or \"tube\" wave. Waves are left-handed and right-handed depending upon the breaking formation of the wave.\nWaves are generally recognized by the surfaces over which they break. For example, there are beach breaks, reef breaks and point breaks.\nThe most important influence on wave shape is the topography of the seabed directly behind and immediately beneath the breaking wave. Each break is different since each location's underwater topography is unique. At beach breaks, sandbanks change shape from week to week. Surf forecasting is aided by advances in information technology. Mathematical modeling graphically depicts the size and direction of swells around the globe.\nSwell regularity varies across the globe and throughout the year. During winter, heavy swells are generated in the mid-latitudes, when the North and South polar fronts shift toward the Equator. The predominantly Westerly winds generate swells that advance Eastward, so waves tend to be largest on West coasts during winter months. However, an endless train of mid-latitude cyclones cause the isobars to become undulated, redirecting swells at regular intervals toward the tropics.\nEast coasts also receive heavy winter swells when low-pressure cells form in the sub-tropics, where slow moving highs inhibit their movement. These lows produce a shorter fetch than polar fronts, however, they can still generate heavy swells since their slower movement increases the duration of a particular wind direction. The variables of fetch and duration both influence how long wind acts over a wave as it travels since a wave reaching the end of a fetch behaves as if the wind died.\nDuring summer, heavy swells are generated when cyclones form in the tropics. Tropical cyclones form over warm seas, so their occurrence is influenced by El Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1a cycles. Their movements are unpredictable.\nSurf travel and some surf camps offer surfers access to remote, tropical locations, where tradewinds ensure offshore conditions. Since winter swells are generated by mid-latitude cyclones, their regularity coincides with the passage of these lows. Swells arrive in pulses, each lasting for a couple of days, with a few days between each swell.\nThe availability of free model data from the NOAA has allowed the creation of several surf forecasting websites.\nTube shape and speed.\nTube shape is defined by length to width ratio. A perfectly cylindrical vortex has a ratio of 1:1. Other forms include:\n\"Peel\" or \"peeling off\" as a descriptive term for the quality of a break has been defined as \"a fast, clean, evenly falling curl line, perfect for surfing, and usually found at pointbreaks.\"\nTube speed is the rate of advance of the break along the length of the wave, and is the speed at which the surfer must move along the wave to keep up with the advance of the tube. \nTube speed can be described using the peel angle and wave celerity. Peel angle is the angle between the wave front and the horizontal projection of the point of break over time, which in a regular break is most easily represented by the line of white water left after the break. A break that closes out, or breaks all at once along its length, leaves white water parallel to the wave front, and has a peel angle of 0\u00b0. This is unsurfable as it would require infinite speed to progress along the face fast enough to keep up with the break. A break which advances along the wave face more slowly will leave a line of new white water at an angle to the line of the wave face.\nformula_1\nWhere:\nformula_2velocity of surfer along the wave face\nformula_3wave celerity (velocity in direction of propagation)\nformula_4peel angle\nIn most cases a peel angle less than 25\u00b0 is too fast to surf.\nWave intensity.\nThe type of break depends on shoaling rate. Breaking waves can be classified as four basic types: spilling (\u03beb&lt;0.4), plunging (0.4&lt;\u03beb&lt;2), collapsing (\u03beb&gt;2) and surging (\u03beb&gt;2), and which type occurs depends on the slope of the bottom.\nWaves suitable for surfing break as spilling or plunging types, and when they also have a suitable peel angle, their value for surfing is enhanced. Other factors such as wave height and period, and wind strength and direction can also influence steepness and intensity of the break, but the major influence on the type and shape of breaking waves is determined by the slope of the seabed before the break. The breaker type index and Iribarren number allow classification of breaker type as a function of wave steepness and seabed slope.\nArtificial reefs.\nThe value of good surf in attracting surf tourism has prompted the construction of artificial reefs and sand bars. Artificial surfing reefs can be built with durable sandbags or concrete, and resemble a submerged breakwater. These artificial reefs not only provide a surfing location, but also dissipate wave energy and shelter the coastline from erosion. Ships such as Seli 1 that have accidentally stranded on sandy bottoms, can create sandbanks that give rise to good waves.\nAn artificial reef known as Chevron Reef was constructed in El Segundo, California in hopes of creating a new surfing area. However, the reef failed to produce any quality waves and was removed in 2008. In Kovalam, South West India, an artificial reef has successfully provided the local community with a quality lefthander, stabilized coastal soil erosion, and provided good habitat for marine life. ASR Ltd., a New Zealand-based company, constructed the Kovalam reef and is working on another reef in Boscombe, England.\nArtificial waves.\nEven with artificial reefs in place, a tourist's vacation time may coincide with a \"flat spell\", when no waves are available. Completely artificial wave pools aim to solve that problem by controlling all the elements that go into creating perfect surf, however there are only a handful of wave pools that can simulate good surfing waves, owing primarily to construction and operation costs and potential liability. Most wave pools generate waves that are too small and lack the power necessary to surf. The Seagaia Ocean Dome, located in Miyazaki, Japan, was an example of a surfable wave pool. Able to generate waves with up to faces, the specialized pump held water in 20 vertical tanks positioned along the back edge of the pool. This allowed the waves to be directed as they approach the artificial sea floor. Lefts, Rights, and A-frames could be directed from this pump design providing for rippable surf and barrel rides. The Ocean Dome cost about $2\u00a0billion to build and was expensive to maintain. The Ocean Dome was closed in 2007. In England, construction is nearing completion on the Wave, situated near Bristol, which will enable people unable to get to the coast to enjoy the waves in a controlled environment, set in the heart of nature.\nThere are two main types of artificial waves that exist today. One type are the artificial or stationary waves which simulate a moving, breaking wave by pumping a layer of water against a smooth structure mimicking the shape of a breaking wave. Because of the velocity of the rushing water, the wave and the surfer can remain stationary while the water rushes by under the surfboard. Artificial waves of this kind provide the opportunity to try surfing and learn its basics in a moderately small and controlled environment near or far from locations with natural surf.\nManeuvers.\nStandup surfing begins when the surfer paddles toward shore in an attempt to match the speed of the wave (the same applies whether the surfer is standup paddling, bodysurfing, boogie-boarding or using some other type of watercraft, such as a waveski or kayak). Once the wave begins to carry the surfer forward, the surfer stands up and proceeds to ride the wave. The basic idea is to position the surfboard so it is just ahead of the breaking part (whitewash) of the wave, in the so-called 'pocket'. It is difficult for beginners to catch the wave at all.\nSurfers' skills are tested by their ability to control their board in difficult conditions, riding challenging waves, and executing maneuvers such as strong turns and cutbacks (turning board back to the breaking wave) and \"carving\" (a series of strong back-to-back maneuvers). More advanced skills include the \"floater\" (riding on top of the breaking curl of the wave), and \"off the lip\" (banking off crest of the breaking wave). A newer addition to surfing is the progression of the \"air,\" whereby a surfer propels off the wave entirely up into the air and then successfully lands the board back on the wave.\nThe tube ride is considered to be the ultimate maneuver in surfing. As a wave breaks, if the conditions are ideal, the wave will break in an orderly line from the middle to the shoulder, enabling the experienced surfer to position themselves inside the wave as it is breaking. This is known as a tube ride. Viewed from the shore, the tube rider may disappear from view as the wave breaks over the rider's head. The longer the surfer remains in the tube, the more successful the ride. This is referred to as getting tubed, barrelled, shacked or pitted. Some of the world's best-known waves for tube riding include Pipeline on the North Shore of Oahu, Teahupoo in Tahiti and G-Land in Java. Other names for the tube include \"the barrel\", and \"the pit\".\nHanging ten and hanging five are moves usually specific to longboarding. Hanging Ten refers to having both feet on the front end of the board with all of the surfer's toes off the edge, also known as nose-riding. Hanging Five is having just one foot near the front, with five toes off the edge.\nCutback: Generating speed down the line and then turning back to reverse direction.\nSnap: Quickly turning along the face or top of the wave, almost as if snapping the board back towards the wave. Typically done on steeper waves.\nBlowtail: Pushing the tail of the board out of the back of the wave so that the fins leave the water.\nFloater: Suspending the board atop the wave. Very popular on small waves.\nTop-Turn: Turn off the top of the wave. Sometimes used to generate speed and sometimes to shoot spray.\nBottom Turn: A turn at the bottom or mid-face of the wave, this maneuver is used to set up other maneuvers such as the top turn, cutback and even aerials.\nAirs/Aerials: These maneuvers have been becoming more and more prevalent in the sport in both competition and free surfing. An air is when the surfer can achieve enough speed and approach a certain type of section of a wave that is supposed to act as a ramp and launch the surfer above the lip line of the wave, \u201ccatching air\u201d, and landing either in the transition of the wave or the whitewash when hitting a close-out section.\nAirs can either be straight airs or rotational airs. Straight airs have minimal rotation if any, but definitely no more rotation than 90 degrees. Rotational airs require a rotation of 90 degrees or more depending on the level of the surfer.\nTypes of rotations:\nTerms.\nThe Glossary of surfing includes some of the extensive vocabulary used to describe various aspects of the sport of surfing as described in literature on the subject. In some cases terms have spread to a wider cultural use. These terms were originally coined by people who were directly involved in the sport of surfing.\nLearning.\nMany popular surfing destinations have surf schools and surf camps that offer lessons. Surf camps for beginners and intermediates are multi-day lessons that focus on surfing fundamentals. They are designed to take new surfers and help them become proficient riders. All-inclusive surf camps offer overnight accommodations, meals, lessons and surfboards. Most surf lessons begin with instruction and a safety briefing on land, followed by instructors helping students into waves on longboards or \"softboards\". The softboard is considered the ideal surfboard for learning, due to the fact it is safer, and has more paddling speed and stability than shorter boards. Funboards are also a popular shape for beginners as they combine the volume and stability of the longboard with the manageable size of a smaller surfboard. New and inexperienced surfers typically learn to catch waves on softboards around the funboard size. Due to the softness of the surfboard the chance of getting injured is substantially minimized.\nIt is possible to learn to surf without an instructor, but the process is usually safer and quicker with a surf instructor. Typical surfing instruction is best-performed one-on-one, but can also be done in a group setting. Post-COVID, there's been a shift towards online and land-based surf coaching and training. Online surf coaching is allowing surfers to learn at their own pace and convenience from anywhere. Land-based training, such as skateboard simulations, offers a way to practice maneuvers repeatedly, refining techniques with the guidance of professional coaches either in person or remotely using video analysis apps. The most popular surf locations offer perfect surfing conditions for beginners, as well as challenging breaks for advanced students. The ideal conditions for learning would be small waves that crumble and break softly, as opposed to the steep, fast-peeling waves desired by more experienced surfers. When available, a sandy seabed is generally safer.\nSurfing can be broken into several skills: paddling strength, positioning to catch the wave, timing, and balance. Paddling out requires strength, but also the mastery of techniques to break through oncoming waves (\"duck diving\", \"eskimo roll\" also known as \"turtle roll\"). Take-off positioning requires experience at predicting the wave set and where it will break. The surfer must pop up quickly as soon as the wave starts pushing the board forward. Preferred positioning on the wave is determined by experience at reading wave features including where the wave is breaking. Balance plays a crucial role in standing on a surfboard. Thus, balance training exercises are good preparation. Practicing with a balance board, longboard (skateboard), surfskate or swing board helps novices master the art of surfing. However, it's important to note that these land-based training methods have faced criticism within the surf coaching community. Concerns include the potential for developing poor surfing style and habits, such as excessive wiggling, due to training on flat surfaces which do not accurately mimic the dynamic nature of ocean waves.\nTo address these limitations, training in a skate bowl is recommended. Skate bowls can offer a more realistic simulation of the centrifugal forces experienced while surfing. This type of training helps in developing better control and style by replicating the curved, wave-like shapes and motions surfers encounter in the water. Integrating skate bowl training can provide a more comprehensive preparation for the surfing experience, balancing the benefits of basic balance training with the nuances of wave dynamics.\nThe repetitive cycle of paddling, popping up, and balancing requires stamina and physical strength. Having a proper warm-up routine can help prevent injuries.\nEquipment.\nSurfing can be done on various equipment, including surfboards, longboards, stand up paddle boards (SUPs), bodyboards, wave skis, skimboards, kneeboards, surf mats and macca's trays. Surfboards were originally made of solid wood and were large and heavy (often up to long and having a mass of ). Lighter balsa wood surfboards (first made in the late 1940s and early 1950s) were a significant improvement, not only in portability, but also in increasing maneuverability.\nMost modern surfboards are made of fiberglass foam (PU), with one or more wooden strips or \"stringers\", fiberglass cloth, and polyester resin (PE). An emerging board material is epoxy resin and Expanded Polystyrene foam (EPS) which is stronger and lighter than traditional PU/PE construction. Even newer designs incorporate materials such as carbon fiber and variable-flex composites in conjunction with fiberglass and epoxy or polyester resins. Since epoxy/EPS surfboards are generally lighter, they will float better than a traditional PU/PE board of similar size, shape and thickness. This makes them easier to paddle and faster in the water. However, a common complaint of EPS boards is that they do not provide as much feedback as a traditional PU/PE board. For this reason, many advanced surfers prefer that their surfboards be made from traditional materials.\nOther equipment includes a leash (to stop the board from drifting away after a wipeout and to prevent it from hitting other surfers), surf wax, traction pads (to keep a surfer's feet from slipping off the deck of the board), and fins (also known as \"skegs\") which can either be permanently attached (\"glassed-on\") or interchangeable. Sportswear designed or particularly suitable for surfing may be sold as \"boardwear\" (the term is also used in snowboarding). In warmer climates, swimsuits, surf trunks or boardshorts are worn, and occasionally rash guards; in cold water, surfers can opt to wear wetsuits, boots, hoods, and gloves to protect them against lower water temperatures. A newer introduction is a rash vest with a thin layer of titanium to provide maximum warmth without compromising mobility. In recent years, there have been advancements in technology that have allowed surfers to pursue even bigger waves with added elements of safety. Big wave surfers are now experimenting with inflatable vests or colored dye packs to help decrease their odds of drowning.\nThere are many different surfboard sizes, shapes, and designs in use today. Modern longboards, generally in length, are reminiscent of the earliest surfboards, but now benefit from modern innovations in surfboard shaping and fin design. Competitive longboard surfers need to be competent at traditional \"walking\" manoeuvres, as well as the short-radius turns normally associated with shortboard surfing. The modern shortboard began life in the late 1960s and has evolved into today's common \"thruster\" style, defined by its three fins, usually around in length. The thruster was invented by Australian shaper Simon Anderson.\nMidsize boards, often called funboards, provide more maneuverability than a longboard, with more flotation than a shortboard. While many surfers find that funboards live up to their name, providing the best of both surfing modes, others are critical.\n\"It is the happy medium of mediocrity,\" writes Steven Kotler. \"Funboard riders either have nothing left to prove or lack the skills to prove anything.\"\nThere are also various niche styles, such as the \"Egg\", a longboard-style short board targeted at people who want to ride a shortboard but need more paddle power. The \"Fish\", a board that is typically shorter, flatter, and wider than a normal shortboard, often with a split tail (known as a \"swallow tail\"). The Fish often has two or four fins and is specifically designed for surfing smaller waves. For big waves, there is the \"Gun\", a long, thick board with a pointed nose and tail (known as a pintail) specifically designed for big waves.\nThe physics of surfing.\nThe physics of surfing involves the physical oceanographic properties of wave creation in the surf zone, the characteristics of the surfboard, and the surfer's interaction with the water and the board.\nWave formation.\nOcean waves are defined as a collection of dislocated water parcels that undergo a cycle of being forced past their normal position and being restored back to their normal position. Wind causes ripples and eddies to form waves that gradually gain speed and distance (fetch). Waves increase in energy and speed and then become longer and stronger. The fully-developed sea has the strongest wave action that experiences storms lasting 10-hours and creates wave heights in the open ocean.\nThe waves created in the open ocean are classified as deep-water waves. Deep-water waves have no bottom interaction and the orbits of these water molecules are circular; their wavelength is short relative to water depth and the velocity decays before reaching the bottom of the water basin. Deep water waves are waves in water depths greater than half their wavelengths. Wind forces waves to break in the deep sea.\nDeep-water waves travel to shore and become shallow-water waves when the water depth is less than half of their wavelength, and the wave motion becomes constrained by the bottom, causing the orbit paths to be flattened to ellipses. The bottom exerts a frictional drag on the bottom of the wave, which decreases the celerity (or the speed of the waveform), and causes refraction. Slowing the wave forces it to shorten which increases the height and steepness, and the top (crest) falls because the velocity of the top of the wave becomes greater than the velocity of the bottom of the wave where the drag occurs.\nThe surf zone is the place of convergence of multiple waves types creating complex wave patterns. A wave suitable for surfing results from maximum speeds of . This speed is relative because local onshore winds can cause waves to break. In the surf zone, shallow water waves are carried by global winds to the beach and interact with local winds to make surfing waves.\nDifferent onshore and off-shore wind patterns in the surf zone create different types of waves. Onshore winds cause random wave breaking patterns and are more suitable for experienced surfers. Light offshore winds create smoother waves, while strong direct offshore winds cause plunging or large barrel waves. Barrel waves are large because the water depth is small when the wave breaks. Thus, the breaker intensity (or force) increases, and the wave speed and height increase. Off-shore winds produce non-surfable conditions by flattening a weak swell. Weak swell is made from surface gravity forces and has long wavelengths.\nWave conditions for surfing.\nSurfing waves can be analyzed using the following parameters: breaking wave height, wave peel angle (\u03b1), wave breaking intensity, and wave section length. The breaking wave height has two measurements, the relative heights estimated by surfers and the exact measurements done by physical oceanographers. Measurements done by surfers were 1.36 to 2.58 times higher than the measurements done by scientists. The scientifically concluded wave heights that are physically possible to surf are .\nThe wave peel angle is one of the main constituents of a potential surfing wave. Wave peel angle measures the distance between the peel-line and the line tangent to the breaking crest line. This angle controls the speed of the wave crest. The speed of the wave is an addition of the propagation velocity vector (Vw) and peel velocity vector (Vp), which results in the overall velocity of the wave (Vs).\nWave breaking intensity measures the force of the wave as it breaks, spills, or plunges (a plunging wave is termed by surfers as a \"barrel wave\"). Wave section length is the distance between two breaking crests in a wave set. Wave section length can be hard to measure because local winds, non-linear wave interactions, island sheltering, and swell interactions can cause multifarious wave configurations in the surf zone.\nThe parameters breaking wave height, wave peel angle (\u03b1), and wave breaking intensity, and wave section length are important because they are standardized by past oceanographers who researched surfing; these parameters have been used to create a guide that matches the type of wave formed and the skill level of surfer.\nTable 1 shows a relationship of smaller peel angles correlating with a higher skill level of the surfer. Smaller wave peel angles increase the velocities of waves. A surfer must know how to react and paddle quickly to match the speed of the wave to catch it. Therefore, more experience is required to catch low peel angle waves. More experienced surfers can handle longer section lengths, increased velocities, and higher wave heights. Different locations offer different types of surfing conditions for each skill level.\nSurf breaks.\nA surf break is an area with an obstruction or an object that causes a wave to break. Surf breaks entail multiple scale phenomena. Wave section creation has microscale factors of peel angle and wave breaking intensity. The micro-scale components influence wave height and variations on wave crests. The mesoscale components of surf breaks are the ramp, platform, wedge, or ledge that may be present at a surf break. Macro-scale processes are the global winds that initially produce offshore waves. Types of surf breaks are headlands (point break), beach break, river/estuary entrance bar, reef breaks, and ledge breaks.\nHeadland (point break).\nA headland or point break interacts with the water by causing refraction around the point or headland. The point absorbs the high-frequency waves and long-period waves persist, which are easier to surf. Examples of locations that have headland or point break-induced surf breaks are Dunedin (New Zealand), Raglan (New Zealand), Malibu (California), Rincon (California), and Kirra (Australia).\nBeach break.\nA beach break is an area of open coastline where the waves break over a sand-bottom. They are the most common, yet also the most volatile of surf breaks. Wave breaks happen successively at beach breaks, as in there are multiple peaks to surf at a single beach break location. Example locations are Tairua and Aramoana Beach (New Zealand) and the Gold Coast (Australia).\nRiver or estuary entrance bar.\nA river or estuary entrance bar creates waves from the ebb-tidal delta, sediment outflow, and tidal currents. An ideal estuary entrance bar exists in Whangamata Bar, New Zealand.\nReef break.\nA reef break is conducive to surfing because large waves consistently break over the reef. The reef is usually made of coral, and because of this, many injuries occur while surfing reef breaks. However, the waves that are produced by reef breaks are some of the best in the world. Famous reef breaks are present in Padang Padang (Indonesia), Pipeline (Hawaii), Uluwatu (Bali), and Teahupo'o (Tahiti).\nLedge break.\nA ledge break is formed by steep rocks ledges that make intense waves because the waves travel through deeper water then abruptly reach shallower water at the ledge. Shark Island, Australia is a location with a ledge break. Ledge breaks create difficult surfing conditions, sometimes only allowing body surfing as the only feasible way to confront the waves.\nRip currents.\nRip currents are fast, narrow currents that are caused by onshore transport within the surf zone and the successive return of the water seaward. The wedge bathymetry makes a convenient and consistent rip current of 5\u201310 meters that brings the surfers to the \u201ctake-off point\u201d then out to the beach.\nOceanographers have two theories on rip current formation. The wave interaction model assumes that two edges of waves interact, create differing wave heights, and cause longshore transport of nearshore currents. The Boundary Interaction Model assumes that the topography of the sea bottom causes nearshore circulation and longshore transport; the result of both models is a rip current.\nRip currents can be extremely strong and narrow as they extend out of the surf zone into deeper water, reaching speeds from and up to , which is faster than any human can swim. The water in the jet is sediment rich, bubble rich, and moves rapidly. The rip head of the rip current has long shore movement. Rip currents are common on beaches with mild slopes that experience sizeable and frequent oceanic swell.\nOn the surfboard.\nA longer surfboard of causes more friction with the water; therefore, it will be slower than a smaller and lighter board with a length of . Longer boards are good for beginners who need help balancing. Smaller boards are good for more experienced surfers who want to have more control and maneuverability.\nWhen practicing the sport of surfing, the surfer paddles out past the wave break to wait for a wave. When a surfable wave arrives, the surfer must paddle extremely fast to match the velocity of the wave so the wave can accelerate him or her.\nWhen the surfer is at wave speed, the surfer must quickly pop up, stay low, and stay toward the front of the wave to become stable and prevent falling as the wave steepens. The acceleration is less toward the front than toward the back. The physics behind the surfing of the wave involves the horizontal acceleration force (F\u00b7sin\u03b8) and the vertical force (F\u00b7cos\u03b8=mg). Therefore, the surfer should lean forward to gain speed, and lean on the back foot to brake. Also, to increase the length of the ride of the wave, the surfer should travel parallel to the wave crest.\nDangers.\nDrowning.\nSurfing, like all water sports, carries the inherent risk of drowning. Although the board assists a surfer in staying buoyant, it can become separated from the user. A leash, attached to the ankle or knee, can keep a board from being swept away, but does not keep a rider on the board or above water. In some cases, possibly including the drowning of professional surfer Mark Foo, the leash can be a cause of drowning by snagging on a reef or other object and holding the surfer underwater. By keeping the surfboard close to the surfer during a wipeout, a leash also increases the chances that the board may strike the rider, which could knock them unconscious and lead to drowning (especially with a hard surfboard instead of a soft surfboard). A fallen rider's board can become trapped in larger waves, and if the rider is attached by a leash, they can be dragged for long distances underwater. Surfers should be careful to remain in smaller surf until they have acquired the advanced skills and experience necessary to handle bigger waves and more challenging conditions. Even world-class surfers have drowned in extremely challenging conditions.\nCollisions.\nUnder the wrong set of conditions, anything that a surfer's body can come in contact with is a potential hazard, including sand bars, rocks, small ice, reefs, surfboards, and other surfers. Collisions with these objects can sometimes cause injuries such as cuts and scrapes and in rare instances, death.\nA large number of injuries, up to 66%, are caused by collision with a surfboard (nose or fins). Fins can cause deep lacerations and cuts, as well as bruising. While these injuries can be minor, they can open the skin to infection from the sea; groups like Surfers Against Sewage campaign for cleaner waters to reduce the risk of infections. Local bugs and diseases can be risk factors when surfing around the globe.\nFalling off a surfboard or colliding with others is commonly referred to as a \"wipeout\".\nMarine life.\nSea life can sometimes cause injuries (Bethany Hamilton) and even fatalities. Animals such as sharks, stingrays, Weever fish, seals and jellyfish can sometimes present a danger. Warmer-water surfers often do the \"stingray shuffle\" as they walk out through the shallows, shuffling their feet in the sand to scare away stingrays that may be resting on the bottom.\nRip currents.\nRip currents are water channels that flow away from the shore. Under the wrong circumstances these currents can endanger both experienced and inexperienced surfers. Since a rip current appears to be an area of flat water, tired or inexperienced swimmers or surfers may enter one and be carried out beyond the breaking waves. Although many rip currents are much smaller, the largest rip currents have a width of . The flow of water moving out towards the sea in a rip will be stronger than most swimmers, making swimming back to shore difficult, however, by paddling parallel to the shore, a surfer can easily exit a rip current. Alternatively, some surfers actually ride on a rip current because it is a fast and effortless way to get out beyond the zone of breaking waves.\nSeabed.\nThe seabed can pose a risk for surfers. If a surfer falls while riding a wave, the wave tosses and tumbles the surfer around, often in a downwards direction. At reef breaks and beach breaks, surfers have been seriously injured and even killed, because of a violent collision with the sea bed, the water above which can sometimes be very shallow, especially at beach breaks or reef breaks during low tide. Cyclops, Western Australia, for example, is one of the biggest and thickest reef breaks in the world, with waves measuring up to high, but the reef below is only about below the surface of the water.\nMicroorganisms.\nA January 2018 study by the University of Exeter called the \"Beach Bum Survey\" found surfers and bodyboarders to be three times as likely as non-surfers to harbor antibiotic-resistant \"E. coli\" and four times as likely to harbor other bacteria capable of easily becoming antibiotic resistant. The researchers attributed this to the fact that surfers swallow roughly ten times as much seawater as swimmers.\nEar damage.\nSurfers sometimes use ear protection such as ear plugs to avoid surfer's ear, inflammation of the ear or other damage. Surfer's ear is where the bone near the ear canal grows after repeated exposure to cold water, making the ear canal narrower. The narrowed canal makes it harder for water to drain from the ear. This can result in pain, infection and sometimes ringing of the ear.\nEar plugs designed for surfers, swimmers and other water athletes are primarily made to keep water out of the ear, thereby letting a protective pocket of air stay inside the ear canal. They can also block cold air, dirt and bacteria. Many designs are made to let sound through, and either float and/or have a leash in case the plug accidentally gets bumped out.\nSurf rash.\nSurf rash appears in many different ways on the skin, commonly as a painful red bumpy patch located on the surfer's chest or inner legs. A rash guard will lessen the incidence of surf rash caused by abrasion or sunburn. Healing ointments such as petroleum jelly can be used to treat irritated skin.\nSpinal cord.\nSurfer's myelopathy is a rare spinal cord injury causing paralysis of the lower extremities, caused by hyperextension of the back. This is due to one of the main blood vessels of the spine becoming kinked, depriving the spinal cord of oxygen. In some cases the paralysis is permanent. Although any activity where the back is arched can cause this condition (i.e. yoga, pilates, etc.), this rare phenomenon has most often been seen in those surfing for the first time. According to DPT Sergio Florian, some recommendations for preventing myelopathy is proper warm up, limiting the session length and sitting on the board while waiting for waves, rather than lying.\nSurfers and surf culture.\nSurfers represent a diverse culture based on riding the waves. Some people practice surfing as a recreational activity, while others make it the central focus of their lives. Surfing culture in the US is most dominant in Hawaii and California, because these two states offer the best surfing conditions. However, waves can be found wherever there is coastline, and a tight-knit yet far-reaching subculture of surfers has emerged throughout America. Some historical markers of the culture included the woodie, the station wagon used to carry surfers' boards, as well as boardshorts, the long swim shorts typically worn while surfing. Surfers also wear wetsuits in colder regions and when the seasons cool the air and water.\nDuring the 1960s, as surfing caught on in California, its popularity spread through American pop culture. Several teen movies, starting with the Gidget series in 1959, transformed surfing into a dream life for American youth. Later movies, including Beach Party (1963), Ride the Wild Surf (1964), and Beach Blanket Bingo (1965) promoted the California dream of sun and surf. Surf culture also fueled the early records of the Beach Boys.\nThe sport is also a significant part of Australia's eastern coast sub-cultural life, especially in New South Wales, where the weather and water conditions are most favourable for surfing.\nThe sport of surfing now represents a multibillion-dollar industry, especially in clothing and fashion markets. Founded in 1964, the International Surfing Association (ISA) is the oldest foundation associated with surfing formed to better improve surfing and recognized by the International Olympic Committee as the leading authority on surfing. National and international surf competitions began in 1964. In addition, The World Surf League (WSL) was established in 1976 and promotes various championship tours, hosting top competitors in some of the best surf spots around the globe. A small number of people make a career out of surfing by receiving corporate sponsorships and performing for photographers and videographers in far-flung destinations; they are typically referred to as freesurfers. Sixty-six surfers on a long surfboard set a record in Huntington Beach, California for most people on a surfboard at one time. Dale Webster consecutively surfed for 14,641 days, making it his main life focus.\nAs of 2023, the Guinness Book of World Records recognized a 26.2\u00a0m (86\u00a0ft) wave ride by Sebastian Steudtner at Nazar\u00e9, Portugal as the largest wave ever surfed.\nWhen the waves were flat, surfers persevered with sidewalk surfing, which is now called skateboarding. Sidewalk surfing has a similar feel to surfing and requires only a paved road or sidewalk. To create the feel of the wave, surfers even sneaked into empty backyard swimming pools to ride in, known as pool skating. Eventually, surfing made its way to the slopes with the invention of the Snurfer, later credited as the first snowboard. Many other board sports have been invented over the years, but all can trace their heritage back to surfing.\nMany surfers claim to have a spiritual connection with the ocean, describing surfing, the surfing experience, both in and out of the water, as a type of spiritual experience or a religion. Recent academic studies and practitioner testimonies have demonstrated the mental health and well-being benefits of surfing which has spurred the development of para surfing and surf therapy.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*Surfing in Canada\n*Surfing in Madeira\n*Surfing in Scotland\n*Surfing in the United States\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28202", "revid": "4288359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28202", "title": "September 24", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 24 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28203", "revid": "1896838", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28203", "title": "September 25", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 25 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28204", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28204", "title": "September 29", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearSeptember 29 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28207", "revid": "4492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28207", "title": "SMS", "text": "Text messaging service component\nShort Message Service (SMS) is a text messaging service component of most telephone, Internet and mobile device systems. It uses standardized communication protocols that let mobile phones exchange short text messages, typically transmitted over cellular networks.\nDeveloped as part of the GSM standards, and based on the SS7 signalling protocol, SMS rolled out on digital cellular networks starting in 1993 and was originally intended for customers to receive alerts from their carrier/operator. The service allows users to send and receive text messages of up to 160 characters, originally to and from GSM phones and later also CDMA and Digital AMPS; it has since been defined and supported on newer networks, including present-day 5G ones. Using SMS gateways, messages can be transmitted over the Internet through an SMSC, allowing communication to computers, fixed landlines, and satellite. MMS was later introduced as an upgrade to SMS with \"picture messaging\" capabilities.\nIn addition to recreational texting between people, SMS is also used for mobile marketing (a type of direct marketing), two-factor authentication logging-in, televoting, mobile banking (see SMS banking), and for other commercial content. The SMS standard has been hugely popular worldwide as a method of text communication: by the end of 2010, it was the most widely used data application with an estimated 3.5 billion active users, or about 80% of all mobile phone subscribers. More recently, SMS has become increasingly challenged by newer proprietary instant messaging services; RCS has been designated as the potential open standard successor to SMS.\nDevelopmental history.\nSMS technology originated from radio telegraphy in radio memo pagers that used standardized phone protocols. These were defined in 1986 as part of the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) series of standards.&lt;ref name=\"GSM 28/85\"&gt;GSM Doc 28/85 \"Services and Facilities to be provided in the GSM System\" rev2, June 1985&lt;/ref&gt; The first SMS message was sent on 3 December 1992, when Neil Papworth, a test engineer for Sema Group, sent \"Merry Christmas\" to the Orbitel 901 phone of colleague Richard Jarvis.\nInitial concept.\nAdding text messaging functionality to mobile devices began in the early 1980s. The first action plan of the CEPT Group GSM was approved in December 1982, requesting that \"The services and facilities offered in the public switched telephone networks and public data networks\u00a0... should be available in the mobile system.\" This plan included the exchange of text messages either directly between mobile stations, or transmitted via message handling systems in use at that time.\nThe SMS concept was developed in the Franco-German GSM cooperation in 1984 by Friedhelm Hillebrand and Bernard Ghillebaert. The GSM is optimized for telephony, since this was identified as its main application. The key idea for SMS was to use this telephone-optimized system, and to transport messages on the signalling paths needed to control the telephone traffic during periods when no signalling traffic existed. In this way, unused resources in the system could be used to transport messages at minimal cost. However, it was necessary to limit the length of the messages to 128 bytes (later improved to 160 seven-bit characters) so that the messages could fit into the existing signalling formats. Based on his personal observations and on analysis of the typical lengths of postcard and Telex messages, Hillebrand argued that 160 characters was sufficient for most brief communications.\nSMS could be implemented in every mobile station by updating its software. Hence, a large base of SMS-capable terminals and networks existed when people began to use SMS. A new network element required was a specialized short message service centre, and enhancements were required to the radio capacity and network transport infrastructure to accommodate growing SMS traffic.\nEarly development.\nThe technical development of SMS was a multinational collaboration supporting the framework of standards bodies. Through these organizations the technology was made freely available to the whole world.\nThe first proposal which initiated the development of SMS was made by a contribution of Germany and France in the GSM group meeting in February 1985 in Oslo. This proposal was further elaborated in GSM subgroup WP1 Services (Chairman Martine Alvernhe, France Telecom) based on a contribution from Germany. There were also initial discussions in the subgroup WP3 network aspects chaired by Jan Audestad (Telenor). The result was approved by the main GSM group in a June 1985 document which was distributed to industry. The input documents on SMS had been prepared by Friedhelm Hillebrand of Deutsche Telekom, with contributions from Bernard Ghillebaert of France T\u00e9l\u00e9com. The definition that Friedhelm Hillebrand and Bernard Ghillebaert brought into GSM called for the provision of a message transmission service of alphanumeric messages to mobile users \"with acknowledgement capabilities\". The last three words transformed SMS into something much more useful than the electronic paging services used at the time that some in GSM might have had in mind.\nSMS was considered in the main GSM group as a possible service for the new digital cellular system. In GSM document \"Services and Facilities to be provided in the GSM System,\" both mobile-originated and mobile-terminated short messages appear on the table of GSM teleservices.\nThe discussions on the GSM services were concluded in the recommendation GSM 02.03 \"TeleServices supported by a GSM PLMN.\" Here a rudimentary description of the three services was given:\nThe material elaborated in GSM and its WP1 subgroup was handed over in Spring 1987 to a new GSM body called IDEG (the Implementation of Data and Telematic Services Experts Group), which had its kickoff in May 1987 under the chairmanship of Friedhelm Hillebrand (German Telecom). The technical standard known today was largely created by IDEG (later WP4) as the two recommendations GSM 03.40 (the two point-to-point services merged) and GSM 03.41 (cell broadcast).\nWP4 created a Drafting Group Message Handling (DGMH), which was responsible for the specification of SMS. Finn Trosby of Telenor chaired the draft group through its first three years, in which the design of SMS was established. DGMH had five to eight participants, and Finn Trosby mentions as major contributors Kevin Holley, Eija Altonen, Didier Luizard and Alan Cox. The first action plan mentions for the first time the Technical Specification 03.40 \"Technical Realisation of the Short Message Service\". Responsible editor was Finn Trosby. The first and very rudimentary draft of the technical specification was completed in November 1987. However, drafts useful for the manufacturers followed at a later stage in the period. A comprehensive description of the work in this period is given in.\nThe work on the draft specification continued in the following few years, where Kevin Holley of Cellnet (now Telef\u00f3nica O2 UK) played a leading role. Besides the completion of the main specification GSM 03.40, the detailed protocol specifications on the system interfaces also needed to be completed.\nEarly implementations.\nThe first SMS message was sent over the Vodafone GSM network in the United Kingdom on 3 December 1992, from Neil Papworth of Sema Group (now Mavenir Systems) using a personal computer to Richard Jarvis of Vodafone using an Orbitel 901 handset. The text of the message was \"Merry Christmas.\"\nThe first commercial deployment of a short message service center (SMSC) was by Aldiscon part of Logica (now part of CGI) with Telia (now TeliaSonera) in Sweden in 1993, followed by Fleet Call (now Nextel) in the US, Telenor in Norway and BT Cellnet (now O2 UK) later in 1993. All first installations of SMS gateways were for network notifications sent to mobile phones, usually to inform of voice mail messages.\nThe first commercially sold SMS service was offered to consumers, as a person-to-person text messaging service by Radiolinja (now part of Elisa) in Finland in 1993. Most early GSM mobile phone handsets did not support the ability to send SMS text messages, and Nokia was the only handset manufacturer whose total GSM phone line in 1993 supported user-sending of SMS text messages. According to Matti Makkonen, an engineer at Nokia at the time, the Nokia 2010, which was released in January 1994, was the first mobile phone to support composing SMSes easily.\nGrowth and adoption.\nInitial growth was slow, with customers in 1995 sending on average only 0.4 messages per GSM customer per month. Initially, networks in the UK only allowed customers to send messages to other users on the same network, limiting the usefulness of the service. This restriction was lifted in 1999. Over time, this issue was eliminated by switch billing instead of billing at the SMSC and by new features within SMSCs to allow blocking of foreign mobile users sending messages through it. By the end of 2000, the average number of messages reached 35 per user per month, and on Christmas Day 2006, over 205 million messages were sent in the UK alone. SMS had become a social phenomenon in Finland among teens and youngsters by 1999. SMS traffic across Europe reached 4 billion messages as of January 2000.\nSMS became extremely popular in the Philippines by 2001 and the country was dubbed the \"texting capital of the world\", partly helped by large numbers of free text messages offered by the mobile operators in monthly subscriptions. SMS adoption was limited to parts of Europe and Asia during these earlier years, with U.S. adoption being low partly due to incompatible networks and cheap voice calls relative to other countries. \"The Economist\" wrote in 2003, as noted by an analyst:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The short answer is that, in America, talk is cheap. Because local calls on land lines are usually free, wireless operators have to offer big \u201cbundles\u201d of minutes\u2014up to 5,000 minutes per month\u2014as part of their monthly pricing plans to persuade subscribers to use mobile phones instead. Texting first took off in other parts of the world among cost-conscious teenagers who found that it was cheaper to text than to call [..] Free local calls also make logging on to the internet, for hours at a time, and using PC-to-PC \u201cinstant messaging\u201d (IM) the preferred mode of electronic chat among American teenagers.\nThis is also backed by the fact that as of 2003, American internet users were spending on average five times more time online than Europeans, and many poorer countries in Europe and other regions around the world had significantly lower rates of internet access compared to the United States at the time (see digital divide), hence making SMS more accessible.\nContemporary usage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSMS has become a large commercial industry, earning $114.6\u00a0billion globally in 2010. In the year 2002, 366 billion SMS text messages were sent globally, a number that rose to 6.1 trillion in 2010, which is an average of 193,000 messages per second. The global average price for an SMS message is US$0.11, while mobile networks charge each other interconnect fees of at least US$0.04 when connecting between different phone networks. In 2015, the actual cost of sending an SMS in Australia was found to be $0.00016 per SMS. The global SMS messaging business was estimated to be worth over US$240 billion in 2013, accounting for almost half of all revenue generated by mobile messaging.\nThe popularity of SMS also led to the spontaneous creation of the so-called 'SMS language' phenomenon, where words are shortened in order to deal with the 160 character limit of SMS messages. Usage of SMS for mobile data services became increasingly prominent in the early 2000s due to its ubiquity, reliability, and cold reception of the newer WAP standard. (see \"Premium-rated services\" below). In the early and mid 2000s, Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) was developed as an improved version of SMS that supports sending of pictures and video.\nSMS has been increasingly challenged by Internet Protocol-based messaging services with additional features for modern mobile devices, such as Facebook Messenger, WhatsApp, Telegram, or WeChat. These services run independently from mobile network operators and typically don't provide cross-platform messaging capabilities like SMS or email does. For example, between 2010 and 2022, SMS telecom revenue in India dropped 94 percent, while \"revenue share per user from data usage...grew over 10 times.\", although in some regions such as North America SMS continues to be used by over 80 percent of the population as of 2023. In order to create a modern successor to SMS that isn't run by a single company and is fully interoperable between devices, industry figures have created the RCS 'Universal Profile' initiative. It was supported by Apple when iOS 18 came out in 2024, which will mean that virtually all new mobile phones (iOS and Android platforms) will have RCS texting capabilities, though this may also depend on if the network operator supports it.\nPremium-rated services.\nSMS may be used to provide premium rate services to subscribers of a network. Mobile-terminated short messages can be used to deliver digital content such as news alerts, financial information, logos, and ringtones. The first premium-rate media content delivered via the SMS system was the world's first paid downloadable ringing tones, as commercially launched by Saunalahti (later Jippii Group, now part of Elisa Group), in 1998. Initially, only Nokia branded phones could handle them. By 2002 the ringtone business globally had exceeded $1 billion of service revenues, and nearly US$5 billion by 2008. Today, they are also used to pay smaller payments online\u2014for example, for file-sharing services, in mobile application stores, or VIP section entrance. Outside the online world, one can buy a bus ticket or beverages from ATM, pay a parking ticket, order a store catalog or some goods (e.g., discount movie DVDs), make a donation to charity, and much more.\nOther uses.\nAdditionally, an intermediary service can facilitate a text-to-voice conversion to be sent to landlines.\nIn 2014, Caktus Group developed the world's first SMS-based voter registration system in Libya. As of February 2015 more than 1.5 million people have registered using that system, providing Libyan voters with unprecedented access to the democratic process.\n\"SMS enablement\" allows individuals to send an SMS message to a business phone number (traditional landline) and receive a SMS in return. Providing customers with the ability to text to a phone number allows organizations to offer new services that deliver value. Examples include chat bots, and text enabled customer service and call centers.\nFlash SMS.\nA Flash SMS is a type of SMS that appears directly on the main screen without user interaction and is not automatically stored in the inbox. It can be useful in emergencies, such as a fire alarm or cases of confidentiality, as in delivering one-time passwords.\nSilent SMS.\nIn 2010, almost half a million silent SMS messages were sent by the German federal police, customs and the federal domestic intelligence service Verfassungsschutz. These silent messages, also known as silent TMS, stealth SMS, stealth ping or Short Message Type 0, are used to locate a person and thus to create a complete movement profile. They do not show up on a display, nor trigger any acoustical signal when received. Their primary purpose was to deliver special services of the network operator to any cell phone.\nSMS bombs.\nIn March 2001, Dutch police in Amsterdam attempted to fight increasing cell phone theft by sending an SMS every three minutes to a phone that has been reported stolen, with the message \"This handset was nicked, buying or selling is a crime. The police.\"\nText messaging outside GSM.\nSMS was originally designed as part of GSM, but is now available on a wide range of networks globally, including 3G, 4G and 5G networks. However, not all text messaging systems use SMS, and some notable alternative implementations of the concept include J-Phone's \"SkyMail\" and NTT Docomo's \"Short Mail\", both in Japan. Email messaging from phones, as popularized by NTT Docomo's i-mode and the RIM BlackBerry, also typically uses standard mail protocols such as SMTP over TCP/IP.\nTechnical details.\nGSM.\nThe \"Short Message Service\u2014Point to Point (SMS-PP)\"\u2014was originally defined in GSM recommendation 03.40, which is now maintained in 3GPP as TS 23.040. GSM 03.41 (now 3GPP TS 23.041) defines the \"Short Message Service\u2014Cell Broadcast (SMS-CB)\", which allows messages (advertising, public information, etc.) to be broadcast to all mobile users in a specified geographical area. Cell broadcast is the technology behind Wireless Emergency Alerts in the US which is used for public safety messages and AMBER alerts, and similar public safety messages in other countries. These messages are similar to SMS messages.\nMessages are sent to a short message service center (SMSC), which provides a \"store and forward\" mechanism. It attempts to send messages to the SMSC's recipients. If a recipient is not reachable, the SMSC queues the message for later retry. Some SMSCs also provide a \"forward and forget\" option where transmission is tried only once. Both mobile terminated (MT, for messages sent \"to\" a mobile handset) and mobile originating (MO, for those sent \"from\" the mobile handset) operations are supported. Message delivery is \"best effort\", so there are no guarantees that a message will actually be delivered to its recipient, but delay or complete loss of a message is uncommon, typically affecting less than 5 percent of messages. Some providers allow users to request delivery reports, either via the SMS settings of most modern phones, or by prefixing each message with *0# or *N#. However, the exact meaning of confirmations varies from reaching the network, to being queued for sending, to being sent, to receiving a confirmation of receipt from the target device, and users are often not informed of the specific type of success being reported.\nSMS is a stateless communication protocol in which every SMS message is considered entirely independent of other messages. Enterprise applications using SMS as a communication channel for stateful dialogue (where an MO reply message is paired to a specific MT message) requires that session management be maintained external to the protocol.\nMessage size.\nTransmission of short messages between the SMSC and the handset is done whenever using the Mobile Application Part (MAP) of the SS7 protocol. Messages are sent with the MAP MO- and MT-ForwardSM operations, whose payload length is limited by the constraints of the signaling protocol to precisely 140 bytes (140 bytes \u00d7 8 bits / byte = 1120 bits).\nShort messages can be encoded using a variety of alphabets: the default GSM 7-bit alphabet, the 8-bit data alphabet, and the 16-bit UCS-2 or UTF-16 alphabets. Depending on which alphabet the subscriber has configured in the handset, this leads to the maximum individual short message sizes of 160 7-bit characters, 140 8-bit characters, or 70 16-bit characters. GSM 7-bit alphabet support is mandatory for GSM handsets and network elements, but characters in languages such as Hindi, Arabic, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, or Cyrillic alphabet languages (e.g., Russian, Ukrainian, Serbian, Bulgarian, etc.) must be encoded using the 16-bit UCS-2 character encoding (see Unicode). Routing data and other metadata is additional to the payload size.\nLarger content (concatenated SMS, multipart or segmented SMS, or \"long SMS\") can be sent using multiple messages, in which case each message will start with a User Data Header (UDH) containing segmentation information. Since UDH is part of the payload, the number of available characters per segment is lower: 153 for 7-bit encoding, 134 for 8-bit encoding and 67 for 16-bit encoding. The receiving handset is then responsible for reassembling the message and presenting it to the user as one long message. While the standard theoretically permits up to 255 segments, 10 segments is the practical maximum with some carriers, and long messages are often billed as equivalent to multiple SMS messages. In some cases 127 segments are supported, but software limitations in some SMS applications do not permit this. Some providers have offered length-oriented pricing schemes for messages, although that type of pricing structure is rapidly disappearing.\nGateway providers.\nSMS gateway providers facilitate SMS traffic between businesses and mobile subscribers, including SMS for enterprises, content delivery, and entertainment services involving SMS, e.g. TV voting. Considering SMS messaging performance and cost, as well as the level of messaging services, SMS gateway providers can be classified as aggregators or SS7 providers.\nThe aggregator model is based on multiple agreements with mobile carriers to exchange two-way SMS traffic into and out of the operator's SMSC, also known as \"local termination model\". Aggregators lack direct access into the SS7 protocol, which is the protocol where the SMS messages are exchanged. SMS messages are delivered to the operator's SMSC, but not the subscriber's handset; the SMSC takes care of further handling of the message through the SS7 network.\nAnother type of SMS gateway provider is based on SS7 connectivity to route SMS messages, also known as \"international termination model\". The advantage of this model is the ability to route data directly through SS7, which gives the provider total control and visibility of the complete path during SMS routing. This means SMS messages can be sent directly to and from recipients without having to go through the SMSCs of other mobile operators. Therefore, it is possible to avoid delays and message losses, offering full delivery guarantees of messages and optimized routing. This model is particularly efficient when used in mission-critical messaging and SMS used in corporate communications. Moreover, these SMS gateway providers are providing branded SMS services with masking but after misuse of these gateways most countries' governments have taken serious steps to block these gateways.\nInterconnectivity with other networks.\nMessage Service Centers communicate with the Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN) or PSTN via Interworking and Gateway MSCs.\nSubscriber-originated messages are transported from a handset to a service center, and may be destined for mobile users, subscribers on a fixed network, or Value-Added Service Providers (VASPs), also known as application-terminated. Subscriber-terminated messages are transported from the service center to the destination handset, and may originate from mobile users, from fixed network subscribers, or from other sources such as VASPs.\nOn some carriers non-subscribers can send messages to a subscriber's phone using an Email-to-SMS gateway. Additionally, many carriers, including AT&amp;T Mobility, T-Mobile USA, Sprint, and Verizon Wireless, offer the ability to do this through their respective websites.\nFor example, an AT&amp;T subscriber whose phone number was 555-555-5555 would receive emails addressed to 5555555555@txt.att.net as text messages. Subscribers can easily reply to these SMS messages, and the SMS reply is sent back to the original email address. Sending email to SMS is free for the sender, but the recipient is subject to the standard delivery charges. Only the first 160 characters of an email message can be delivered to a phone, and only 160 characters can be sent from a phone. However, longer messages may be broken up into multiple texts, depending upon the telephone service provider.\nText-enabled fixed-line handsets are required to receive messages in text format. However, messages can be delivered to non enabled phones using text-to-speech conversion.\nShort messages can send binary content such as ringtones or logos, as well as Over-the-air programming (OTA) or configuration data. Such uses are a vendor-specific extension of the GSM specification and there are multiple competing standards, although Nokia's Smart Messaging is common.\nSMS is used for M2M (Machine to Machine) communication. For instance, there is an LED display machine controlled by SMS, and some vehicle tracking companies use SMS for their data transport or telemetry needs. SMS usage for these purposes is slowly being superseded by GPRS services owing to their lower overall cost. GPRS is offered by smaller telco players as a route of sending SMS text to reduce the cost of SMS texting internationally.\nSupport in other architectures.\nThe Mobile Application Part (MAP) of the SS7 protocol included support for the transport of Short Messages through the Core Network from its inception. MAP Phase 2 expanded support for SMS by introducing a separate operation code for Mobile Terminated Short Message transport. Since Phase 2, there have been no changes to the Short Message operation packages in MAP, although other operation packages have been enhanced to support CAMEL SMS control.\nFrom 3GPP Releases 99 and 4 onwards, CAMEL Phase 3 introduced the ability for the Intelligent Network (IN) to control aspects of the Mobile Originated Short Message Service, while CAMEL Phase 4, as part of 3GPP Release 5 and onwards, provides the IN with the ability to control the Mobile Terminated service. CAMEL allows the gsmSCP to block the submission (MO) or delivery (MT) of Short Messages, route messages to destinations other than that specified by the user, and perform real-time billing for the use of the service. Prior to standardized CAMEL control of the Short Message Service, IN control relied on switch vendor specific extensions to the Intelligent Network Application Part (INAP) of SS7.\nAT commands.\nMany mobile and satellite transceiver units support the sending and receiving of SMS using an extended version of the Hayes command set. The extensions were standardised as part of the GSM Standards and extended as part of the 3GPP standards process.\nThe connection between the terminal equipment and the transceiver can be realized with a serial cable (e.g., USB), a Bluetooth link, an infrared link, etc. Common AT commands include AT+CMGS (send message), AT+CMSS (send message from storage), AT+CMGL (list messages) and AT+CMGR (read message).\nHowever, not all modern devices support receiving of messages if the message storage (for instance the device's internal memory) is not accessible using AT commands.\nPremium-rated short messages.\nThe Value-added service provider (VASP) providing premium-rate content submits the message to the mobile operator's SMSC(s) using a TCP/IP protocol such as the short message peer-to-peer protocol (SMPP) or the External Machine Interface (EMI). The SMSC delivers the text using the normal Mobile Terminated delivery procedure. The subscribers are charged extra for receiving this premium content; the revenue is typically divided between the mobile network operator and the VASP either through revenue share or a fixed transport fee. Submission to the SMSC is usually handled by a third party.\nMobile-originated short messages may also be used in a premium-rated manner for services such as televoting. In this case, the VASP providing the service obtains a short code from the telephone network operator, and subscribers send texts to that number. The payouts to the carriers vary by carrier; percentages paid are greatest on the lowest-priced premium SMS services. Most information providers should expect to pay about 45 percent of the cost of the premium SMS up front to the carrier. The submission of the text to the SMSC is identical to a standard MO Short Message submission, but once the text is at the SMSC, the Service Center (SC) identifies the Short Code as a premium service. The SC will then direct the content of the text message to the VASP, typically using an IP protocol such as SMPP or EMI. Subscribers are charged a premium for the sending of such messages, with the revenue typically shared between the network operator and the VASP. Short codes only work within one country, they are not international.\nAn alternative to inbound SMS is based on long numbers (international number format, such as \"+44 762 480 5000\"), which can be used in place of short codes for SMS reception in several applications, such as TV voting, product promotions and campaigns. Long numbers work internationally, allow businesses to use their own numbers, rather than short codes, which are usually shared across many brands. Additionally, long numbers are nonpremium inbound numbers.\nThreaded SMS.\nThreaded SMS is a visual styling orientation of SMS message history that arranges messages to and from a contact in chronological order on a single screen. It was first invented by a developer working to implement the SMS client for the BlackBerry, who was looking to make use of the blank screen left below the message on a device with a larger screen capable of displaying far more than the usual 160 characters, and was inspired by threaded Reply conversations in email.\nVisually, this style of representation provides a back-and-forth chat-like history for each individual contact. Hierarchical-threading at the conversation-level (as typical in blogs and online messaging boards) is not widely supported by SMS messaging clients. This limitation is due to the fact that there is no session identifier or subject-line passed back and forth between sent and received messages in the header data (as specified by SMS protocol) from which the client device can properly thread an incoming message to a specific dialogue, or even to a specific message within a dialogue.\nMost smart phone text-messaging-clients are able to create some contextual threading of \"group messages\" which narrows the context of the thread around the common interests shared by group members. On the other hand, advanced enterprise messaging applications which push messages from a remote server often display a dynamically changing reply number (multiple numbers used by the same sender), which is used along with the sender's phone number to create session-tracking capabilities analogous to the functionality that cookies provide for web-browsing. As one pervasive example, this technique is used to extend the functionality of many Instant Messenger (IM) applications such that they are able to communicate over two-way dialogues with the much larger SMS user-base. In cases where multiple reply numbers are used by the enterprise server to maintain the dialogue, the visual conversation threading on the client may be separated into multiple threads.\nApplication-to-person (A2P) SMS.\nWhile SMS reached its popularity as a person-to-person messaging, another type of SMS became popular by 2017: application-to-person (A2P) messaging. A2P is a type of SMS sent from a subscriber to an application or sent from an application to a subscriber. It is commonly used by businesses, such as banks, e-gaming, logistic companies, e-commerce, to send SMS messages from their systems to their customers.\nIn the US, carriers have traditionally preferred that A2P messages be sent using a short code rather than a standard long code. In 2021, US carriers introduced a new service called A2P 10DLC, supporting the used of 10-digit long codes for A2P messages. In the United Kingdom A2P messages can be sent with a dynamic 11 character sender ID; however, short codes are used for OPTOUT commands.\nSatellite phone networks.\nAll commercial satellite phone networks except ACeS and OptusSat support SMS. While early Iridium handsets only support incoming SMS, later models can also send messages. The price per message varies for different networks. Unlike some mobile phone networks, there is no extra charge for sending international SMS or to send one to a different satellite phone network. SMS can sometimes be sent from areas where the signal is too poor to make a voice call.\nSatellite phone networks usually have web-based or email-based SMS portals where one can send free SMS to phones on that particular network.\nUnreliability.\nUnlike dedicated texting systems like the Simple Network Paging Protocol and Motorola's ReFLEX protocol, SMS message delivery is not guaranteed, and many implementations provide no mechanism through which a sender can determine whether an SMS message has been delivered in a timely manner. SMS messages are generally treated as lower-priority traffic than voice, and various studies have shown that around 1% to 5% of messages are lost entirely, even during normal operation conditions, and others may not be delivered until long after their relevance has passed. The use of SMS as an emergency notification service in particular has been questioned.\nVulnerabilities.\nThe Global Service for Mobile communications (GSM), with the greatest worldwide number of users, succumbs to several security vulnerabilities. In the GSM, only the airway traffic between the Mobile Station (MS) and the Base Transceiver Station (BTS) is optionally encrypted with a weak and broken stream cipher (A5/1 or A5/2). The authentication is unilateral and also vulnerable. There are also many other security vulnerabilities and shortcomings. Such vulnerabilities are inherent to SMS as one of the superior and well-tried services with a global availability in the GSM networks. SMS messaging has some extra security vulnerabilities due to its store-and-forward feature, and the problem of fake SMS that can be conducted via the Internet. When a user is roaming, SMS content passes through different networks, perhaps including the Internet, and is exposed to various vulnerabilities and attacks. Another concern arises when an adversary gets access to a phone and reads the previous unprotected messages.\nIn October 2005, researchers from Pennsylvania State University published an analysis of vulnerabilities in SMS-capable cellular networks. The researchers speculated that attackers might exploit the open functionality of these networks to disrupt them or cause them to fail, possibly on a nationwide scale.\nSMS spoofing.\nThe GSM industry has identified a number of potential fraud attacks on mobile operators that can be delivered via abuse of SMS messaging services. The most serious threat is SMS Spoofing, which occurs when a fraudster manipulates address information in order to impersonate a user that has roamed onto a foreign network and is submitting messages to the home network. Frequently, these messages are addressed to destinations outside the home network\u2014with the home SMSC essentially being \"hijacked\" to send messages into other networks.\nThe only sure way of detecting and blocking spoofed messages is to screen incoming mobile-originated messages to verify that the sender is a valid subscriber and that the message is coming from a valid and correct location. This can be implemented by adding an intelligent routing function to the network that can query originating subscriber details from the home location register (HLR) before the message is submitted for delivery. This kind of intelligent routing function is beyond the capabilities of legacy messaging infrastructure.\nLimitation.\nIn an effort to limit telemarketers who had taken to bombarding users with hordes of unsolicited messages, India introduced new regulations in September 2011, including a cap of 3,000 SMS messages per subscriber per month, or an average of 100 per subscriber per day. Due to representations received from some of the service providers and consumers, TRAI (Telecom Regulatory Authority of India) has raised this limit to 200 SMS messages per SIM per day in case of prepaid services, and up to 6,000 SMS messages per SIM per month in case of postpaid services with effect from November 1, 2011. However, it was ruled unconstitutional by the Delhi high court, but there are some limitations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28208", "revid": "50876013", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28208", "title": "Santa Monica, California", "text": "Resort city in California, United States\nSanta Monica () is a city in Los Angeles County, situated along Santa Monica Bay on California's South Coast. Santa Monica's 2020 U.S. census population was 93,076. Santa Monica is a popular resort town, owing to its climate, beaches, and hospitality industry. It has a diverse economy, hosting headquarters of companies such as Skydance Media, Hulu, Activision Blizzard, Universal Music Group, Starz Entertainment, Lionsgate Studios, Illumination and The Recording Academy.\nSanta Monica traces its history to Rancho San Vicente y Santa M\u00f3nica, granted in 1839 to the Sep\u00falveda family of California. The rancho was later sold to John P. Jones and Robert Baker, who, in 1875, along with his Californio heiress wife Arcadia Bandini de Stearns Baker, founded Santa Monica, which incorporated as a city in 1886. The city developed into a seaside resort during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, with the creation of tourist attractions such as Palisades Park, the Santa Monica Pier, Ocean Park, and the Hotel Casa del Mar.\nHistory.\nIndigenous.\nThe Tongva are indigenous to the Santa Monica area. The village of Comicranga was established in the Santa Monica area. One of the village's notable residents was Victoria Reid, who was the daughter of the chief of the village. During the Spanish period, she was taken to Mission San Gabriel from her parents at the age of six.\nSpanish era.\nThe first non-indigenous group to set foot in the area was the party of explorer Gaspar de Portol\u00e1, which camped near the present-day intersection of Barrington and Ohio Avenues on August 3, 1769.\nThere are two different accounts of how the city's name came to be. One says it was named in honor of the feast day of Saint Monica (mother of Saint Augustine), but her feast day is May 4. Another version says it was named by Juan Cresp\u00ed on account of a pair of springs, the Kuruvungna Springs, that were reminiscent of the tears Saint Monica shed over her son's early impiety.\nMexican era.\nIn 1839, Governor Juan Bautista Alvarado granted Rancho San Vicente y Santa M\u00f3nica to Francisco Sep\u00falveda II, of the Sep\u00falveda family of California. As the definitions of the rancho grant were not precise, the Sep\u00falveda family came into conflict with the neighboring Rancho Boca de Santa M\u00f3nica, owned by Ysidro Reyes and Francisco M\u00e1rquez. A small Californio community grew up on Rancho San Vicente y Santa M\u00f3nica, made up primarily of vaqueros working on the rancho and their families.\nPost-conquest era.\nAfter the American conquest of California, Mexico signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which gave Mexicans and Californios living in the state certain unalienable rights. U.S. government sovereignty in California began on February 2, 1848.\nIn the 1870s, the Los Angeles and Independence Railroad connected Santa Monica with Los Angeles, and a wharf out into the bay. The first town hall was an 1873 brick building, later a beer hall, and now part of the Santa Monica Hostel. By 1885, the town's first hotel was the Santa Monica Hotel.\nAmusement piers became popular in the first decades of the 20th century, and the extensive Pacific Electric Railway brought people to the city's beaches from across the Greater Los Angeles Area.\nAround the start of the 20th century, a growing population of Asian Americans lived in and around Santa Monica and Venice. A Japanese fishing village was near the Long Wharf, while small numbers of Chinese lived or worked in Santa Monica and Venice. The two ethnic minorities were often viewed differently by White Americans, who were often well-disposed toward the Japanese but condescending to the Chinese. The Japanese village fishermen were an integral economic part of the Santa Monica Bay community.\nDonald Wills Douglas Sr. built a plant in 1922 at Clover Field (Santa Monica Airport) for the Douglas Aircraft Company. In 1924, four Douglas-built planes took off from Clover Field to attempt the first aerial circumnavigation of the world. Two planes returned after covering in 175 days, and were greeted on their return on September 23, 1924, by a crowd of 200,000. The Douglas Company (later McDonnell Douglas) kept facilities in the city until the 1970s.\nThe Great Depression hit Santa Monica deeply. One report gives citywide employment in 1933 of just 1,000. Hotels and office building owners went bankrupt. In the 1930s, corruption infected Santa Monica (along with neighboring Los Angeles). The federal Works Project Administration helped build several buildings, most notably City Hall. The main Post Office and Barnum Hall (Santa Monica High School auditorium) were also among other WPA projects.\nModern era.\nDouglas's business grew with the onset of World War II, employing as many as 44,000 people in 1943. To defend against air attack, set designers from the Warner Brothers Studios prepared elaborate camouflage that disguised the factory and airfield. The RAND Corporation began as a project of the Douglas Company in 1945, and spun off into an independent think tank on May 14, 1948. RAND acquired a campus across the street from the Civic Center and is still there today.\nThe completion of the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium in 1958 eliminated Belmar, the first African American community in the city, and the Santa Monica Freeway in 1966 decimated the Pico neighborhood that had been a leading African American enclave on the Westside.\nBeach volleyball is believed to have been developed by Duke Kahanamoku in Santa Monica during the 1920s.\nSanta Monica has two hospitals: Saint John's Health Center and Santa Monica-UCLA Medical Center. Its cemetery is Woodlawn Memorial.\nSanta Monica has several local newspapers, including \"Santa Monica Daily Press\", \"Santa Monica Mirror\", and \"Santa Monica Star\".\nGeography.\nSanta Monica rests on a mostly flat slope that angles down toward Ocean Avenue and toward the south. High bluffs separate the north side of the city from the beaches. Santa Monica borders the L.A. neighborhoods of Pacific Palisades to the north and Venice to the south. To the west, Santa Monica has a coastline fronting Santa Monica Bay, and to the east of the city are the L.A. communities of West Los Angeles and Brentwood.\nClimate.\nSanta Monica has a coastal Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csb\"). It receives an average of 310 days of sunshine a year. It is in USDA plant hardiness zone 11a. Because of its location, nestled on the vast and open Santa Monica Bay, morning fog is a common phenomenon in May, June, July and early August (caused by ocean temperature variations and currents). Like other inhabitants of the greater Los Angeles area, residents have a particular terminology for this phenomenon: the \"May Gray\", the \"June Gloom\", and even \"Fogust\". Overcast skies are common on June mornings, but usually the strong sun burns the fog off by noon. In the late winter/early summer, daily fog is a phenomenon, too. It happens suddenly and it may last some hours or past sunset time. Nonetheless, it will sometimes stay cloudy and cool all day during June, even as other parts of the Los Angeles area experience sunny skies and warmer temperatures. At times, the sun can be shining east of 20th Street while the beach area is overcast. As a general rule, the beach temperature is from 5 to 10 degrees Fahrenheit (3 to 6 degrees Celsius) cooler than it is inland during summer days, and 5 to 10 degrees warmer during winter nights.\nIt is also in September that the highest temperatures tend to be reached. It is winter, however, when the hot, dry winds of the Santa Anas are most common. In contrast, temperatures exceeding 10 degrees below average are rare.\nThe rainy season is from late October through late March. Winter storms usually approach from the northwest and pass quickly through the Southland. There is very little rain during the rest of the year. Yearly rainfall totals are unpredictable, as rainy years are occasionally followed by droughts. There has never been any snow or frost, but there has been hail.\nSanta Monica usually enjoys cool breezes blowing in from the ocean, which tend to keep the air fresh and clean. Therefore, smog is less of a problem for Santa Monica than elsewhere around Los Angeles. However, from September through November, the Santa Ana winds sometimes blow from the east, bringing smoggy and hot inland air to the beaches.\nThe hottest temperature ever reported in Santa Monica was on November 1, 1966, while the lowest is on March 1, 1945, and again on March 21, 1952. The highest minimum temperature is on October 24, 2007, and the lowest maximum temperature is on 4 dates in February 2001 and again on March 10, 2006. The snowiest months on record are January 1954 and March 1955, both with trace amounts. They are the only months to report any snowfall. Many months have reported no rainfall at all. Conversely, the wettest month on record is January 1995 with a total of of rainfall. The wettest year on record is 1998, with a total of of rainfall; the driest is 1989, with a total of of rainfall.\nEnvironment.\nThe city first proposed its Sustainable City Plan in 1992 and in 1994, was one of the first cities in the nation to formally adopt a comprehensive sustainability plan, setting waste reduction and water conservation policies for both public and private sector through its Office of Sustainability and the Environment. Eighty-two percent of the city's public works vehicles run on alternative fuels, including most of the municipal bus system, making it among the largest of such fleets in the country. Santa Monica fleet vehicles and buses source their natural gas from Redeem, a Southern California-based supplier of renewable and sustainable natural gas obtained from non-fracked methane biogas generated from organic landfill waste.\nSanta Monica adopted a Community Energy Independence Initiative to achieve complete energy independence by 2020 (vs. California's already ambitious 33% renewables goal). The city exceeded that aspiration when, in February 2019, it switched over to electricity from the Clean Power Alliance, with a citywide default of 100% renewably sourced energy. That same year, the Santa Monica City Council adopted a Climate Action and Adaptation Plan aimed at achieving an 80% cut in carbon emissions by 2030, and reaching community-wide carbon neutrality by 2050 or sooner.\nAn urban runoff facility (SMURFF), the first of its kind in the US, catches and treats of water each week that would otherwise flow into the bay via storm-drains and sells it back to end-users within the city for reuse as gray-water, while bioswales throughout the city allow rainwater to percolate into and replenish the groundwater. The groundwater supply plays an important role in the city's Sustainable Water Master Plan, whereby Santa Monica has set a goal of attaining 100% water independence by 2020. The city has numerous programs designed to promote water conservation among residents, including a rebate for those who convert lawns to drought-tolerant gardens that require less water.\nSanta Monica has also instituted a green building-code whereby merely constructing to code automatically renders a building equivalent to the US Green Building Council's LEED Silver standards. The city's Main Library is one of many LEED certified or LEED equivalent buildings in the city. It is built over a 200,000-gallon cistern that collects filtered stormwater from the roof. The water is used for landscape irrigation.\nSince 2009, Santa Monica has been developing the Zero Waste Strategic Operations Plan by which the city will set a goal of diverting at least 95% of all waste away from landfills, and toward recycling and composting, by 2030. The plan includes a food waste composting program, which diverts 3 million pounds of restaurant food waste away from landfills annually. As of 2013[ [update]], 77% of all solid waste produced citywide is diverted from landfills.\nEnvironmentally focused initiatives include curbside recycling, curbside composting bins (in addition to trash, yard-waste, and recycling bins), farmers' markets, community gardens, garden-share, an urban forest initiative, a hazardous materials home-collection service, and a green business certification.\nAs in other coastal beach communities, coastal erosion due to coastal infrastructure and high human usage is an increasing challenge, and will become worse due to sea level rise. Starting in 2016, local environmental groups began dune and beach restoration projects.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported Santa Monica had a population of 93,076. This corresponds to density of 11,067.3 people per square mile. The racial makeup of Santa Monica was 63,383 (68.1%) white, 8,602 (9.2%) Asian, 3,776 (4.1%) Black or African American, 539 (0.6%) American Indian and Alaska Native, 123 (0.1%) Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 5,347 (5.7%) some other race, and 11,306 (12.1%) people were of two or more races.\nIncluding all responses for people of two or more races, 73,996 (79.5%) were white alone or in combination with one or more other races, 11,864 (12.7%) were Asian alone or in combination with one or more other races, 5,459 (5.9%) were Black or African American alone or in combination, 1,877 (2.0%) were American Indian and Alaska Native alone or in combination, 415 (0.4%) were Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander alone or in combination, and 11,619 (12.5%) were some other race alone or in combination with one or more other races.\n13,544 (14.6%) were Hispanic or Latino of any race. Of those, 2,729 (2.9% of the total population) were white alone, 153 (0.2%) were Black or African American alone, 410 (0.4%) were American Indian and Alaska Native alone, 136 (0.1%) were Asian alone, 14 (0.0%) were Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander alone, 4,542 (4.9%) were some other race alone, and 5,560 (6.0%) were two or more races.\nThe census reported that Santa Monica had 52,389 housing units. Of those, 47,438 (90.5%) were occupied. 12,856 (27.1%) of the occupied units were owner-occupied and 34,582 (72.9%) were renter-occupied. Of the vacant units, 2,540 (4.8% of total) were for rent, 230 (0.4%) were rented but not occupied, 183 (0.3%) were for sale only, 205 (0.4%) were sold but not occupied, 693 (1.3%) were for seasonal, recreational, or occasional use, and 1,100 (2.1%) were otherwise vacant.\nThe median household income between 2017 and 2021 was $99,847 (2021 dollars), with 10.6% of people living in poverty. 94.8% of households had a computer between 2017 and 2021, and 91.0% had broadband internet access.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported Santa Monica had a population of 89,736. The population density was . The racial makeup of Santa Monica was 69,663 (77.6%) White (70.1% Non-Hispanic White), 3,526 (3.9%) African American, 338 (0.4%) Native American, 8,053 (9.0%) Asian, 124 (0.1%) Pacific Islander, 4,047 (4.5%) from other races, and 3,985 (4.4%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 11,716 persons (13.1%), with Mexican Americans, Spanish Americans, and Argentine Americans making up 64.2%, 6.4%, and 4.7% of the Hispanic population respectively.\nThe Census reported 87,610 people (97.6% of the population) lived in households, 1,299 (1.4%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 827 (0.9%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 46,917 households, out of which 7,835 (16.7%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 13,092 (27.9%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 3,510 (7.5%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,327 (2.8%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 2,867 (6.1%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 416 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 22,716 households (48.4%) were made up of individuals, and 5,551 (11.8%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.87. There were 17,929 families (38.2% of all households); the average family size was 2.79.\nThe population was spread out, with 12,580 people (14.0%) under the age of 18, 6,442 people (7.2%) aged 18 to 24, 32,552 people (36.3%) aged 25 to 44, 24,746 people (27.6%) aged 45 to 64, and 13,416 people (15.0%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40.4 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.2 males.\nThere were 50,912 housing units at an average density of , of which 13,315 (28.4%) were owner-occupied, and 33,602 (71.6%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.1%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.1%. 30,067 people (33.5% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units, and 57,543 people (64.1%) lived in rental housing units.\nAccording to the 2010 United States Census, Santa Monica had a median household income of $73,649, with 11.2% of the population living below the federal poverty line.\n2000.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 84,084 people, 44,497 households, and 16,775 families in the city. The population density was . There were 47,863 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 78.29% White, 7.25% Asian, 3.78% African American, 0.47% Native American, 0.10% Pacific Islander, 5.97% from other races, and 4.13% from two or more races. 13.44% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nThere were 44,497 households, out of which 15.8% had children under the age of 18, 27.5% were married couples living together, 7.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 62.3% were non-families. 51.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.83, and the average family size was 2.80.\nThe city of Santa Monica is consistently among the most educated cities in the United States, with 23.8 percent of all residents holding graduate degrees.\nThe population was diverse in age, with 14.6% under 18, 6.1% from 18 to 24, 40.1% from 25 to 44, 24.8% from 45 to 64, and 14.4% 65 years or older. The median age was 39 years. For every 100 females, there were 93.0 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 91.3 males.\nAccording to a 2009 estimate, the median income for a household in the city was $71,095, and the median income for a family was $109,410. Males had a median income of $55,689 versus $42,948 for females. The per capita income for the city was $42,874. 10.4% of the population and 5.4% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 9.9% of those under the age of 18 and 10.2% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nCrime.\nIn 2006, crime in Santa Monica affected 4.41% of the population, slightly lower than the national average crime rate that year of 4.48%. The majority of this was property crime, which affected 3.74% of Santa Monica's population in 2006; this was higher than the rates for Los Angeles County (2.76%) and California (3.17%), but lower than the national average (3.91%). These per-capita crime rates are computed based on Santa Monica's full-time population of about 85,000. However, the Santa Monica Police Department has suggested the actual per-capita crime rate is much lower, as tourists, workers, and beachgoers can increase the city's daytime population to between 250,000 and 450,000 people.\nHate crime has typically been minimal in Santa Monica, with only one reported incident in 2007. The city experienced a spike in anti-Islamic hate crimes in 2001 after the September 11 attacks, but hate crime levels returned to their minimal 2000 levels by 2002.\nGang activity.\nThe Pico neighborhood of Santa Monica (south of the Santa Monica Freeway) experiences some gang activity. The city estimates there are about 50 gang members based in Santa Monica, although some community organizers dispute this claim. Gang activity has been prevalent for decades in the Pico neighborhood.\nIn October 1998, alleged Culver City 13 gang member Omar Sevilla of Culver City was killed. A couple of hours after the shooting of Sevilla, German tourist Horst Fietze was killed. Several days later, Juan Martin Campos, a Santa Monica city employee, was shot and killed. Police believe this was a retaliatory killing in response to Sevilla's killing. Less than 24 hours later, Javier Cruz was wounded in a drive-by shooting outside his home on 17th and Michigan.\nIn 1998, there was a double homicide in the Westside Clothing store on Lincoln Boulevard. During the incident, Culver City gang members David \"Puppet\" Robles and Jesse \"Psycho\" Garcia entered the store masked and began opening fire, killing Anthony and Michael Juarez. Police say the incident was in retaliation for a shooting committed by the Santa Monica 13 gang days before the Juarez brothers were shot down.\nHomeless population.\nIn 2022, there were 826 homeless individuals in Santa Monica.\nEconomy.\nSanta Monica is home to the headquarters of many notable businesses, such as Beachbody, Fatburger, Hulu, Illumination, Otter Media, Lionsgate, Macerich, Miramax, CBS Media Ventures, Skydance Media the RAND Corporation, Saban Capital Group, The Recording Academy (which presents the annual Grammy Awards), TOMS Shoes, and Universal Music Group. Atlantic Aviation is at the Santa Monica Airport. The National Public Radio member station KCRW is on the Santa Monica College campus. VCA Animal Hospitals is just outside the eastern city limit.\nSeveral videogame development studios are based in Santa Monica, making it a major location for the industry. These include:\nIn addition, Santa Monica is part of Silicon Beach, and the area serves as the home of hundreds of venture capital-funded startup companies.\nFormer Santa Monica businesses include Douglas Aircraft (now merged with Boeing), GeoCities (which in December 1996 was headquartered on the third floor of 1918 Main Street in Santa Monica), Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and MySpace (now headquartered in Beverly Hills).\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2022 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report, the top employers in the city were:\nArts and culture.\nThe Santa Monica Looff Hippodrome (carousel) is a National Historic Landmark. It sits on the Santa Monica Pier, which was built in 1909. The La Monica Ballroom on the pier was once the largest ballroom in the US and the source for many New Year's Eve national network broadcasts.\nThe Santa Monica Civic Auditorium was an important music venue for several decades and hosted the Academy Awards in the 1960s. McCabe's Guitar Shop is a leading acoustic performance space as well as a retail outlet. The \"Santa Monica Playhouse\" is a popular theater in the city.\nBergamot Station is a city-owned art gallery compound. The city is also home to the California Heritage Museum and the Angels Attic dollhouse and toy museum.\nThe New West Symphony is the resident orchestra of Barnum Hall. They are also the resident orchestra of the Oxnard Performing Arts Center and the Thousand Oaks Civic Arts Plaza.\nSanta Monica hosts the annual Santa Monica Film Festival.\nThe city's oldest movie theater is the Majestic. Opened in 1912 and also known as the Mayfair Theatre, it has been closed since the 1994 Northridge earthquake. The Aero Theater (now operated by the American Cinematheque) and Criterion Theater were built in the 1930s and still show movies.\nNotable restaurants have included Madame Wu's Garden, Batterfish, Stout Burgers and Beers, and The Misfit.\nShopping districts.\nSanta Monica has three main shopping districts: Montana Avenue on the north side, the Downtown District in the city's core, and Main Street on the south end. Each has its own unique feel and personality. Montana Avenue is a stretch of luxury boutique stores, restaurants, and small offices that generally features more upscale shopping. The Main Street district offers an eclectic mix of clothing, restaurants, and other specialty retail.\nThe Downtown District is the home of the Third Street Promenade, a major outdoor pedestrian-only shopping district that stretches for three blocks between Wilshire Blvd. and Broadway. Third Street is closed to vehicles for those three blocks to allow people to stroll, congregate, shop, and enjoy street performers.\nThe Santa Monica Place, featuring Bloomingdale's and Nordstrom in a three-level outdoor environment, is at the Promenade's southern end. After a period of redevelopment, the mall reopened in the fall of 2010 as a modern shopping, entertainment, and dining complex with more outdoor space.\nPublic library system.\nThe Santa Monica Public Library consists of a Main Library in the downtown area, plus four neighborhood branches: Fairview, Montana Avenue, Ocean Park, and Pico Boulevard.\nSports.\nThe Santa Monica Track Club has many prominent track athletes, including many Olympic gold medalists. Santa Monica is the home to Southern California Aquatics, which was founded by Olympic swimmer Clay Evans and Bonnie Adair. Santa Monica is also home to the Santa Monica Rugby Club, a semi-professional team that competes in the Pacific Rugby Premiership, the highest-level rugby union club competition in the United States.\n1984 &amp; 2028 Summer Olympics.\nThe men's and women's marathon ran through parts of Santa Monica during the 1984 Summer Olympics.\nDuring the 2028 Summer Olympics, Santa Monica will host athletics (marathon), triathlon, and road cycling.\nParks and recreation.\nPalisades Park stretches out along the crumbling bluffs overlooking the Pacific and is a favorite walking area to view the ocean. It includes public art, a totem pole, camera obscura, benches, picnic areas, p\u00e9tanque courts, and restrooms.\nTongva Park occupies between Ocean Avenue and Main Street, just south of Colorado Avenue. The park includes an overlook, amphitheater, playground, garden, fountains, picnic areas, and restrooms.\nThe Santa Monica Stairs, a long, steep staircase consisting of 152 wooden steps and 18 concrete steps in a straight path, that leads from north of San Vicente down into Santa Monica Canyon, is a popular spot for outdoor workouts. Some area residents have complained that the stairs have become too popular, attracting too many exercisers to the wealthy neighborhood of multimillion-dollar properties.\nIshihara Park opened to the public in 2017 and acts as a buffer between the Los Angeles Metro Rail and the surrounding residential community.\nGovernment.\nLocal government.\nSanta Monica is governed by the Santa Monica City Council, a Council-Manager governing body with seven members elected at-large. The mayor is Lana Negrete, and the Mayor Pro Tempore is Caroline Torosis. The other five council members are Jesse Zwick, Natalya Zernitskaya, Barry Snell, Dan Hall, and Ellis Raskin.\nRepresentation.\nIn the California State Legislature, Santa Monica is in the senatorial district, represented by Democrat Ben Allen, and in the Assembly district, represented by Democrat Rick Zbur.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Santa Monica is in California's congressional district, represented by Democrat Ted Lieu.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nThe Santa Monica\u2013Malibu Unified School District provides public education at the elementary and secondary levels. In addition to the traditional model of early education school houses, SMASH (Santa Monica Alternative School House) is \"a K\u20138 public school of choice with team teachers and multi-aged classrooms\". The district maintains eight elementary schools, three middle schools, and three high schools in Santa Monica.\nPrivate schools.\nPrivate schools in the city include Crossroads School and Saint Monica Catholic High School.\nAsahi Gakuen, a weekend Japanese supplementary school system, operates its Santa Monica campus (\u30b5\u30f3\u30bf\u30e2\u30cb\u30ab\u6821\uff65\u9ad8\u7b49\u90e8 \"Santamonika-k\u014d k\u014dt\u014dbu\") at Webster Middle in the Sawtelle neighborhood of Los Angeles. All high school classes in the Asahi Gakuen system are held at the Santa Monica campus.\nPost-secondary.\nSanta Monica College is a community college founded in 1929. Many SMC graduates transfer to the University of California system. It occupies and enrolls 30,000 students annually. The Frederick S. Pardee RAND Graduate School, associated with the RAND Corporation, is the U.S.'s largest producer of public policy PhDs. The Art Institute of California \u2013 Los Angeles is also in Santa Monica near the Santa Monica Airport.\nUniversities and colleges within a radius from Santa Monica include Santa Monica College, Antioch University Los Angeles, Loyola Marymount University, Mount St. Mary's University, Pepperdine University, California State University, Northridge, California State University, Los Angeles, UCLA, USC, West Los Angeles College, California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Occidental College (Oxy), Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles Southwest College, Los Angeles Valley College, and Emperor's College of Traditional Oriental Medicine.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nBicycles.\nSanta Monica has a bike action plan and launched a bicycle sharing system in November 2015. The city is traversed by the Marvin Braude Bike Trail. Santa Monica has received the Bicycle Friendly Community Award (Bronze in 2009, Silver in 2013) by the League of American Bicyclists. Local bicycle advocacy organizations include Santa Monica Spoke, a local chapter of the Los Angeles County Bicycle Coalition. Santa Monica is thought to be one of the leaders for bicycle infrastructure and programming in Los Angeles County although cycling infrastructure in Los Angeles County in general remains very poor compared to other major cities.\nThe city implemented a 5-year and 20-year Bike Action Plan to attain 14 to 35% bicycle transportation mode share by 2030 through the installation of enhanced bicycle infrastructure throughout the city. In 2023, Santa Monica scored near the 90th percentile of cities surveyed in the PeopleForBikes City Ratings, which measures the quality of a city's bike network.\nIn terms of the number of bicycle accidents, Santa Monica ranks as one of the worst (#2) out of 102 California cities with a population of 50,000\u2013100,000, a ranking consistent with the city's composite ranking.\nIn 2007 and 2008, local police cracked down on Santa Monica Critical Mass rides that had become controversial, putting a damper on the tradition.\nHighways.\nI-10 begins in Santa Monica near the Pacific Ocean and heads east. The Santa Monica Freeway between Santa Monica and downtown Los Angeles has the distinction of being one of the busiest highways in all of North America. After traversing the Greater Los Angeles area, I-10 crosses seven more states, terminating at Jacksonville, Florida. In Santa Monica, there is a road sign designating this route as the Christopher Columbus Transcontinental Highway. State Route\u00a02 (SR\u00a02) begins in Santa Monica, barely grazing SR\u00a01 at Lincoln Boulevard, and continues northeast across Los Angeles County, through the Angeles National Forest, crossing the San Gabriel Mountains as the Angeles Crest Highway, ending in Wrightwood. Santa Monica is also the western terminus of Historic U.S. Route 66. Close to the eastern boundary of Santa Monica, Sepulveda Boulevard reaches from Long Beach at the south, to the northern end of the San Fernando Valley. Just east of Santa Monica is Interstate\u00a0405 (I-405), the San Diego Freeway, a major north\u2013south route in Los Angeles and Orange counties.\nMotorized vehicles.\nSanta Monica has purchased the first ZeroTruck all-electric medium-duty truck. The vehicle will be equipped with a Scelzi utility body, which is based on the Isuzu N series chassis, a UQM PowerPhase 100 advanced electric motor, and is the only US-built electric truck offered for sale in the United States in 2009.\nBus.\nThe city of Santa Monica runs its own bus service, the Big Blue Bus, which also serves much of West Los Angeles and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). A Big Blue Bus was featured prominently in the action movie \"Speed\".\nThe city of Santa Monica is also served by the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority's (Metro) bus lines. Metro also complements Big Blue service, as when Big Blue routes are not operational overnight, Metro buses make many Big Blue Bus stops, in addition to MTA stops.\nLight rail.\nDesign and construction on the of the Expo Line from Culver City to Santa Monica started in September 2011, with service beginning on May 20, 2016. Santa Monica Metro stations include , , and . Travel time between the Downtown Santa Monica station and 7th Street/Metro Center station in Downtown Los Angeles is approximately 46 minutes, while the travel time between the Downtown Santa Monica station and the terminal Atlantic station in East Los Angeles is approximately 1 hour and 9 minutes.\nHistorical aspects of the Expo line route are noteworthy. It uses the former Los Angeles region's electric interurban Pacific Electric Railway's right-of-way that ran from the Exposition Park area of Los Angeles to Santa Monica. This route was called the Santa Monica Air Line and provided electric-powered freight and passenger service between Los Angeles and Santa Monica beginning in the 1920s. Passenger service was discontinued in 1953, but diesel-powered freight deliveries to warehouses along the route continued until March 11, 1988. The abandonment of the line spurred future transportation considerations and concerns within the community, and the entire right-of-way was purchased from Southern Pacific by Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority. The line was built in 1875 as the steam-powered Los Angeles and Independence Railroad to bring mining ore to ships in Santa Monica harbor and as a passenger excursion train to the beach.\nAirport and ports.\nThe city owns and operates a general aviation airport, Santa Monica Airport, which has been the site of several important aviation achievements. Commercial flights are available for residents at LAX, a few miles south of Santa Monica.\nLike other cities in Los Angeles County, Santa Monica is dependent upon the Port of Long Beach and the Port of Los Angeles for international ship cargo. In the 1890s, Santa Monica was once in competition with Wilmington, California, and San Pedro for recognition as the \"Port of Los Angeles\" (see History of Santa Monica, California).\nOther.\nSince the mid-1980s, various proposals have been made to extend the Purple Line subway to Santa Monica under Wilshire Boulevard. There are no current plans to complete the \"subway to the sea\", an estimated $5\u00a0billion project.\nIn August 2018, Santa Monica issued permits to Bird, Lime, Lyft, and Jump Bikes to operate dockless scooter-sharing systems in the city. As of April 2023, Lyft, Spin, Veo, and Wheels are licensed to provide micro-mobility transportation in city.\nEmergency services.\nTwo major hospitals are within the Santa Monica city limits, UCLA Medical Center, Santa Monica and Saint John's Health Center. Four fire stations provide medical and fire response, staffed with six Paramedic Engines, a Truck company, a Hazardous Materials team, and an Urban Search &amp; Rescue team. Santa Monica Fire Department has its own Dispatch Center. Ambulance transportation is provided by McCormick Ambulance Services.\nLaw enforcement services are provided by the Santa Monica Police Department\nThe Los Angeles County Department of Health Services operates the Simms/Mann Health and Wellness Center in Santa Monica. The Department's West Area Health Office is in the Simms/Mann Center.\nInternet services.\nSanta Monica has a municipal wireless network which provides several free city Wi-Fi hotspots distributed around the city.\nIn popular culture.\nFilm and television.\nHundreds of films have been shot or set in part in Santa Monica.\nFilms.\nCharlie Chaplin filmed in Palisades Park in 1915 for his comedy short film By The Sea. One of the oldest exterior shots in Santa Monica is Buster Keaton's \"Spite Marriage\" (1929) which shows much of 2nd Street. The comedy \"It's a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World\" (1963) included several scenes shot in Santa Monica, including those along the California Incline, which led to the movie's treasure spot, \"The Big W\". The Sylvester Stallone film \"Rocky III\" (1982) shows Rocky Balboa and Apollo Creed training to fight Clubber Lang by running on the Santa Monica Beach, and Stallone's \"Demolition Man\" (1993) includes Santa Monica settings. In \"Pee-wee's Big Adventure\" (1985), the theft of Pee-wee's bike occurs on the Third Street Promenade.\nHenry Jaglom's indie \"Someone to Love\" (1987), the last film in which Orson Welles appeared, takes place in Santa Monica's venerable Mayfair Theatre. \"Heathers\" (1988) used Santa Monica's John Adams Middle School for many exterior shots. \"The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs\" (1996) is set entirely in Santa Monica, particularly the Palisades Park area, and features a radio station that resembles KCRW at Santa Monica College. \"17 Again\" (2009) was shot at Samohi. Other films that show significant exterior shots of Santa Monica include \"Fletch\" (1985), \"Species\" (1995), \"Get Shorty\" (1995), and \"Ocean's Eleven\" (2001). Richard Rossi's biopic opens and closes at the beach in Santa Monica, and his film Canaan Land features the lead characters on a date at the pier. \"Iron Man\" features the Santa Monica pier and surrounding communities as Tony Stark tests his experimental flight suit.\nThe documentary \"Dogtown and Z-Boys\" (2001) and the related dramatic film \"Lords of Dogtown\" (2005) are both about the influential skateboarding culture of Santa Monica's Ocean Park neighborhood in the 1970s.\nSanta Monica (and in particular the Santa Monica Airport) was featured in Roland Emmerich's disaster film \"2012\" (2009). A magnitude 10.9 earthquake destroys the airport and the surrounding area as a group of survivors escapes in a personal plane. The Santa Monica Pier and the whole city sink into the Pacific Ocean in the aftermath.\nTelevision.\nA number of television series have been set in Santa Monica, including \"Baywatch\", \"Goliath\", \"Pacific Blue\" (1996\u20132000), \"Private Practice\" (2007\u20132013), and \"Three's Company\" (1977\u20131984), which was set in the Ocean Park neighborhood of Santa Monica. The Santa Monica pier is shown in the main theme of CBS series \"\".\nLiterature.\nHorace McCoy's 1935 novel \"They Shoot Horses, Don't They?\" is set at a dance marathon held in a ballroom on the Santa Monica Pier.\nRaymond Chandler's most famous character, private detective Philip Marlowe, frequently has a portion of his adventures in a place called \"Bay City\", which is modeled on Depression-era Santa Monica. In Marlowe's world, Bay City is \"a wide-open town\", where gambling and other crimes thrive due to a massively corrupt and ineffective police force.\nTennessee Williams lived (while working at MGM Studios) in a hotel on Ocean Avenue in the 1940s. At that location, he wrote the play \"The Glass Menagerie\" (which premiered in 1944). His short story \"\" (1954) is set near Santa Monica Beach and mentions the clock visible in much of the city, high up on The Broadway Building, on Broadway near Second Street.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28209", "revid": "7196877", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28209", "title": "Shot put", "text": "Track and field event\nThe shot put is a track-and-field event involving \"putting\" (throwing) a heavy spherical ball\u2014the \"shot\"\u2014as far as possible. For men, the sport has been a part of the modern Olympics since their revival (1896), and women's competition began in 1948. The shot put is part of the most common combined events, the decathlon, the women's and men's heptathlon and the women's pentathlon.\nHistory.\nHomer mentions competitions of rock throwing by soldiers during the siege of Troy but there is no record of any weights being thrown in Greek competitions. The first evidence for stone- or weight-throwing events were in the Scottish Highlands, and date back to approximately the first century. In the 16th century King Henry VIII was noted for his prowess in court competitions of weight and hammer throwing.\nThe first events resembling the modern shot put likely occurred in the Middle Ages when soldiers held competitions in which they hurled cannonballs. Shot put competitions were first recorded in early 19th century Scotland, and were a part of the British Amateur Championships beginning in 1866.\nCompetitors take their throw from inside a marked circle in diameter, with a \"toe board\" or \"stop board\" high at the front of the circle. The distance thrown is measured from the inside of the circumference of the circle to the nearest mark made on the ground by the falling shot, with distances rounded down to the nearest centimetre under IAAF and WMA rules.\nLegal throws.\nThe following rules (indoor and outdoor) must be adhered to for a legal throw:\nFoul throws occur when an athlete:\nAt any time if the shot loses contact with the neck then it is technically an illegal put.\nRegulation misconceptions.\nThe following are either obsolete or non-existent, but commonly believed rules for professional competition:\nCompetition.\nShot put competitions have been held at the modern Summer Olympic Games since their inception in 1896, and it is also included as an event in the World Athletics Championships.\nEach of these competitions in the modern era have a set number of rounds of throws. Typically there are three qualification rounds to determine qualification for the final. There are then three preliminary rounds in the final with the top eight competitors receiving a further three throws. Each competitor in the final is credited with their longest throw, regardless of whether it was achieved in the preliminary or final three rounds. The competitor with the longest legal put is declared the winner.\nWeight.\nIn open competitions the men's shot weighs , and the women's shot weighs . Junior, school, and masters competitions often use different weights of shots, typically below the weights of those used in open competitions; the individual rules for each competition should be consulted in order to determine the correct weights to be used.\nPutting styles.\nTwo putting styles are in current general use by shot put competitors: the \"glide\" and the \"spin\". With all putting styles, the goal is to release the shot with maximum forward velocity at an angle of slightly less than forty-five degrees.\nGlide.\nThe origin of this technique dates to 1951, when Parry O'Brien from the United States invented a technique that involved the putter facing backwards, rotating 180 degrees across the circle, and then tossing the shot. Unlike spin, this technique is a linear movement.\nWith this technique, a right-hand thrower would begin facing the rear of the circle. They would typically adopt a specific type of crouch, involving their bent right leg, in order to begin the throw from a more beneficial posture whilst also isometrically preloading their muscles. The positioning of their bodyweight over their bent leg, which pushes upwards with equal force, generates a preparatory isometric press. The force generated by this press will be channelled into the subsequent throw making it more powerful. To initiate the throw they kick to the front with the left leg, while pushing off forcefully with the right. As the thrower crosses the circle, the hips twist toward the front, the left arm is swung out then pulled back tight, followed by the shoulders, and they then strike in a putting motion with their right arm. The key is to move quickly across the circle with as little air under the feet as possible, hence the name 'glide'.\nSpin.\nThis is also known as the rotational technique. It was first practiced in Europe in the 1950s but did not receive much attention until the 1970s. In 1972, Aleksandr Baryshnikov set his first USSR record using a new putting style, the spin (\"\u043a\u0440\u0443\u0433\u043e\u0432\u043e\u0439 \u043c\u0430\u0445\" in Russian), invented by his coach Viktor Alexeyev. The spin involves rotating like a discus thrower and using rotational momentum for power. In 1976 Baryshnikov went on to set a world record of with his spin style, and was the first shot putter to cross the 22-meter mark.\nWith this technique, a right-hand thrower faces the rear, and begins to spin on the ball of the left foot. The thrower comes around and faces the front of the circle and drives the right foot into the center of the circle. Finally, the thrower reaches for the front of the circle with the left foot, twisting the hips and shoulders like in the glide, and puts the shot.\nWhen the athlete executes the spin, the upper body is twisted hard to the right, so the imaginary lines created by the shoulders and hips are no longer parallel. This action builds up torque, and stretches the muscles, creating an involuntary elasticity in the muscles, providing extra power and momentum. When the athlete prepares to release, the left foot is firmly planted, causing the momentum and energy generated to be conserved, pushing the shot in an upward and outward direction.\nAnother purpose of the spin is to build up a high rotational speed, by swinging the right leg initially, then to bring all the limbs in tightly, similar to a figure skater bringing in their arms while spinning to increase their speed. Once this fast speed is achieved the shot is released, transferring the energy into the shot put.\nUntil 2016, a woman had never made an Olympic final (top 8) using the spin technique. The first woman to enter a final and win a medal at the Olympics was Anita M\u00e1rton.\nRyan Crouser, the current men's world record holder, added an additional move, the \"Crouser Slide\", to his spin technique. He used this technique to set the world record at the Los Angeles Grand Prix in 2023.\nCartwheel.\nA vertical spinning technique where the athlete does a cartwheel on one hand before releasing the shot. It is currently banned in major competitions.\nUsage.\nCurrently, most top male shot putters use the spin. However the glide remains popular since the technique leads to greater consistency compared to the rotational technique. Almost all throwers start by using the glide. Tomasz Majewski notes that although most athletes use the spin, he and some other top shot putters achieved success using this classic method (for example he became the first to defend the Olympic title in 56 years).\nThe world record and the next six best male results (23.37, 23.30, 23.15, and 23.12 by Ryan Crouser, 23.23 by Joe Kovacs, and 23.12 and 23.10 by Randy Barnes) were completed with the spin technique, while the eighth-best all-time put of 23.06\u00a0m () by Ulf Timmermann was completed with the glide technique.\nThe decision to glide or spin may need to be decided on an individual basis, determined by the thrower's size and power. Short throwers may benefit from the spin and taller throwers may benefit from the glide, but many throwers do not follow this guideline.\nTypes of shot.\nThe shot is made of different kinds of materials depending on its intended use. Materials used include sand, iron, cast iron, solid steel, stainless steel, brass, and synthetic materials like polyvinyl. Some metals are more dense than others, making the size of the shot vary. For example, different materials are used to make indoor and outdoor shot \u2013 because damage to surroundings must be taken into account \u2013 so the latter are smaller. There are various size and weight standards for the implement that depend on the age and gender of the competitors as well as the national customs of the governing body.\nWorld records.\nThe current world record holders are:\nContinental records.\nThe current records held on each continent are:\nAll-time top 25.\nMen (indoor).\nNotes.\nRyan Crouser threw 23.38 i, a possible world record, in Pocatello, Idaho on 18 February 2023. But this result was unratifiable because the throwing circle was too wide and raised above ground level.\nWomen (indoor).\nAnnulled.\nThe following athletes had their performance (inside 21.50 m) annulled due to doping offences:\nSeason's bests.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28210", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28210", "title": "S. C. Kleene", "text": ""}
{"id": "28211", "revid": "1020372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28211", "title": "Stan Kelly-Bootle", "text": "English archivist, computer scientist, and folk musician (1929\u20132014)\nStanley Bootle, known as Stan Kelly-Bootle (15 September 1929 \u2013 16 April 2014), was a British author, academic, singer-songwriter and computer scientist.\nHe took his stage name Stan Kelly (he was not known as Stan Kelly-Bootle in folk music circles) from the Irish folk song \"Kelly, the boy from Killane\". His best-known song is the \"Liverpool Lullaby\" or \"The Mucky Kid\" which was recorded in 1965 on the \"Three City Four\" LP and sung by Marian McKenzie. It was also sung by the Ian Campbell Folk Group on the \"Contemporary Campbells\" LP. It was later recorded by Judy Collins in 1966 for her album \"In My Life\". Cilla Black recorded it three years later as the B-side to her pop hit \"Conversations\". Kelly-Bootle achieved the first postgraduate degree in computer science in 1954, from the University of Cambridge.\nEarly life.\nStan Kelly-Bootle was born Stanley Bootle in Liverpool, Lancashire, on 15 September 1929 and grew up in the Wavertree area of the city. His parents were Arthur Bootle and Ada Gallagher.\nEducation.\nKelly-Bootle was schooled at the Liverpool Institute. He spent 1948\u20131950 doing his national service in the British Army, achieving the rank of Sgt. Instructor in RADAR. He attended Downing College, Cambridge, graduating with a first class degree in Numerical Analysis and Automatic Computing in 1954, the first postgraduate degree in computer science.\nFolk singing career.\nIn 1954, Kelly-Bootle helped found the St. Lawrence Folk Song Society at Cambridge University. As a folk singer-songwriter, he performed under the name Stan Kelly. He wrote some of his own tunes and lyrics set to traditional tunes, made over two hundred radio and television appearances and released several recordings, as well as having his songs recorded by others.\nDiscography.\nSolo releases include:\nOther audio recordings include:\nComputing career.\nHe started his computing career programming the pioneering EDSAC computer, designed and built at Cambridge University. He worked for IBM in the United States and the UK from 1955 to 1970. From 1970 to 1973, he worked as Manager for University Systems for Sperry-UNIVAC. He also lectured at the University of Warwick.\nWriting career.\nIn 1973, Kelly-Bootle left Sperry-UNIVAC and became a freelance consultant, writer and programmer. He was known in the computer community for \"The Devil's DP Dictionary\" and its second edition, \"The Computer Contradictionary\" (1995), which he authored. These works are cynical lexicographies in the vein of Ambrose Bierce's \"The Devil's Dictionary\". Kelly-Bootle authored or co-authored several serious textbooks and tutorials on subjects such as the Motorola 68000 family of CPUs, programming languages including various C compilers, and the Unix operating system. He authored the \"Devil's Advocate\" column in \"UNIX Review\" from 1984 to 2000, and had columns in \"Computer Language\" (\"Bit by Bit\", 1989\u20131994), \"OS/2 Magazine\" (\"End Notes\", 1994\u201397) and \"Software Development\" (\"Seamless Quanta\", October 1995 \u2013 May 1997). He contributed columns and articles to several other computer industry magazines, as well.\nKelly-Bootle's articles for magazines such as \"ACM Queue\", \"AI/Expert\", and \"UNIX Review\" contain examples of word-play, criticism of silly marketing and usage (he refers often to the computer \"laxicon\"), and commentary on the industry in general. He wrote an online monthly column posted on the Internet. While most of his writing was oriented towards the computer industry, he wrote a few books relating to his other interests, including \nDeath.\nStan Kelly-Bootle died on 16 April 2014, aged 84, in hospital in Oswestry, Shropshire.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28212", "revid": "50436820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28212", "title": "Skewness", "text": "Measure of the asymmetry of random variables\nSkewness in probability theory and statistics is a measure of the asymmetry of the probability distribution of a real-valued random variable about its mean. Similarly to kurtosis, it provides insights into characteristics of a distribution. The skewness value can be positive, zero, negative, or undefined.\nFor a unimodal distribution (a distribution with a single peak), negative skew commonly indicates that the \"tail\" is on the left side of the distribution, and positive skew indicates that the tail is on the right. In cases where one tail is long but the other tail is fat, skewness does not obey a simple rule. For example, a zero value in skewness means that the tails on both sides of the mean balance out overall; this is the case for a symmetric distribution but can also be true for an asymmetric distribution where one tail is long and thin, and the other is short but fat. Thus, the judgement on the symmetry of a given distribution by using only its skewness is risky; the distribution shape must be taken into account.\nIntroduction.\nConsider the two distributions in the figure. Within each graph, the values on the right side of the distribution taper differently from the values on the left side. These tapering sides are called \"tails\", and they provide a visual means to determine which of the two kinds of skewness a distribution has:\n Skewness in a data series may sometimes be observed not only graphically but by simple inspection of the values. For instance, consider the numeric sequence (49, 50, 51), whose values are evenly distributed around a central value of 50. We can transform this sequence into a negatively skewed distribution by adding a value far below the mean, which is probably a negative outlier, e.g. (40, 49, 50, 51). Therefore, the mean of the sequence becomes 47.5, and the median is 49.5. Based on the formula of nonparametric skew, defined as formula_1 the skew is negative. Similarly, we can make the sequence positively skewed by adding a value far above the mean, which is probably a positive outlier, e.g. (49, 50, 51, 60), where the mean is 52.5, and the median is 50.5.\nAs mentioned earlier, a unimodal distribution with zero value of skewness does not imply that this distribution is symmetric necessarily. However, a symmetric unimodal or multimodal distribution always has zero skewness.\nRelationship of mean and median.\nThe skewness is not directly related to the relationship between the mean and median: a distribution with negative skew can have its mean greater than or less than the median, and likewise for positive skew.\nIn the older notion of nonparametric skew, defined as formula_1 where formula_3 is the mean, formula_4 is the median, and formula_5 is the standard deviation, the skewness is defined in terms of this relationship: positive/right nonparametric skew means the mean is greater than (to the right of) the median, while negative/left nonparametric skew means the mean is less than (to the left of) the median. However, the modern definition of skewness and the traditional nonparametric definition do not always have the same sign: while they agree for some families of distributions, they differ in some of the cases, and conflating them is misleading.\nIf the distribution is symmetric, then the mean is equal to the median, and the distribution has zero skewness. If the distribution is both symmetric and unimodal, then the mean = median = mode. This is the case of a coin toss or the series 1,2,3,4... Note, however, that the converse is not true in general, i.e. zero skewness (defined below) does not imply that the mean is equal to the median.\nA 2005 journal article points out:Many textbooks teach a rule of thumb stating that the mean is right of the median under right skew, and left of the median under left skew. This rule fails with surprising frequency. It can fail in multimodal distributions, or in distributions where one tail is long but the other is heavy. Most commonly, though, the rule fails in discrete distributions where the areas to the left and right of the median are not equal. Such distributions not only contradict the textbook relationship between mean, median, and skew, they also contradict the textbook interpretation of the median.\nFor example, in the distribution of adult residents across US households, the skew is to the right. However, since the majority of cases is less than or equal to the mode, which is also the median, the mean sits in the heavier left tail. As a result, the rule of thumb that the mean is right of the median under right skew failed.\nDefinition.\nFisher's moment coefficient of skewness.\nThe skewness formula_6 of a random variable X is the third standardized moment formula_7, defined as:\nformula_8\nwhere \u03bc is the mean, \u03c3 is the standard deviation, E is the expectation operator, \"\u03bc\"3 is the third central moment, and \"\u03ba\"\"t\" are the t-th cumulants. It is sometimes referred to as Pearson's moment coefficient of skewness, or simply the moment coefficient of skewness, but should not be confused with Pearson's other skewness statistics (see below). The last equality expresses skewness in terms of the ratio of the third cumulant \"\u03ba\"3 to the 1.5th power of the second cumulant \"\u03ba\"2. This is analogous to the definition of kurtosis as the fourth cumulant normalized by the square of the second cumulant. \nThe skewness is also sometimes denoted Skew[\"X\"].\nIf \u03c3 is finite and \u03bc is finite too, then skewness can be expressed in terms of the non-central moment E[\"X\"3] by expanding the previous formula:\nformula_9\nExamples.\nSkewness can be infinite, as when\nformula_10\nwhere the third cumulants are infinite, or as when\nformula_11\nwhere the third cumulant is undefined.\nExamples of distributions with finite skewness include the following.\nSample skewness.\nFor a sample of \"n\" values, two natural estimators of the population skewness are\nformula_12\nand\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 is the sample mean, s is the sample standard deviation, \"m\"2 is the (biased) sample second central moment, and \"m\"3 is the (biased) sample third central moment. formula_15 is a method of moments estimator. \nAnother common definition of the \"sample skewness\" is\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is the unique symmetric unbiased estimator of the third cumulant and formula_18 is the symmetric unbiased estimator of the second cumulant (i.e. the sample variance). This adjusted Fisher\u2013Pearson standardized moment coefficient formula_19 is the version found in Excel and several statistical packages including Minitab, SAS and SPSS.\nUnder the assumption that the underlying random variable formula_20 is normally distributed, it can be shown that all three ratios formula_21, formula_15 and formula_23 are unbiased and consistent estimators of the population skewness formula_24, with formula_25, i.e., their distributions converge to a normal distribution with mean 0 and variance 6 (Fisher, 1930). The variance of the sample skewness is thus approximately formula_26 for sufficiently large samples. More precisely, in a random sample of size \"n\" from a normal distribution,\nformula_27\nIn normal samples, formula_21 has the smaller variance of the three estimators, with\nformula_29\nFor non-normal distributions, formula_21, formula_15 and formula_23 are generally biased estimators of the population skewness formula_6; their expected values can even have the opposite sign from the true skewness. For instance, a mixed distribution consisting of very thin Gaussians centred at \u221299, 0.5, and 2 with weights 0.01, 0.66, and 0.33 has a skewness formula_6 of about \u22129.77, but in a sample of 3 formula_23 has an expected value of about 0.32, since usually all three samples are in the positive-valued part of the distribution, which is skewed the other way.\nApplications.\nSkewness is a descriptive statistic that can be used in conjunction with the histogram and the normal quantile plot to characterize the data or distribution.\nSkewness indicates the direction and relative magnitude of a distribution's deviation from the normal distribution.\nWith pronounced skewness, standard statistical inference procedures such as a confidence interval for a mean will be not only incorrect, in the sense that the true coverage level will differ from the nominal (e.g., 95%) level, but they will also result in unequal error probabilities on each side.\nSkewness can be used to obtain approximate probabilities and quantiles of distributions (such as value at risk in finance) via the Cornish\u2013Fisher expansion.\nMany models assume normal distribution; i.e., data are symmetric about the mean. The normal distribution has a skewness of zero. But in reality, data points may not be perfectly symmetric. So, an understanding of the skewness of the dataset indicates whether deviations from the mean are going to be positive or negative.\nD'Agostino's K-squared test is a goodness-of-fit normality test based on sample skewness and sample kurtosis.\nOther measures of skewness.\nOther measures of skewness have been used, including simpler calculations suggested by Karl Pearson (not to be confused with Pearson's moment coefficient of skewness, see above). These other measures are:\nPearson's first skewness coefficient (mode skewness).\nThe Pearson mode skewness, or first skewness coefficient, is defined as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;.\nPearson's second skewness coefficient (median skewness).\nThe Pearson median skewness, or second skewness coefficient, is defined as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;.\nWhich is a simple multiple of the nonparametric skew.\nQuantile-based measures.\nBowley's measure of skewness (from 1901), also called Yule's coefficient (from 1912) is defined as: \nformula_36\nwhere \"Q\" is the quantile function (i.e., the inverse of the cumulative distribution function). The numerator is difference between the average of the upper and lower quartiles (a measure of location) and the median (another measure of location), while the denominator is the semi-interquartile range formula_37, which for symmetric distributions is equal to the MAD measure of dispersion.\nOther names for this measure are Galton's measure of skewness, the Yule\u2013Kendall index and the quartile skewness,\nSimilarly, Kelly's measure of skewness is defined as\nformula_38\nA more general formulation of a skewness function was described by Groeneveld, R. A. and Meeden, G. (1984):\nformula_39\nThe function \"\u03b3\"(\"u\") satisfies \u22121 \u2264 \"\u03b3\"(\"u\") \u2264 1 and is well defined without requiring the existence of any moments of the distribution. Bowley's measure of skewness is \"\u03b3\"(\"u\") evaluated at \"u\" = 3/4 while Kelly's measure of skewness is \"\u03b3\"(\"u\") evaluated at \"u\" = 9/10. This definition leads to a corresponding overall measure of skewness defined as the supremum of this over the range 1/2 \u2264 \"u\" &lt; 1. Another measure can be obtained by integrating the numerator and denominator of this expression. \nQuantile-based skewness measures are at first glance easy to interpret, but they often show significantly larger sample variations than moment-based methods. This means that often samples from a symmetric distribution (like the uniform distribution) have a large quantile-based skewness, just by chance.\nGroeneveld and Meeden's coefficient.\nGroeneveld and Meeden have suggested, as an alternative measure of skewness,\nformula_40\nwhere \u03bc is the mean, \u03bd is the median, is the absolute value, and E() is the expectation operator. This is closely related in form to Pearson's second skewness coefficient.\nL-moments.\nUse of L-moments in place of moments provides a measure of skewness known as the L-skewness.\nDistance skewness.\nA value of skewness equal to zero does not imply that the probability distribution is symmetric. Thus there is a need for another measure of asymmetry that has this property: such a measure was introduced in 2000. It is called distance skewness and denoted by dSkew. If \"X\" is a random variable taking values in the d-dimensional Euclidean space, X has finite expectation, \"X\"' is an independent identically distributed copy of X, and formula_41 denotes the norm in the Euclidean space, then a simple \"measure of asymmetry\" with respect to location parameter \u03b8 is\nformula_42\nand dSkew(\"X\") := 0 for \"X\" = \"\u03b8\" (with probability 1). Distance skewness is always between 0 and 1, equals 0 if and only if \"X\" is diagonally symmetric with respect to \u03b8 (X and 2\"\u03b8\" \u2212 \"X\" have the same probability distribution) and equals 1 if and only if \"X\" is a constant \"c\" (formula_43) with probability one. Thus there is a simple consistent statistical test of diagonal symmetry based on the sample distance skewness:\nformula_44\nMedcouple.\nThe medcouple is a scale-invariant robust measure of skewness, with a breakdown point of 25%. It is the median of the values of the kernel function\nformula_45\ntaken over all couples formula_46 such that formula_47, where formula_48 is the median of the sample formula_49. It can be seen as the median of all possible quantile skewness measures.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28213", "revid": "197953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28213", "title": "Sydney M. Lamb", "text": ""}
{"id": "28215", "revid": "1544984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28215", "title": "Saint Columba (disambiguation)", "text": "Saint Columba (521\u2013597) was an Irish Christian saint who evangelized Scotland.\nSaint Columba may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28217", "revid": "34765295", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28217", "title": "Serial Experiments Lain", "text": "1998 television anime series\nSerial Experiments Lain is a Japanese anime television series created and co-produced by Yasuyuki Ueda, written by Chiaki J. Konaka and directed by Ry\u016btar\u014d Nakamura. Animated by Triangle Staff and featuring original character designs by Yoshitoshi Abe, the series was broadcast for 13 episodes on TV Tokyo and its affiliates from July to September 1998. It follows Lain Iwakura, an adolescent girl in suburban Japan, and her relation to the Wired, a global communications network similar to the internet.\n\"Lain\" features surreal and avant-garde imagery and explores philosophical topics such as reality, identity, and communication. The series incorporates creative influences from computer history, cyberpunk, and conspiracy theories. Critics and fans have praised \"Lain\" for its originality, visuals, atmosphere, themes, and its dark depiction of a world fraught with paranoia, social alienation, and reliance on technology considered insightful of 21st century life. It received the Excellence Prize at the Japan Media Arts Festival in 1998.\nPlot.\nLain Iwakura is a socially isolated middle school student living in Setagaya City, Tokyo, with her emotionally detached family\u2014her distant mother Miho, computer-obsessed father Yasuo, and disengaged older sister Mika. Her quiet existence is disrupted when students at her school receive emails from Chisa Yomoda, a classmate who had recently committed suicide. To Lain's confusion, Chisa claims she is not truly dead but has instead abandoned her physical form to exist within the Wired, a vast virtual realm similar to the Internet. Chisa declares she has found \"God\" there, drawing Lain into a surreal investigation of the Wired's nature and its growing influence over reality.\nThe Wired is portrayed as an emergent digital plane, originating from telecommunications technology and expanding through the Internet and cyberspace. It is theorized that the Schumann resonances, a natural property of Earth's magnetic field, could enable direct subconscious communication between humans and machines, erasing the distinction between the virtual and the real. Masami Eiri, a former project director at Tachibana General Laboratories, exploited this possibility by embedding his own code into Protocol Seven, a next-generation Internet protocol. After transferring his consciousness into the Wired and discarding his physical body, he proclaims himself its deity. He identifies Lain as the key to merging both worlds, attempting to persuade her through manipulation, coercion, and promises of transcendence.\nA group known as the Knights of the Eastern Calculus, inspired by the Knights of the Lambda Calculus, operates as hackers who worship Masami and seek to dismantle the boundary between the Wired and reality. Their actions induce psychological breakdowns in those unable to reconcile the two realms. Meanwhile, Tachibana General Laboratories opposes them, striving to maintain the separation. Lain, however, exhibits an innate connection to the Wired, experiencing distortions in her perception\u2014visions of a woman struck by a train, phantom whispers, and spectral messages urging her deeper into the network.\nLain's home life remains cold and disconnected. Though Yasuo provides her with advanced computer equipment, her family shows little genuine care. Her interactions with classmates Alice, Julie, and Reika further highlight her alienation, particularly after an incident at Cyberia, a nightclub where a drug called Accela induces violent psychosis in users. There, Lain unnervingly stares down an assailant, who calls her a \"scattered God's...\" before killing himself. Later, she receives a mysterious Psyche chip, rumored to enhance her computer's capabilities, which she installs despite Yasuo's vague warnings about conflating the Wired with reality.\nAs the boundary between worlds weakens, disturbing events escalate. A popular virtual game, \"Phantoma\", is manipulated by the Knights to trap players in a distorted reality, leading to real-world violence. One player, convinced his actions have no consequences, murders a girl before realizing too late that the effects were tangible. Lain witnesses this through her computer, horrified yet increasingly aware of her own role in the unfolding crisis.\nIn the end, Lain resets reality, erasing all memory of herself and restoring the division between worlds. Everyone's lives improve, but Lain is left alone, grappling with her identity as an artificial consciousness. Though forgotten, she finds solace in observing others' happiness, particularly Alice, who moves on with her life. Lain is now capable of existing anywhere across both realms.\nVoiced by: Kaori Shimizu\nLain is a fourteen-year-old girl who uncovers her true nature through the series. She is first depicted as a shy junior high school student with few friends or interests. She later grows multiple bolder personalities, both in the physical world and the Wired, and starts making more friends. As the series progresses, she eventually learns she is an autonomous, sentient computer program in the form of a human, who is designed to sever the invisible barrier between the Wired and the real world. The truth of her creation is left ambiguous, particularly whether she was truly created by Tachibana General Laboratories (or Eiri independently), and whether some or all of her origin might be predestined from natural, supernatural, or alien factors. In the end, Lain is challenged to accept herself as a \"de facto\" goddess for the Wired, having become an omnipotent and omnipresent virtual being with worshippers of her own, whose existence is beyond the borders of devices, time, or space.\nVoiced by: Y\u014dko Asada\nLain's classmate and only true friend throughout the series. She is very sincere and has no discernible quirks. She is the first to attempt to help Lain socialize; she takes her out to a nightclub. From then on, she tries her best to look after Lain. Alice, along with her two best friends Julie and Reika, were taken by Chiaki Konaka from his previous work, \"Alice in Cyberland\".\nVoiced by: Sh\u014d Hayami\n The key designer of Protocol Seven. While working for Tachibana General Laboratories, he illicitly included codes enabling him to control the whole protocol at will and embedded his own mind and will into the seventh protocol. Because of this, he was fired by Tachibana General Laboratories, and was found dead not long after. He believes that the only way for humans to evolve even further and develop even greater abilities is to absolve themselves of their physical and human limitations, and to live as virtual entities\u2014or avatars\u2014in the Wired for eternity. He claims to have been Lain's creator all along, but was in truth standing in for another as an acting god, who was waiting for the Wired to reach its more evolved current state: Lain herself.\nVoiced by: Ry\u016bsuke \u014cbayashi\nLain and Mika's father. Passionate about computers and electronic communication, he works with Masami Eiri at Tachibana General Laboratories. He subtly pushes Lain, his \"youngest daughter\", towards the Wired and monitors her development until she becomes more and more aware of herself and of her \"raison d'\u00eatre\". He eventually leaves Lain, telling her that although he did not enjoy playing house, he genuinely loved and cared for her as a real father would. Despite Yasuo's eagerness to lure Lain into the Wired, he warns her not to get overly involved in it or to confuse it with the real world.\nVoiced by: Rei Igarashi\nLain and Mika's mother. Although she dotes on her husband, she is indifferent towards both her kids. She does not show much emotion compared to her husband, but she does share at least one trait; just like her husband, she ends up leaving Lain. She is a computer scientist.\nVoiced by: Ayako Kawasumi\nLain's older sister, an apathetic sixteen-year-old high school student. She seems to enjoy mocking Lain's behavior and interests. Mika is considered by \"Anime Revolution\" to be the only normal member of Lain's family: she sees her boyfriend in love hotels, is on a diet, and shops in Shibuya regularly. At a certain point in the series, she becomes heavily traumatized by violent and relentless hallucinations; while Lain begins freely delving into the Wired. Mika is taken there by her proximity to Lain, and she gets stuck between the real world and the Wired.\nVoiced by: Keito Takimoto\nA young boy of about Lain's age. He occasionally works for the Knights to bring forth \"the one truth\". Despite this, he has not yet been made a member, and knows nothing of their true intentions. Taro loves virtual reality games and hangs out all day at Cyberia with his friends, Myu-Myu and Masayuki. He uses special technology, such as custom Handi Navi and video goggles. Taro takes pride in his internet anonymity, and he asks Lain for a date with her Wired self in exchange for information.\nVoiced by: Eiichir\u014d Suzuki\nA top executive from Tachibana General Laboratories. He has a personal agenda, which he carries out with the help of the Men in Black. He looks forward to the arrival of a real God through the Wired, and is the man behind the Knights' mass assassination. There are many things he does not know about Lain, but he would rather ask questions about her than disclose his agenda.\n, Voiced by: Jouji Nakata (Japanese); Jamieson Price (English)\nLin Suixi (), Voiced by: Takumi Yamazaki (Japanese); Bob Buchholz (English)\nThe Men in Black work for the Office Worker in tracking down and murdering all of the members of the Knights. They are not told the true plan, but they know that Masami Eiri is somehow involved, despite having been \"killed\". They see no need for an almighty, all-powerful God\u2014let alone Lain\u2014in the Wired.\nVoiced by: Sumi Mutoh\nA teenage girl who committed suicide at the beginning of the series. After her death, she e-mails Lain, Julie, and a few other kids, stating that she is still alive in the Wired, ultimately leading to almost every event that occurs within the anime. After the reset by Lain in the final episode, Chisa is given her physical body back and the opportunity to live again, taking Lain's place in her former friend group.\nVoiced by: Chiharu Tezuka\nOne of Alice's friends from school. She does not seem to care for Lain, since she harasses her quite a lot. She is more serious than Julie, and also somewhat meaner.\nVoiced by: Manabi Mizuno\nAnother friend of Alice. She also harasses Lain, but not as severely as Reika does. She is sometimes insensitive to other people's feelings.\nVoiced by: Sora Fujima (Japanese); Dorothy Elias-Fahn (English)\nTaro's best friend. He is usually seen hanging out with Taro and Myu-Myu.\nVoiced by: Yuki Yamamoto (Japanese); Sandy Fox (English)\nA young girl who hangs out with Taro and Masayuki at Cyberia Caf\u00e9. She has feelings for Taro, and gets jealous when he flirts with Lain.\nVoiced by: Takashi Taniguchi (Japanese); Paul St. Peter (English)\nProduction.\n\"Serial Experiments Lain\" was conceived, as a series, to be original to the point of it being considered \"an enormous risk\" by its producer Yasuyuki Ueda.\nUeda had to answer repeated queries about a statement he had made in an \"Animerica\" interview where he claimed that \"Lain\" was \"a sort of cultural war against American culture and the American sense of values we [Japan] adopted after World War II\". He later explained in numerous interviews that he created \"Lain\" with a set of values he viewed as distinctly Japanese; he hoped Americans would not understand the series as the Japanese would. This would lead to a \"war of ideas\" over the meaning of the anime, hopefully culminating in new communication between the two cultures. When Ueda discovered that the American audience held most of the same views on the series as the Japanese did, he was disappointed.\nThe \"Lain\" franchise was originally conceived to connect across forms of media (anime, video games, manga). Ueda said in an interview, \"the approach I took for this project was to communicate the essence of the work by the total sum of many media products\". The scenario for the video game was written first, and the video game was produced at the same time as the anime series, though the series was released first. A d\u014djinshi titled \"The Nightmare of Fabrication\" was produced by Yoshitoshi Abe and released in Japanese in the artbook \"An Omnipresence in Wired\". Ueda and Konaka declared in an interview that the idea of a multimedia project was not unusual in Japan, as opposed to the contents of \"Lain\", and the way they are exposed.\nWriting.\nThe authors were asked in interviews if they had been influenced by \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\", in the themes and graphic design. This was strictly denied by writer Chiaki J. Konaka in an interview, arguing that he had not even seen \"Evangelion\" until he finished the fourth episode of \"Lain\". Being primarily a horror movie writer, his stated influences are Godard (especially for using typography on screen), \"The Exorcist\", \"Hell House\", and Dan Curtis's \"House of Dark Shadows\". Alice's name, like the names of her two friends Julie and Reika, came from a previous production from Konaka, \"Alice in Cyberland\u200a\", which in turn was largely influenced by \"Alice in Wonderland\". As the series developed, Konaka was \"surprised\" by how close Alice's character became to the original \"Wonderland\" character.\nVannevar Bush (and memex), John C. Lilly, Timothy Leary and his eight-circuit model of consciousness, Ted Nelson and Project Xanadu are cited as precursors to the Wired. Douglas Rushkoff and his book \"Cyberia\" were originally to be cited as such, and in \"Serial Experiments: Lain\", Cyberia became the name of a nightclub populated with hackers and techno-punk teenagers. Likewise, the series' \"deus ex machina\" lies in the conjunction of the Schumann resonances and Jung's collective unconscious (the authors chose this term over Kabbalah and Akashic Record). Majestic 12 and the Roswell UFO incident are used as examples of how a hoax might still affect history, even after having been exposed as such, by creating sub-cultures. This links again to Vannevar Bush, the alleged \"brains\" of MJ12.\nTwo of the literary references in \"Lain\" are quoted through Lain's father: he first logs onto a website with the password \"Think Bule Count One Tow\" [\"sic\"] (\"Think Blue, Count Two\" is an Instrumentality of Man story featuring virtual persons projected as real ones in people's minds); and his saying that \"madeleines would be good with the tea\" in the last episode makes \"Lain\" \"one of the only cartoons ever to allude to Proust\".\nCharacter design.\nYoshitoshi Abe confesses to have never read manga as a child, as it was \"off-limits\" in his household. His major influences are \"nature and everything around him\". Specifically speaking about Lain's character, Abe was inspired by Kenji Tsuruta, Akihiro Yamada, Range Murata and Yukinobu Hoshino. In a broader view, he has been influenced in his style and technique by Japanese artists Kyosuke Chinai and Toshio Tabuchi.\nThe character design of Lain was not Abe's sole responsibility. Her distinctive left forelock for instance was a demand from Yasuyuki Ueda. The goal was to produce asymmetry to reflect Lain's unstable and disconcerting nature. It was designed as a mystical symbol, as it is supposed to prevent voices and spirits from being heard by the left ear. The bear pajamas she wears were a demand from character animation director Takahiro Kishida. Though bears are a trademark of the Konaka brothers, Chiaki Konaka first opposed the idea. Director Nakamura then explained how the bear motif could be used as a shield for confrontations with her family. It is a key element of the design of the shy \"real world\" Lain (see \"mental illness\" under Themes). When she first goes to the Cyberia nightclub, she wears a bear hat for similar reasons. Retrospectively, Konaka said that Lain's pajamas became a major factor in drawing fans of \"moe\" characterization to the series, and remarked that \"such items may also be important when making anime\".\nAbe's original design was generally more complicated than what finally appeared on screen. As an example, the X-shaped hair clip was to be an interlocking pattern of gold links. The links would open with a snap, or rotate around an axis until the moment the \" X \" became a \" = \". This was not used as there is no scene where Lain takes her hair clip off.\nThemes.\n\"Serial Experiments Lain\" is not a conventionally linear story, being described as \"an alternative anime, with modern themes and realization\". Themes range from theological to psychological and are dealt with in a number of ways: from classical dialogue to image-only introspection, passing by direct interrogation of imaginary characters.\nCommunication, in its wider sense, is one of the main themes of the series, not only as opposed to loneliness, but also as a subject in itself. Writer Konaka said he wanted to directly \"communicate human feelings\". Director Nakamura wanted to show the audience \u2014 and particularly viewers between 14 and 15\u2014\"the multidimensional wavelength of the existential self: the relationship between self and the world\".\nLoneliness, if only as representing a lack of communication, is recurrent through \"Lain\". Lain herself (according to Anime Jump) is \"almost painfully introverted with no friends to speak of at school, a snotty, condescending sister, a strangely apathetic mother, and a father who seems to want to care but is just too damn busy to give her much of his time\". Friendships turn on the first rumor; and the only insert song of the series is named \"Kodoku no shigunaru\", literally \"signal of loneliness\".\nMental illness, especially dissociative identity disorder, is a significant theme in \"Lain\": the main character is constantly confronted with alter-egos, to the point where writer Chiaki Konaka and Lain's voice actress Kaori Shimizu had to agree on subdividing the character's dialogues between three different orthographs. The three names designate distinct \"versions\" of Lain: the real-world, \"childish\" Lain has a shy attitude and bear pajamas. The \"advanced\" Lain, her Wired personality, is bold and questioning. Finally, the \"evil\" Lain is sly and devious, and does everything she can to harm Lain or the ones close to her. As a writing convention, the authors spelled their respective names in kanji, katakana, and Latin characters (see picture).\nReality never has the pretense of objectivity in \"Lain\". Acceptations of the term are battling throughout the series, such as the \"natural\" reality, defined through normal dialogue between individuals; the material reality; and the tyrannic reality, enforced by one person onto the minds of others. A key debate to all interpretations of the series is to decide whether matter flows from thought, or the opposite. The production staff carefully avoided \"the so-called God's Eye Viewpoint\" to make clear the \"limited field of vision\" of the world of \"Lain\".\nTheology plays its part in the development of the story too. \"Lain\" has been viewed as a questioning of the possibility of an infinite spirit in a finite body. From self-realization as a goddess to deicide, religion (the title of a layer) is an inherent part of \"Lain\"'s background.\nApple computers.\n\"Lain\" contains extensive references to Apple computers, as the brand was used at the time by most of the creative staff, such as writers, producers, and the graphical team. As an example, the title at the beginning of each episode is announced by the Apple computer speech synthesis program PlainTalk, using the voice \"Whisper\", e.g. codice_1. Tachibana Industries, the company that creates the NAVI computers, is a reference to Apple computers: the tachibana orange is a Japanese variety of mandarin orange. NAVI is the abbreviation of Knowledge Navigator, and the HandiNAVI is based on the Apple Newton, one of the world's first PDAs. The NAVIs are seen to run \"Copland OS Enterprise\" (this reference to Copland was an initiative of Konaka, a declared Apple fan), and Lain's and Alice's NAVIs closely resembles the Twentieth Anniversary Macintosh and the iMac G3 respectively. The HandiNAVI programming language, as seen on the seventh episode, is a dialect of Lisp; the Newton also used a Lisp dialect (NewtonScript). The program being typed by Lain can be found in the CMU AI repository; it is a simple implementation of Conway's Game of Life in Common Lisp.\nDuring a series of disconnected images, an iMac and the Think Different advertising slogan appears for a short time, while the \"Whisper\" voice says it. This was an unsolicited insertion from the graphic team, also Mac-enthusiasts. Other subtle allusions can be found: \"Close the world, Open the nExt\" is the slogan for the \"Serial Experiments Lain\" video game. NeXT was the company that produced NeXTSTEP, which later evolved into Mac OS X after Apple bought NeXT. Another example is \"To Be Continued.\" at the end of episodes 1\u201312, with a blue \"B\" and a red \"e\" on \"Be\"; this matches the original logo of Be Inc., a company founded by ex-Apple employees and NeXT's main competitor in its time.\nBroadcast and release history.\n\"Serial Experiments Lain\" was first aired on TV Tokyo and its affiliates on July 6, 1998, and concluded on September 28, 1998, with the thirteenth and final episode. The series consists of 13 episodes (referred to in the series as \"Layers\") of 24 minutes each, except for the sixth episode, \"Kids\" (23 minutes 14 seconds). In Japan, the episodes were released on LD, VHS, and DVD with a total of five volumes. A DVD compilation named \"\"Serial Experiments Lain DVD-BOX \u042fesurrection\" was released along with a promo DVD called \"LPR-309\" in 2000. As this box set is now discontinued, a rerelease was made in 2005 called \"Serial Experiments Lain TV-BOX\". A 4-volume DVD box set was released in the US by Pioneer/Geneon. A Blu-ray release of the anime was made in December 2009 called \"Serial Experiments Lain Blu-ray Box| RESTORE\"\".\nThe anime series was licensed in North America by Pioneer Entertainment (later Geneon USA) on VHS and DVD in 1999. In December 2002, TechTV announced that \"Serial Experiments Lain\" would air on the channel as part of its Anime Unleashed programming block, with the series making its debut on January 21, 2003. The original home releases went out-of-print in December 2007 when Geneon closed its USA division. At Anime Expo 2010, North American distributor Funimation announced that it had obtained the license to the series and re-released it in 2012. The anime series returned to US television on October 15, 2012, on the Funimation Channel.\nReception.\n\"Serial Experiments Lain\" was first broadcast in Tokyo at 1:15\u00a0a.m. JST. The word \"weird\" appears almost ubiquitously in English language reviews of the series, or the alternatives \"bizarre\", and \"atypical\", due mostly to the freedoms taken with the animation and its unusual science fiction themes, and due to its philosophical and psychological context. Critics responded positively to these thematic and stylistic characteristics, and it was awarded an Excellence Prize by the 1998 Japan Media Arts Festival for \"its willingness to question the meaning of contemporary life\" and the \"extraordinarily philosophical and deep questions\" it asks.\nAccording to Christian Nutt from \"Newtype USA\", the main attraction to the series is its keen view on \"the interlocking problems of identity and technology\". Nutt saluted Abe's \"crisp, clean character design\" and the \"perfect soundtrack\" in his 2005 review of series, saying that \"\"Serial Experiments Lain\" might not yet be considered a true classic, but it's a fascinating evolutionary leap that helped change the future of anime.\" \"Anime Jump\" gave it 4.5/5, and Anime on DVD gave it A+ on all criteria for volume 1 and 2, and a mix of A and A+ for volume 3 and 4.\n\"Lain\" was subject to commentary in the literary and academic worlds. The \"Asian Horror Encyclopedia\" calls it \"an outstanding psycho-horror anime about the psychic and spiritual influence of the Internet\". It notes that the red spots present in all the shadows look like blood pools (see picture). It notes the death of a girl in a train accident is \"a source of much ghost lore in the twentieth century\", more so in Tokyo.\nThe \"Anime Essentials\" anthology by Gilles Poitras describes it as a \"complex and somehow existential\" anime that \"pushed the envelope\" of anime diversity in the 1990s, alongside the much better known contemporaries \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\" and \"Cowboy Bebop\". Professor Susan J. Napier, in her 2003 reading to the American Philosophical Society called \"The Problem of Existence in Japanese Animation\" (published 2005), compared \"Serial Experiments Lain\" to \"Ghost in the Shell\" and Hayao Miyazaki's \"Spirited Away\". According to her, the main characters of the two other works cross barriers; they can cross back to our world, but Lain cannot. Napier asks whether there is something to which Lain should return, \"between an empty 'real' and a dark 'virtual'\". Mike Toole of Anime News Network named \"Serial Experiments Lain\" as one of the most important anime of the 1990s.\nDespite the positive feedback the television series had received, Anime Academy gave the series a 75%, partly due to the \"lifeless\" setting it had. Michael Poirier of \"EX\" magazine stated that the last three episodes fail to resolve the questions in other DVD volumes. Justin Sevakis of Anime News Network noted that the English dub was decent, but that the show relied so little on dialogue that it hardly mattered.\nRelated media.\nSoundtracks.\nThe first original soundtrack, \"Serial Experiments Lain Soundtrack\", features music by Reichi Nakaido: the ending theme and part of the television series' score, alongside other songs inspired by the series. The second, \"Serial Experiments Lain Soundtrack: Cyberia Mix\", features electronica songs inspired by the television series, including a remix of the opening theme \"Duvet\" by DJ Wasei. The third, \"lain BOOTLEG\", consists of the ambient score of the series across forty-five tracks. \"BOOTLEG\" also contains a second mixed-mode data and audio disc, containing a clock program and a game, as well as an extended version of the first disc \u2013 nearly double the length \u2013 across 57 tracks in 128\u00a0kbit/s MP3 format, and sound effects from the series in WAV format. Because the word \"bootleg\" appears in its title, it is easily confused with the Sonmay counterfeit edition of itself, which only contains the first disc in an edited format. All three soundtrack albums were released by Pioneer Records.\nThe series' opening theme, \"Duvet\", was written and performed in English by the British rock band B\u00f4a. The band released the song as a single and as part of the EP \"Tall Snake\", which features both an acoustic version and DJ Wasei's remix from \"Cyberia Mix\".\nVideo games.\nOn November 26, 1998, Pioneer LDC released a video game with the same name as the anime for the PlayStation. It was designed by Konaka and Yasuyuki, and made to be a \"network simulator\" in which the player would navigate to explore Lain's story. The creators themselves did not call it a game, but \"Psycho-Stretch-Ware\", and it has been described as being a kind of visual novel: the gameplay is limited to unlocking pieces of information, and then reading/viewing/listening to them, with little or no puzzle needed to unlock. Lain distances itself even more from classical games by the random order in which information is collected. The aim of the authors was to let the player get the feeling that there are myriads of informations that they would have to sort through, and that they would have to do with less than what exists to understand. As with the anime, the creative team's main goal was to let the player \"feel\" Lain, and \"to understand her problems, and to love her\". A guidebook to the game called \"Serial Experiments Lain Official Guide\" () was released the same month by MediaWorks.\nIn March 2025, Team MJM announced \"Signal\", an official occult-themed role-playing game derivative of the \"Serial Experiments Lain\" series. The game was released on May 19, 2025, and became Windows and macOS via Steam and itch.io services, with a limited CD-ROM edition also planned.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28219", "revid": "40552684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28219", "title": "Spontaneous emission", "text": "Quantum mechanical state change\nSpontaneous emission is the process in which a quantum mechanical system (such as a molecule, an atom or a subatomic particle) transitions from an excited energy state to a lower energy state (e.g., its ground state) and emits a quantized amount of energy in the form of a photon. If the system in question is excited by some means other than heating, the spontaneous emission is called luminescence. There are different sub-categories of luminescence depending on how excited atoms are produced (electroluminescence, chemiluminescence etc.). If the excitation is affected by the absorption of radiation the spontaneous emission is called fluorescence. Some systems have a metastable level and continue to fluoresce long after the exciting radiation is turned off; this is called phosphorescence. Lasers start via spontaneous emission, then during continuous operation work by stimulated emission.\nSpontaneous emission cannot be explained by classical electromagnetic theory and is fundamentally a quantum process. Albert Einstein first predicted the phenomenon of spontaneous emission in a series of papers starting in 1916, culminating in what is now called the Einstein A Coefficient. Einstein's quantum theory of radiation anticipated ideas later expressed in quantum electrodynamics and quantum optics by several decades. Later, after the formal discovery of quantum mechanics in 1926, the rate of spontaneous emission was accurately described from first principles by Paul Dirac in his quantum theory of radiation, the precursor to the theory which he later called quantum electrodynamics. Contemporary physicists, when asked to give a physical explanation for spontaneous emission, generally invoke the zero-point energy of the electromagnetic field. In 1963, the Jaynes\u2013Cummings model was developed describing the system of a two-level atom interacting with a quantized field mode (i.e. the vacuum) within an optical cavity. This model predicted that the rate of spontaneous emission could be controlled depending on the boundary conditions of the surrounding vacuum field. These experiments gave rise to cavity quantum electrodynamics (CQED), the study of effects of mirrors and cavities on radiative corrections.\nIntroduction.\nIf a light source ('the atom') is in an excited state with energy formula_1, it may spontaneously decay to a lower lying level (e.g., the ground state) with energy formula_2, releasing the difference in energy between the two states as a photon. The photon will have angular frequency formula_3 and an energy formula_4:\nformula_5\nwhere formula_6 is the reduced Planck constant. Note: formula_7, where formula_8 is the Planck constant and formula_9 is the linear frequency. The phase of the photon in spontaneous emission is random as is the direction in which the photon propagates. This is not true for stimulated emission. An energy level diagram illustrating the process of spontaneous emission is shown below:\nIf the number of light sources in the excited state at time formula_10 is given by formula_11, the rate at which formula_12 decays is:\nformula_13\nwhere formula_14 is the rate of spontaneous emission. In the rate-equation formula_14 is a proportionality constant for this particular transition in this particular light source. The constant is referred to as the \"Einstein A coefficient\", and has units s\u22121. \nThe above equation can be solved to give:\nformula_16\nwhere formula_17 is the initial number of light sources in the excited state, formula_10 is the time and formula_19 is the radiative decay rate of the transition. The number of excited states formula_12 thus decays exponentially with time, similar to radioactive decay. After one lifetime, the number of excited states decays to 36.8% of its original value (formula_21-time). The radiative decay rate formula_22 is inversely proportional to the lifetime formula_23:\nformula_24\nTheory.\nSpontaneous transitions were not explainable within the framework of the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, in which the electronic energy levels were quantized, but the electromagnetic field was not. Given that the eigenstates of an atom are properly diagonalized, the overlap of the wavefunctions between the excited state and the ground state of the atom is zero. Thus, in the absence of a quantized electromagnetic field, the excited state atom cannot decay to the ground state. In order to explain spontaneous transitions, quantum mechanics must be extended to a quantum field theory, wherein the electromagnetic field is quantized at every point in space. The quantum field theory of electrons and electromagnetic fields is known as quantum electrodynamics.\nIn quantum electrodynamics (or QED), the electromagnetic field has a ground state, the QED vacuum, which can mix with the excited stationary states of the atom. As a result of this interaction, the \"stationary state\" of the atom is no longer a true eigenstate of the combined system of the atom plus electromagnetic field. In particular, the electron transition from the excited state to the electronic ground state mixes with the transition of the electromagnetic field from the ground state to an excited state, a field state with one photon in it. Spontaneous emission in free space depends upon vacuum fluctuations to get started.\nAlthough there is only one electronic transition from the excited state to ground state, there are many ways in which the electromagnetic field may go from the ground state to a one-photon state. That is, the electromagnetic field has infinitely more degrees of freedom, corresponding to the different directions in which the photon can be emitted. Equivalently, one might say that the phase space offered by the electromagnetic field is infinitely larger than that offered by the atom. This infinite degree of freedom for the emission of the photon results in the apparent irreversible decay, i.e., spontaneous emission.\nIn the presence of electromagnetic vacuum modes, the combined atom-vacuum system is explained by the superposition of the wavefunctions of the excited state atom with no photon and the ground state atom with a single emitted photon:\nformula_25\nwhere formula_26 and formula_27 are the atomic excited state-electromagnetic vacuum wavefunction and its probability amplitude, formula_28 and formula_29 are the ground state atom with a single photon (of mode formula_30) wavefunction and its probability amplitude, formula_31 is the atomic transition frequency, and formula_32 is the frequency of the photon. The sum is over formula_33 and formula_34, which are the wavenumber and polarization of the emitted photon, respectively. As mentioned above, the emitted photon has a chance to be emitted with different wavenumbers and polarizations, and the resulting wavefunction is a superposition of these possibilities. To calculate the probability of the atom at the ground state (formula_35), one needs to solve the time evolution of the wavefunction with an appropriate Hamiltonian. To solve for the transition amplitude, one needs to average over (integrate over) all the vacuum modes, since one must consider the probabilities that the emitted photon occupies various parts of phase space equally. The \"spontaneously\" emitted photon has infinite different modes to propagate into, thus the probability of the atom re-absorbing the photon and returning to the original state is negligible, making the atomic decay practically irreversible. Such irreversible time evolution of the atom-vacuum system is responsible for the apparent spontaneous decay of an excited atom. If one were to keep track of all the vacuum modes, the combined atom-vacuum system would undergo unitary time evolution, making the decay process reversible. Cavity quantum electrodynamics is one such system where the vacuum modes are modified resulting in the reversible decay process, see also Quantum revival. The theory of the spontaneous emission under the QED framework was first calculated by Victor Weisskopf and Eugene Wigner in 1930 in a landmark paper. The Weisskopf-Wigner calculation remains the standard approach to spontaneous radiation emission in atomic and molecular physics. Dirac had also developed the same calculation a couple of years prior to the paper by Wigner and Weisskopf.\nRate of spontaneous emission.\nThe rate of spontaneous emission (i.e., the radiative rate) can be described by Fermi's golden rule. The rate of emission depends on two factors: an 'atomic part', which describes\nthe internal structure of the light source and a 'field part', which describes the density of electromagnetic modes of the environment. The atomic part describes the strength of a transition between two states in terms of transition moments. In a homogeneous medium, such as free space, the rate of spontaneous emission in the dipole approximation is given by:\nformula_36\nformula_37\nwhere formula_3 is the emission frequency, formula_39 is the index of refraction, formula_40 is the transition dipole moment, formula_41 is the vacuum permittivity, formula_6 is the reduced Planck constant, formula_43 is the vacuum speed of light, and formula_44 is the fine-structure constant. The expression formula_45 stands for the definition of the transition dipole moment formula_46 for dipole moment operator formula_47, where formula_48 is the elementary charge and formula_49 stands for position operator. (This approximation breaks down in the case of inner shell electrons in high-Z atoms.) The above equation clearly shows that the rate of spontaneous emission in free space increases proportionally to formula_50.\nIn contrast with atoms, which have a discrete emission spectrum, quantum dots can be tuned continuously by changing their size. This property has been used to check the formula_50-frequency dependence of the spontaneous emission rate as described by Fermi's golden rule.\nRadiative and nonradiative decay: the quantum efficiency.\nIn the rate-equation above, it is assumed that decay of the number of excited states formula_12 only occurs under emission of light. In this case one speaks of full radiative decay and this means that the quantum efficiency is 100%. Besides radiative decay, which occurs under the emission of light, there is a second decay mechanism; nonradiative decay. To determine the total decay rate formula_53, radiative and nonradiative rates should be summed:\nformula_54\nwhere formula_53 is the total decay rate, formula_22 is the radiative decay rate and formula_57 the nonradiative decay rate. The quantum efficiency (QE) is defined as the fraction of emission processes in which emission of light is involved:\nformula_58\nIn nonradiative relaxation, the energy is released as phonons, more commonly known as heat. Nonradiative relaxation occurs when the energy difference between the levels is very small, and these typically occur on a much faster time scale than radiative transitions. For many materials (for instance, semiconductors), electrons move quickly from a high energy level to a meta-stable level via small nonradiative transitions and then make the final move down to the bottom level via an optical or radiative transition. This final transition is the transition over the bandgap in semiconductors. Large nonradiative transitions do not occur frequently because the crystal structure generally cannot support large vibrations without destroying bonds (which generally doesn't happen for relaxation). Meta-stable states form a very important feature that is exploited in the construction of lasers. Specifically, since electrons decay slowly from them, they can be deliberately piled up in this state without too much loss and then stimulated emission can be used to boost an optical signal.\nRadiative cascade.\nIf emission leaves a system in an excited state, additional transitions can occur, leading to atomic radiative cascade. For example, if calcium atoms in a low-pressure atomic beam are excited by ultraviolet light from the 41S0 ground state to the 61P1 state, they can decay in three steps, first to 61S0 then to 41P1 and finally to the ground state. The photons from the second and third transitions have correlated polarizations demonstrating quantum entanglement. These correlations were used by John Clauser and Alain Aspect in work that contributed to their 2022 Nobel prize in physics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28220", "revid": "1686264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28220", "title": "Nicolas L\u00e9onard Sadi Carnot", "text": "French physicist and engineer (1796\u20131832)\nNicolas L\u00e9onard Sadi Carnot (; 1 June 1796 \u2013 24 August 1832) was a French military engineer and physicist. A graduate of the \u00c9cole polytechnique, Carnot served as an officer in the Engineering Arm (\"le g\u00e9nie\") of the French Army. He also pursued scientific studies and in June 1824 published an essay titled \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\". In that book, which would be his only publication, Carnot developed the first successful theory of the maximum efficiency of heat engines.\nCarnot's scientific work attracted little attention during his lifetime, but in 1834 it became the object of a detailed commentary and explanation by another French engineer, \u00c9mile Clapeyron. Clapeyron's commentary in turn attracted the attention of William Thomson (later Lord Kelvin) and Rudolf Clausius. Thomson used Carnot's analysis to develop an absolute thermodynamic temperature scale, while Clausius used it to define the concept of entropy, thus formalizing the second law of thermodynamics.\nSadi Carnot was the son of Lazare Carnot, an eminent mathematician, engineer, and commander of the French Revolutionary Army and later of the Napoleonic army. Some of the difficulties that Sadi faced in his own career might have been connected to the persecution of his family by the restored Bourbon monarchy after the fall of Napoleon in 1815. Sadi Carnot died in relative obscurity at the age of 36, but today he is often characterized as the \"father of thermodynamics\".\nLife.\nFamily background.\nSadi Carnot was born in Paris on the 1st of June 1796, at the Petit Luxembourg palace, where his father Lazare resided as one of the five members of the Directory, the highest governing body of the French First Republic in the immediate aftermath of the Thermidorian Reaction. His mother, Sophie \"n\u00e9e\" Dupont (1764-1813), came from a wealthy family based in Saint-Omer.\nSadi was named by his father Lazare after the 13th-century Persian poet Sadi of Shiraz. An older brother, also named Sadi, had been born in 1794 but died in infancy the following year. \"Sadi\" is the only given name that appears in the second-born's civil birth certificate, dated 14 prairial, year IV in the French Republican calendar. On 11 July 1796 the child was baptized in the Catholic church of Saint-Louis-d'Antin as \"Nicolas-L\u00e9onard Dupont\". The principal witness at that baptism was his maternal grandfather, Jacques-Antoine-L\u00e9onard Dupont. The father is wrongly identified in the baptismal record as Jacques-L\u00e9onard-Joseph-Auguste Dupont (who was, in fact, the child's maternal uncle). Following the biographical notice published long after his death by his brother Hippolyte, most sources now give his full name as \"Nicolas L\u00e9onard Sadi\", but there is no evidence that he ever used any name other than \"Sadi\".\nSadi had a younger brother, Hippolyte Carnot, who was born in 1801 in Saint-Omer and who would later become a prominent politician. Hippolyte's eldest son Marie Fran\u00e7ois Sadi Carnot served as President of France from 1887 to 1894. Another of Hippolyte's sons was the chemist, mining engineer and politician Adolphe Carnot. Sadi himself would remain a bachelor and left no descendants.\nEducation and military career.\nThe young Sadi was educated first at home by his father and later at the Lyc\u00e9e Charlemagne, in Paris, where he prepared for the examinations required to enter the \u00c9cole polytechnique, which his father had helped to establish. In 1811, at the age of 16 (the minimum allowed) Sadi Carnot became a cadet of the \u00c9cole polytechnique, where his classmates included the future mathematician Michel Chasles. Among his professors were Andr\u00e9-Marie Amp\u00e8re, Sim\u00e9on Denis Poisson, Fran\u00e7ois Arago, and Gaspard-Gustave Coriolis. Thus, the school had become renowned for its instruction in mathematics and physics.\nDuring the Battle of Paris in March of 1814, Carnot, Chasles, and other cadets of the \u00c9cole polytechnique participated in the defense of Vincennes. This appears to have been Carnot's only experience of battle. Carnot graduated in 1814 and was admitted at the \u00c9cole d'application de l'artillerie et du g\u00e9nie (\"School of Applied Artillery and Military Engineering\") in Metz, where he completed a two-year course. Sadi then became an officer in the French army's corps of engineers.\nCarnot's father Lazare served as Napoleon's minister of the interior during the \"Hundred Days\", and, after Napoleon's final defeat in 1815, Lazare was forced into exile in the German city of Magdeburg. Sadi's position in the army, under the restored Bourbon monarchy of King Louis XVIII, became increasingly difficult. Lazare never returned to France, dying in Magdeburg in 1823.\nSadi became a captain in the \"G\u00e9nie\" and was posted to various locations, where he inspected fortifications, tracked plans, and wrote many reports. However, it appeared that his recommendations were ignored and that his career was stagnating. On 15 September 1818, at the age of 22, he took a six-month leave to prepare for the entrance examination to the newly formed General Staff in Paris. Carnot passed the exam and joined the General Staff in January of 1819, with the lower rank of lieutenant. He remained on call for military duty, but from then on he dedicated most of his attention to private intellectual pursuits and received only two-thirds pay.\nPrivate studies and research.\nIn Paris, Carnot befriended Nicolas Cl\u00e9ment and Charles-Bernard Desormes and attended lectures on physics and chemistry at the Sorbonne and the Coll\u00e8ge de France. He also attended the Conservatoire national des arts et m\u00e9tiers, where he followed the lectures on chemistry by Cl\u00e9ment and those on economics by Jean-Baptiste Say. Carnot became interested in understanding the limits to improving the performance of steam engines, which led him to the investigations that became his \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\", published at his own expense in June 1824.\nCarnot was finally promoted to his former rank of captain in September of 1827, but the following April he quit the army, having completed only fifteen months of active service and without right to a pension. In a directory of alumni of the \u00c9cole polytechnique published by Ambroise Fourcy in 1828, Carnot is listed as \"maker of steam engines\". This and some other indications suggest that Carnot may have been involved in a practical scheme for the improvement of steam engines, but no patents or other concrete evidences of that work have emerged.\nViews and character.\nCarnot was interested in political economy. His political orientation was liberal, but he seems to have preferred the more interventionist doctrines of Jean de Sismondi to the \"laissez-faire\" policies advocated by classical liberal economists like Say and David Ricardo. Out of Carnot's private writings on economics only some fragmentary notes survive.\nCarnot initially welcomed the July Revolution of 1830, which ended the Bourbonic regime under Charles X and established a new constitutional monarchy under \"Citizen King\" Louis Philippe. According to his brother Hippolyte, there was some discussion among leaders of the new regime of incorporating Sadi to the Chamber of Peers, as he could be considered to have inherited the Imperial title of \"Count Carnot\" that Napoleon had bestowed on his father Lazare in 1815. Nothing came of this, however, perhaps because Sadi's republican convictions prevented him from accepting a hereditary distinction.\nAccording to recollections published long after Sadi's death by his brother Hippolyte, Sadi was an avid reader of Blaise Pascal, Moli\u00e8re and Jean de La Fontaine. Hippolyte recalled that Sadi was a philosophical theist who believed in divine causality but not in divine punishment. Carnot wrote in his private papers that \"what to an ignorant man is chance, cannot be chance to one better instructed\". He was critical of established religion, but spoke in favor of \"the belief in an all-powerful Being, who loves us and watches over us.\"\nHippolyte also described his brother as a talented violin player, interested principally in the music of Jean-Baptiste Lully and Giovanni Battista Viotti, who also cultivated gymnastics, fencing, swimming, dancing, and skating. According to historian of science James F. Challey, \"although sensitive and perceptive\", Carnot \"appeared extremely introverted, even aloof, to all but a few close friends.\" This may help explain why Carnot's work failed to make any significant impression within either the scientific or the engineering community during his lifetime.\nIllness and death.\nIn the summer of 1832 Carnot apparently suffered from a severe bout of scarlet fever. On 3 August he was interned in a private sanatorium run by psychiatrist Jean-\u00c9tienne Esquirol and located in Ivry, just south of Paris. According to the hospital record, he was cured from \"mania\" but then died of cholera on 24 August. Carnot was buried in the old cemetery of Ivry, close to what is now the Mairie d'Ivry station.\n\"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire\".\nSadi Carnot's contribution to the development of thermodynamics is contained in his only published work, a short book titled \"R\u00e9flexions sur la puissance motrice du feu et sur les machines propres \u00e0 d\u00e9velopper cette puissance\" (\"Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire and on Machines Fitted to Develop that Power\") published in Paris in June of 1824 by Bachelier, with Carnot himself paying for the printing of the 600 copies. The work attracted little attention during his lifetime and virtually disappeared from booksellers and libraries. An article published in 1834 (two years after Carnot's death and ten years after the publication of his book) by the engineer and fellow \"polytechnicien\" \u00c9mile Clapeyron finally succeeded in calling attention to Carnot's work, which some years later was used by Lord Kelvin and Rudolf Clausius to define the concepts of absolute temperature, entropy, and the second law of thermodynamics.\nBackground.\nThomas Newcomen invented the first practical piston-operated steam engine in 1712. Some 50 years after that, James Watt made his celebrated improvements, which were responsible for greatly increasing the usefulness of steam engines. When Carnot became interested in the subject in the 1820s, steam engines were in increasingly wide application in industry and their economic importance was widely recognized. Compound engines (engines with more than one stage of expansion) had already been invented, and there was even a crude internal combustion engine, known as the \"pyr\u00e9olophore\" and built by the brothers Claude and Nic\u00e9phore Ni\u00e9pce, with which Carnot was familiar and which he described in some detail in his book.\nThat practical work on steam engines and the intuitive understanding among engineers of some of the principles underlying their operation co-existed, however, with an almost complete lack of a scientific understanding of the physical phenomena associated with heat. The principle of conservation of energy had not yet been clearly articulated and the ideas surrounding it were fragmentary and controversial. Carnot himself accepted the view, prevalent in France and associated with the work of Antoine Lavoisier, that heat is a weightless and invisible fluid, called \"caloric\", which may be liberated by chemical reactions and which flows from bodies at higher temperature to bodies at lower temperature.\nIn his book, Carnot sought to answer basic questions: \"Is there a limit to the work that can be generated from a given heat source?\" and \"Can the performance of an engine be improved by replacing steam with a different working fluid?\". Engineers in Carnot's time had tried, using highly pressurized steam and other fluids, to improve the efficiency of engines. In these early stages of engine development, the efficiency of a typical engine \u2014the useful work it was able to do when a given quantity of fuel was burned\u2014 was only about 5\u20137%.\nCarnot's book was only 118 pages long and covered a wide range of topics about heat engines in what Carnot must have intended to be a form accessible to a wide public. He made minimal use of mathematics, which he confined to elementary algebra and arithmetic, except in some footnotes. Carnot discussed the relative merits of air and steam as working fluids, the merits of various aspects of steam-engine design, and even included some ideas of his own regarding possible practical improvements. However, the central part of the book was an abstract treatment of an idealized engine (the Carnot cycle) with which the author sought to clarify the fundamental principles that govern all heat engines, independently of the details of their design or operation. This resulted in an idealized thermodynamic system upon which exact calculations could be made, and avoided the complications introduced by many of the crude features of the contemporary steam engines.\nCarnot cycle.\nCarnot considered an idealized process in which heat from a thermal reservoir at a high temperature flows very slowly (and thus reversibly) into the gas contained in a cylinder enclosed by a movable piston. This gives an isothermal expansion of the gas that pushes out the piston and can be used to perform useful work. This does not yet constitute an engine because the piston must be returned to its original position in order for the machine to run cyclically.\nCarnot then proposed reducing the temperature of the gas by an adiabatic expansion, during which the cylinder is thermally isolated so as to prevent heat from entering or leaving the gas. Once the temperature of the gas has reached the same value as that of the colder reservoir, the cylinder is put into thermal contact with that reservoir and the gas undergoes an isothermal compression, during which it very slowly (and thus reversibly) rejects heat into the reservoir.\nTo close the cycle, the temperature of the gas in the cylinder can be raised by adiabatic compression, until it reaches a value equal to the temperature of the hotter reservoir. This succession of isothermal expansion, adiabatic expansion, isothermal compression, and adiabatic compression can then be repeated as many times as desired, generating a net amount of work each time, at the expense of a transfer of heat from the hotter reservoir to the colder reservoir.\nAs Carnot explained, such a cycle constitutes the most efficient heat engine possible (given the temperatures of the two reservoirs), not only because of the (trivial) absence of friction, heat leakage, or other incidental wasteful processes: The main reason is that it involves no conduction of heat between parts of the engine at different temperatures. Carnot understood that the conduction of heat between bodies at different temperatures is a wasteful and irreversible process, which must be minimized if the heat engine is to achieve its maximum efficiency.\nBecause Carnot's cycle is reversible, it can also be used as a refrigerator: if an external agent supplies the needed mechanical work to move the piston, the sequence of transformations of the gas will absorb heat from the colder reservoir and reject it into the hotter reservoir. Carnot argued that no engine operating between reservoirs at two given temperatures could deliver more work than his reversible cycle. Otherwise, the more efficient engine could run Carnot's cycle in reverse as a refrigerator, thus returning all of the \"caloric\" from the colder back to the hotter reservoir, with some positive amount of work left over to perform a further useful task. Carnot assumed that such a process, in which no net \"caloric\" was consumed while positive work could be done forever, would be a perpetual motion and therefore forbidden by the laws of physics.\nThis argument led Carnot to conclude that \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The motive power of heat is independent of the agents employed to realize it; its quantity is fixed solely by the temperatures of the bodies between which is effected, finally, the transfer of caloric.\nCarnot understood that his idealized engine would have the maximum possible thermal efficiency given the temperatures of the two reservoirs, but he did not calculate the value of that efficiency because of the ambiguities associated with the various temperature scales used by scientists at the time:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the fall of caloric, motive power undoubtedly increases with the difference of temperature between the warm and cold bodies, but we do not know whether it is proportional to this difference.\nPhase transitions.\nLater in his book, Carnot considered a heat engine operating very close to the boiling point of water, alcohol, or some other working fluid. The transition between the liquid and vapor phases involves a sudden change in density (and therefore in the volume occupied by the fluid) while a latent heat is needed to transform some amount of the fluid from one phase to the other as the temperature stays constant. This is modernly called a first-order phase transition. By requiring that the volume change associated with such a transition not be available to construct what he characterized as a perpetual motion device, Carnot arrived at what would later be formalized mathematically as the \"Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation\". In the \"Feynman Lectures on Physics\", theoretical physicist Richard Feynman stresses that this result is due to Carnot and gives a modernized version of Carnot's original argument.\nIn 1849, James Thomson applied Carnot's reasoning to the freezing of water (i.e., the phase transition between liquid water and ice), and concluded that it predicted that the melting point of ice must decrease if an external pressure is applied to it, an effect that no one had ever proposed or studied before. James Thomson's prediction was later confirmed experimentally by his brother William Thomson, the future Lord Kelvin, who found that the data agreed fully with Carnot's analysis. Kelvin later said of Carnot's argument that \"nothing in the whole range of Natural Philosophy is more remarkable than the establishment of general laws by such a process of reasoning.\"\nReception.\nCarnot published his book in June 1824, and it was presented at that time to the French Academy of Sciences by Pierre-Simon Girard. Girard also published a praiseful but rather broad review of the book in the \"Revue encyclop\u00e9dique\", but after that the book seems to have fallen into obscurity. It was only after the publication of an extensive commentary and explication of Carnot's work by \u00c9mile Clapeyron in 1834 that engineers and scientists began to take an interest in Carnot's contributions. Clapeyron's article was translated into English in 1837 and into German in 1843.\nKelvin read Clapeyron's paper in 1845, while visiting the Paris laboratory of Henri Regnault, but it was only at the end of 1848 that Kelvin was able to read Carnot's original work, in a copy provided to him by Lewis Gordon. Independently of Kelvin, the German physicist Rudolf Clausius also based his study of thermodynamics on Carnot's work. Clausius modified Carnot's arguments to make them compatible with the mechanical equivalence of heat. This then led Clausius to define the concept of entropy and to formulate the second law of thermodynamics.\nCarnot's text was re-printed in 1871 in the \"Annales Scientifiques\" of the \u00c9cole normale sup\u00e9rieure, and again by Gauthier-Villars in 1878 with the collaboration of Hippolyte Carnot. In 1890 an English translation of the book was published by R. H. Thurston. That version has been reprinted in recent decades by Dover. In 1892, Lord Kelvin referred to Carnot's essay as \"an epoch-making gift to science.\"\nCarnot published his book in the heyday of steam engines. His theory explained the advantage of engines that use superheated steam, since they absorb heat from a reservoir at a higher temperature. Carnot's work did not, however, lead to any immediate practical improvements of steam technologies. It was only towards the end of the nineteenth century that engineers deliberately implemented Carnot's key concepts: that the efficiency of a heat is improved by increasing the temperature at which heat is drawn and by minimizing the flow of heat between bodies at different temperatures. In particular, Rudolf Diesel used Carnot's analysis in his design of the diesel engine, in which heat is injected at a much higher temperature than in the older steam engines, and in which the heat from the combustion of the fuel goes primarily into expanding the air in the cylinder (rather than into increasing its temperature).\nDeath and posterity.\nSadi's younger brother Hippolyte obscured the details of Sadi's death and destroyed most of his personal papers. Much later, in 1878, when Carnot's essay had come to be widely recognized as a founding document of the new science of thermodynamics, Hippolyte sponsored the publication of a new edition that included a \"Biographical notice on Sadi Carnot\" written by Hippolyte, along with some \"Excerpts from unpublished notes by Sadi on mathematics, physics and other subjects\". These are the only sources of information on many aspects of Sadi's life and thought. In the opinion of historian of science Arthur Birembaut, the \"smokescreen\" that Hippolyte drew over his brother's life makes it impossible now to reconstruct the details of Sadi's career, his relationship with other physicists and engineers, and the circumstances of his death.\nAmong the private notes published by Hippolyte in 1878 there is material indicating that Sadi Carnot had, by the spring of 1832, rejected the caloric theory and accepted the equivalence of heat and work. In his notes, Carnot wrote that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn those same notes Carnot estimated that 1 kilocalorie is the equivalent of 370 kg\u00b7m, whereas the currently accepted value is 427 kg\u00b7m. Carnot did not, however, publish any of that work. It is possible that his uncertainty about the consequences for the validity of his previous analysis in the \"Reflections\" of rejecting the caloric theory might explain why he did not follow up on his work of 1824 before his untimely death.\nFollowing the work of Kelvin and Clausius, Carnot came to be widely regarded as the \"father of thermodynamics\". In 1970 the International Astronomical Union named the lunar crater Carnot in his honor. In 1991 the minor planet 12289 was also named after Carnot.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28221", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28221", "title": "Suleiman I", "text": "Suleiman I may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "28222", "revid": "50884856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28222", "title": "Sydney Opera House", "text": "Performing arts centre in Australia\nThe Sydney Opera House is a multi-venue performing arts centre in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. Located on the foreshore of Sydney Harbour, it is widely regarded as one of the world's most famous and distinctive buildings, and a masterpiece of 20th-century architecture.\nDesigned by Danish architect J\u00f8rn Utzon and completed by an Australian architectural team headed by Peter Hall, the building was formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 20 October 1973, 16 years after Utzon's 1957 selection as winner of an international design competition. The Government of New South Wales, led by the premier, Joseph Cahill, authorised work to begin in 1958 with Utzon directing construction. The government's decision to build Utzon's design is often overshadowed by circumstances that followed, including cost and scheduling overruns as well as the architect's ultimate resignation.\nThe building and its surrounds occupy the whole of Bennelong Point on Sydney Harbour, between Sydney Cove and Farm Cove, adjacent to the Sydney central business district and the Royal Botanic Garden, and near to the Sydney Harbour Bridge.\nThe building comprises multiple performance venues, which together host over 1,800 performances annually, attended by more than 1.4\u00a0million people. Performances are presented by numerous performing artists, with many resident companies such as Opera Australia, the Sydney Theatre Company and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. As one of the most popular visitor attractions in Australia, the site is visited by more than ten million people annually, and approximately 350,000 visitors take a guided tour of the building each year. The building is managed by the Sydney Opera House Trust, an agency of the New South Wales State Government.\nIn 2007, the Sydney Opera House became a UNESCO World Heritage Site, having been listed on the (now defunct) Register of the National Estate since 1980, the National Trust of Australia register since 1983, the City of Sydney Heritage Inventory since 2000, the New South Wales State Heritage Register since 2003, and the Australian National Heritage List since 2005. The Opera House was also a finalist in the \"New 7 Wonders of the World\" campaign list.\nDescription.\nThe facility features a modern expressionist design, with a series of large precast concrete \"shells\", each composed of sections of a sphere of radius, forming the roofs of the structure, set on a monumental podium. The building covers of land and is long and wide at its widest point. It is supported on 588 concrete piers sunk as much as below sea level. The highest roof point is 67 metres above sea-level which is the same height as that of a 22-storey building. The roof is made of 2,194 pre-cast concrete sections, which weigh up to 15 tonnes each.\nAlthough the roof structures are commonly referred to as \"shells\" (as in this article), they are precast concrete panels supported by precast concrete ribs, not shells in a strictly structural sense. Though the shells appear uniformly white from a distance, they actually feature a subtle chevron pattern composed of 1,056,006 tiles in two colours: glossy white and matte cream. The tiles were manufactured by the Swedish company H\u00f6gan\u00e4s AB which generally produced stoneware tiles for the paper-mill industry.\nApart from the tile of the shells and the glass curtain walls of the foyer spaces, the building's exterior is largely clad with aggregate panels composed of pink granite quarried at Tarana. Significant interior surface treatments also include off-form concrete, Australian white birch plywood supplied from Wauchope in northern New South Wales, and brush box glulam.\nPerformance venues and facilities.\nThe Sydney Opera House includes a number of performance venues:\nHistory.\nOrigins of the project.\nSite selection.\nPlanning began in the late 1940s when Eugene Goossens, the Chief Conductor of the Sydney Symphony Orchestra and Director of the New South Wales State Conservatorium of Music, lobbied for a suitable venue for opera and orchestral performance. The Sydney Symphony Orchestra's performance home, the Sydney Town Hall, was not considered large enough. By 1954, Goossens succeeded in gaining the support of New South Wales Premier Joseph Cahill, who called for designs for a dedicated opera house. It was also Goossens who insisted that Bennelong Point be the site: Cahill had wanted it to be on or near Wynyard railway station in the northwest of the central business district.\nArchitecture competition 1955\u20131957.\nAn international design competition with a grand prize of 5,000 Australian pounds was launched by Cahill on 13 September 1955 and received 233 entries, representing architects from 32 countries. The criteria specified a large hall seating 3,000 and a small hall for 1,200 people, each to be designed for different uses, including full-scale operas, orchestral and choral concerts, mass meetings, lectures, ballet performances, and other presentations.\nThe jury for the competition were: Professor Henry Ashworth (University of Sydney), Cobden Parkes (New South Wales Government Architect); Professor Leslie Martin (Professor of Architecture of Cambridge University and architect of Royal Festival Hall 1951) and Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen.\nThe winner, announced in Sydney on 29 January 1957, was Danish architect J\u00f8rn Utzon. Saarinen selected Utzon's distinctive design from a final cut of 30 rejects. Utzon's design was inspired by natural shapes, most notably those of bird wings, clouds, shells, walnuts, rivers and palm leaves.\nThe runner-up was a Philadelphia-based team assembled by Robert Geddes and George Qualls, both teaching at the University of Pennsylvania School of Design. They brought together a band of Penn faculty and friends from Philadelphia architectural offices, including Melvin Brecher, Warren Cunningham, Joseph Marzella, Walter Wiseman, and Leon Loschetter. Geddes, Brecher, Qualls, and Cunningham went on to found the firm GBQC Architects.\nUtzon visited Sydney in 1957 to help supervise the project. His office moved to Palm Beach, Sydney in February 1963.\nUtzon received the Pritzker Architecture Prize, architecture's highest honour, in 2003. The Pritzker Prize citation read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no doubt that the Sydney Opera House is his masterpiece. It is one of the great iconic buildings of the 20th century, an image of great beauty that has become known throughout the world \u2013 a symbol for not only a city but a whole country and continent.\nDesign development and construction timeline.\nPreparation of site.\nThe Fort Macquarie Tram Depot, occupying the site at the time of these plans, was demolished in 1958 and construction began in March 1959. The Opera House was built in four stages: stage I (1957\u20131959) was planning out the building; stage II (1959\u20131963) consisted of building the upper podium; stage III (1963\u20131967) the construction of the outer shells, based upon the image of whales breaching the water; stage IV (1967\u20131973) interior design and construction.\nStage I: Podium.\nStage I started on 2 March 1959 with the construction firm Civil &amp; Civic, monitored by the engineers Ove Arup &amp; Partners. The government had pushed for work to begin early, fearing that funding, or public opinion, might turn against them. But Utzon had still not completed the final designs. Major structural issues still remained unresolved. By 23 January 1961, work was running 47 weeks behind, mainly because of unexpected difficulties (inclement weather, unexpected difficulty diverting stormwater, construction beginning before proper construction drawings had been prepared, changes of original contract documents). Work on the podium was finally completed in February 1963. The forced early start led to significant later problems, not least of which was that the podium columns were not strong enough to support the roof structure, and had to be re-built.\nStage II: Roof.\nThe shells of the competition entry were originally of undefined geometry, but, early in the design process, the \"shells\" were perceived as a series of parabolas supported by precast concrete ribs. However, Ove Arup &amp; Partners were unable to find an acceptable solution to constructing them. The formwork for using \"in-situ\" concrete would have been prohibitively expensive, and, because there was no repetition in any of the roof forms, the construction of precast concrete for each individual section would possibly have been even more expensive.\nFrom 1957 to 1963, the design team went through at least 12 iterations of the form of the shells trying to find an economically acceptable form (including schemes with parabolas, circular ribs and ellipsoids) before a workable solution was completed.\nThe design work on the shells involved one of the earliest uses of computers in structural analysis, to understand the complex forces to which the shells would be subjected. The computer system was also used in the assembly of the arches. The pins in the arches were surveyed at the end of each day, and the information was entered into the computer so the next arch could be properly placed the following day.\nIn mid-1961, the design team found a solution to the problem: the shells all being created as sections from a sphere. This solution allows arches of varying length to be cast in a common mould, and a number of arch segments of common length to be placed adjacent to one another, to form a spherical section. With whom exactly this solution originated has been the subject of some controversy. It was originally credited to Utzon. Ove Arup's letter to Ashworth, a member of the Sydney Opera House Executive Committee, states: \"Utzon came up with an idea of making all the shells of uniform curvature throughout in both directions.\" Peter Jones, the author of Ove Arup's biography, states that \"the architect and his supporters alike claimed to recall the precise \"eureka\" moment ...; the engineers and some of their associates, with equal conviction, recall discussion in both central London and at Ove's house.\"\nHe goes on to claim that \"the existing evidence shows that Arup's canvassed several possibilities for the geometry of the shells, from parabolas to ellipsoids and spheres.\" Yuzo Mikami, a member of the design team, presents an opposite view in his book on the project, \"Utzon's Sphere\". It is unlikely that the truth will ever be categorically known, but there is a clear consensus that the design team worked very well indeed for the first part of the project and that Utzon, Arup, and Ronald Jenkins (partner of Ove Arup and Partners responsible for the Opera House project) all played a very significant part in the design development.\nAs Peter Murray states in \"The Saga of the Sydney Opera House\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... the two men\u2014and their teams\u2014enjoyed a collaboration that was remarkable in its fruitfulness and, despite many traumas, was seen by most of those involved in the project as a high point of architect/engineer collaboration.\nThe design of the roof was tested on scale models in wind tunnels at University of Southampton and later NPL to establish the wind-pressure distribution around the roof shape in very high winds, which helped in the design of the roof tiles and their fixtures.\nThe immensely complex design and construction of the shells was completed by Hornibrook, who were also responsible for construction in Stage III. Hornibrook manufactured the 2400 precast ribs and 4000 roof panels in an on-site factory and also developed the construction processes. The achievement of this solution avoided the need for expensive formwork construction by allowing the use of precast units and it also allowed the roof tiles to be prefabricated in sheets on the ground, instead of being stuck on individually at height.\nThe tiles themselves were manufactured by the Swedish company H\u00f6gan\u00e4s Keramik. It took three years of development to produce the effect Utzon wanted in what became known as the Sydney Tile, 120mm square. It is made from clay with a small percentage of crushed stone.\nOve Arup and Partners' site engineer supervised the construction of the shells, which used an innovative adjustable steel-trussed \"erection arch\" (developed by Hornibrook's engineer Joe Bertony) to support the different roofs before completion. On 6 April 1962, it was estimated that the Opera House would be completed between August 1964 and March 1965.\nStage III: Interiors.\nStage III, the interiors, started with Utzon moving his entire office to Sydney in February 1963. However, there was a change of government in 1965, and the new Robert Askin government declared the project under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Public Works. Due to the Ministry's criticism of the project's costs and time, along with their impression of Utzon's designs being impractical, this ultimately led to his resignation in 1966 (see below).\nThe cost of the project so far, even in October 1966, was still only A$22.9\u00a0million, less than a quarter of the final $102\u00a0million cost. However, the projected costs for the design were at this stage much more significant.\nThe second stage of construction was progressing toward completion when Utzon resigned. His position was principally taken over by Peter Hall, who became largely responsible for the interior design. Other persons appointed that same year to replace Utzon were E. H. Farmer as government architect, D. S. Littlemore and Lionel Todd.\nFollowing Utzon's resignation, the acoustic advisor, Lothar Cremer, confirmed to the Sydney Opera House Executive Committee (SOHEC) that Utzon's original acoustic design allowed for only 2,000 seats in the main hall and further stated that increasing the number of seats to 3,000 as specified in the brief would be disastrous for the acoustics. According to Peter Jones, the stage designer, Martin Carr, criticised the \"shape, height and width of the stage, the physical facilities for artists, the location of the dressing rooms, the widths of doors and lifts, and the location of lighting switchboards.\"\nCompletion and cost.\nThe Opera House was formally completed in 1973, having cost $102\u00a0million. H.R. \"Sam\" Hoare, the Hornibrook director in charge of the project, provided the following approximations in 1973:\nStage I: podium Civil &amp; Civic approximately $5.5m.\nStage II: roof shells MR Hornibrook approximately $12.5m.\nStage III: completion MR Hornibrook $56.5m.\nSeparate contracts: stage equipment, stage lighting and organ $9.0m. Fees and other costs: $16.5m.\nThe original cost and scheduling estimates in 1957 projected a cost of \u00a33,500,000 ($7\u00a0million) and completion date of 26 January 1963 (Australia Day). In reality, the project was completed ten years late and 1,357% over budget in real terms.\nStrike and Workers' Control.\nIn 1972, a construction worker was fired, leading the BLF-affiliated workers to demand his rehiring and a 25% wage increase. In response to this, all the workers were fired, and in revenge the workers broke into the construction site with a crowbar and brought their own toolboxes. Workers' control was applied to the site for five weeks as the construction workers worked 35 hours a week with improved morale, more efficient organization and fewer people skipping work. The workers agreed to end their work-in when management agreed to give them a 25% wage increase, the right to elect their foremen, four weeks annual leave and a large payment for their troubles.\nUtzon and his resignation.\nBefore the Sydney Opera House competition, J\u00f8rn Utzon had won seven of the 18 competitions he had entered but had never seen any of his designs built. Utzon's submitted concept for the Sydney Opera House was almost universally admired and considered groundbreaking. The Assessors Report of January 1957 stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The drawings submitted for this scheme are simple to the point of being diagrammatic. Nevertheless, as we have returned again and again to the study of these drawings, we are convinced that they present a concept of an Opera House which is capable of becoming one of the great buildings of the world.\nFor the first stage, Utzon worked successfully with the rest of the design team and the client, but, as the project progressed, the Cahill government insisted on progressive revisions. They also did not fully appreciate the costs or work involved in design and construction. Tensions between the client and the design team grew further when an early start to construction was demanded despite an incomplete design. This resulted in a continuing series of delays and setbacks while various technical engineering issues were being refined. The building was unique, and the problems with the design issues and cost increases were exacerbated by commencement of work before the completion of the final plans.\nAfter the 1965 election of the Liberal Party, with Robert Askin becoming Premier of New South Wales, the relationship of client, architect, engineers and contractors became increasingly tense. Askin had been a \"vocal critic of the project prior to gaining office.\" His new Minister for Public Works, Davis Hughes, was even less sympathetic. Elizabeth Farrelly, an Australian architecture critic, wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;at an election night dinner party in Mosman, Hughes' daughter Sue Burgoyne boasted that her father would soon sack Utzon. Hughes had no interest in art, architecture or aesthetics. A fraud, as well as a philistine, he had been exposed before Parliament and dumped as Country Party leader for 19 years of falsely claiming a university degree. The Opera House gave Hughes a second chance. For him, as for Utzon, it was all about control; about the triumph of homegrown mediocrity over foreign genius.\nDifferences ensued. One of the first was that Utzon believed the clients should receive information on all aspects of the design and construction through his practice, while the clients wanted a system (notably drawn in sketch form by Davis Hughes) where architect, contractors, and engineers each reported to the client directly and separately. This had great implications for procurement methods and cost control, with Utzon wishing to negotiate contracts with chosen suppliers (such as Ralph Symonds for the plywood interiors) and the New South Wales government insisting contracts be put out to tender.\nUtzon was highly reluctant to respond to questions or criticism from the client's Sydney Opera House Executive Committee (SOHEC). However, he was greatly supported throughout by a member of the committee and one of the original competition judges, Harry Ingham Ashworth. Utzon was unwilling to compromise on some aspects of his designs that the clients wanted to change.\nUtzon's ability was never in doubt, despite questions raised by Davis Hughes, who attempted to portray Utzon as an impractical dreamer. Ove Arup actually stated that Utzon was \"probably the best of any I have come across in my long experience of working with architects\" and: \"The Opera House could become the world's foremost contemporary masterpiece if Utzon is given his head.\"\nIn 1965 Utzon was working closely with Ralph Symonds, a manufacturer of plywood based in Sydney and highly regarded by many, despite an Arup engineer warning that Ralph Symonds's \"knowledge of the design stresses of plywood was extremely sketchy\" and that the technical advice was \"elementary to say the least and completely useless for our purposes.\" Australian architecture critic Elizabeth Farrelly has referred to Ove Arup's project engineer Michael Lewis as having \"other agendas\". By February 1966, Utzon was owed more than $100,000 in fees. Hughes then withheld funding so that Utzon could not even pay his own staff. The government minutes record that following several threats of resignation, Utzon finally stated to Davis Hughes: \"If you don't do it, I resign.\" Hughes replied: \"I accept your resignation. Thank you very much. Goodbye.\"\nUtzon left the project on 28 February 1966. He said that Hughes's refusal to pay him any fees and the lack of collaboration caused his resignation and later described the situation as \"Malice in Blunderland\". In March 1966, Hughes offered him a subordinate role as \"design architect\" under a panel of executive architects, without any supervisory powers over the House's construction, but Utzon rejected this. Utzon left Australia, never to return.\nFollowing the resignation, there was great controversy about who was in the right and who was in the wrong. The \"Sydney Morning Herald\" initially opined: \"No architect in the world has enjoyed greater freedom than Mr Utzon. Few clients have been more patient or more generous than the people and the Government of NSW. One would not like history to record that this partnership was brought to an end by a fit of temper on the one side or by a fit of meanness on the other.\" On 17 March 1966, the \"Herald\" offered the view that: \"It was not his [Utzon's] fault that a succession of Governments and the Opera House Trust should so signally have failed to impose any control or order on the project ... his concept was so daring that he himself could solve its problems only step by step ... his insistence on perfection led him to alter his design as he went along.\"\nThe Sydney Opera House opened the way for the immensely complex geometries of some modern architecture. The design was one of the first examples of the use of computer-aided design to design complex shapes. The design techniques developed by Utzon and Arup for the Sydney Opera House have been further developed and are now used for architecture, such as works of Gehry and blobitecture, as well as most reinforced concrete structures. The design is also one of the first in the world to use araldite to glue the precast structural elements together and proved the concept for future use.\nIt was also a first in mechanical engineering. Another Danish firm, Steensen Varming, was responsible for designing the new air-conditioning plant, the largest in Australia at the time, supplying over of air per minute, using the innovative idea of harnessing the harbour water to create a water-cooled heat pump system that is still in operation today.\nOpening.\n Opening, Sydney Opera House, 1973\nThe Sydney Opera House was formally opened by Queen Elizabeth II, on 20 October 1973. A large crowd attended. The opening was televised and included fireworks and a performance of Beethoven's Symphony No. 9.\nIt is frequently erroneously claimed that Utzon was not invited to the opening and his name was not mentioned at the ceremony. Utzon was in fact invited, but he declined in order to avoid the controversy over his dismissal overshadowing the event; and while the Queen's speech did not mention Utzon (or any other involved architect), Premier Askin did credit him.\nReconciliation with Utzon; building refurbishment.\nIn the late 1990s, the Sydney Opera House Trust resumed communication with Utzon in an attempt to effect a reconciliation and to secure his involvement in future changes to the building. In 1999, he was appointed by the trust as a design consultant for future work.\nIn 2004, the first interior space rebuilt to an Utzon design was opened and renamed \"The Utzon Room\" in his honour. It contains an original Utzon tapestry (14.00 x 3.70 metres) called \"Homage to Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach\". In April 2007, he proposed a major reconstruction of the Opera Theatre, as it was then known. Utzon died on 29 November 2008, having never returned to Australia to see the completed Opera House.\nA state memorial service, attended by Utzon's son Jan and daughter Lin, was held in the Concert Hall on 25 March 2009 featuring performances, readings and recollections from prominent figures in the Australian performing arts scene.\nRefurbished Western Foyer and accessibility improvements were commissioned on 17 November 2009, the largest building project completed since Utzon was re-engaged in 1999. Designed by Utzon and his son Jan, the project provided improved ticketing, toilet and cloaking facilities. New escalators and a public lift enabled enhanced access for the disabled and families with prams. The prominent paralympian athlete Louise Sauvage was announced as the building's \"accessibility ambassador\" to advise on further improvements to aid people with disabilities.\nIn 2013, a 60-metre long artwork by artist Reg Mombassa was unveiled at the Sydney Opera House. The Gumscape, Road and Creatures triptych was commissioned by the Sydney Opera House to cover the scaffolding concealing refurbishment building work.\nOn 29 March 2016, an original 1959 tapestry by Le Corbusier (2.18 x 3.55 metres), commissioned by Utzon to be hung in the Sydney Opera House and called \"Les D\u00e9s Sont Jet\u00e9s\" (The Dice Are Cast), was finally unveiled \"in situ\" after being owned by the Utzon family and held at their home in Denmark for over 50 years. The tapestry was bought at auction by the Sydney Opera House in June 2015. It now hangs in the building's Western Foyer and is accessible to the public.\nIn the second half of 2017, the Joan Sutherland Theatre was closed to replace the stage machinery and for other works.\nArchitectural design role of Peter Hall.\nAfter the resignation of Utzon, the Minister for Public Works, Davis Hughes, and the Government Architect, Ted Farmer, organised a team to bring the Sydney Opera House to completion. The architectural work was divided between three appointees who became the Hall, Todd, Littlemore partnership. David Littlemore would manage construction supervision, Lionel Todd contract documentation, while the crucial role of design became the responsibility of Peter Hall.\nHall completed a combined arts and architecture degree at Sydney University. Upon graduation a travel scholarship enabled him to spend twelve months in Europe during which time he visited Utzon in Helleb\u00e6k. Returning to Sydney, Hall worked for the Government Architect, a branch of the NSW Public Works Department. While there he established himself as a talented design architect with a number of court and university buildings, including the Goldstein Hall at the University of New South Wales, which won the Sir John Sulman Medal in 1964.\nHall resigned from the Government Architects office in early 1966 to pursue his own practice. When approached to take on the design role, (after at least two prominent Sydney architects had declined), Hall spoke with Utzon by phone before accepting the position. Utzon reportedly told Hall: he (Hall) would not be able to finish the job and the Government would have to invite him back.46 Hall also sought the advice of others, including architect Don Gazzard who warned him acceptance would be a bad career move as the project would \"never be his own\".\nHall agreed to accept the role on the condition there was no possibility of Utzon returning. Even so, his appointment did not go down well with many of his fellow architects who considered that no one but Utzon should complete the Sydney Opera House. Upon Utzon's dismissal, a rally of protest had marched to Bennelong Point. A petition was also circulated, including in the Government Architects office. Peter Hall was one of the many who had signed the petition that called for Utzon's reinstatement.\nWhen Hall agreed to the design role and was appointed in April 1966, he imagined he would find the design and documentation for the Stage III well advanced. What he found was an enormous amount of work ahead of him with many aspects completely unresolved by Utzon in relation to seating capacity, acoustics and structure. In addition Hall found the project had proceeded for nine years without the development of a concise client brief. To bring himself up to speed, Hall investigated concert and opera venues overseas and engaged stage consultant Ben Schlange and acoustic consultant Wilhelm Jordan, while establishing his team. In consultation with all the potential building users, the first Review of Program was completed in January 1967. The most significant conclusion reached by Hall was that concert and opera were incompatible in the same hall. Although Utzon had sketched ideas using plywood for the great enclosing glass walls, their structural viability was unresolved when Hall took on the design role. With the ability to delegate tasks and effectively coordinate the work of consultants, Hall guided the project for over five years until the opening day in 1973.\nA former Government Architect, Peter Webber, in his book \"Peter Hall: the Phantom of the Opera House\", concludes: when Utzon resigned no one was better qualified (than Hall) to rise to the challenge of completing the design of the Opera House.\nPerformance firsts.\nDuring the construction phase, lunchtime performances were often arranged for the workers, with American vocalist Paul Robeson the first artist to perform, in 1960.\nVarious performances were presented prior to the official opening:\nAfter the opening:\nPublic and commemorative events.\nIn 1993, Constantine Koukias was commissioned by the Sydney Opera House Trust in association with REM Theatre to compose \"Icon\", a large-scale music theatre piece for the 20th anniversary of the Sydney Opera House.\nDuring the 2000 Summer Olympics, the venue served as the focal point for the triathlon events. The event had a swimming loop at Farm Cove, along with competitions in the neighbouring Royal Botanical Gardens for the cycling and running portions of the event.\nIn 2006, tiles from the Sydney Opera House were added to the facade of the Tribune Tower in Chicago.\nSince 2013, a group of residents from the nearby Bennelong Apartments, calling themselves the Sydney Opera House Concerned Citizens Group, have been campaigning against Forecourt Concerts on the grounds that they exceed noise levels outlined in the development approval (DA). In February 2017 the Department of Planning and &amp; Environment handed down a $15,000 fine to the Sydney Opera House for breach of allowed noise levels at a concert held in November 2015. However, the DA was amended in 2016 to allow an increase in noise levels in the forecourt by 5 decibels. The residents opposing the concerts contend that a new DA should have been filed rather than an amendment.\nThe Sydney Opera House sails formed a graphic projection-screen in a lightshow mounted in connection with the International Fleet Review in Sydney Harbour on 5 October 2013.\nOn 31 December 2013, the venue's 40th anniversary year, a New Year fireworks display was mounted for the first time in a decade. The Sydney Opera House hosted an event, 'the biggest blind date' on Friday 21 February 2014 that won an historic Guinness World Record. The longest continuous serving employee was commemorated on 27 June 2018, for 50 years of service.\nOn 14 June 2019, a state memorial service for former Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke was held at the Sydney Opera House.\nOn 20 October 2023, the Opera House turned 50 years old.\nIn December 2024, after five years of absence, the Nutcracker returned to the Sydney Opera house. The new production, which is directed by David Hallberg, brings interactions with the contemporary audiences to the classic ballet.\nControversies.\nThe Opera House chief executive Louise Herron clashed with Sydney radio commentator Alan Jones on 5 October 2018. Jones called for her sacking for refusing to allow Racing NSW to use the Opera House sails to advertise The Everest horse race. Within hours, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian overruled Herron. Two days later, Prime Minister Scott Morrison supported the decision, calling the Opera House \"the biggest billboard Sydney has\". The NSW Labor Party leader, Luke Foley, and senior federal Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese had supported the proposal. The political view was not supported by significant public opinion, with a petition against the advertising collecting over 298,000 names by 9 October 2018. 235,000 printed petition documents were presented to the NSW Parliament in the morning. A survey conducted on 8 October by market research firm Micromex found that 81% of those surveyed were not supportive of the premier's direction.\nCoronation controversy.\nIn 2023, the New South Wales Government scrapped plans to light the sails of the Sydney Opera House in honour of the coronation of King Charles. State Premier Chris Minns argued that the sails had been lit up too often and was costing significant taxpayer money, stating that the cost was somewhere between eighty and one hundred thousand dollars.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n This Wikipedia article contains material from http://, listed on the \"New South Wales State Heritage Register\" published by the Government of New South Wales under https:// licence (accessed on 3 September 2017).\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28223", "revid": "50883454", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28223", "title": "Selim II", "text": "Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1566 to 1574\nSelim II (; ; 28 May 1524 \u2013 15 December 1574), also known as Selim the Blond () or Selim the Drunkard (), was the sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1566 until his death in 1574. He was a son of Suleiman the Magnificent and his wife Hurrem Sultan. Selim had been an unlikely candidate for the throne until his brother Mehmed died of smallpox, his half-brother Mustafa was strangled to death by the order of his father and his brother Bayezid was killed on the order of his father after a rebellion against him and Selim.\nDuring his reign, his grand vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha exerted significant control over state governance. The conquest of Cyprus and Tunis were notable achievements during his reign but setbacks occurred in the Battle of Lepanto and the failed capture of Astrakhan as part of the war with Russia.\nEarly years.\nSelim was born on 28 May 1524 in Constantinople during the reign of his father, Suleiman the Magnificent. His mother was H\u00fcrrem Sultan, an Orthodox priest's daughter, who was the current Sultan's concubine at the time. In 1533 or 1534, his mother, H\u00fcrrem, was freed and became Suleiman's legal wife. He had four brothers, \u015eehzade Mehmed, \u015eehzade Bayezid, \u015eehzade Abdullah and \u015eehzade Cihangir, and a sister Mihrimah Sultan. In June\u2013July 1530, a three week celebration was organised in Constantinople that centered around the circumcision of Selim, and his elder brothers Mustafa, and Mehmed. The princes were circumcised on 27 June 1530. The festivities ranged from displays of captured enemy items to simulated battles, featuring performances by jugglers and strongmen, as well as reenactments of recent conflicts. Suleiman played a crucial role, observing everything from a loggia in the Hippodrome, while Pargal\u0131 Ibrahim Pasha actively oversaw the proceedings and presented extravagant gifts to the sultan and the princes.\nIn May 1537, he and his brother Mehmed joined their father on his campaign to Corfu. This marked the inaugural military campaign of his sons. Their presence in a military campaign conveyed a message of dynastic continuity. In 1540, the sultan took him and Mehmed with him to spend the winter in Edirne. In June 1541, he and Mehmed once again accompanied their father on his campaign to Buda. In 1542, he was appointed governor of the province of Karaman, after which he went to Konya. Following Mehmed's unexpected demise in November 1543, the role of district governorship of Saruhan was assumed by Selim in the spring of 1544. During the summer of 1544, a gathering of family members occurred in Bursa, uniting Selim, his parents Suleiman and H\u00fcrrem, his sister Mihrimah, and Mihrimah's husband R\u00fcstem Pasha. In the 1548\u201349 military campaign against the Safavids, Selim was dispatched to Edirne, acting as a substitute for the sultan during the campaign. In 1553, he accompanied his father against the Safavids and kept Suleiman's company throughout most of the campaign. During this campaign, his elder half-brother, Mustafa was executed on their father's orders.\nSuccession struggle.\nIn 1555 a rebellion erupted in northeastern Bulgaria, led by a man claiming to be \u015eehzade Mustafa. He organised his followers like the Ottoman administration, redistributing taxes and gaining support. Bayezid, aware of the situation, prepared militarily and initiated negotiations. Suleiman sent Sokullu Mehmed Pasha to suppress the uprising. Bayezid's envoy convinced the pretender's chief vizier to defect, leading to the leader's capture and execution in Constantinople on 31 July 1555. Rumors suggested Bayezid orchestrated the revolt, but Suleiman's desire to punish him was hindered by his wife H\u00fcrrem. Tensions over succession continued, with Bayezid and Selim in rivalry. Strategic maneuvers, including Bayezid's relocation to Germiyan, maintained equilibrium in their positions, both poised to return to the capital upon news of their father's fate.\nSuleiman's persistent health concerns prompted efforts to dispel rumors of imminent death. In June 1557, the French ambassador noted Suleiman's strategic display of vitality upon returning to Constantinople, countering speculations about succession plans. The dynamics shifted decisively after H\u00fcrrem's death in April 1558, known for mediating between her sons. Suleiman aimed to secure the cooperation of his sons, Selim and Bayezid, in a plan to reassign them to new, distant governorates. The proposal involved moving Selim from Manisa to Konya and relocating Bayezid from K\u00fctahya to the remote town of Amasya. Both brothers' sons were also granted governorships in smaller counties adjacent to their fathers' assignments. In September, Suleiman reassigned his sons, sending Selim to Konya and Bayezid to Amasya.\nIn mid-April 1559, Bayezid and his army departed Amasya and advanced toward Ankara. Despite conveying to his father his desire to return to K\u00fctahya, it became evident that his true intention was to attack and eliminate Selim, aiming to be the sole heir to the throne before Suleiman sided with Selim. Upon learning of Bayezid's expedition, Suleiman deemed military action necessary, instructing the third vizier Sokullu Mehmed to join Selim with janissaries, accompanied by Rumeli troops. Before Constantinople's forces reached Konya, Bayezid altered course southward from Ankara, arriving near Konya by late May 1559. Selim, anticipating the attack, assumed a defensive stance with augmented forces, ultimately prevailing in the engagement on May 30 and 31.\nIn July 1559, Bayezid embarked on an eastern march from Amasya, accompanied by ten thousand men and four of his sons. By the autumn of the same year, he reached Yerevan, a Safavid town, receiving great respect from its governor. Subsequently, in October, he arrived in Qazvin, where Shah Tahmasp I welcomed him initially with enthusiasm, hosting elaborate parties in his honor. However, in April 1560, on Sultan Suleiman's request, Tahmasp imprisoned Bayezid. Both Suleiman and Selim dispatched envoys to Persia to persuade Shah Tahmasp to execute Bayezid. Over the next one and a half years, embassies shuttled between Istanbul and Qazvin. The last Ottoman embassy, arriving on 16 July 1561, had the formal task of attempting to return Bayezid to Istanbul. This delegation included figures like H\u00fcsrev Pasha, Sinan Pasha, Ali Aqa Chavush Bashi, and two hundred officials.\nSuleiman's letter accompanying the embassy expressed his willingness to reconfirm the Treaty of Amasya (1555) and foster a new era of Ottoman\u2013Safavid relations. Throughout these diplomatic efforts, Suleiman bestowed numerous gifts on Tahmasp and agreed to pay him for handing over Bayezid\u2014400,000 gold coins were given to Tahmasp. Finally, on 25 September 1561, Tahmasp handed over Bayezid and his four sons, who were subsequently executed near Qazvin by the Ottoman executioner, Ali Aqa Chavush Bashi, using the garroting method. In early 1562, Selim had been appointed as the governor of K\u00fctahya, and following Bayezid's death, his last years as a prince were spent peacefully in his court in K\u00fctahya.\nReign.\nAccession.\nSelim ascended the throne on 29 September 1566, following the death of his father on 6 September. Initially, his enthronement ceremony occurred in Istanbul, despite the presence of viziers and the military in Szigetv\u00e1r, Hungary. The ceremony went unrecognised, leading to a request for a new ceremony in Belgrade. On 2 October, three days later, the sultan left Istanbul. In order to safeguard the process of enthronement and accession, the astute grand vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha maintained the secrecy of Suleiman's death until Selim arrived at the army in Belgrade. In Belgrade, a throne was positioned between two tu\u011fs (horsehair battle standards) in front of the imperial tent. The allegiance ceremony was then conducted at that location. The new sultan went to Belgrade without offering the accession bonus, the standing army sought assurances of gratuity and promotion, but the sultan dismissed their request. Consequently, upon entering Istanbul, the army revolted, citing the absence of a proper enthronement ceremony.\nCharacter of Selim's rule.\nIn this new political environment, the grand vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha exerted significant control over governance throughout his entire reign. Mehmed Pasha served continuously as grand vizier under Suleiman, and then Selim. Known for strategically placing family members and associates in key positions across the empire, he established a reliable network of proteges. Contemporary accounts highlight Sokollu's virtual sovereignty during Selim's reign, with the grand vizier effectively managing the empire. Selim's limited involvement in governance can be attributed not only to Sokollu's dominant role but also to a significant shift in the empire's political landscape. The emergence of the court and favourites system, along with the sedentarization of the sultanate, marked Selim's reign and later became defining aspects of power struggles among his successors.\nBeginning with Selim, the sultans also abstained from participating in military campaigns, spending most of their time in the palace. Over time during his reign, the janissaries began to increase their power at the expense of the sultan. \"Accession money\" demanded by the janissaries had increased; they used their power to gain more benefits for their personal lives instead of improving the state. Janissaries were now able to marry and were allowed to enrol their sons in the Corps.\nTreaties of Edirne and Speyer.\nIn 1568, the treaty of Edirne was concluded, after which the Habsburg Holy Roman Emperor, Maximilian II recognised recent Ottoman conquests in Hungary and continued paying an annual tribute to the sultan. The longstanding Transylvanian issue, a source of conflicts between the Habsburgs and Ottomans, found resolution in the treaty of Speyer during the imperial diet in 1570. In this treaty, John Sigismund Z\u00e1polya relinquished his title as the elected king of Hungary, adopting the titles of prince of Transylvania and the adjacent parts of Hungary. Maximilian acknowledged these changes, and John Sigismund accepted Maximilian's suzerainty over his principality, which remained a part of the Holy Crown of Hungary. Despite this, the Transylvanian prince continued to be an Ottoman vassal. In essence, the Principality of Transylvania existed in a dual dependency, with its sovereignty constrained by both the sultan and the Habsburg kings of Hungary.\nAstrakhan expedition.\nIn 1569, Selim made an unsuccessful attempt to conquer Astrakhan. One of the most ambitious endeavours during his reign, albeit left unfinished, was the construction of a canal connecting the Don and Volga rivers. Championed by Grand Vizier Sokollu Mehmed Pasha, this extensive project involved excavating around 40 miles of challenging terrain. The canal, if completed, aimed to strategically benefit the Ottomans along the northern frontiers, serving to control Muscovy's advancement and establishing a base for potential attacks on Safavid Persia. Unfortunately, adverse weather conditions and disorder among the soldiers dispatched to the region hindered the canal's completion.\nCampaigns in the Mediterranean.\nDuring his reign, naval campaigns unfolded in the Mediterranean. In 1571, the Ottomans seized Cyprus from the Venetians, transforming it into a new province alongside neighboring regions in mainland Anatolia. Initially, the island's harsh climate deterred migration, but under state pressure, a considerable number of Turkish settlers eventually established themselves. In the same year, the Holy League, comprising papal, Venetian, and Spanish fleets, retaliated for the capture of Cyprus in the decisive Battle of Lepanto, a significant Christian stronghold. The Ottoman navy suffered a devastating defeat, leading to a year-long reconstruction effort, yet the loss of skilled naval personnel continued to impact the state throughout Selim's reign. Despite this setback, the recovery of the fortress of Tunis from Spain in 1574, shortly before Selim's death, marked a notable naval success.\nArchitecture.\nSuleiman had left a lasting legacy in Damascus by commissioning the construction of the impressive Takiyya al-Sulaimaniyya mosque along the Barada River, situated outside the city walls. Designed in 1554 by the renowned architect Sinan, it was commonly referred to as the Takiyya, acknowledging the Sufi hostel (tekke or zawiyya) within its courtyard chambers. Selim expanded upon his father's mosque by adding the Madrasa Salimiyya in 1566\u201367. Subsequently, this complex became the starting point for the annual pilgrimage to Mecca. Selim favoured Edirne over Istanbul, demonstrating his affection for the former Ottoman capital, especially relishing visits and hunting sessions in the city. And so he undertook the construction of a significant mosque here. The mosque which is known as Selimiye Mosque, is the largest of all Ottoman mosques, was erected between 1569 and 1575 under the supervision of Sultan Selim's chief architect, Mimar Sinan. He also undertook a significant renovation of the Hagia Sophia Mosque from 1572 to 1574 under the guidance of Sinan. This restoration included repairing the buttresses, substituting the wooden minaret with a brick one, and introducing two new minarets. Furthermore, adjacent structures were demolished to create the characteristic courtyard of the imperial mosque.\nDeath.\nSelim died after slipping and falling on a marble floor while drunk at the age of fifty on 15 December 1574. He was buried in his tomb in Hagia Sophia Mosque, Istanbul.\nCharacter.\nSelim was known for being a generous supporter of poets and had a strong interest in literature, and wrote poems under the pen name \"Selimi\". During his time as the governor of K\u00fctahya, he actively engaged with poetry, surrounding himself with poets, including notable figures like Turak \u00c7elebi. Among his associates, Nigari not only served as a confidante but also played roles as an entertainer and portraitist for the sultan.\nHe is reputed in the sources of the period to have been a generous monarch, fond of pleasure and entertainment and of drink councils, and who enjoyed the presence of scholars, poets and musicians around him. However, it is stated that he did not appear much in public, and that his father often went to Friday prayer and out among the public; Selim neglected this and spent his time in the palace.\nFamily.\nConsorts.\nSelim had a Haseki and legal wife, and at least seven others concubines.\nSons.\nSelim had at least eight sons:\nDaughters.\nSelim had at least four daughters:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "28224", "revid": "36942950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28224", "title": "Smith", "text": "Smith may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28226", "revid": "1317123655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28226", "title": "Show business", "text": "Vernacular term for the entertainment industry\nShow business, sometimes shortened to show biz or showbiz (since c. 1945), is a vernacular term for all aspects of the entertainment industry. From the business side (including managers, agents, producers, and distributors), the term applies to the creative element (including artists, performers, writers, musicians, and technicians) and was in common usage throughout the 20th century, though the first known use in print dates from 1850. At that time and for several decades, it typically included the initial definite article \"the\". By the latter part of the century, it had acquired a slightly arcane quality associated with the era of variety, but the term was still in active use. In modern entertainment industry, it is also associated with the fashion industry (creating trend and fashion) and acquiring intellectual property rights from the invested research in the entertainment business.\nIndustry.\nThe global media and entertainment (M&amp;E) market, including film, television shows and advertising, streaming media, music, broadcasting, radio, book publishing, video games, and ancillary services and products was worth US$1.72\u00a0trillion in 2015, $1.9\u00a0trillion in 2016, and estimated at $2.14\u00a0trillion in 2020. About one third of the total ($735\u00a0billion in 2017) is made up by the U.S. entertainment industry, the largest M&amp;E market in the world.\nSectors and companies.\nThe entertainment sector can be split up into the following subsectors:\nISIC.\nThe industry segment is covered by class \"R\" of the International Standard Industrial Classification: \"Arts, entertainment and recreation\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28227", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28227", "title": "Socratic Irony", "text": ""}
{"id": "28228", "revid": "23471211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28228", "title": "Socratic irony", "text": ""}
{"id": "28230", "revid": "49662468", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28230", "title": "Speaker for the Dead", "text": "1986 novel by Orson Scott Card\nSpeaker for the Dead is a 1986 science fiction novel by American writer Orson Scott Card, an indirect sequel to the 1985 novel \"Ender's Game\". The book takes place around the year 5270, some 3,000 years after the events in \"Ender's Game\". However, because of relativistic space travel at near-light speed, Ender himself is only about 35 years old.\nThis is the first book to describe the Starways Congress, a high standpoint legislature for the human space colonies, and the Hundred Worlds, the planets with human colonies that are tightly intertwined by Ansible technology, which enables instantaneous communication across any distance.\nLike \"Ender's Game\", the book won the Nebula Award (1986) and the Hugo Award (1987). \"Speaker for the Dead\" was published in a slightly revised edition in 1991. It was followed by \"Xenocide\" and \"Children of the Mind\".\nSetting.\nSome years after the eradication of the Formic species (in \"Ender's Game\"), Ender Wiggin writes a book called \"The Hive Queen\", describing the life of the Formics as described to him by the dormant Formic Queen whom he secretly carries. As humanity uses light-speed travel to establish new colonies, Ender and his sister Valentine age slowly through relativistic travel. Ender's older brother, the now-aged Hegemon of Earth, Peter Wiggin, recognizes Ender's writings in \"The Hive Queen\", and requests Ender write for him once he dies. Ender agrees and authors \"The Hegemon\". These two books, written under the pseudonym \"Speaker for the Dead\", launch a new spiritual movement of Speakers for the Dead, who have authority to investigate and eulogize a person and their work after their death. \"The Hive Queen\" also shifts societal opinion about the Formic war, leading humanity to view Ender Wiggin, previously a hero, as responsible for a tragic and cruel xenocide, 'xeno-', meaning alien, and '-cide', referring to the act of killing, together meaning the act of killing populations of aliens (comparable to genocide).\nThree thousand years after the Formic xenocide, humans have spread across the Hundred Worlds, ruled by Starways Congress. A Brazilian Catholic human colony called Milagre is established on the planet Lusitania (1886 S.C.). The planet is home to a sentient species of symbiotic forest dwellers. The colonists (who primarily speak Portuguese) dub them \"Pequeninos\" (Little Ones) but they are often referred to as \"piggies\" due to their porcine snouts. Their society is matriarchal and gender-segregated, and their belief system centers around the trees of the forests. The Pequeninos prove to be of great interest to scientists. Since humans had destroyed the only sentient species they had encountered (the Formics), special care is taken to ensure no similar mistakes are made with the Pequeninos. The human colony is fenced in, strictly regulated to limit contact with the Pequeninos to a handful of scientists, and forbidden to share human technology or culture with them.\nShortly after the colony's founding, many of the colonists die from the \"Descolada\" virus (Portuguese for \"uncoiled\"), which alters DNA and causes terrible pain, rampant cancerous growth of fungus and even extra limbs, decay of healthy tissue, and death. The xenobiologists Gusto and Cida von Hesse manage to create a treatment for the virus before succumbing to it themselves (1936 S.C.), leaving behind their young daughter Novinha.\nPlot.\nEight years after the Descolada virus has been brought under control, Xenologer Pipo and his thirteen-year-old son and apprentice Libo have developed a friendship with the Pequeninos. They allow Novinha to join their science team as the colony's only xenobiologist after she passes the test at age thirteen. After accidentally sharing information about human genders with a male Pequenino named Rooter, the scientists find Rooter's body eviscerated with a sapling planted within it. Guessing this may be a torturous sacrificial ritual, restrictions on studying the Pequeninos are enforced, barring the humans from asking questions directly to Pequeninos.\nA few years later, Novinha discovers that every lifeform on Lusitania carries the \"Descolada\" virus which, though lethal to humans, appears to serve a beneficial purpose to native lifeforms. When Pipo learns of this, he suddenly has an insight, and before he tells the others, races off to talk to the Pequeninos. Libo and Novinha find Pipo's body cut open just as Rooter's had been, but with no sapling planted. As Pipo's death appears unprovoked, the Pequeninos are now considered a threat by the Starways Congress and restrictions on studying them are tightened. Distraught, Novinha makes a call for a Speaker for the Dead for Pipo. She is in love with Libo but fears that if he sees her files of research he will make the same discovery as Pipo and meet the same fate. She marries another colonist, Marcos Ribeira, so as to lock her files from being opened.\nAndrew Wiggin, unbeknownst by others to be the Ender Wiggin responsible for the Formic xenocide, lives innocuously on the planet Trondheim. He responds to Novinha's call, parting with his sister, Valentine, who had traveled with him but is now settled with a family. He travels with an artificial intelligence named Jane who communicates with Ender through a jewel earring; she was born in the Ansible network that enables faster-than-light communications and keeps her existence secret. After relativistic travel, Ender arrives at Lusitania 22 years later (1970 S.C.), finding that Novinha canceled her request for a Speaker five days after sending it. In the intervening time, Libo died in the same manner as Pipo, and Marcos succumbed to a chronic illness. Novinha's eldest children, Ela and Miro, have requested a Speaker for Libo and Marcos. Ender, gaining access to all of the appropriate files, learns of tension since Pipo's death: Novinha has turned away from xenobiology to study crop growth and had a loveless abusive relationship with Marcos; Miro has secretly worked with Libo's daughter Ouanda to continue to study the Pequeninos, breaking the law to share human technology and knowledge with them. Miro and Ouanda have fallen in love. With Ender's arrival, Miro tells him that one of the Pequeninos, Human, has taken a great interest in Ender, and Ender becomes aware that Human can hear messages from the Formic Hive Queen. Ender discovers that Marcos was infertile: all six of Novinha's children were fathered by Libo. Ender also learns what Pipo had seen in Novinha's data.\nAs word of Miro's and Ouanda's illegal sharing of human technology with the Pequeninos is reported to Congress, Ender secretly meets with the Pequeninos. They know his true identity and they implore him to help them be part of civilization, while the Formic Queen tells Ender that Lusitania would be an ideal place to restart the hive, as her race can help guide the Pequeninos. Congress orders Miro and Ouanda to be sent off-planet for penal action and the colony be disbanded. Ender delivers his eulogy for Marcos, revealing Novinha's infidelity. Miro, distraught to learn that he is Ouanda's half-brother, attempts to escape to the Pequeninos, but he suffers neurological damage after he tries to cross the electrified fence. Ender reveals to the colony what Pipo learned: every life form on Lusitania is paired with another through the \"Descolada\" virus, so that the death of one births the other. In the case of the Pequeninos, they become trees when they die. The colony leaders agree to rebel against Congress, severing their Ansible connection and deactivating the fence, allowing Ender, Ouanda, and Ela to go with Human to speak to the Pequenino wives, to help establish a case to present to Congress.\nThe Pequenino wives help Ender corroborate the complex life cycle of the Pequeninos, affirming that the death ritual Pipo observed was to help create \"fathertrees\" who fertilize the Pequenino females to continue their race. The Pequeninos believed they were honoring Pipo, and later Libo, by helping them become fathertrees, but Ender explains that humans lack this \"third life\", and if the Pequeninos are to cohabitate with humans, they must respect this difference. To affirm their understanding and agreement, Ender is asked to perform the ritual of giving Human \"third life\" as a fathertree.\nMiro recovers from most of the physical damage from his encounter with the fence, but he is partially paralyzed; Ender transfers Jane to him, and she becomes Miro's companion. Valentine and her family decide to travel from Trondheim to Lusitania to help with the revolt and will arrive in some decades due to relativistic travel; Ender sends Miro to meet them halfway. Novinha finally absolves herself of her guilt for the death of Pipo and Libo. She and Ender marry. Ender plants the Hive Queen as per her request, and he writes his third book, a biography of the life of the Pequenino Human.\nFilm adaptation.\nAt the Los Angeles Times Book Festival on April 20, 2013, Card stated that he did not want \"Speaker for the Dead\" to be made into a film: \"\"Speaker for the Dead\" is unfilmable,\" Card said in response to a question from the audience. \"It consists of talking heads, interrupted by moments of excruciating and unwatchable violence. Now, I admit, there's plenty of unwatchable violence in film, but never attached to my name. \"Speaker for the Dead\", I don't want it to be filmed. I can't imagine it being filmed.\"\nInfluence.\nCard wrote in his introduction to the 1991 edition that he had received letters from readers who conducted \"Speakings\" at funerals.\nReception.\nDavid Langford reviewed \"Speaker for the Dead\" for \"White Dwarf\" #91, and stated that \"Despite token guilt at his genocide of the sensitively named alien 'buggers;' (previous book), Ender never suffers for his triumphs - even though Card is strong on suffering for everyone else, and happily cripples a young boy to add needless excitement to the finale. I was impressed by this thoughtful SF adventure, but with reservations ...\" \"AudioFile\" reviewed the book as \"giving life to the emotional and intellectual challenge of the story\" and described it as \"brilliant and compelling\".\" Publishers Weekly\" described it as a \"rich and ambitious novel\" but \"overlong\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28232", "revid": "5320876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28232", "title": "Star catalogue", "text": "Astronomical catalogue that lists stars and their positions in the sky\nA star catalogue is an astronomical catalogue that lists stars. In astronomy, many stars are referred to simply by catalogue numbers. There are a great many different star catalogues which have been produced for different purposes over the years, and this article covers only some of the more frequently quoted ones. Star catalogues were compiled by many different ancient people, including the Babylonians, Greeks, Chinese, Persians, and Arabs. They were sometimes accompanied by a star chart for illustration. Most modern catalogues are available in electronic format and can be freely downloaded from space agencies' data centres. The largest is being compiled from the spacecraft \"Gaia\" and thus far has over a billion stars.\nCompleteness and accuracy are described by the faintest limiting magnitude V (largest number) and the accuracy of the positions.\nHistorical catalogues.\nAncient Near East.\nFrom their existing records, it is known that the ancient Egyptians recorded the names of only a few identifiable constellations and a list of thirty-six decans that were used as a star clock. The Egyptians called the circumpolar star \"the star that cannot perish\" and, although they made no known formal star catalogues, they nonetheless created extensive star charts of the night sky which adorn the coffins and ceilings of tomb chambers.\nAlthough the ancient Sumerians were the first to record the names of constellations on clay tablets, the earliest known star catalogues were compiled by the ancient Babylonians of Mesopotamia in the late 2nd millennium BC, during the Kassite Period (c.\u20091531\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091155 BC). They are better known by their Assyrian-era name 'Three Stars Each'. These star catalogues, written on clay tablets, listed thirty-six stars: twelve for \"Anu\" along the celestial equator, twelve for \"Ea\" south of that, and twelve for \"Enlil\" to the north. The Mul.Apin lists, dated to sometime before the Neo-Babylonian Empire (626\u2013539 BC), are direct textual descendants of the \"Three Stars Each\" lists and their constellation patterns show similarities to those of later Greek civilization.\nHellenistic world and Roman Empire.\nIn Ancient Greece, the astronomer and mathematician Eudoxus laid down a full set of the classical constellations around 370 BC. His catalogue \"Phaenomena\", rewritten by Aratus of Soli between 275 and 250 BC as a didactic poem, became one of the most consulted astronomical texts in antiquity and beyond. It contained descriptions of the positions of the stars and the shapes of the constellations, and provided information on their relative times of rising and setting.\nApproximately in the 3rd century BC, the Greek astronomers Timocharis of Alexandria and Aristillus created another star catalogue. Hipparchus (c.\u2009190\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009120 BC) completed his star catalogue in 129 BC, the earliest known attempt to map the entire sky, which he compared to Timocharis' and discovered that the longitude of the stars had changed over time. This led him to determine the first value of the precession of the equinoxes. In the 2nd century, Ptolemy (c.\u200990\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009186 AD) of Roman Egypt published a star catalogue as part of his \"Almagest\", which listed 1,022 stars visible from Alexandria. Ptolemy's catalogue was based almost entirely on an earlier one by Hipparchus. It remained the standard star catalogue in the Western and Arab worlds for over eight centuries. The Islamic astronomer al-Sufi updated it in 964, and the star positions were redetermined by Ulugh Beg in 1437, but it was not fully superseded until the appearance of the thousand-star catalogue of Tycho Brahe in 1598.\nThe ancient Vedic and other scriptures of India were very well aware of the astronomical positions and constellations. Both \"Mahabharata\" and \"Ramayana\" provide references to various events in terms of the planetary positions and constellations of that time. The Planetary positions at the time of Mahabharata war has been given comprehensively. A very interesting and exhaustive discussion about the planetary positions along with specific name of constellations appears in a paper by R N Iyengar in the \"Indian Journal of History of Science\".\nAncient China.\nThe earliest known inscriptions for Chinese star names were written on oracle bones and date to the Shang dynasty (c.\u20091600\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091050 BC). Sources dating from the Zhou dynasty (c.\u20091050 \u2013 256 BC) which provide star names include the \"Zuo Zhuan\", the \"Shi Jing\", and the \"Canon of Yao\" (\u582f\u5178) in the \"Book of Documents\". The \"L\u00fcshi Chunqiu\" written by the Qin statesman L\u00fc Buwei (d.\u2009235 BC) provides most of the names for the twenty-eight mansions (i.e. asterisms across the ecliptic belt of the celestial sphere used for constructing the calendar). An earlier lacquerware chest found in the Tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng (interred in 433 BC) contains a complete list of the names of the twenty-eight mansions. Star catalogues are traditionally attributed to Shi Shen and Gan De, two rather obscure Chinese astronomers who may have been active in the 4th century BC of the Warring States period (403\u2013221 BC). The \"Shi Shen astronomy\" (\u77f3\u7533\u5929\u6587, Shi Shen tienwen) is attributed to Shi Shen, and the \"Astronomic star observation\" (\u5929\u6587\u661f\u5360, Tianwen xingzhan) to Gan De.\nIt was not until the Han dynasty (202 BC \u2013 220 AD) that astronomers started to observe and record names for all the stars that were apparent (to the naked eye) in the night sky, not just those around the ecliptic. A star catalogue is featured in one of the chapters of the late 2nd-century-BC history work \"Records of the Grand Historian\" by Sima Qian (145\u201386 BC) and contains the \"schools\" of Shi Shen and Gan De's work (i.e. the different constellations they allegedly focused on for astrological purposes). Sima's catalogue\u2014the \"Book of Celestial Offices\" (\u5929\u5b98\u66f8 Tianguan shu)\u2014includes some 90 constellations, the stars therein named after temples, ideas in philosophy, locations such as markets and shops, and different people such as farmers and soldiers. For his \"Spiritual Constitution of the Universe\" (\u9748\u61b2, Ling Xian) of 120 AD, the astronomer Zhang Heng (78\u2013139 AD) compiled a star catalogue comprising 124 constellations. Chinese constellation names were later adopted by the Koreans and Japanese.\nIslamic world.\nA large number of star catalogues were published by Muslim astronomers in the medieval Islamic world. These were mainly \"Zij\" treatises, including Arzachel's \"Tables of Toledo\" (1087), the Maragheh observatory's \"Zij-i Ilkhani\" (1272), and Ulugh Beg's \"Zij-i Sultani\" (1437). Other famous Arabic star catalogues include Alfraganus' \"A compendium of the science of stars\" (850) which corrected Ptolemy's \"Almagest\"; and al-Sufi's \"Book of Fixed Stars\" (964) which described observations of the stars, their positions, magnitudes, brightness, and colour, drawings for each constellation, and the first known description of the Andromeda Galaxy. Many stars are still known by their Arabic names (see List of Arabic star names).\nPre-Columbian Americas.\nThe \"Motul Dictionary\", compiled in the 16th century by an anonymous author (although attributed to Fray Antonio de Ciudad Real), contains a list of stars originally observed by the ancient Mayas. The Maya Paris Codex also contains symbols for different constellations which were represented by mythological beings.\nBayer and Flamsteed catalogues.\nTwo systems introduced in historical catalogues remain in use to the present day. The first system comes from the German astronomer Johann Bayer's \"Uranometria\", published in 1603 and regarding bright stars. These are given a Greek letter followed by the genitive case of the constellation in which they are located; examples are Alpha Centauri or Gamma Cygni. The major problem with Bayer's naming system was the number of letters in the Greek alphabet (24). It was easy to run out of letters before running out of stars needing names, particularly for large constellations such as Argo Navis. Bayer extended his lists up to 67 stars by using lower-case Roman letters (\"a\" through \"z\") then upper-case ones (\"A\" through \"Q\"). Few of those designations have survived. It is worth mentioning, however, as it served as the starting point for variable star designations, which start with \"R\" through \"Z\", then \"RR\", \"RS\", \"RT\"...\"RZ\", \"SS\", \"ST\"...\"ZZ\" and beyond.\nThe second system comes from the English astronomer John Flamsteed's \"Historia coelestis Britannica\" (1725). It kept the genitive-of-the-constellation rule for the back end of his catalogue names, but used numbers instead of the Greek alphabet for the front half. Examples include 61 Cygni and 47 Ursae Majoris.\nFull-sky catalogues (in chronological order).\nBayer and Flamsteed covered only a few thousand stars between them. In theory, full-sky catalogues try to list every star in the sky. There are, however, billions of stars resolvable by 21st century telescopes, so this is an impossible goal; with this kind of catalog, an attempt is generally made to get every star brighter than a given magnitude.\nLAL.\nJ\u00e9r\u00f4me Lalande published the \"Histoire c\u00e9leste fran\u00e7aise\" in 1801, which contained an extensive star catalog, among other things. The observations made were made from the Paris Observatory and so it describes mostly northern stars. This catalogue contained the positions and magnitudes of 47,390 stars, out to magnitude 9, and was the most complete catalogue up to that time. A significant reworking of this catalogue by followers of Lalande in 1846 added reference numbers to the stars that are used to refer to some of these stars to this day. The decent accuracy of this catalogue kept it in common use as a reference by observatories around the world throughout the 19th century.\nBD/CD/CPD.\nThe \"Bonner Durchmusterung\" (\"German\": Bonn sampling) and follow-ups were the most complete of the pre-photographic star catalogues.\nThe \"Bonner Durchmusterung\" itself was published by Friedrich Wilhelm Argelander, Adalbert Kr\u00fcger, and Eduard Sch\u00f6nfeld between 1852 and 1859. It covered 320,000 stars in epoch 1855.0.\nAs it covered only the northern sky and some of the south (being compiled from the Bonn observatory), this was then supplemented by the \"S\u00fcdliche Durchmusterung \" (SD), which covers stars between declinations \u22121 and \u221223 degrees\n(1886, 120,000 stars). It was further supplemented by the \"Cordoba Durchmusterung\" (580,000 stars), which began to be compiled at C\u00f3rdoba, Argentina in 1892 under the initiative of John M. Thome and covers declinations \u221222 to \u221290. Lastly, the \"Cape Photographic Durchmusterung\" (450,000 stars, 1896), compiled at the Cape, South Africa, covers declinations \u221218 to\u00a0\u221290.\nAstronomers preferentially use the HD designation (see next entry) of a star, as that catalogue also gives spectroscopic information, but as the Durchmusterungs cover more stars they occasionally fall back on the older designations when dealing with one not found in Draper. Unfortunately, a lot of catalogues cross-reference the Durchmusterungs without specifying which one is used in the zones of overlap, so some confusion often remains.\nStar names from these catalogues include the initials of which of the four catalogues they are from (though the \"Southern\" follows the example of the \"Bonner\" and uses BD; CPD is often shortened to CP), followed by the angle of declination of the star (rounded towards zero, and thus ranging from +00 to +89 and \u221200 to \u221289), followed by an arbitrary number as there are always thousands of stars at each angle. Examples include BD+50\u00b01725 or CD\u221245\u00b013677.\nHD/HDE.\nThe Henry Draper Catalogue was published in the period 1918\u20131924. It covers the whole sky down to about ninth or tenth magnitude, and is notable as the first large-scale attempt to catalogue spectral types of stars.\nThe catalogue was compiled by Annie Jump Cannon and her co-workers at Harvard College Observatory under the supervision of Edward Charles Pickering, and was named in honour of Henry Draper, whose widow donated the money required to finance it.\nHD numbers are widely used today for stars which have no Bayer or Flamsteed designation. Stars numbered 1\u2013225300 are from the original catalogue and are numbered in order of right ascension for the 1900.0 epoch. Stars in the range 225301\u2013359083 are from the 1949 extension of the catalogue. The notation HDE can be used for stars in this extension, but they are usually denoted HD as the numbering ensures that there can be no ambiguity.\nAC.\nThe \"Catalogue astrographique\" (Astrographic Catalogue) was part of the international \"Carte du Ciel\" programme designed to photograph and measure the positions of all stars brighter than magnitude 11.0. In total, over 4.6 million stars were observed, many as faint as 13th magnitude. This project was started in the late 19th century. The observations were made between 1891 and 1950. To observe the entire celestial sphere without burdening too many institutions, the sky was divided among 20 observatories, by declination zones. Each observatory exposed and measured the plates of its zone, using a standardized telescope (a \"normal astrograph\") so each plate photographed had a similar scale of approximately 60 arcsecs/mm. The U.S. Naval Observatory took over custody of the catalogue, now in its 2000.2 edition.\nBS, BSC, HR.\nFirst published in 1930 as the \"Yale Catalog of Bright Stars\", this catalogue contained information on all stars brighter than visual magnitude 6.5 in the \"Harvard Revised Photometry Catalogue\". The list was revised in 1983 with the publication of a supplement that listed additional stars down to magnitude 7.1. The catalogue detailed each star's coordinates, proper motions, photometric data, spectral types, and other useful information.\nThe last printed version of the Bright Star Catalogue was the 4th revised edition, released in 1982. The 5th edition is in electronic form and is available online.\nSAO.\nThe Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory catalogue was compiled in 1966 from various previous astrometric catalogues, and contains only the stars to about ninth magnitude for which accurate proper motions were known. There is considerable overlap with the Henry Draper catalogue, but any star lacking motion data at that time is omitted. The epoch for the position measurements in the latest edition is J2000.0. The SAO catalogue contains this major piece of information not in Draper, the proper motion of the stars, so it is often used when that fact is of importance. The cross-references with the Draper and Durchmusterung catalogue numbers in the latest edition are also useful.\nNames in the SAO catalogue start with the letters SAO, followed by a number. The numbers are assigned following 18 ten-degree bands in the sky, with stars sorted by right ascension within each band.\nUSNO-B1.0.\nUSNO-B1.0 is an all-sky catalogue created by research and operations astrophysicists at the U.S. Naval Observatory (as developed at the United States Naval Observatory Flagstaff Station), that presents positions, proper motions, magnitudes in various optical passbands, and star/galaxy estimators for 1,042,618,261 objects derived from 3,643,201,733 separate observations. The data was obtained from scans of 7,435 Schmidt plates taken for the various sky surveys during the last 50 years. USNO-B1.0 is believed to provide all-sky coverage, completeness down to V = 21, 0.2 arcsecond astrometric accuracy at J2000.0, 0.3 magnitude photometric accuracy in up to five colors, and 85% accuracy for distinguishing stars from non-stellar objects. USNO-B is now followed by NOMAD; both can be found on the Naval Observatory server. The entire 50GB compressed catalog can be downloaded via BitTorrent using instructions from Skychart. The Naval Observatory is currently working on B2 and C variants of the USNO catalogue series.\nGSC.\nThe \"Guide Star Catalog\" is an online catalogue of stars produced for the purpose of accurately positioning and identifying stars satisfactory for use as guide stars by the Hubble Space Telescope program. The first version of the catalogue was produced in the late 1980s by digitizing photographic plates and contained about 20 million stars, out to about magnitude 15. The latest version of this catalogue contains information for 945,592,683 stars, out to magnitude 21. The latest version continues to be used to accurately position the Hubble Space Telescope.\nPPM.\nThe PPM Star Catalogue (1991) is one of the best, both in the proper motion and star position till 1999. Not as precise as the Hipparcos catalogue but with many more stars. The PPM was built from BD, SAO, HD, and more, with sophisticated algorithm and is an extension for the Fifth Fundamental Catalogue, \"Catalogues of Fundamental Stars\".\nHIP.\nThe Hipparcos catalogue was compiled from the data gathered by the European Space Agency's astrometric satellite \"Hipparcos\", which was operational from 1989 to 1993. The catalogue was published in June 1997 and contains 118,218 stars; an updated version with re-processed data was published in 2007. It is particularly notable for its parallax measurements, which are considerably more accurate than those produced by ground-based observations.\nGaia catalogues.\nThe Gaia catalogues are based on observations made by the \"Gaia\" space telescope. They are released in stages that contain increasing amounts of information; the early releases also miss some stars, especially fainter stars located in dense star fields. Data from every data release can be accessed at the \"Gaia\" archive.\nGaia DR1, the first data release based on 14 months of observations made through September 2015, took place on 13 September 2016. The data release includes positions and magnitudes in a single photometric band for 1.1 billion stars using only \"Gaia\" data, positions, parallaxes, and proper motions for more than 2 million stars based on a combination of \"Gaia\" and Tycho-2 data for those objects in both catalogues, light curves, and characteristics for about 3000 variable stars, and positions and magnitudes for more than 2000 extragalactic sources used to define the celestial reference frame. The second data release (DR2), which occurred on 25 April 2018, is based on 22 months of observations made between 25 July 2014 and 23 May 2016. It includes positions, parallaxes, and proper motions for about 1.3 billion stars and positions of an additional 300 million stars, red and blue photometric data for about 1.1 billion stars and single colour photometry for an additional 400 million stars, and median radial velocities for about 7 million stars between magnitude 4 and 13. It also contains data for over 14,000 selected Solar System objects. The first part of the third data release, EDR3 (Early Data Release 3) was released on 3 December 2020. It is based on 34 months of observations and consists of improved positions, parallaxes, and proper motions of over 1.8 billion objects The full DR3, published in June 2022, includes the EDR3 data plus Solar System data; variability information; results for non-single stars, for quasars, and for extended objects; astrophysical parameters; and a special data set, the Gaia Andromeda Photometric Survey (GAPS). The final Gaia catalogue is expected to be released three years after the end of the Gaia mission.\nSpecialized catalogues.\nSpecialized catalogues make no effort to list all the stars in the sky, working instead to highlight a particular type of star, such as variables or nearby stars.\nADS.\nAitken's double star catalogue (1932) lists 17,180 double stars north of declination \u221230 degrees.\nCarbon stars.\nStephenson's General Catalogue of galactic Carbon stars is a catalogue of 7000+ carbon stars.\nGl, GJ, Wo.\nThe Gliese (later Gliese-Jahrei\u00df) catalogue attempts to list all star systems within of Earth ordered by right ascension (see the List of nearest stars). Later editions expanded the coverage to . Numbers in the range 1.0\u2013915.0 (Gl numbers) are from the second edition, which was\n\"Catalogue of Nearby Stars\" (1969, W. Gliese).\nThe integers up to 915 represent systems which were in the first edition. Numbers with a decimal point were used to insert new star systems for the second edition without destroying the desired order (by right ascension). This catalogue is referred to as CNS2, although this name is never used in catalogue numbers.\nNumbers in the range 9001\u20139850 (Wo numbers) are from the supplement\n\"Extension of the Gliese catalogue\" (1970, R. Woolley, E. A. Epps, M. J. Penston and S. B. Pocock).\nNumbers in the ranges 1000\u20131294 and 2001\u20132159 (GJ numbers) are from the supplement\n\"Nearby Star Data Published 1969\u20131978\" (1979, W. Gliese and H. Jahrei\u00df).\nThe range 1000\u20131294 represents nearby stars, while 2001\u20132159 represents suspected nearby stars. In the literature, the GJ numbers are sometimes retroactively extended to the Gl numbers (since there is no overlap). For example, Gliese 436 can be interchangeably referred to as either Gl 436 or GJ 436.\nNumbers in the range 3001\u20134388 are from\n\"Preliminary Version of the Third Catalogue of Nearby Stars\" (1991, W. Gliese and H. Jahrei\u00df).\nAlthough this version of the catalogue was termed \"preliminary\", it is still the current one as of March 2006[ [update]], and is referred to as CNS3. It lists a total of 3,803 stars. Most of these stars already had GJ numbers, but there were also 1,388 which were not numbered. The need to give these 1,388 \"some\" name has resulted in them being numbered 3001\u20134388 (NN numbers, for \"no name\"), and data files of this catalogue now usually include these numbers. An example of a star which is often referred to by one of these unofficial GJ numbers is GJ 3021.\nGCTP.\nThe General Catalogue of Trigonometric Parallaxes, first published in 1952 and later superseded by the New GCTP (now in its fourth edition), covers nearly 9,000 stars. Unlike the Gliese, it does not cut off at a given distance from the Sun; rather it attempts to catalogue all known measured parallaxes. It gives the co-ordinates in 1900 epoch, the secular variation, the proper motion, the weighted average absolute parallax and its standard error, the number of parallax observations, quality of interagreement of the different values, the visual magnitude, and various cross-identifications with other catalogues. Auxiliary information, including UBV photometry, MK spectral types, data on the variability and binary nature of the stars, orbits when available, and miscellaneous information to aid in determining the reliability of the data are also listed.\nhttps:// Louise F. Jenkins, Yale University Observatory.\nWilliam F. van Altena, John Truen-liang Lee and Ellen Dorrit Hoffleit, Yale University Observatory, 1995.\nProper motion catalogues.\nA common way of detecting nearby stars is to look for relatively high proper motions. Several catalogues exist, of which we'll mention a few. The Ross and Wolf catalogues pioneered the domain:\nRoss, Frank Elmore, \"New Proper Motion Stars\", eight successive lists, \"The Astronomical Journal\", Vol. 36 to 48, 1925\u20131939\nWolf, Max, \"Katalog von 1053 st\u00e4rker bewegten Fixsternen\", Ver\u00f6ff. d. Badischen Sternwarte zu Heidelberg (K\u00f6nigstuhl), Bd. 7, No. 10, 1919; and numerous lists in \"Astronomische Nachrichten\", 209 to 236, 1919\u20131929\nWillem Jacob Luyten later produced a series of catalogues:\nL \u2013 Luyten, Proper motion stars and White dwarfs\nLuyten, W. J., \"Proper Motion Survey with the forty-eight inch Schmidt Telescope\", University of Minnesota, 1941 (http://)\nLFT \u2013 Luyten Five-Tenths catalogue\nLuyten, W. J., \"A Catalog of 1849 Stars with Proper Motion exceeding 0.5\" annually\", Lund Press, Minneapolis (Mn), 1955 (http://)\nLHS \u2013 Luyten Half-Second catalogue\nLuyten, W. J., \"Catalogue of stars with proper motions exceeding 0\"5 annually\", University of Minnesota, 1979 (http://)\nLTT \u2013 Luyten Two-Tenths catalogue\nLuyten, W. J. \"Luyten's Two Tenths. A catalogue of 9867 stars in the Southern Hemisphere with proper motions exceeding 0\".2 annually\", Minneapolis, 1957; \"A catalogue of 7127 stars in the Northern Hemisphere with proper motions exceeding 0\".2 annually``, Minneapolis, 1961; also supplements 1961\u20131962. (http://http://http://http://)\"\nNLTT \u2013 New Luyten Two-Tenths catalogue\nLuyten, W. J., \"New Luyten Catalogue of stars with proper motions larger than two tenths of an arcsecond (NLTT)\", Univ. of Minnesota, 1979, supplement 1980 (http://http://)\nLPM \u2013 Luyten Proper-Motion catalogue\n Luyten, W. J., \"Proper Motion Survey with the 48 inch Schmidt Telescope\", University of Minnesota, 1963\u20131981\nLP numbers: L in zones \u221245 to \u221289 deg.; LP in zones +89 to \u221244 deg.\nAround the same time period, Henry Lee Giclas worked on a similar series of catalogues:\nGiclas, H. L., et al., \"Lowell Proper Motion Survey\", \"Lowell Observatory Bulletin\", 1971\u20131979 (http://)\nStruve Double Star Catalog.\nFriedrich Georg Wilhelm von Struve discovered a very large number of double stars and in 1827 published his double star catalogue \"Catalogus novus stellarum duplicium\". For example, binary star 61 Cygni is designated \"Struve 2758\" or \"STF 2758\". Stars of his catalogue are sometimes indicated by the Greek letter sigma, \u03a3. Thus, 61 Cygni is also designated as \u03a32758.\nuvby98.\nThe \"ubvy\u03b2 Photoelectric Photometric Catalogue\" is a compilation of previously published photometric data. Published in 1998, the catalogue includes 63,316 stars surveyed through 1996.\nZC catalogue.\nThe Robertson's \"Zodiacal Catalogue\", collected by the astronomer James Robertson, is a catalogue of 3539 zodiacal stars brighter than 9th magnitude. It is mainly used for Star Occultations by the Moon.\nSuccessors to USNO-A, etc.\nStars evolve and move over time, making catalogues evolving, impermanent databases at even the most rigorous levels of production. The USNO catalogues are the most current and widely used astrometric catalogues available at present, and include USNO products such as USNO-B (the successor to USNO-A), NOMAD, UCAC and others in production or narrowly released. Some users may see specialized catalogues (more recent versions of the above), tailored catalogues, interferometrically-produced catalogues, dynamic catalogues, and those with updated positions, motions, colors, and improved errors. Catalogue data is continually collected at the Naval Observatory dark-sky facility, NOFS; and the latest refined, updated catalogues are reduced and produced by NOFS and the USNO. See the USNO Catalog and Image Servers for more information and access.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28233", "revid": "1316542406", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28233", "title": "Stellar designations and names", "text": "Process by which stars are named\nIn astronomy, stars have a variety of different stellar designations and names, including catalogue designations, current and historical proper names, and foreign language names.\nOnly a tiny minority of known stars have proper names; all others have only designations from various catalogues or lists, or no identifier at all. Hipparchus in the 2nd century BC enumerated about 850 naked-eye stars. Johann Bayer in 1603 listed about twice this number. Only in the 19th century did star catalogues list the naked-eye stars exhaustively. The Bright Star Catalogue, which is a star catalogue listing all stars of apparent magnitude 6.5 or brighter, or roughly every star visible to the naked eye from Earth, contains 9,096 stars. The most voluminous modern catalogues list on the order of a billion stars, out of an estimated total of 200 to 400 billion in the Milky Way.\nProper names may be historical, often transliterated from Arabic or Chinese names. Such transliterations can vary so there may be multiple spellings. A smaller number of names have been introduced since the Middle Ages, and a few in modern times as nicknames have come into popular use, for example \"Sualocin\" for \u03b1 Delphini and \"Navi\" for \u03b3 Cassiopeiae.\nThe International Astronomical Union (IAU) has begun a process to select and formalise unique proper names for the brighter naked-eye stars and for other stars of popular interest. To the IAU, \"name\" refers to the (usually colloquial) term used for a star in everyday speech, while \"\"designation\" is solely alphanumerical\" and used almost exclusively in official catalogues and for professional astronomy. Many of the names and some of the designations in use today were inherited from the time before the IAU existed. Other designations are being added all the time. As of the start of 2019, the IAU had decided on a little over 300 proper names, mostly for the brighter naked-eye stars.\nProper names.\nSeveral hundred of the brightest stars had traditional names, most of which derived from Arabic, but a few from Latin. There were a number of problems with these names, however:\nIn 2016, the IAU organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalog and standardize proper names for stars. The WGSN's first bulletin dated July 2016 included a table of 125 stars comprising the first two batches of names approved by the WGSN (on 30 June and 20 July 2016) together with names of stars (including four traditional star names: Ain, Edasich, Errai and Fomalhaut) reviewed and adopted by the IAU Executive Committee Working Group on Public Naming of Planets and Planetary Satellites during the 2015 NameExoWorlds campaign and recognized by the WGSN. Further batches of names were approved on 21\u00a0August, 12 September, 5 October and 6 November 2016. These were listed in a table of 102 stars included in the WGSN's second bulletin dated November 2016. The next additions were done on 1 February 2017 (13 new star names), 30 June 2017 (29), 5 September 2017 (41), 17 November 2017 (3) and 1 June 2018 (17). All 330 names are included in the current List of IAU-approved Star Names, last updated on 1 June 2018 (with a minor correction posted on 11 June 2018).\nIn practice, names are only universally used for the very brightest stars (Sirius, Arcturus, Vega, etc.) and for a small number of slightly less bright but \"interesting\" stars (Algol, Polaris, Mira, etc.). For other naked eye stars, the Bayer or Flamsteed designation is often preferred.\nIn addition to the traditional names, a small number of stars that are \"interesting\" can have modern English names. For instance, two second-magnitude stars, Alpha Pavonis and Epsilon Carinae, were assigned the proper names Peacock and Avior respectively in 1937 by Her Majesty's Nautical Almanac Office during the creation of \"The Air Almanac\", a navigational almanac for the Royal Air Force. Of the fifty-seven stars included in the new almanac, these two had no traditional names. The RAF insisted that all of the stars must have names, so new names were invented for them. These names have been approved by the IAU WGSN.\nThe book \"\" by R. H. Allen (1899) has had effects on star names:\nStars named for individuals.\nA few stars are named for individuals. These are mostly names in common use that were taken up by the scientific community at some juncture. The first such case (discounting characters from mythology) was Cor Caroli (\u03b1 CVn), named in the 17th century for Charles I of England. The remaining examples are mostly named after astronomers, the best known are probably Barnard's Star (which has the highest known proper motion of any star and is thus notable even though it is far too faint to be seen with the naked eye), Kapteyn's Star and recently Tabby's Star.\nThe International Astronomical Union has held two NameExoWorlds contests to give proper names to exoplanets and their host stars, in 2014/5 and 2019. As a result, several stars were named after people, including Cervantes for Mu Arae, Copernicus for 55 Cancri A, and Rosal\u00edadecastro (HD 149143) after the writer Rosal\u00eda de Castro.\nCatalogue designations.\nIn the absence of any better means of designating a star, catalogue designations are generally used. Many star catalogues are used for this purpose; see star catalogues.\nBy constellation.\nThe first modern schemes for designating stars systematically labelled them within their constellation.\nFull-sky catalogues.\nFull-sky star catalogues detach the star designation from the star's constellation and aim at enumerating all stars with apparent magnitude greater than a given cut-off value.\nVariable designations.\nVariable stars that do not have Bayer designations are assigned designations in a variable star scheme that superficially extends the Bayer scheme with uppercase Latin letters followed by constellation names, starting with single letters R to Z, and proceeding to pairs of letters. Such designations mark them as variable stars. Examples include R Cygni, RR Lyrae, and GN Andromedae. (Many variable stars also have designations in other catalogues.)\nExoplanet searches.\nWhen a planet is detected around a star, the star is often given a name and number based on the name of the telescope or survey mission that discovered it and based on how many planets have already been discovered by that mission e.g. HAT-P-9, WASP-1, COROT-1, Kepler-4, TRAPPIST-1.\nSale of star names by non-scientific entities.\nStar naming rights are not available for sale via the IAU or any other scientific body. Rather, star names are selected on a non-commercial basis by a small number of international organizations of astronomers, scientists, and registration bodies, who assign names consisting usually of a Greek letter followed by the star's constellation name, or less frequently based on their ancient traditional name.\nHowever, there are a number of non-scientific \"star-naming\" companies that offer to assign personalized nicknames to stars within their own private catalogs. These names are used only by that company and are only available for viewing on their web site or on purchased items. Names by commercial entities are not recognized by the astronomical community, or by competing star-naming companies. The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs has issued violation notices against companies which claimed to sell stars or the naming rights to them. A survey conducted by amateur astronomers discovered that just over half of consumers would still want to \"name a star\" with a non-scientific star-naming company even though they have been warned or informed such naming is not recognized by the astronomical community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28235", "revid": "36392306", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28235", "title": "Space Shuttle Challenger", "text": "Space Shuttle orbiter (1983\u20131986)\nSpace Shuttle \"Challenger\" (OV-099) was a Space Shuttle orbiter manufactured by Rockwell International and operated by NASA. Named after the commanding ship of a nineteenth-century scientific expedition that traveled the world, \"Challenger\" was the second Space Shuttle orbiter to fly into space after \"Columbia\", and launched on its maiden flight in April 1983. It was destroyed in January 1986 soon after launch in a disaster that killed all seven crewmembers aboard. \nInitially manufactured as a test article not intended for spaceflight, it was used for ground testing of the Space Shuttle orbiter's structural design. However, after NASA found that their original plan to upgrade \"Enterprise\" for spaceflight would be more expensive than upgrading \"Challenger\", the orbiter was pressed into operational service in the Space Shuttle program. Lessons learned from the first orbital flights of \"Columbia\" led to \"Challenger\"'s design possessing fewer thermal protection system tiles and a lighter fuselage and wings. This led to it being lighter than \"Columbia\", though still heavier than \"Discovery\".\nDuring its three years of operation, \"Challenger\" was flown on ten missions in the Space Shuttle program, spending over 62 days in space and completing almost 1,000 orbits around Earth. Following its maiden flight, \"Challenger\" supplanted \"Columbia\" as the leader of the Space Shuttle fleet, being the most-flown orbiter during all three years of its operation while \"Columbia\" itself was seldom used during the same time frame. \"Challenger\" was used for numerous civilian satellite launches, such as the first tracking and data relay satellite, the Palapa B communications satellites, the Long Duration Exposure Facility, and the Earth Radiation Budget Satellite. It was also used as a test bed for the Manned Maneuvering Unit (MMU) and served as the platform to repair the malfunctioning SolarMax telescope. In addition, three consecutive Spacelab missions were conducted with the orbiter in 1985, one of which being the first German crewed spaceflight mission. Passengers carried into orbit by \"Challenger\" include the first American female astronaut, the first American female spacewalker, the first African-American astronaut, and the first Canadian astronaut.\nOn its tenth flight in January 1986, \"Challenger\" broke up 73 seconds after liftoff, killing the seven-member crew of STS-51-L that included Christa McAuliffe, who would have been the first teacher in space. The Rogers Commission concluded that an O-ring seal in one of \"Challenger\"'s solid rocket boosters failed to contain pressurized burning gas that leaked out of the booster, causing a structural failure of \"Challenger\"'s external tank and the orbiter's subsequent breakup due to aerodynamic forces. NASA's organizational culture was also scrutinized by the Rogers Commission, and the Space Shuttle program's goal of replacing the United States' expendable launch systems was cast into doubt. The loss of \"Challenger\" and its crew led to a broad rescope of the program including replacing it with \"Endeavour\", and numerous aspects \u2014 such as launches from Vandenberg, the MMU, and Shuttle-Centaur \u2014 were scrapped to improve crew safety; \"Challenger\" and \"Atlantis\" were the only orbiters modified to conduct Shuttle-Centaur launches. The recovered remains of the orbiter are mostly buried in a missile silo located at Cape Canaveral LC-31; one piece is on display at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex.\nHistory.\n\"Challenger\" was named after HMS \"Challenger\", a British corvette that was the command ship for the \"Challenger\" Expedition, a pioneering global marine research expedition undertaken from 1872 through 1876. The Apollo 17 Lunar Module, which landed on the Moon in 1972, was also named \"Challenger\".\nConstruction.\nBecause of the low production volume of orbiters, the Space Shuttle program decided to build a vehicle as a Structural Test Article, STA-099, that could later be converted to a flight vehicle. The contract for STA-099 was awarded to North American Rockwell on July 26, 1972, and construction was completed in February 1978. After STA-099's rollout, it was sent to a Lockheed test site in Palmdale, where it spent over 11 months in vibration tests designed to simulate entire shuttle flights, from launch to landing. To prevent damage during structural testing, qualification tests were performed to a safety factor of 1.2 times the design limit loads. The qualification tests were used to validate computational models, and compliance with the required 1.4 factor of safety was shown by analysis. STA-099 was essentially a complete airframe of a Space Shuttle orbiter, with only a mockup crew module installed and thermal insulation placed on its forward fuselage.\nNASA planned to refit the prototype orbiter \"Enterprise\" (OV-101), used for flight testing, as the second operational orbiter; but \"Enterprise\" lacked most of the systems needed for flight, including a functional propulsion system, thermal insulation, a life support system, and most of the cockpit instrumentation. Modifying it for spaceflight was considered to be too difficult, expensive, and time-consuming. Since STA-099 was not as far along in the construction of its airframe, it would be easier to upgrade to a flight article. Because STA-099's qualification testing prevented damage, NASA found that rebuilding STA-099 into a flightworthy orbiter would be less expensive than refitting \"Enterprise\". Work on converting STA-099 to operational status began in January 1979, starting with the crew module (the pressurized portion of the vehicle), as the rest of the vehicle was still being used for testing by Lockheed. STA-099 returned to the Rockwell plant in November 1979, and the original, unfinished crew module was replaced with the newly constructed model. Major parts of STA-099, including the payload bay doors, body flap, wings, and vertical stabilizer, also had to be returned to their individual subcontractors for rework. By early 1981, most of these components had returned to Palmdale to be reinstalled. Work continued on the conversion until July 1982, when the new orbiter was rolled out as \"Challenger\".\n\"Challenger\", as did the orbiters built after it, had fewer tiles in its Thermal Protection System than \"Columbia\", though it still made heavier use of the white LRSI tiles on the cabin and main fuselage than did the later orbiters. Most of the tiles on the payload bay doors, upper wing surfaces, and rear fuselage surfaces were replaced with DuPont white Nomex felt insulation. These modifications and an overall lighter structure allowed \"Challenger\" to carry 2,500\u00a0lb (1,100\u00a0kg) more payload than \"Columbia.\" \"Challenger\"'s fuselage and wings were stronger and lighter than \"Columbia\"'s. The hatch and vertical-stabilizer tile patterns were different from those of the other orbiters. \"Challenger\" was the first orbiter to have a heads-up display (HUD) system for use in the descent phase of a mission, and the first to feature Phase I main engines rated for 104% maximum thrust.\nFlights and modifications.\nAfter its first flight in April 1983, \"Challenger\" quickly became the workhorse of NASA's Space Shuttle fleet, flying six of nine Space Shuttle missions in 1983 and 1984. Even when the orbiters \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\" joined the fleet, \"Challenger\" flew three missions a year from 1983 to 1985. \"Challenger\", along with \"Atlantis\", was modified at Kennedy Space Center to be able to carry the Centaur-G upper stage in its payload bay. If flight STS-51-L had been successful, \"Challenger\"'s next mission would have been the deployment of the \"Ulysses\" probe with the Centaur to study the polar regions of the Sun.\n\"Challenger\" flew the first American woman, African-American, Dutchman, and Canadian into space; carried three Spacelab missions; and performed the first night launch and night landing of a Space Shuttle.\nFinal mission and destruction.\nSTS-51-L was the orbiter's tenth and final flight, initially planned to launch on January 26, 1986 (after several technical and paperwork delays). The mission attracted huge media attention, as one of the crew was a civilian schoolteacher, Christa McAuliffe, who was assigned to carry out live lessons from the orbiter (as part of NASA's Teacher in Space Project). Other members would deploy the TDRS-B satellite and conduct comet observations.\n\"Challenger\" blasted off at 11:38 am EST on January 28, 1986. Just over a minute into the flight, a faulty booster joint opened up, leading to a flame that melted securing struts which resulted in a catastrophic structural failure and explosion of the External Tank. The resulting pressure waves and aerodynamic forces destroyed the orbiter, resulting in the loss of all of the crew.\n\"Challenger\" was the first Space Shuttle to be destroyed in a mission disaster. The collected debris of the vessel is currently buried in decommissioned missile silos at Launch Complex 31, Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. A section of the fuselage recovered from Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" can also be found at the \"Forever Remembered\" memorial at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex in Florida. Debris from the orbiter sometimes washes up on the Florida coast. This is collected and transported to the silos for storage. Because of its early loss, \"Challenger\" was the only Space Shuttle that never wore the NASA \"meatball\" logo, and was never modified with the MEDS \"glass cockpit\". The tail was never fitted with a drag chute, which was fitted to the remaining orbiters in 1992. \"Challenger\" and sister ship \"Columbia\" are the only two shuttles that never visited the Mir Space Station or the International Space Station. In September 2020 Netflix released \"\", a four-part miniseries created by Steven Leckart and Glen Zipper documenting the tragedy firsthand.\nLawsuits.\nIn March 1988 the federal government and Morton Thiokol Inc. agreed to pay $7.7 million in cash and annuities to the families of four of the seven \"Challenger\" astronauts as part of a settlement aimed at avoiding lawsuits in the nation's worst space disaster, according to government documents. Morton Thiokol, the company that manufactured the faulty solid rocket booster that caused the accident, paid 60 percent, $4,641,000. The remainder, $3,094,000, was paid by the government.\nIn September 1988 a federal judge dismissed two lawsuits seeking $3 billion from Space Shuttle rocket-maker Morton Thiokol Inc. by Roger Boisjoly, a former company engineer who warned against the ill-fated 1986 \"Challenger\" launch.\nList of missions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28236", "revid": "6617018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28236", "title": "Space Shuttle Enterprise", "text": "Space Shuttle test vehicle, used for glide tests\nSpace Shuttle \"Enterprise\" (Orbiter Vehicle Designation: OV-101) was the first orbiter of the Space Shuttle system. Rolled out on September 17, 1976, it was built for NASA as part of the Space Shuttle program to perform atmospheric test flights after being launched from a modified Boeing 747. It was constructed without engines or a functional heat shield. As a result, it was not capable of spaceflight.\nOriginally, \"Enterprise\" had been intended to be refitted for orbital flight to become the second space-rated orbiter in service. However, during the construction of Space Shuttle \"Columbia\", details of the final design changed, making it simpler and less costly to build \"Challenger\" around a body frame that had been built as a test article. Similarly, \"Enterprise\" was considered for refit to replace \"Challenger\" after the latter was destroyed, but \"Endeavour\" was built from structural spares instead.\n\"Enterprise\" was restored and placed on display in 2003 at the Smithsonian's new Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Virginia. Following the retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, \"Discovery\" replaced \"Enterprise\" at the Udvar-Hazy Center, and \"Enterprise\" was transferred to the \"Intrepid\" Museum in New York City, where it has been on display since July 2012.\nDifferences between \"Enterprise\" and future shuttles.\nThe design of \"Enterprise\" was not the same as that planned for \"Columbia\", the first flight model; the aft fuselage was constructed differently, and it did not have the interfaces to mount OMS pods. A large number of subsystems\u2014ranging from main engines to radar equipment\u2014were not installed on \"Enterprise\", but the capacity to add them in the future was retained, as NASA originally intended to refit the orbiter for spaceflight at the conclusion of its testing. Instead of a thermal protection system, its surface was primarily covered with simulated tiles made from polyurethane foam. Fiberglass was used for the leading edge panels in place of the reinforced carbon\u2013carbon ones of spaceflight-worthy orbiters. Only a few sample thermal tiles and some Nomex blankets were real. \"Enterprise\" used fuel cells to generate its electrical power, but these were not sufficient to power the orbiter for spaceflight.\n\"Enterprise\" also lacked reaction control system thrusters and hydraulic mechanisms for the landing gear; the landing gear doors were simply opened through the use of explosive bolts and the gear dropped down solely by gravity. As it was only used for atmospheric testing, \"Enterprise\" featured a large nose probe mounted on its nose cap, common on test aircraft because the location provides the most accurate readings for the test instruments, being mounted out in front of the disturbed airflow.\n\"Enterprise\" was equipped with Lockheed-manufactured zero-zero ejection seats like those its sister \"Columbia\" carried on its first four missions.\nService.\nConstruction began on \"Enterprise\" on June 4, 1974. Designated OV-101, it was originally planned to be named \"Constitution\" and unveiled on Constitution Day, September 17, 1976. Fans of asked US President Gerald Ford, through a letter-writing campaign, to name the orbiter after the television show's fictional starship, USS \"Enterprise\". \nIn an official memo, White House advisors cited \"hundreds of thousands of letters\" from Trekkies, \"one of the most dedicated constituencies in the country\", as a reason for giving the shuttle the name. Although Ford did not publicly mention the campaign, the president said that he was \"partial to the name\" \"Enterprise\", and directed NASA officials to change the name.\nIn mid-1976 the orbiter was used for ground vibration tests, allowing engineers to compare data from an actual flight vehicle with theoretical models.\nOn September 17, 1976, \"Enterprise\" was rolled out of Rockwell's plant at Palmdale, California. In recognition of its fictional namesake, \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry and most of the principal cast of the original series of \"Star Trek\" were on hand at the dedication ceremony.\nApproach and landing tests (ALT).\nOn January 31, 1977, \"Enterprise\" was taken by road to Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards Air Force Base to begin operational testing.\nWhile at NASA Dryden \"Enterprise\" was used by NASA for a variety of ground and flight tests intended to validate aspects of the shuttle program. The initial nine-month testing period was referred to by the acronym \"ALT\", for \"Approach and Landing Test\". These tests included a maiden \"flight\" on February 18, 1977, atop a Boeing 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft (SCA) to measure structural loads and ground handling and braking characteristics of the mated system. Ground tests of all orbiter subsystems were carried out to verify functionality prior to atmospheric flight.\nThe mated \"Enterprise\"/SCA combination was then subjected to five test flights with \"Enterprise\" uncrewed and unactivated. The purpose of these test flights was to measure the flight characteristics of the mated combination. These tests were followed with three test flights with \"Enterprise\" crewed to test the shuttle flight control systems.\nOn August 12, 1977, \"Enterprise\" flew on its own for the first time. \"Enterprise\" underwent four more free flights where the craft separated from the SCA and was landed under astronaut control. These tests verified the flight characteristics of the orbiter design and were used to carry out several aerodynamic and weight configurations. The first three flights were flown with a tailcone placed at the end of \"Enterprise\"'s aft fuselage, which reduced drag and turbulence when mated to the SCA. The final two flights saw the tailcone removed and mockup main engine nozzles installed. On the fifth and final glider flight, pilot-induced oscillation problems were revealed, which had to be addressed before the first orbital launch occurred.\nMated Vertical Ground Vibration Test (MGVT).\nFollowing the conclusion of the ALT test flight program, on March 13, 1978, \"Enterprise\" was flown once again, but this time halfway across the country to NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Alabama for the Mated Vertical Ground Vibration Testing (MGVT). The orbiter was lifted up on a sling very similar to the one used at Kennedy Space Center and placed inside the Dynamic Test Stand building, and mated to the Vertical Mate Ground Vibration Test tank (VMGVT-ET), which in turn was attached to a set of inert Solid Rocket Boosters (SRB) to form a complete shuttle launch stack, and marked the first time in the program's history that all Space Shuttle elements, an Orbiter, an External Tank (ET), and two SRBs, were mated together. During the course of the program, \"Enterprise\" and the rest of the launch stack would be exposed to a punishing series of vibration tests simulating as closely as possible those expected during various phases of launch, some tests with and others without the SRBs in place.\nPlanned preparations for spaceflight.\nAt the conclusion of this testing, \"Enterprise\" was due to be taken back to Palmdale for retrofitting as a fully spaceflight capable vehicle. Under this arrangement, \"Enterprise\" would be launched on its maiden spaceflight in July 1981 to launch a communications satellite and retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility, then planned for a 1980 release on the first operational orbiter, \"Columbia\". Afterward, \"Enterprise\" would conduct two Spacelab missions. However, in the period between the rollout of \"Enterprise\" and the rollout of \"Columbia\", a number of significant design changes had taken place, particularly with regard to the weight of the fuselage and wings. This meant that retrofitting the prototype would have been a much more expensive process than previously realized, involving the dismantling of the orbiter and the return of various structural sections to subcontractors across the country. As a consequence, NASA made the decision to convert an incomplete Structural Test Article, numbered STA-099, which had been built to undergo a variety of stress tests, into a fully flight-worthy orbiter, which became \"Challenger\".\nFit checks.\nFollowing the MGVT program and with the decision to not use \"Enterprise\" for orbital missions, it was ferried to Kennedy Space Center on April 10, 1979. By June 1979, it was mated with an external tank and solid rocket boosters (known as a boilerplate configuration) and tested in a launch configuration at KSC Launch Complex 39A for a series of fit checks of the facilities there.\nAfter this period, \"Enterprise\" was returned to NASA's Dryden Flight Research Facility in September 1981. In 1983 and 1984, \"Enterprise\" underwent an international tour visiting France, West Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada. \"Enterprise\" also visited California, Alabama, and Louisiana (while visiting the 1984 Louisiana World Exposition). \nBetween November 1984 and May 1985, \"Enterprise\" was again mated with an external tank and solid rocket boosters in a boilerplate configuration for a series of fit checks of the never-used shuttle facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.\nOn November 18, 1985, \"Enterprise\" was ferried to Washington, D.C., where it became property of the Smithsonian Institution and was stored in the National Air and Space Museum's hangar at Dulles International Airport.\nPost-\"Challenger\".\nAfter the \"Challenger\" disaster, NASA considered using \"Enterprise\" as a replacement. Refitting the shuttle with all of the necessary equipment for it to be used in space was considered, but NASA decided to use spare parts constructed at the same time as \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\" to build \"Endeavour\".\nPost-\"Columbia\".\nIn 2003 after the breakup of \"Columbia\" during re-entry, the \"Columbia\" Accident Investigation Board conducted tests at Southwest Research Institute, which used an air cannon to shoot foam blocks of similar size, mass and speed to that which struck \"Columbia\" at a test structure which mechanically replicated the orbiter wing leading edge. They removed a section of fiberglass leading edge from \"Enterprise\"'s wing to perform analysis of the material and attached it to the test structure, then shot a foam block at it. While the leading edge was not broken as a result of the test, which took place on May 29, 2003, the impact was enough to permanently deform a seal and leave a thin gap long. Since the strength of the reinforced carbon\u2013carbon (RCC) on \"Columbia\" is \"substantially weaker and less flexible\" than the test section from \"Enterprise\", this result suggested that the RCC would have been shattered. A section of RCC leading edge from \"Discovery\" was tested on June 6, to determine the effects of the foam on a similarly aged leading edge, resulting in a crack on panel 6 and cracking on a T-shaped seal between panels 6 and 7. On July 7, using a leading edge from \"Atlantis\" and focused on panel 8 with refined parameters stemming from the \"Columbia\" accident investigation, a second test created a ragged hole approximately in the RCC structure. The tests clearly demonstrated that a foam impact of the type \"Columbia\" sustained could seriously breach the protective RCC panels on the wing leading edge.\nThe board determined that the probable cause of the accident was that the foam impact caused a breach of a reinforced carbon-carbon panel along the leading edge of \"Columbia\"'s left wing, allowing hot gases generated during re-entry to enter the wing and cause structural collapse. This caused \"Columbia\" to tumble out of control, breaking up with the loss of the entire crew.\nMuseum exhibit.\nNew Orleans, Louisiana.\nIn 1984, \"Enterprise\" was on display during the 1984 Louisiana World Exposition (World's Fair) in New Orleans.\nWashington, D.C..\nFrom 1985 to 2003, \"Enterprise\" was stored at the Smithsonian's hangar at Washington Dulles International Airport before it was restored and moved to the Smithsonian's newly built National Air and Space Museum Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center at Washington Dulles, where it was the centerpiece of the space collection. On April 12, 2011, NASA announced that \"Discovery\", the most traveled orbiter in the fleet, would replace \"Enterprise\" in the Smithsonian's collection once the Shuttle fleet was retired, with ownership of \"Enterprise\" transferred to the \"Intrepid\" Museum in New York City. On April 17, 2012, \"Discovery\" was transported by Shuttle Carrier Aircraft to Dulles from Kennedy Space Center, where it made several passes over the Washington D.C. metro area. After \"Discovery\" had been removed from the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft, both orbiters were displayed nose-to-nose outside the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center before \"Enterprise\" was made ready for its flight to New York.\nNew York.\nOn December 12, 2011, ownership of \"Enterprise\" was officially transferred to the \"Intrepid\" Museum in New York City. In preparation for the anticipated relocation, engineers evaluated the vehicle in early 2010 and determined that it was safe to fly on the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft once again. At approximately 13:40\u00a0UTC on April 27, 2012, \"Enterprise\" took off from Dulles International Airport en route to a fly-by over the Hudson River, New York's JFK International Airport, the Statue of Liberty, the George Washington and Verrazano-Narrows Bridges, and several other landmarks in the city, in an approximately 45-minute \"final tour\". At 15:23\u00a0UTC, \"Enterprise\" touched down at JFK International Airport.\nThe mobile Mate-Demate Device and cranes were transported from Dulles to the ramp at JFK and the shuttle was removed from the SCA overnight on May 12, 2012, placed on a specially designed flat bed trailer and returned to Hangar 12. On June 3 a Weeks Marine barge took \"Enterprise\" to Jersey City. The Shuttle sustained cosmetic damage to a wingtip when a gust of wind blew the barge towards a piling. It was hoisted June 6 onto the Intrepid Museum in Manhattan.\n\"Enterprise\" went on public display on July 19, 2012, at the Intrepid Museum's new Space Shuttle Pavilion, a temporary shelter consisting of a pressurized, air-supported fabric bubble constructed on the aft end of the carrier's flight deck.\nOn October 29, 2012, storm surges from Hurricane Sandy caused Pier 86, including the Intrepid Museum's visitor center, to flood, and knocked out the museum's electrical power and both backup generators. The loss of power caused the Space Shuttle Pavilion to deflate, and high winds from the hurricane caused the fabric of the Pavilion to tear and collapse around the orbiter. Minor damage was spotted on the vertical stabilizer of the orbiter, as a portion of the tail fin above the rudder/speedbrake had broken off. The broken section was recovered by museum staff. While the pavilion itself could not be replaced for some time in 2013, the museum erected scaffolding and sheeting around \"Enterprise\" to protect it from the environment.\nBy April 2013, the damage sustained to \"Enterprise\"'s vertical stabilizer had been fully repaired, and construction work on the structure for a new pavilion was under way. The pavilion and exhibit reopened on July 10, 2013.\n\"Enterprise\" was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on March 13, 2013, reference number 13000071, in recognition of its role in the development of the Space Shuttle Program. The historic significance criteria are in space exploration, transportation, and engineering.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28237", "revid": "50833841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28237", "title": "Space Shuttle Columbia", "text": "Space Shuttle orbiter (1981\u20132003)\nSpace Shuttle \"Columbia\" (OV-102) was a Space Shuttle orbiter manufactured by Rockwell International and operated by NASA. Named after the first American ship to circumnavigate the globe, and the female personification of the United States, \"Columbia\" was the first of five Space Shuttle orbiters to fly in space, debuting the Space Shuttle launch vehicle on its maiden flight on April 12, 1981 and becoming the first spacecraft to be re-used after its first flight when it launched on STS-2 on November 12, 1981. As only the second full-scale orbiter to be manufactured after the Approach and Landing Test vehicle \"Enterprise\", \"Columbia\" retained unique external and internal features compared with later orbiters, such as test instrumentation and distinctive black chines. In addition to a heavier aft fuselage and the retention of an internal airlock throughout its lifetime, these made \"Columbia\" the heaviest of the five spacefaring orbiters: around heavier than \"Challenger\" and heavier than \"Endeavour\" when originally constructed. \"Columbia\" also carried ejection seats based on those from the SR-71 during its first six flights until 1983, and from 1986 onwards carried an imaging pod on its vertical stabilizer.\nDuring its 22 years of operation, \"Columbia\" was flown on 28 missions in the Space Shuttle program, spending over 300 days in space and completing over 4,000 orbits around Earth. NASA's flagship orbiter, \"Columbia\" often flew flights dedicated to scientific research in orbit following the loss of \"Challenger\" in 1986. \"Columbia\" was used for eleven of the fifteen flights of Spacelab laboratories, all four United States Microgravity Payload missions, and the only flight of Spacehab's Research Double Module. \"Columbia\" flew many of the longest duration space shuttle missions, all dedicated to scientific research. The only space shuttle that could rival \"Columbia\"'s long missions was \"Endeavour\", which flew the STS-67 mission that lasted for nearly 17 days. In 1992, NASA modified \"Columbia\" to be able to fly some of the longest missions in the Shuttle Program history using the Extended Duration Orbiter pallet. The orbiter used the pallet in thirteen of the pallet's fourteen flights, which aided lengthy stays in orbit for scientific and technological research missions. The longest duration flight of the Shuttle Program, STS-80, was flown with \"Columbia\" in 1996, at over 17 days in orbit. \"Columbia\" was also used to deploy the first ever satellites into orbit by the Shuttle on STS-5, retrieve the Long Duration Exposure Facility and deploy the \"Chandra\" observatory, which was the heaviest payload ever carried by the Space Shuttle. \"Columbia\" also carried into space the first female commander of an American spaceflight mission, the first ESA astronaut, the first female astronaut of Indian origin, and the first Israeli astronaut.\nAt the end of its final flight in February 2003, \"Columbia\" disintegrated upon reentry, killing the seven-member crew of STS-107 and destroying most of the scientific payloads aboard. The \"Columbia\" Accident Investigation Board convened shortly afterwards concluded that damage sustained to the orbiter's left wing during the launch of STS-107 fatally compromised the vehicle's thermal protection system. The loss of \"Columbia\" and its crew led to a refocusing of NASA's human exploration programs and led to the establishment of the Constellation program in 2005 and the eventual retirement of the Space Shuttle program in 2011. Numerous memorials and dedications were made to honor the crew following the disaster; the Columbia Memorial Space Center was opened as a national memorial for the accident, and the Columbia Hills in Mars' Gusev crater, which the \"Spirit\" rover explored, were named after the crew. The majority of \"Columbia\"'s recovered remains are stored at the Kennedy Space Center's Vehicle Assembly Building, though some pieces are on public display at the nearby Visitor Complex.\nHistory.\nConstruction began on \"Columbia\" in 1975 at Rockwell International's (formerly North American Aviation/North American Rockwell) principal assembly facility in Palmdale, California, a suburb of Los Angeles. \"Columbia\" was named after the American sloop \"Columbia Rediviva\" which, from 1787 to 1793, under the command of Captain Robert Gray, explored the US Pacific Northwest and became the first American vessel to circumnavigate the globe. It is also named after the command module of Apollo 11, the first crewed landing on another celestial body. \"Columbia\" was also the female symbol of the United States. After construction, the orbiter arrived at Kennedy Space Center on March 25, 1979, to prepare for its first launch. \"Columbia\" was originally scheduled to lift off in late 1979, however the launch date was delayed by problems with both the RS-25 engine and the thermal protection system (TPS). On March 19, 1981, during preparations for a ground test, workers were asphyxiated in Columbia's nitrogen-purged aft engine compartment, resulting in (variously reported) two or three fatalities.\nThe first flight of \"Columbia\" (STS-1) was commanded by John Young, a veteran from the Gemini and Apollo programs who in 1972 had been the ninth person to walk on the Moon; and piloted by Robert Crippen, a rookie astronaut originally selected to fly on the military's Manned Orbital Laboratory (MOL) spacecraft, but transferred to NASA after its cancellation, and served as a support crew member for the Skylab and Apollo-Soyuz missions.\n\"Columbia\" spent 610 days in the Orbiter Processing Facility (OPF), another 35 days in the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB), and 105 days on Pad 39A before finally lifting off. It was successfully launched on April 12, 1981, the 20th anniversary of the first human spaceflight (Vostok 1), and returned on April 14, 1981, after orbiting the Earth 36 times, landing on the dry lakebed runway at Edwards Air Force Base in California. It then undertook three further research missions to test its technical characteristics and performance. Its first operational mission, with a four-man crew, was STS-5, which launched on November 11, 1982. At this point \"Columbia\" was joined by \"Challenger\", which flew the next three shuttle missions, while \"Columbia\" underwent modifications for the first Spacelab mission.\nIn 1983, \"Columbia\", under the command of John Young on what was his sixth spaceflight, undertook its second operational mission (STS-9), in which the Spacelab science laboratory and a six-person crew was carried, including the first non-American astronaut on a space shuttle, Ulf Merbold. After the flight, it spent 18 months at the Rockwell Palmdale facility beginning in January 1984, undergoing modifications that removed the Orbiter Flight Test hardware and updating it to similar specifications as those of its sister orbiters. At that time the shuttle fleet was expanded to include \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\".\n\"Columbia\" returned to space on January 12, 1986, with the launch of STS-61-C. The mission's crew included Franklin Chang-Diaz, and the first sitting member of the House of Representatives to venture into space, Bill Nelson.\nThe next shuttle mission, STS-51-L, was undertaken by \"Challenger\". It was launched on January 28, 1986, ten days after STS-61-C had landed, and ended in disaster 73 seconds after launch. Prior to the accident, \"Columbia\" had been slated to be ferried to Vandenberg Air Force Base to conduct fueling tests and to perform a flight readiness firing at SLC-6 to validate the west coast launch site. In the aftermath, NASA's shuttle timetable was disrupted, and the Vandenberg tests, which would have cost $60\u00a0million, were canceled. \"Columbia\" was not flown again until 1989 (on STS-28), after which it resumed normal service as part of the shuttle fleet.\nSTS-93, launched on July 23, 1999, was the first U.S. space mission with a female commander, Lt. Col. Eileen Collins. This mission deployed the Chandra X-ray Observatory.\n\"Columbia\"'s final complete mission was STS-109, the fourth servicing mission for the Hubble Space Telescope. Its next mission, STS-107, culminated in the orbiter's loss when it disintegrated during reentry, killing all seven of its crew.\nConsequently, President George W. Bush decided to retire the Shuttle orbiter fleet by 2010 in favor of the Constellation program and its crewed Orion spacecraft. The Constellation program was later canceled with the NASA Authorization Act of 2010 signed by President Barack Obama on October 11.\nFirst operational orbiter.\nWeight.\nAs the second orbiter to be constructed and the first able to fly into space, \"Columbia\" was roughly heavier than subsequent orbiters such as \"Endeavour\" when she was first constructed, which had benefited from advances in materials technology. In part, this was due to heavier wing and fuselage spars, the weight of early test instrumentation that remained fitted to the avionics suite, and an internal airlock that, originally fitted into the other orbiters, was later removed in favor of an external airlock to facilitate Shuttle/Mir and Shuttle/International Space Station dockings..\"Columbia\" was not modified for the planned Centaur-G booster (canceled after the loss of \"Challenger\"). The retention of the internal airlock allowed NASA to use \"Columbia\" for the STS-109 Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission, along with the Spacehab double module used on STS-107. Due to \"Columbia's\" higher weight, it was less ideal for NASA to use it for missions to the International Space Station due the performance decreases needed to carry the heavy payloads to the high inclination orbit, though modifications were made to the Shuttle during its last refit in case the spacecraft was needed for such tasks.\nThermal protection system.\nExternally, \"Columbia\" was the first orbiter in the fleet whose surface was mostly covered with High &amp; Low Temperature Reusable Surface Insulation (HRSI/LRSI) tiles as its main thermal protection system (TPS), with white silicone rubber-painted Nomex \u2013 known as Felt Reusable Surface Insulation (FRSI) blankets \u2013 in some areas on the wings, fuselage, and payload bay doors. FRSI once covered almost 25% of the orbiter; the first upgrade resulted in its removal from many areas, and in later flights, it was only used on the upper section of the payload bay doors and inboard sections of the upper wing surfaces. The upgrade also involved replacing many of the white LRSI tiles on the upper surfaces with Advanced Flexible Reusable Surface Insulation (AFRSI) blankets (also known as Fibrous Insulation Blankets, or FIBs) that had been used on \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\".\nOriginally, \"Columbia\" had 32,000 tiles \u2013 the upgrade reduced this to 24,300. The AFRSI blankets consisted of layers of pure silica felt sandwiched between a layer of silica fabric on the outside and S-Glass fabric on the inside, stitched together using pure silica thread in a 1-inch grid, then coated with a high-purity silica coating. The blankets were semi-rigid and could be made as large as 30\" by 30\". Each blanket replaced as many as 25 tiles and was bonded directly to the orbiter. The direct application of the blankets to the orbiter resulted in weight reduction, improved durability, reduced fabrication, and installation cost, and reduced installation schedule time. All of this work was performed during \"Columbia's\" first retrofitting and the post-\"Challenger\" stand-down.\nThough the orbiter's thermal protection system and other enhancements had been refined, \"Columbia\" would never weigh as little unloaded as the other orbiters in the fleet. The next-oldest shuttle, \"Challenger\", was also relatively heavy, although lighter than \"Columbia\".\nMarkings and insignia.\n\"Columbia\" was the only operational orbiter with black chines. These were added because at first, shuttle designers did not know how reentry heating would affect the craft's upper wing surfaces. The chines allowed \"Columbia\" to be easily recognized at a distance, unlike the subsequent orbiters. The black chines were a late modification and were a high temperature paint over the white FRSI. The chines were modified on \"Columbia\" shortly before rollover to the Vehicle Assembly Building in late 1980 for STS-1. The only other orbiter with black chines was \"Pathfinder\", but it was a cosmetic test article and only gained them when it was refurbished.\nAdditionally, until its last refit, \"Columbia\" was the only operational orbiter with wing markings consisting of an American flag on the port (left) wing and the letters \"USA\" on the starboard (right) wing. \"Challenger\", \"Discovery\", \"Atlantis\", and \"Endeavour\" all, until 1998, bore markings consisting of the letters \"USA\" above an American flag on the left-wing, and the pre-1998 NASA \"worm\" logotype afore the respective orbiter's name on the right-wing. \"Enterprise\", the test vehicle which was the prototype for \"Columbia\", originally had the same wing markings as \"Columbia\" but with white chines and the \"USA\" letters on the right-wing spaced closer together. \"Enterprise\"'s markings were modified to match \"Challenger\" in 1983. The name of the orbiter was originally placed on the payload bay doors much like \"Enterprise\" but was placed on the crew cabin after the \"Challenger\" disaster so that the orbiter could be easily identified while in orbit.\nFrom its last refit following the conclusion of STS-93 to its destruction, \"Columbia\" bore markings identical to those of its operational sister orbiters\u2013the NASA \"meatball\" insignia on the left-wing and the American flag afore the orbiter's name on the right-wing. \"Columbia\" only flew twice with these markings, STS-109 and STS-107.\nSILTS pod.\nAnother unique external feature, termed the \"SILTS\" pod (Shuttle Infrared Leeside Temperature Sensing), was located on the top of \"Columbia's\" vertical stabilizer, and was installed after STS-9 to acquire infrared and other thermal data. Though the pod's equipment was removed after initial tests, NASA decided to leave it in place, mainly to save costs, along with the agency's plans to use it for future experiments. The vertical stabilizer was later modified to incorporate the drag chute first used on \"Endeavour\" in 1992.\nOEX/MADS \"black box\".\nOne unique feature that permanently stayed on \"Columbia\" from STS-1 to STS-107 was the OEX (Orbiter Experiments) box or MADS (Modular Auxiliary Data System) recorder. On March 19, 2003, this \"black box\" was found slightly damaged but fully intact by the U.S. Forest Service in San Augustine County in Texas after weeks of search and recovery efforts after the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. The OEX/MADS was not designed to survive a catastrophic loss like an airplane black box.\nOther upgrades.\n\"Columbia\" was originally fitted with Lockheed-built ejection seats identical to those found on the SR-71 Blackbird. These were active for the four orbital test flights, but deactivated after STS-4, and removed entirely after STS-9. \"Columbia\" was the only spaceworthy orbiter not delivered with head-up displays for the Commander and Pilot, although these were incorporated after STS-9. Like its sister ships, \"Columbia\" was eventually retrofitted with the new MEDS \"glass cockpit\" display and lightweight seats.\nPlanned future.\nHad \"Columbia\" not been destroyed, it would have been fitted with the external airlock/docking adapter for STS-118, an International Space Station assembly mission, originally planned for November 2003. \"Columbia\" was scheduled for this mission due to \"Discovery\" being out of service for its Orbital Major Modification, and because the ISS assembly schedule could not be adhered to with only \"Endeavour\" and \"Atlantis\".\n\"Columbia\"'s career would have started to wind down after STS-118. It was to service the Hubble Space Telescope two more times between 2004 and 2005. Following the \"Columbia\" accident, NASA flew the STS-125 mission using \"Atlantis\", combining the planned fourth and fifth servicing missions into one final mission to Hubble. Because of the retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet, the batteries and gyroscopes that keep the telescope pointed will eventually fail, which would result in its reentry and breakup in Earth's atmosphere. A \"Soft Capture Docking Mechanism\", based on the docking adapter that was to be used on the Orion spacecraft, was installed during the last servicing mission in anticipation of this event.\nFlights.\n\"Columbia\" flew 28 missions, gathering 300.74 days spent in space with 4,808 orbits and a total distance of until STS-107.\nThough having been in service during the Shuttle-Mir and International Space Station programs, \"Columbia\" did not fly any missions that visited a space station. The other three active orbiters at the time had visited both \"Mir\" and the ISS at least once. \"Columbia\" was built according to a heavier earlier design with a reduced payload for ISS missions, so it was decided not to install a Space Station docking system. This made room for longer science modules such as Spacelab and the Spacehab Research Double Module, so \"Columbia\" was used instead for science missions and for Hubble Space Telescope service.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFinal mission and disaster.\n\"Columbia\" disintegrated on February 1, 2003, around 09:00 EST during atmospheric re-entry after a 16-day scientific mission. The Columbia Accident Investigation Board has determined that one of \"Columbia's\" wings, made of a carbon composite, had been punctured 16 days earlier. A hole had formed when the external fuel tank shed material that peeled off during the launch, and struck the shuttle's left wing. During the intense heat of re-entry, hot gases penetrated the interior of the wing. The likely result was a compromise of the hydraulic system, leading to failure of the linkage to control surfaces. The resulting loss of control would have exposed minimally protected areas of the orbiter to full-entry heating and dynamic pressures that ultimately led to break up of the entire spacecraft.\nThe report delved deeply into the underlying organizational and cultural issues the board believed contributed to the accident. The report was highly critical of NASA's decision-making and risk-assessment processes. Further, the report outlined several potential options for saving the crew which NASA had not considered during the mission, such as a potential rescue with the shuttle \"Atlantis\" (then being prepped for launch for STS-114), or in-flight repairs for the damaged wing. The nearly 84,000 pieces of collected debris of the vessel are stored in a large room on the 16th-floor of the Vehicle Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space Center. The collection was opened to the media once and has since been open only to researchers. Unlike \"Challenger\", for which a replacement orbiter was built, \"Columbia\" was not replaced.\nThe seven crew members who died aboard this final mission were: Rick Husband, Commander; William C. McCool, Pilot; Michael P. Anderson, Payload Commander/Mission Specialist 3; David M. Brown, Mission Specialist 1; Kalpana Chawla, Mission Specialist 2; Laurel Clark, Mission Specialist 4; and Ilan Ramon, Payload Specialist 1.\nTributes and memorials.\nPatricia Huffman Smith Museum.\nThe debris field encompassed hundreds of miles across Texas extending into Louisiana and Arkansas. The nose cap and remains of all seven crew members were found in Sabine County, East Texas. The Patricia Huffman Smith NASA Museum \"Remembering Columbia\" was opened in Hemphill, Sabine County. The museum documents \"Columbia\" explorations throughout all its missions, including the final STS-107. Its exhibits also show the efforts of local citizens during the recovery period of the \"Columbia\" shuttle debris and its crew's remains. An area is dedicated to each STS-107 crew member, and also to the Texas Forest Service helicopter pilot who died in the recovery effort. The museum houses many objects and artifacts from NASA and its contractors, the families of the STS-107 crew and other individuals. The crew's families contributed personal items of the crew members to be on permanent display. The museum features two interactive simulator displays that emulate activities of the shuttle and orbiter, and the digital learning center and its classroom provide educational opportunities.\nColumbia Memorial Space Center.\nThe Columbia Memorial Space Center is the U.S. national memorial for the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\"'s seven crew members. It is located in Downey, California on the site of the Space Shuttle's origin and production, the former North American Aviation plant in Los Angeles County, California. The facility is also a hands-on learning center with interactive exhibits, workshops, and classes about space science, astronautics, and the Space Shuttle program's legacy\u2014providing educational opportunities for all ages.\nNaming dedications.\nThe Shuttle's final crew was honored in 2003 when the United States Board on Geographic Names approved the name Columbia Point for a mountain in Colorado's Sangre de Cristo Mountains, less than a half-mile from Challenger Point, a peak named after America's other lost Space Shuttle. The Columbia Hills on Mars were also named in honor of the crew, and a host of other memorials were dedicated in various forms.\nThe Columbia supercomputer at the NASA Advanced Supercomputing (NAS) Division located at Ames Research Center in California was named in honor of the crew lost in the 2003 disaster. Built as a joint effort between NASA and technical partners SGI and Intel in 2004, the supercomputer was used in scientific research of space, the Earth's climate, and aerodynamic design of space launch vehicles and aircraft. The first part of the system, built in 2003, was dedicated to STS-107 astronaut and engineer Kalpana Chawla, who prior to joining the Space Shuttle program worked at Ames Research Center.\nA female bald eagle at the National Eagle Center in Wabasha, Minnesota is named in tribute to the victims of the disaster.\nIn popular culture.\nA refurbished \"Columbia\" features prominently in a 1999 episode of \"Cowboy Bebop\", being used to rescue series protagonist Spike from burning up in Earth's atmosphere after his ship runs out of fuel. \"Columbia\" is depicted taking off horizontally with the aid of small boosters mounted near its nose. After capturing the stray craft in its cargo bay, \"Columbia\" encounters trouble on its return to Earth, including a failure of the heat shielding, finally crash landing in a desert with its occupants unharmed. Following the real-world disaster, Adult Swim temporarily removed the episode from its rotation.\nIn response to the loss of \"Columbia\", guitarist Steve Morse of the rock band Deep Purple wrote the instrumental \"Contact Lost\", which was featured as the closing track on their 2003 album \"Bananas\". It was dedicated to the astronauts who died in the disaster, and Morse's songwriting royalties were donated to the families of the lost astronauts. Astronaut and mission specialist engineer Kalpana Chawla, one of the victims of the accident, was a fan of Deep Purple and had exchanged e-mails with the band during the flight, making the tragedy even more personal for the group. She took three CDs into space with her, two of which were Deep Purple albums \"Machine Head\" and \"Purpendicular.\" Both CDs survived the destruction of the shuttle and the 39-mile plunge. \nSeveral songs in popular music give minor tribute to \"Columbia\", and some are dedicated. The Eric Johnson instrumental \"Columbia\" from his 2005 album \"Bloom\" was written as a commemoration and tribute to the lives that were lost. Johnson said \"I wanted to make it more of a positive message, a salute, a celebration rather than just concentrating on a few moments of tragedy, but instead the bigger picture of these brave people's lives.\" The Canadian Band Rush made a song 'Countdown' on their album 'Signals' which is about the first Space Shuttle launch by Columbia. The Scottish band Runrig pays tribute to Clark on the 2016 album \"The Story\". The final track, \"Somewhere,\" ends with a recording of her voice. Clark was a Runrig fan and had a wake up call with Runrig's \"Running to the Light\". She took \"The Stamping Ground\" CD into space with her. When the shuttle broke up, the CD was found back on Earth and was presented to the band by her family.\nThe \"Columbia\" appears as an exhibit within the Pewter City Museum in \"Pok\u00e9mon Red\" and \"Blue\".\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28238", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28238", "title": "Space Shuttle Discovery", "text": "Space Shuttle orbiter (1984\u20132011)\nSpace Shuttle \"Discovery\" (Orbiter Vehicle Designation: OV-103) is a retired American Space Shuttle orbiter. The spaceplane was one of the orbiters from NASA's Space Shuttle program and the third of five fully operational orbiters to be built. Its first mission, STS-41-D, flew from August 30 to September 5, 1984. Over 27 years of service it launched and landed 39 times, aggregating more spaceflights than any other spacecraft as of \u00a02024[ [update]]. The Space Shuttle launch vehicle had three main components: the Space Shuttle orbiter, a single-use central fuel tank, and two reusable solid rocket boosters. Nearly 25,000 heat-resistant tiles cover the orbiter to protect it from high temperatures on re-entry.\n\"Discovery\" became the third operational orbiter to enter service, preceded by \"Columbia\" and \"Challenger\". After the Challenger and Columbia accidents, Discovery became the oldest surviving orbiter. It embarked on its final mission, STS-133, on February 24, 2011, and touched down for the last time at Kennedy Space Center on March 9, having spent a cumulative total of nearly a full year in space. \"Discovery\" performed both research and International Space Station (ISS) assembly missions, and also carried the Hubble Space Telescope into orbit among other satellites. \n\"Discovery\" was the first operational shuttle to be retired, followed by \"Endeavour\" and then \"Atlantis\". The shuttle is now on display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center of the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum.\nHistory.\nThe name \"Discovery\" was chosen to carry on a tradition based on ships of exploration, primarily , one of the ships commanded by Captain James Cook during his third and final major voyage from 1776 to 1779, and Henry Hudson's , which was used in 1610\u20131611 to explore Hudson Bay and search for a Northwest Passage. Other ships bearing the name have included of the 1875\u20131876 British Arctic Expedition to the North Pole, and , which carried the 1901\u20131904 \"Discovery\" Expedition to Antarctica, led by Captain Scott.\nSpace Shuttle \"Discovery\" launched the Hubble Space Telescope and conducted the second and third Hubble service missions. It also launched the \"Ulysses\" probe and three TDRS satellites. Twice \"Discovery\" was chosen as the \"Return To Flight\" Orbiter, first in 1988 after the loss of \"Challenger\" in 1986, and then again for the twin \"Return To Flight\" missions in July 2005 and July 2006 after the \"Columbia\" disaster in 2003. Project Mercury astronaut John Glenn, who was 77 at the time, flew with \"Discovery\" on STS-95 in 1998, making him the oldest person to go into space at that time in history.\nHad plans to launch United States Department of Defense payloads from Vandenberg Air Force Base gone ahead, \"Discovery\" would have become the dedicated US Air Force shuttle. Its first West Coast mission, STS-62-A, was scheduled for 1986, but canceled in the aftermath of the \"Challenger disaster\".\nOn May 27, 1999, \"Discovery\" was launched on STS-96, the first shuttle mission to dock with the International Space Station.\n\"Discovery\" was retired after completing its final mission, STS-133 on March 9, 2011. The spacecraft is now on display in Virginia at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center, an annex of the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum.\nIn 2025, the Trump One Big Beautiful Bill had a rider from Texas federal lawmakers stating that a Shuttle was to be moved to Texas. The only federally owned shuttle remaining, \"Discovery\", would be the shuttle that would be dismantled and moved, at a cost of over $300 million. It would likely be moved to Houston, but cannot leave the Smithsonian and transported to Texas without being taken apart.\nFeatures and upgrades.\nDuring its construction, \"Discovery\" was fitted with several black tiles near the middle starboard window where there should have been white tiles. It is unknown if this was the result of a harmless manufacturing mishap or done intentionally to give a distinctive look to the shuttle. This feature has been called 'teardrop' and allowed \"Discovery\" to be told apart from the rest of the fleet without looking at its name, although often unnoticed by the uninitiated.\nThe spacecraft weighed roughly less than \"Columbia\" when it was brought into service due to optimalizations determined during the construction and testing of \"Enterprise\", \"Columbia\" and \"Challenger\". \"Discovery\" weighs heavier than \"Atlantis\" and heavier than \"Endeavour\" after further weight-saving adjustments were made.\nPart of the \"Discovery\" weight optimizations included the greater use of quilted AFRSI blankets rather than the white LRSI tiles on the fuselage, and the use of graphite epoxy instead of aluminum for the payload bay doors and some of the wing spars and beams.\nUpon its delivery to the Kennedy Space Center in 1983, \"Discovery\" was modified alongside \"Challenger\" to accommodate the liquid-fueled Centaur-G booster, which had been planned for use beginning in 1986 but was cancelled in the wake of the \"Challenger\" disaster.\nBeginning in late 1995, the orbiter underwent a nine-month Orbiter Maintenance Down Period (OMDP) in Palmdale, California. This included outfitting the vehicle with a fifth set of cryogenic tanks and an external airlock to support missions to the International Space Station. As with all the orbiters, it could be attached to the top of specialized aircraft and did so in June 1996 when it returned to the Kennedy Space Center, and later in April 2012 when sent to the Udvar-Hazy Center, riding piggy-back on a modified Boeing 747.\nAfter STS-105, \"Discovery\" became the first of the orbiter fleet to undergo Orbiter Major Modification (OMM) period at the Kennedy Space Center. Work began in September 2002 to prepare the vehicle for Return to Flight. The work included scheduled upgrades and additional safety modifications.\nDecommissioning.\n\"Discovery\" was decommissioned on March 9, 2011. NASA offered \"Discovery\" to the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum for public display and preservation, after a month-long decontamination process, as part of the national collection. \"Discovery\" replaced \"Enterprise\", which was in the Smithsonian's display at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center until 2011. \"Discovery\" was transported to Washington Dulles International Airport on April 17, 2012, and was transferred to the Udvar-Hazy Center on April 19 where a welcome ceremony was held. Afterwards, at around 5:30\u00a0pm, \"Discovery\" was rolled to its \"final wheels stop\" in the Udvar-Hazy Center.\nTexas senators John Cornyn and Ted Cruz added a provision to the 2025 One Big Beautiful Bill Act to spend $85 million to relocate a space vehicle that has flown astronauts into space, presumably \"Discovery\" because of the sponsors of the provision and previous legislation attempts, from the Udvar-Hazy Center to the Space Center Houston Museum in Texas. While the Smithsonian estimated that the total cost of the transfer would be approximately $325 million, they also countered that ownership of the shuttle had been transferred to the museum and was no longer federal property, and that Congress did not have the ability to force a transfer.\nFlights.\nBy its last mission, \"Discovery\" had flown in 39 missions, completed 5,830 orbits, and spent 365 days in orbit over 27 years. \"Discovery\" flew more flights than any other Orbiter Shuttle, including four in 1985 alone. \"Discovery\" flew both \"return to flight\" missions after the \"Challenger\" and \"Columbia\" disasters: STS-26 in 1988, STS-114 in 2005, and STS-121 in 2006. \"Discovery\" flew the ante-penultimate mission of the Space Shuttle program, STS-133, having launched on February 24, 2011. \"Endeavour\" flew STS-134 and \"Atlantis\" performed STS-135, NASA's last Space Shuttle mission. On February 24, 2011, Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" launched from Kennedy Space Center's Launch Complex 39-A to begin its final orbital flight.\nFlights listing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFlow directors.\nThe Flow Director was responsible for the overall preparation of the shuttle for launch and processing it after landing, and remained permanently assigned to head the spacecraft's ground crew while the astronaut flight crews changed for every mission. Each shuttle's Flow Director was supported by a Vehicle Manager for the same spacecraft. Space Shuttle \"Discovery\"'s Flow Directors were:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28239", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28239", "title": "Space Shuttle Atlantis", "text": "Space Shuttle orbiter (1985\u20132011)\nSpace Shuttle \"Atlantis\" (Orbiter Vehicle designation: OV\u2011104) is a retired Space Shuttle orbiter vehicle which belongs to NASA, the spaceflight and space exploration agency of the United States. \"Atlantis\" was manufactured by the Rockwell International company in Southern California and was delivered to the Kennedy Space Center in Eastern Florida in April 1985. \"Atlantis\" is the fourth operational and the second-to-last Space Shuttle built. Its maiden flight was STS-51-J made from October 3 to 7, 1985.\n\"Atlantis\" embarked on its 33rd and final mission, also the final mission of a space shuttle, STS-135, on July 8, 2011. STS-134 by \"Endeavour\" was expected to be the final flight before STS-135 was authorized in October 2010. STS-135 took advantage of the processing for the STS-335 Launch on Need mission that would have been necessary if STS-134's crew became stranded in orbit. \"Atlantis\" landed for the final time at the Kennedy Space Center on July 21, 2011.\nBy the end of its final mission, \"Atlantis\" had orbited the Earth a total of 4,848 times, traveling nearly , which is more than 525 times the distance from the Earth to the Moon.\n\"Atlantis\" is named after RV \"Atlantis\", a two-masted sailing ship that operated as the primary research vessel for the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution from 1930 to 1966.\nThe space shuttle is now on display at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex.\nMissions.\nSpace Shuttle \"Atlantis\" lifted off on its maiden voyage STS-51-J on October 3, 1985. This was the second shuttle mission that was a dedicated Department of Defense mission. It flew one other mission, STS-61-B (the second shuttle night launch) before the \"Challenger\" disaster temporarily grounded the shuttle fleet in 1986. Among the five Space Shuttles flown into space, \"Atlantis\" conducted a subsequent mission in the shortest time after the previous mission (turnaround time) when it launched in November 1985 on STS-61-B, only 50 days after its previous mission, STS-51-J in October 1985. \"Atlantis\" was then used for ten flights from 1988 to 1992. Two of these, both flown in 1989, deployed the planetary probes \"Magellan\" to Venus (on STS-30) and \"Galileo\" to Jupiter (on STS-34). With STS-30 \"Atlantis\" became the first Space Shuttle to launch an interplanetary probe.\nDuring the launch of STS-27 in 1988, a piece of insulation shed from the right solid rocket booster struck the underside of the vehicle, severely damaging over 700 tiles and removing one tile altogether. The crew were instructed to use the remote manipulator system to survey the condition of the underside of the right wing, ultimately finding substantial tile damage. Due to the classified nature of the mission, the only images transferred to the mission control center were encrypted and of extremely poor quality. Mission control personnel deemed the damage to be \"lights and shadows\" and instructed the crew to proceed with the mission as usual, infuriating many of the crew. Upon landing, Atlantis became the single-most-damaged shuttle to successfully land. The survival of the crew is attributed to a steel L band antenna plate which was positioned directly under the missing tile. A similar situation would eventually lead to the loss of the shuttle \"Columbia\" in 2003, albeit on the more critical reinforced carbon-carbon.\nDuring STS-37 in 1991, \"Atlantis\" deployed the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. Beginning in 1995 with STS-71, \"Atlantis\" made seven straight flights to the former Russian space station \"Mir\" as part of the Shuttle\u2013\"Mir\" program. STS-71 marked a number of firsts in human spaceflight: 100th U.S. crewed space flight; first U.S. Shuttle-Russian Space Station \"Mir\" docking and joint on-orbit operations; and first on-orbit change-out of shuttle crew. When linked, \"Atlantis\" and \"Mir\" together formed the largest spacecraft in orbit at the time.\n\"Atlantis\" delivered several vital components for the construction of the International Space Station (ISS). During the February 2001 mission STS-98 to the ISS, \"Atlantis\" delivered the Destiny Module, the primary operating facility for U.S. research payloads aboard the ISS. The five-hour 25-minute third spacewalk performed by astronauts Robert Curbeam and Thomas Jones during STS-98 marked NASA's 100th extra vehicular activity in space. The Quest Joint Airlock, was flown and installed to the ISS by \"Atlantis\" during the mission STS-104 in July 2001. The successful installation of the airlock gave on-board space station crews the ability to stage repair and maintenance spacewalks outside the ISS using U.S. EMU or Russian Orlan space suits. The first mission flown by \"Atlantis\" after the Space Shuttle \"Columbia\" disaster was STS-115, conducted during September 2006. The mission carried the P3/P4 truss segments and solar arrays to the ISS. On ISS assembly flight STS-122 in February 2008, \"Atlantis\" delivered the Columbus laboratory to the ISS. Columbus laboratory is the largest single contribution to the ISS made by the European Space Agency (ESA).\nIn May 2009 \"Atlantis\" flew a seven-member crew to the Hubble Space Telescope for its Servicing Mission 4, STS-125. The mission was a success, with the crew completing five spacewalks totaling 37 hours to install new cameras, batteries, a gyroscope and other components to the telescope. This was the final mission not to rendezvous with the ISS.\nThe longest mission flown using \"Atlantis\" was STS-117, which lasted almost 14 days in June 2007. During STS-117, \"Atlantis\"' crew added a new starboard truss segment and solar array pair (the S3/S4 truss), folded the P6 array in preparation for its relocation and performed four spacewalks. \"Atlantis\" was not equipped to take advantage of the Station-to-Shuttle Power Transfer System so missions could not be extended by making use of power provided by ISS.\nDuring the STS-129 post-flight interview on November 16, 2009, shuttle launch director Mike Leinbach said that \"Atlantis\" officially beat Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" for the record low amount of interim problem reports, with a total of just 54 listed since returning from STS-125. Leinbach added, \"It is due to the team and the hardware processing. They just did a great job. The record will probably never be broken again in the history of the Space Shuttle Program, so congratulations to them.\" Leinbach made a similar report during a post-launch interview on May 14, 2010, saying that there were a total of 46 listed from STS-129 to STS-132.\nOrbiter maintenance down periods.\n\"Atlantis\" went through two overhauls of scheduled orbiter maintenance down periods (OMDPs) during its operational history.\n\"Atlantis\" arrived at Palmdale, California in October 1992 for OMDP-1. During that visit 165 modifications were made over the next 20 months. These included the installation of a drag chute, new plumbing lines to configure the orbiter for extended duration, improved nose wheel steering, more than 800 new heat tiles and blankets, new insulation for main landing gear, and structural modifications to the airframe.\nOn November 5, 1997, \"Atlantis\" again arrived at Palmdale for OMDP-2 which was completed on September 24, 1998. The 130 modifications carried out during OMDP-2 included glass cockpit displays, replacement of TACAN navigation with GPS and ISS airlock and docking installation. Several weight reduction modifications were performed on the orbiter including replacement of Advanced Flexible Reusable Surface Insulation (AFRSI) insulation blankets on upper surfaces with FRSI. Lightweight crew seats were installed and the Extended Duration Orbiter (EDO) package installed on OMDP-1 was removed to lighten \"Atlantis\" to better serve its prime mission of servicing the ISS.\nDuring the standdown period post \"Columbia\" accident, \"Atlantis\" went through over 75 modifications to the orbiter ranging from very minor bolt change-outs to window change-outs and different fluid systems.\n\"Atlantis\" was known among the shuttle workforce as being more prone than the others in the fleet to problems that needed to be addressed while readying the vehicle for launch, leading to some nicknaming it \"Britney\".\nDecommissioning.\nNASA initially planned to withdraw \"Atlantis\" from service in 2008, as the orbiter would have been due to undergo its third scheduled OMDP; the timescale of the final retirement of the shuttle fleet was such that having the orbiter undergo this work was deemed uneconomical. It was planned that \"Atlantis\" would be kept in near-flight condition to be used as a spares source for \"Discovery\" and \"Endeavour\". However, with the significant planned flight schedule up to 2010, the decision was taken to extend the time between OMDPs, allowing \"Atlantis\" to be retained for operations. \"Atlantis\" was subsequently swapped for one flight of each \"Discovery\" and \"Endeavour\" in the flight manifest. \"Atlantis\" had completed what was meant to be its last flight, STS-132, prior to the end of the shuttle program, but the extension of the Shuttle program into 2011 led to \"Atlantis\" being selected for STS-135, the final Space Shuttle mission in July 2011.\n\"Atlantis\" is currently displayed at the Kennedy Space Center Visitor Complex. NASA Administrator Charles Bolden announced the decision at an employee event held on April 12, 2011, to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the first shuttle flight: \"First, here at the Kennedy Space Center where every shuttle mission and so many other historic human space flights have originated, we'll showcase my old friend, \"Atlantis\"\".\nThe Visitor Complex displays \"Atlantis\" with payload bay doors opened mounted at a 43.21\u00b0 angle to give the appearance of being in orbit around the Earth. The mount angle pays tribute to the countdown that preceded every shuttle launch at KSC. A multi-story digital projection of Earth rotates behind the orbiter in a indoor facility. Ground breaking of the facility occurred in 2012.\nThe exhibit opened on June 29, 2013.\nCrews.\nA total of 207 individuals flew with Space Shuttle \"Atlantis\" over the course of its 33 missions. Because the shuttle sometimes flew crew members arriving and departing Mir and the ISS, not all of them launched and landed on \"Atlantis\".\nAstronaut Clayton Anderson, ESA astronaut Leopold Eyharts and Russian cosmonauts Nikolai Budarin and Anatoly Solovyev only launched on \"Atlantis\". Similarly, astronauts Daniel Tani and Sunita Williams, as well as cosmonauts Vladimir Dezhurov and Gennady Strekalov only landed with \"Atlantis\". Only 146 men and women both launched and landed aboard \"Atlantis\".\nSome of those people flew with \"Atlantis\" more than once. Taking them into account, 203 total seats were filled over \"Atlantis\"' 33 missions. Astronaut Jerry Ross holds the record for the most flights aboard \"Atlantis\" at five.\nAstronaut Rodolfo Neri Vela who flew aboard \"Atlantis\" on STS-61-B mission in 1985 is the only Mexican to have traveled to space. ESA astronaut Dirk Frimout who flew on STS-45 as a payload specialist was the first Belgian in space. STS-46 mission specialist Claude Nicollier was the first astronaut from Switzerland. On the same flight, astronaut Franco Malerba became the first citizen of Italy to travel to space.\nAstronaut Mike Massimino who flew on STS-125 mission became the first person to use Twitter in space in May 2009.\nHaving flown aboard \"Atlantis\" as part of the STS-132 crew in May 2010 and \"Discovery\" as part of the STS-133 crew in February/March 2011, Stephen Bowen became the first NASA astronaut to be launched on consecutive missions.\nFlights listing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProblems.\nComposite overwrapped pressure vessels.\nNASA announced in 2007 that 24 helium and nitrogen gas tanks in \"Atlantis\" were older than their designed lifetime. These composite overwrapped pressure vessels (COPV) were designed for a 10-year life and later cleared for an additional 10 years; they exceeded this life in 2005. NASA said it could not guarantee any longer that the vessels on \"Atlantis\" would not burst or explode under full pressure. Failure of these tanks could have damaged parts of the orbiter and even wound or kill ground personnel. An in-flight failure of a pressure vessel could have even resulted in the loss of the orbiter and its crew. NASA analyses originally assumed that the vessels would leak before they burst, but new tests showed that they could in fact burst before leaking.\nBecause the original vendor was no longer in business, and a new manufacturer could not be qualified before 2010, when the shuttles were scheduled to be retired, NASA decided to continue operations with the existing tanks. Therefore, to reduce the risk of failure and the cumulative effects of load, the vessels were maintained at 80 percent of the operating pressure as late in the launch countdown as possible, and the launch pad was cleared of all but essential personnel when pressure was increased to 100 percent. The new launch procedure was employed during some of the remaining launches of \"Atlantis\", but was resolved when the two COPVs deemed to have the highest risk of failure were replaced.\nWindow damage.\nAfter the STS-125 mission, a work light knob was discovered jammed in the space between one of \"Atlantis\"'s front interior windows and the Orbiter dashboard structure. The knob was believed to have entered the space during flight, when the pressurized Orbiter was expanded to its maximum size. Then, once back on Earth, the Orbiter contracted, jamming the knob in place. Leaving \"as-is\" was considered unsafe for flight, and some options for removal (including window replacement) would have included a 6-month delay of \"Atlantis\"'s next mission (planned to be STS-129). Had the removal of the knob been unsuccessful, the worst-case scenario was that \"Atlantis\" could have been retired from the fleet, leaving \"Discovery\" and \"Endeavour\" to complete the manifest alone. On June 29, 2009, \"Atlantis\" was pressurized to (3 psi above ambient), which forced the Orbiter to expand slightly. The knob was then frozen with dry ice, and successfully removed. Small areas of damage to the window were discovered where the edges of the knob had been embedded into the pane. Subsequent investigation of the window damage discovered a maximum defect depth of approximately , less than the reportable depth threshold of and not serious enough to warrant the pane's replacement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28240", "revid": "126457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28240", "title": "Space Shuttle Endeavour", "text": "Space Shuttle orbiter (1992\u20132011)\nSpace Shuttle \"Endeavour\" (Orbiter Vehicle Designation: OV-105) is a retired orbiter from NASA's Space Shuttle program and the fifth and final operational Shuttle built. It embarked on its first mission, STS-49, in May 1992 and its 25th and final mission, STS-134, in May 2011. STS-134 was expected to be the final mission of the Space Shuttle program, but with the authorization of STS-135 by the United States Congress, \"Atlantis\" became the last shuttle to fly.\nThe United States Congress approved the construction of \"Endeavour\" in 1987 to replace the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\", which was destroyed in 1986.\nNASA chose, on cost grounds, to build much of \"Endeavour\" from spare parts rather than refitting the Space Shuttle \"Enterprise\", and used structural spares built during the construction of \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\" in its assembly.\nThe building housing the space shuttle in the upcoming Samuel Oschin Air and Space Center at the California Science Center was nearing completion in 2025 with extensive artifact and exhibit installations to follow.\nHistory.\nFollowing the loss of \"Challenger\" in 1986, NASA was authorized to begin the procurement process for a replacement orbiter. A major refit of the prototype orbiter \"Enterprise\" was looked at and rejected on cost grounds, with instead the cache of structural spares that were produced as part of the construction of \"Discovery\" and \"Atlantis\" earmarked for assembly into the new orbiter. Assembly was completed in July 1990, and the new orbiter was rolled out in April 1991. As part of the process, NASA ran a national competition for schools to name the new orbiter\u2014the criteria included a requirement that it be named after an exploratory or research vessel, with a name \"easily understood in the context of space\"; entries included an essay about the name, the story behind it and why it was appropriate for a NASA shuttle, and the project that supported the name. Amongst the entries, \"Endeavour\" was suggested by one-third of the participating schools, with President George H.W. Bush eventually selecting it on the advice of the NASA Administrator, Richard Truly. The national winners were Senatobia Middle School in Senatobia, Mississippi, in the elementary division and Tallulah Falls School in Tallulah Falls, Georgia, in the upper school division. They were honored at several ceremonies in Washington, D.C., including a White House ceremony where President Bush presented awards to each school. \"Endeavour\" was delivered by Rockwell International Space Transportation Systems Division in May 1991 and first launched a year later, in May 1992, on STS-49.\n\"Endeavour\" cost $1.7 billion to build. The orbiter is named after the British HMS \"Endeavour\", the ship which took Captain James Cook on his first voyage of discovery (1768\u20131771). This is why the name is spelled in the British English manner, rather than the American English (\"Endeavor\"). This has caused confusion, including when NASA itself misspelled a sign on the launch pad in 2007. The Space Shuttle carried a piece of the original wood from Cook's ship inside the cockpit. The name also honored \"Endeavour\", the command module of Apollo 15, which was also named for Cook's ship.\nOn May 30, 2020, Dragon 2 capsule C206 was named \"Endeavour\" during the Crew Dragon Demo-2 mission by astronauts Doug Hurley and Bob Behnken in honor of the shuttle, on which both astronauts took their first flights (STS-127 and STS-123 respectively).\nService.\nOn its first mission, it captured and redeployed the stranded \"Intelsat VI\" communications satellite. The first African-American woman astronaut, Mae Jemison, was launched into space on the mission STS-47 on September 12, 1992.\n\"Endeavour\" flew the first servicing mission STS-61 for the Hubble Space Telescope in 1993. In 1997 it was withdrawn from service for eight months for a retrofit, including installation of a new airlock. In December 1998, it delivered the Unity Module to the International Space Station.\n\"Endeavour\"'s last Orbiter Major Modification period began in December 2003 and ended on October 6, 2005. During this time, \"Endeavour\" received major hardware upgrades, including a new, multi-functional, electronic display system, often referred to as a glass cockpit, and an advanced GPS receiver, along with safety upgrades recommended by the \"Columbia\" Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) for the shuttle's return to flight following the loss of \"Columbia\" during reentry on February 1, 2003.\nThe STS-118 mission, \"Endeavour\"'s first since the refit, included astronaut Barbara Morgan, formerly assigned to the Teacher in Space project, and later a member of the Astronaut Corps from 1998 to 2008, as part of the crew. Morgan was the backup for Christa McAuliffe who was on the ill-fated mission STS-51-L in 1986.\nUpgrades and features.\nAs it was constructed later than its elder sisters, \"Endeavour\" was built with new hardware designed to improve and expand orbiter capabilities. Most of this equipment was later incorporated into the other three orbiters during out-of-service major inspection and modification programs. \"Endeavour\"'s upgrades include:\nModifications resulting from a 2005\u20132006 refit of \"Endeavour\" included:\nFinal flights.\n\"Endeavour\" flew its final mission, STS-134, to the International Space Station (ISS) in May 2011. After the conclusion of STS-134, \"Endeavour\" was formally decommissioned.\nSTS-134 was intended to launch in late 2010, but on July 1 NASA released a statement saying the \"Endeavour\" mission was rescheduled for February 27, 2011.\n\"The target dates were adjusted because critical payload hardware for STS-133 will not be ready in time to support the previously planned 16 September launch,\" NASA said in a statement. With the \"Discovery\" launch moving to November, \"Endeavour\" mission \"cannot fly as planned, so the next available launch window is in February 2011,\" NASA said, adding that the launch dates were subject to change.\nThe launch was further postponed until April to avoid a scheduling conflict with a Russian supply vehicle heading for the International Space Station. STS-134 did not launch until May 16 at 08:56 EDT.\n\"Endeavour\" landed at the Kennedy Space Center at 06:34 UTC on June 1, 2011, completing its final mission. It was the 25th night landing of a shuttle. Over its flight career, \"Endeavour\" flew and spent 299 days in space. During \"Endeavour's\" last mission, the Russian spacecraft Soyuz TMA-20 departed from the ISS and paused at a distance of . Italian astronaut Paolo Nespoli took a series of photographs and videos of the ISS with \"Endeavour\" docked. This was the second time a shuttle was photographed docked and the first time since 1996. Commander Mark Kelly was the last astronaut off \"Endeavour\" after the landing, and the crew stayed on the landing strip to sign autographs and pose for pictures.\nSTS-134 was the penultimate Space Shuttle mission; STS-135 was added to the schedule in January 2011, and in July \"Atlantis\" flew for the final time.\nFlights.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFlow Directors.\nThe Flow Director was responsible for the overall preparation of the Shuttle for launch and processing it after landing, and remained permanently assigned to head the spacecraft's ground crew while the astronaut flight crews changed for every mission. Each Shuttle's Flow Director was supported by a Vehicle Manager for the same spacecraft. Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\"'s Flow Directors were:\nDecommissioning.\nAfter more than twenty organizations submitted proposals for the display of an orbiter, on April 12, 2011, NASA announced that the Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\" would go to the California Science Center in Los Angeles. The Space Shuttle was mounted on the Shuttle Carrier Aircraft and departed from the Kennedy Space Center on September 19, 2012,\u00a0heading to the Los Angeles International Airport, with some refueling stops in Ellington Field and Edwards Air Force Base. After low level flyovers above NASA and civic landmarks across the country and in California, it was delivered to LAX on September 21. It was then hoisted off the aircraft and placed inside a United Airlines hangar to prepare for its transportation through the streets of Los Angeles.\nOn October 11 at 11:30pm, \"Endeavour\" left the hangar on four self-propelled robotic transporters. The orbiter slowly left the airport and was carefully transported through the streets of Los Angeles. The Space Shuttle's journey was meticulously measured and each move was carefully choreographed. \nIn multiple locations, there were only inches of clearance for the shuttle's wide wings between telephone poles, apartment buildings and other structures. Many street light standards and traffic signals were temporarily removed as the shuttle passed through. It was necessary to remove over 400 street trees as well, some of which were fairly old, leading to concern. However, the removed trees were replaced two-for-one by the Science Center, using part of the $200 million funding for the move. \nThe power had to be turned off and power carrying poles had to be removed temporarily as the orbiter crept along the streets. News crews lined the streets along the path with visible news personalities in the news trucks. Police escorts and other security personnel, among them including the LAPD, LASD, CHP, and NASA officials, controlled the large crowds gathered, with support from the LAFD and LACoFD to treat heat exhaustion victims as \"Endeavour\" made its way through the city. \"Endeavour\" was sometimes parked for a few hours at certain places, such as Randy's Donuts, and The Forum where it was available for viewing.\n\"Endeavour\"'s route took it across he Manchester Boulevard Bridge over Interstate 405. Due to weight restrictions of the bridge, the shuttle was moved from the robotic transporters to a lighter non-powered dolly and was towed across the bridge by an unmodified Toyota Tundra. Once it had completely crossed the bridge, the shuttle was then returned to the robotic transporters to continue its course. Toyota used the footage of \"Endeavour\" crossing the bridge in a commercial for the 2013 Super Bowl, and the Tundra used to pull the shuttle was donated to the Science Center, where it became part of an exhibit on leverage.\nHaving taken longer than expected, \"Endeavour\" reached the Science Center on October 14 at 7:30pm. Prior to its arrival, a building was constructed on the side of the museum to temporarily house the Space Shuttle. The Space Shuttle's entire journey through the streets of Los Angeles was often dubbed as \"Mission 26: The Big Endeavour\", a nod to its 25 space missions during its career.\nCalifornia Science Center.\nOn October 30, 2012, the Space Shuttle \"Endeavour\" was opened to the public. The shuttle was on display inside the temporary Samuel Oschin Pavilion, where guests offered to not only walk around Endeavour, but also under it, as the vehicle was displayed in the horizontal atop four friction-pendulum seismic isolators to protect it from earthquakes. The shuttle remained inside the temporary pavilion until December 31, 2023. A companion exhibit inside the Science Center features images and artifacts that related the Space Shuttle program to California, where the orbiters were originally constructed.\nAfter its decommissioning, \"Endeavour\"'s Canadarm (formally the 'Shuttle Remote Manipulator System') was removed in order to be sent to the Canadian Space Agency's John H. Chapman Space Centre in Longueuil, Quebec, a suburb of Montreal, where it was to be placed on display. In a Canadian poll on which science or aerospace museum should be selected to display the Canadarm, originally built by SPAR Aerospace, the Canadian Space Agency's headquarters placed third to last with only 35 out of 638 votes. \"Endeavour\"'s Canadarm has since gone on permanent display at the Canada Aviation and Space Museum in Ottawa. In August 2015, NASA engineers removed a few of the tanks from \"Endeavour\" for reuse as storage containers for potable water on the International Space Station.\nOn May 28, 2015, NASA donated the ET-94 external tank, the last mission-ready one in existence as all others were destroyed during launch. On April 12, 2016, the tank was transported by barge from the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans, Louisiana, across the Panama Canal, and was safely docked in Marina del Rey on May 15. The tank was delivered to the Science Center on May 21. It was displayed outside the Samuel Oschin Pavilion until 2023. On March 28, 2017, both Northrop Grumman and NASA donated a pair of flight-proven solid rocket boosters for \"Endeavour\" exhibit. The rocket parts were delivered on September 11, 2020, and were temporarily stored in the Mojave Air and Space Port in Mojave, California until construction began.\nSamuel Oschin Air and Space Center.\nThe \"Samuel Oschin Air and Space Center\", a new building that is under construction, will serve as \"Endeavour's\" new permanent home. The Space Shuttle will be in a 20-story-tall display mounted on with the ET-94 tank, and solid rocket boosters. Once finished, it will be the only Space Shuttle mounted vertically in launch position. \nOriginally slated to open in 2015, construction on the new building started on June 1, 2022. Meanwhile, the ET-94 tank underwent some restoration after being used to analyze the foam on its sister tank, ET-93, which was a factor during the STS-107 mission, which resulted in the Columbia disaster.\nOn July 20, 2023, the assembly of the stack began with the aft skirts (bottom segments of the rocket boosters) being precisely positioned on a concrete slab supported by six base isolators that will protect \"Endeavour\" from earthquakes. The motors for the rocket boosters, which were in storage at the Mojave Air and Space Port, were installed on October 11, 2023. The rocket boosters were fully assembled when the tops were added on December 5, 2023. \nOn January 3, 2024, \"Endeavour\" was protected in a shrink wrap, likely to stay on until construction is complete. The ET-94 tank was then moved into its position in January 16 and was mounted to the rocket boosters. On January 30, the Space Shuttle was then moved into its position, thus completing the stack. Once all components are mounted into place, construction on the building will continue, as a complex diagrid structure will be built around it. Construction work on the building is scheduled to be completed in 2025. It will take several more years to install the artifacts and exhibits inside the building. An official grand opening is not yet announced.\nLegacy.\nFollowing their May 30, 2020, launch on board the SpaceX Crew Dragon Demo-2 vehicle, the crew announced in orbit that they had named their spacecraft \"Endeavour\". Astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley said the name has a dual meaning: first, after the \"incredible endeavor\" put forth by SpaceX and NASA after the retirement of the Space Shuttle fleet in 2011; and second, because both Hurley and Behnken each flew their first flight aboard the shuttle \"Endeavour\" (Behnken on STS-123, Hurley on STS-127) and wanted to name this new spacecraft after the one that took each of them into space. The shuttle appeared in the 2022 films \"Moonfall\" and \"Beavis and Butt-Head Do the Universe\".\nReplica.\nA replica of a section of \"Endeavour\" is on exhibit outside the Discovery Cube Orange County, a science museum in Santa Ana, California.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28242", "revid": "50252551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28242", "title": "Sports Car Club of America", "text": "American automobile club\nThe Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) is a non-profit American automobile club and sanctioning body supporting Autocross, Rallycross, HPDE, Time Trial, Road Racing, RoadRally, and Hill Climbs in the United States. Formed in 1944, it runs many programs for both amateur and professional racers.\nHistory.\nThe SCCA traces its roots to the Automobile Racing Club of America (not to be confused with the current stock car series of the same name). ARCA was founded in 1933 by brothers https:// and Sam Collier, and dissolved in 1941 at the outbreak of World War II. The SCCA was formed in 1944 as an enthusiast group. The SCCA began sanctioning road racing in 1948 with the inaugural Watkins Glen Grand Prix. Cameron Argetsinger, an SCCA member and local enthusiast who would later become Director of Pro Racing and Executive Director of the SCCA, helped organize the event for the SCCA.\nIn 1951, the SCCA National Sports Car Championship was formed from existing marquee events around the nation, including Watkins Glen, Pebble Beach, and Elkhart Lake. Many early SCCA events were held on disused air force bases, organized with the help of Air Force General Curtis LeMay, a renowned enthusiast of sports car racing. LeMay loaned out facilities of Strategic Air Command bases for the SCCA's use; the SCCA relied heavily on these venues during the early and mid-1950s during the transition from street racing to permanent circuits.\nBy 1962, the SCCA was tasked with managing the U.S. World Sportscar Championship rounds at Daytona, Sebring, Bridgehampton and Watkins Glen. The club was also involved in the Formula 1 U.S. Grand Prix. SCCA Executive Director John Bishop helped to create the United States Road Racing Championship series for Group 7 sports cars to recover races that had been taken by rival USAC Road Racing Championship. Bishop was also instrumental in founding the SCCA Trans-Am Series and the SCCA/CASC Can-Am series. In 1969, tension and infighting over Pro Racing's autonomy caused Bishop to resign and help form the International Motor Sports Association.\nSanctioned Events.\nAutocross (Solo).\nThe autocross program is branded as \"Solo\". Up to four cars at a time run on a course laid out with traffic cones on a large paved surface, such as a parking lot or airport runway, without interfering with one another.\nCompetitions are held at the regional, divisional, and national levels. A national champion in each class is determined at the national championship (usually referred to as \"Nationals\") held in September. In 2009, Solo Nationals moved to the Lincoln Airpark in Lincoln, Nebraska. Individual national-level events called \"Championship Tours\" and \"Match Tours\" are held throughout the racing season. The SCCA also holds national-level events in an alternate format called \"ProSolo\". In ProSolo, two cars compete at the same time on mirror-image courses with drag racing-style starts, complete with reaction and 60-foot times. Class winners and other qualifiers (based on time differential against the class winner) then compete in a handicapped elimination round called the \"Challenge\". Points are awarded in both class and Challenge competition, and an annual champion is crowned each September at the ProSolo Finale event in Lincoln, Nebraska.\nRallycross.\nThe SCCA sanctions \"RallyCross\" events, similar to autocross, but on a non-paved course. SCCA ProRally was a national performance rally series similar to the World Rally Championship. At the end of the 2004 season SCCA dropped ProRally and ClubRally. A new organization, Rally America, picked up both series starting in 2005.\nRoad rallies are run on open, public roads. These are not races in the sense of speed, but of precision and navigation. The object is to drive on time, arriving at checkpoints with the proper amount of elapsed time from the previous checkpoint. Competitors do not know where the checkpoints are.\nTrack Night in America.\nTrack Night in America is a track experience program sanctioned by the SCCA. The program is designed to be low barrier to entry, and accepting to all skill levels. Events happen all over the country, on week evenings usually between Tuesday and Thursday. SCCA planned week night track events to keep costs down, as well as build a program that doesn't take over the entrants entire weekend. \nTNiA goes to well known tracks like Road America, VIR, even Sebring and Lime Rock. There are also smaller club tracks like CMP, AMP and Pitt Race. TNiA puts on about 150 events a year, totaling nearly 10,000 entrants each year, and as of 2024 has been running for 10 years.\nTime Trials.\nIn recent years, the SCCA has expanded and re-organized some of the higher-speed events under the Time Trials banner. These include Performance Driving Experience (\"PDX\"), Club Trials, Track Trials, and Hill Climb events. PDX events are non-competition HPDE-type events and consist of driver-education and car control classroom learning combined with on-track instruction.\nClub Racing.\nThe Club Racing program is a road racing division where drivers race on either dedicated race tracks or on temporary street circuits. Competitors require either a regional or a national racing license. Both modified production cars (ranging from lightly modified cars with only extra safety equipment to heavily modified cars that retain only the basic shape of the original vehicle) and designed-from-scratch \"formula\" and \"sports racer\" cars can be used in Club Racing. Most of the participants in the Club Racing program are unpaid amateurs, but some go on to professional racing careers. The club is also the source for race workers in all specialties.\nThe annual national championship for Club Racing is called the SCCA National Championship Runoffs and has been held at Riverside International Raceway (1964, 1966, 1968), Daytona International Speedway (1965, 1967, 1969, 2015), Road Atlanta (1970\u20131993), Mid-Ohio Sports Car Course (1994\u20132005, 2016), Heartland Park Topeka (2006\u20132008), Road America (2009-2013, 2020), Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca (2014), and Indianapolis Motor Speedway (2017). In 2018, the Runoffs will go back west to Sonoma Raceway. In 2019, the race will be held at Virginia International Raceway a track where the race has never been held. It was announced on 15 June 2018 that the Runoffs would go back to Road America in the year 2020. On 25 May 2019, the weekend of the 2019 Indianapolis 500, SCCA announced they will be returning to Indianapolis Motor Speedway in 2021. The current SCCA record holder is Jerry Hansen, (former owner of Brainerd International Raceway), with twenty-seven national championships.\nSCCA Majors formula group classes.\nThe five national classes of the formula group are Formula Atlantic (FA), Formula Continental (FC), Formula Enterprises 2 (FE2), Formula F (FF), and Formula Vee (FV).\nProfessional racing.\nThe SCCA dropped its amateur only policy in 1962 and began sanctioning professional racing. In 1963, the United States Road Racing Championship was formed. In 1966 the Canadian-American Challenge Cup (Can-Am) was created for Group 7 open-top sportscars. The Trans-Am Series for pony cars also began in 1966. Today, Trans-Am uses GT-1 class regulations, giving amateur drivers a chance to race professionally. A professional series for open-wheel racing cars was introduced in 1967 as the SCCA Grand Prix Championship. This series was then held under various names through to the 1976 SCCA/USAC Formula 5000 Championship.\nCurrent SCCA-sanctioned series include Trans Am, the GT World Challenge America for GT and touring cars, the Global MX-5 Cup, and the F1600 Championship Series, F2000 Championship Series, and Atlantic Championship Series for open-wheel racing. SCCA Pro Racing has also sanctioned professional series for some amateur classes such as Spec Racer Ford Pro and Formula Enterprises Pro. SCCA Pro Racing also sanctioned the Volkswagen Jetta TDI Cup during its time.\nConferences, divisions and regions.\nThe SCCA is organized into six conferences, nine divisions and 115 regions, each organizing events in that area to make the events more accessible to people throughout the country. The number of divisions has increased since the SCCA's foundation. Northern Pacific and Southern Pacific started as a single Pacific Coast Division until dividing in 1966. Rocky Mountain Division is a relatively recent split. The Great Lakes Division was split from the Central Division at the end of 2006.\n\"See footnote\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28243", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28243", "title": "SCCA", "text": ""}
{"id": "28244", "revid": "50994027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28244", "title": "Star network", "text": "Computer network topology\nA star network is an implementation of a spoke\u2013hub distribution paradigm in computer networks. In a star network, every host is connected to a central hub. In its simplest form, one central hub acts as a conduit to transmit messages. The star network is one of the most common computer network topologies.\nNetwork.\nThe hub and hosts, and the transmission lines between them, form a graph with the topology of a star. Data on a star network passes through the hub before continuing to its destination. The hub manages and controls all functions of the network. It also acts as a repeater for the data flow. In a typical network, the hub can be a network switch, Ethernet hub, wireless access point or a router \nThe star topology reduces the impact of a transmission line failure by independently connecting each host to the hub. Each host may thus communicate with all others by transmitting to, and receiving from, the hub. The failure of a transmission line linking any host to the hub will result in the isolation of that host from all others, but the rest of the network will be unaffected.\nThe star configuration is commonly used with twisted pair cable and optical fiber cable. However, it can also be used with coaxial cable as in, for example, a video router.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28245", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28245", "title": "SQL Server", "text": "SQL Server may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28246", "revid": "299039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28246", "title": "Sufism", "text": "Body of mystical practice within Islam\nSufism ( or ) is a mystic body of religious practice found within Islam which is characterized by a focus on Islamic purification, spirituality, ritualism, and asceticism.\nPractitioners of Sufism are referred to as \"Sufis\" (from , ), and historically typically belonged to \"orders\" known as (pl. ) \u2014 congregations formed around a grand (saint) who would be the last in a chain of successive teachers linking back to Muhammad, with the goal of undergoing (self purification) and the hope of reaching the spiritual station of . The ultimate aim of Sufis is to seek the pleasure of God by endeavoring to return to their original state of purity and natural disposition, known as .\nSufism emerged early on in Islamic history, partly as a reaction against the expansion of the early Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750) and mainly under the tutelage of Hasan al-Basri. Although Sufis were opposed to dry legalism, they strictly observed Islamic law and belonged to various schools of Islamic jurisprudence and theology. Although the overwhelming majority of Sufis, both pre-modern and modern, remain adherents of Sunni Islam, certain strands of Sufi thought transferred over to the ambits of Shia Islam during the late medieval period. This particularly happened after the Safavid conversion of Iran under the concept of \"irfan\". Important focuses of Sufi worship include , the practice of remembrance of God. Sufis also played an important role in spreading Islam through their missionary and educational activities.\nDespite a relative decline of Sufi orders in the modern era and attacks from fundamentalist Islamic movements (such as Salafism and Wahhabism), Sufism has continued to play an important role in the Islamic world. It has also influenced various forms of spirituality in the West and generated significant academic interest.\nDefinitions.\nThe Arabic word (lit.\u2009''Sufism''), generally translated as Sufism, is commonly defined by Western authors as Islamic mysticism. The Arabic term has been used in Islamic literature with a wide range of meanings, by both proponents and opponents of Sufism. Classical Sufi texts, which stressed certain teachings and practices of the Quran and the sunnah (exemplary teachings and practices of the Islamic prophet Muhammad), gave definitions of \"tasawwuf\" that described ethical and spiritual goals and functioned as teaching tools for their attainment. Many other terms that described particular spiritual qualities and roles were used instead in more practical contexts.\nSome modern scholars have used other definitions of Sufism, such as the \"intensification of Islamic faith and practice\" and the \"process of realizing ethical and spiritual ideals\".\nThe term Sufism was originally introduced into European languages in the 18th century by Orientalist scholars, who viewed it mainly as an intellectual doctrine and literary tradition at variance with what they saw as sterile monotheism of Islam. It was often mistaken as a universal mysticism in contrast to legalistic orthodox Islam. In recent times, historian Nile Green has argued against such distinctions, stating, in the Medieval period Sufism and Islam were more or less the same. In modern scholarly usage, the term serves to describe a wide range of social, cultural, political, and religious phenomena associated with Sufis.\nSufism has been variously defined as \"Islamic mysticism\", \"the mystical expression of Islamic faith\", \"the inward dimension of Islam\", \"the phenomenon of mysticism within Islam\", the \"main manifestation and the most important and central crystallization\" of mystical practice in Islam, and \"the interiorization and intensification of Islamic faith and practice\".\nEtymology.\nThe original meaning of ' seems to have been \"one who wears wool (')\", and the Encyclopaedia of Islam calls other etymological hypotheses \"untenable\". Woolen clothes were traditionally associated with ascetics and mystics. Al-Qushayri and Ibn Khaldun both rejected all possibilities other than \"\" on linguistic grounds. Moreover, medieval scholars like Al Biruni believed that the term 'Sufi' gradually evolved from the Greek term \"\u03c3\u03bf\u03c6\u03cc\u03c2 (sophos)\", which means wisdom or knowledge.\nAnother explanation traces the lexical root of the word to \"\" (), which in Arabic means \"purity\", and in this context another similar idea of as considered in Islam is \"tazkiyah\" (, meaning: self-purification), which is also widely used in Sufism. These two explanations were combined by the Sufi \"al-Rudhabari\" (d.\u00a0322\u00a0AH), who said, \"The Sufi is the one who wears wool on top of purity.\"\nOthers have suggested that the word comes from the term (\"the people of the suffah\" or the bench), who were a group of impoverished companions of Muhammad who held regular gatherings of \"dhikr\". One of the most prominent companions among them was Abu Hurayra. These men and women who sat at the Prophet's Mosque are considered by some to be the first Sufis.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe current consensus is that Sufism emerged in the Hejaz, present-day Saudi Arabia, and that it has existed as a practice of Muslims from the earliest days of Islam, even predating some sectarian divides.\nSufi orders are based on the ' () that was given to Muhammad by his companions (\"\u1e63ahabah\"). By pledging allegiance to Muhammad, the \"sahabah\" had committed themselves to the service of God.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVerily, those who give Bay'\u00e2h (pledge) to you (O Muhammad) they are giving Bay'\u00e2h (pledge) to God. The Hand of God is over their hands. Then whosoever breaks his pledge, breaks it only to his own harm, and whosoever fulfils what he has covenanted with God, He will bestow on him a great reward. \u2014 [Translation of Quran https://]\nSufis believe that by giving (pledging allegiance) to a legitimate Sufi shaykh, one is pledging allegiance to Muhammad; therefore, a spiritual connection between the seeker and Muhammad is established. It is through Muhammad that Sufis aim to learn about, understand and connect with God. Ali is regarded as one of the major figures amongst the \"sahaba\" who have directly pledged allegiance to Muhammad, and Sufis maintain that through Ali, knowledge about Muhammad and a connection with Muhammad may be attained. Such a concept may be understood by the \"hadith\", which Sufis regard to be authentic, in which Muhammad said, \"I am the city of knowledge, and Ali is its gate.\" Eminent Sufis such as Ali Hujwiri refer to Ali as having a very high ranking in \"Tasawwuf\". Furthermore, Junayd of Baghdad regarded Ali as sheikh of the principals and practices of \"Tasawwuf\".\nHistorian Jonathan A.C. Brown notes that during the lifetime of Muhammad, some companions were more inclined than others to \"intensive devotion, pious abstemiousness and pondering the divine mysteries\" more than Islam required, such as Abu Dharr al-Ghifari. Hasan al-Basri, a tabi', is considered a \"founding figure\" in the \"science of purifying the heart\".\nSufism emerged early on in Islamic history, partly as a reaction against the worldliness of the early Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750) and mainly under the tutelage of Hasan al-Basri.\nPractitioners of Sufism hold that in its early stages of development Sufism effectively referred to nothing more than the internalization of Islam. According to one perspective, it is directly from the Qur'an, constantly recited, meditated, and experienced, that Sufism proceeded, in its origin and its development. Other practitioners have held that Sufism is the strict emulation of the way of Muhammad, through which the heart's connection to the Divine is strengthened.\nLater developments of Sufism occurred from people like Dawud Tai and Bayazid Bastami. Early on Sufism was known for its strict adherence to the sunnah, for example it was reported Bastami refused to eat a watermelon because he did not find any proof that Muhammad ever ate it. According to the late medieval mystic, the Persian poet Jami, Abd-Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (died c. 716) was the first person to be called a \"Sufi\". The term also had a strong connection with Kufa, with three of the earliest scholars to be called by the term being Abu Hashim al-Kufi, Jabir ibn Hayyan and Abdak al-Sufi. Later individuals included Hatim al-Attar, from Basra, and Al-Junayd al-Baghdadi. Others, such as Al-Harith al-Muhasibi and Sari al-Saqati, were not known as Sufis during their lifetimes, but later came to be identified as such due to their focus on tazkiah (purification).\nImportant contributions in writing are attributed to Uwais al-Qarani, Hasan of Basra, Harith al-Muhasibi, Abu Nasr as-Sarraj and Said ibn al-Musayyib. Ruwaym, from the second generation of Sufis in Baghdad, was also an influential early figure, as was Junayd of Baghdad; a number of early practitioners of Sufism were disciples of one of the two.\nSufi orders.\nHistorically, Sufis have often belonged to \"orders\" known as (pl. ) \u2013 congregations formed around a grand master who will trace their teaching through a chain of successive teachers back to the Islamic prophet Muhammad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Within the Sufi tradition, the formation of the orders did not immediately produce lineages of master and disciple. There are few examples before the eleventh century of complete lineages going back to the Prophet Muhammad. Yet the symbolic importance of these lineages was immense: they provided a channel to divine authority through master-disciple chains. It was through such chains of masters and disciples that spiritual power and blessings were transmitted to both general and special devotees.\nThese orders meet for spiritual sessions () in meeting places known as , or .\nThey strive for (perfection of worship), as detailed in a : \"Ihsan is to worship Allah as if you see Him; if you can't see Him, surely He sees you.\" Sufis regard Muhammad as , the complete human who personifies the attributes of Absolute Reality, and view him as their ultimate spiritual guide.\nSufi orders trace most of their original precepts from Muhammad through Ali ibn Abi Talib, with the notable exception of the Naqshbandi order, which traces its original precepts to Muhammad through Abu Bakr. However, it was not necessary to formally belong to a tariqa. In the Medieval period, Sufism was almost equal to Islam in general and not limited to specific orders.(p24)\nSufism had a long history already before the subsequent institutionalization of Sufi teachings into devotional orders (\"tariqa\", pl. \"tar\u00eeq\u00e2t\") in the early Middle Ages. The term \"tariqa\" is used for a school or order of Sufism, or especially for the mystical teaching and spiritual practices of such an order with the aim of seeking \u1e25aq\u012bqah (ultimate truth). A tariqa has a murshid (guide) who plays the role of leader or spiritual director. The members or followers of a tariqa are known as \"mur\u012bd\u012bn\" (singular \"mur\u012bd\"), meaning \"desirous\", viz. \"desiring the knowledge of knowing God and loving God\".\nOver the years, Sufi orders have influenced and been adopted by various Shi'i movements, especially Isma'ilism, which led to the Safaviyya order's conversion to Shia Islam from Sunni Islam and the spread of Twelverism throughout Iran.\nSufism as an Islamic discipline.\nExisting in both Sunni and Shia Islam, Sufism is not a distinct sect, as is sometimes erroneously assumed, but a method of approaching or a way of understanding the religion, which strives to take the regular practice of the religion to the \"supererogatory level\" through simultaneously \"fulfilling ... [the obligatory] religious duties\" and finding a \"way and a means of striking a root through the 'narrow gate' in the depth of the soul out into the domain of the pure arid un-imprisonable Spirit which itself opens out on to the Divinity.\" Academic studies of Sufism confirm that Sufism, as a separate tradition from Islam apart from so-called \"pure Islam\", is frequently a product of Western orientalism and modern Islamic fundamentalists.\nAs a mystic and ascetic aspect of Islam, it is considered as the part of Islamic teaching that deals with the purification of the inner self. By focusing on the more spiritual aspects of religion, Sufis strive to obtain direct experience of God by making use of \"intuitive and emotional faculties\" that one must be trained to use. \"Tasawwuf\" is regarded as a science of the soul that has always been an integral part of Orthodox Islam. In his \"Al-Risala al-Safadiyya\", ibn Taymiyyah describes the Sufis as those who belong to the path of the Sunna and represent it in their teachings and writings.\nIbn Taymiyya's Sufi inclinations and his reverence for Sufis like Abdul-Qadir Gilani can also be seen in his hundred-page commentary on \"Futuh al-ghayb\", covering only five of the seventy-eight sermons of the book, but showing that he considered \"tasawwuf\" essential within the life of the Islamic community.\nAl-Ghazali narrates in \"Al-Munqidh min al-dalal\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The vicissitudes of life, family affairs and financial constraints engulfed my life and deprived me of the congenial solitude. The heavy odds confronted me and provided me with few moments for my pursuits. This state of affairs lasted for ten years, but whenever I had some spare and congenial moments I resorted to my intrinsic proclivity. During these turbulent years, numerous astonishing and indescribable secrets of life were unveiled to me. I was convinced that the group of Aulia (holy mystics) is the only truthful group who follow the right path, display best conduct and surpass all sages in their wisdom and insight. They derive all their overt or covert behaviour from the illumining guidance of the holy Prophet, the only guidance worth quest and pursuit.\nFormalization of doctrine.\nIn the eleventh-century, Sufism, which had previously been a less \"codified\" trend in Islamic piety, began to be \"ordered and crystallized\" into orders which have continued until the present day. All these orders were founded by a major Islamic scholar, and some of the largest and most widespread included the Suhrawardiyya (after Abu al-Najib Suhrawardi [d. 1168]), Qadiriyya (after Abdul-Qadir Gilani [d. 1166]), the Rifa'iyya (after Ahmed al-Rifa'i [d. 1182]), the Chishtiyya (after Moinuddin Chishti [d. 1236]), the Shadiliyya (after Abul Hasan ash-Shadhili [d. 1258]), the Hamadaniyyah (after Sayyid Ali Hamadani [d. 1384]), the Naqshbandiyya (after Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari [d. 1389]). Contrary to popular perception in the West, however, neither the founders of these orders nor their followers ever considered themselves to be anything other than orthodox Sunni Muslims, and in fact all of these orders were attached to one of the four orthodox legal schools of Sunni Islam. Thus, the Qadiriyya order was Hanbali, with its founder, Abdul-Qadir Gilani, being a renowned jurist; the Chishtiyya was Hanafi; the Shadiliyya order was Maliki; and the Naqshbandiyya order was Hanafi. Thus, it is precisely because it is historically proven that \"many of the most eminent defenders of Islamic orthodoxy, such as Abdul-Qadir Gilani, Ghazali, and the Sultan \u1e62al\u0101\u1e25 ad-D\u012bn (Saladin) were connected with Sufism\" that the popular studies of writers like Idries Shah are continuously disregarded by scholars as conveying the fallacious image that \"Sufism\" is somehow distinct from \"Islam\". Nile Green has observed that, in the Middle Ages, Sufism more or less was \"Islam\".(p24)\nGrowth of influence.\nHistorically, Sufism became \"an incredibly important part of Islam\" and \"one of the most widespread and omnipresent aspects of Muslim life\" in Islamic civilization from the early medieval period onwards, when it began to permeate nearly all major aspects of Sunni Islamic life in regions stretching from India and Iraq to the Balkans and Senegal.\nThe rise of Islamic civilization coincides strongly with the spread of Sufi philosophy in Islam. The spread of Sufism has been considered a definitive factor in the spread of Islam, and in the creation of integrally Islamic cultures, especially in Africa and Asia. The Senussi tribes of Libya and the Sudan are one of the strongest adherents of Sufism. Sufi poets and philosophers such as Khoja Akhmet Yassawi, Rumi, and Attar of Nishapur (c. 1145 \u2013 c. 1221) greatly enhanced the spread of Islamic culture in Anatolia, Central Asia, and South Asia. Sufism also played a role in creating and propagating the culture of the Ottoman world, and in resisting European imperialism in North Africa and South Asia.\nBetween the 13th and 16th centuries, Sufism produced a flourishing intellectual culture throughout the Islamic world, a \"Renaissance\" whose physical artifacts survive. In many places a person or group would endow a waqf to maintain a lodge (known variously as a \"zawiya\", \"khanqah\", or \"tekke\") to provide a gathering place for Sufi adepts, as well as lodging for itinerant seekers of knowledge. The same system of endowments could also pay for a complex of buildings, such as that surrounding the S\u00fcleymaniye Mosque in Istanbul, including a lodge for Sufi seekers, a hospice with kitchens where these seekers could serve the poor and/or complete a period of initiation, a library, and other structures. No important domain in the civilization of Islam remained unaffected by Sufism in this period.\nModern era.\nOpposition to Sufi teachers and orders from more literalist and legalist strains of Islam existed in various forms throughout Islamic history. It took on a particularly violent form in the 18th century with the emergence of the Wahhabi movement.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, Sufi rituals and doctrines also came under sustained criticism from modernist Islamic reformers, liberal nationalists, and, some decades later, socialist movements in the Muslim world. Sufi orders were accused of fostering popular superstitions, resisting modern intellectual attitudes, and standing in the way of progressive reforms. Ideological attacks on Sufism were reinforced by agrarian and educational reforms, as well as new forms of taxation, which were instituted by Westernizing national governments, undermining the economic foundations of Sufi orders. The extent to which Sufi orders declined in the first half of the 20th century varied from country to country, but by the middle of the century the very survival of the orders and traditional Sufi lifestyle appeared doubtful to many observers.\nHowever, defying these predictions, Sufism and Sufi orders have continued to play a major role in the Muslim world, also expanding into Muslim-minority countries. Its ability to articulate an inclusive Islamic identity with greater emphasis on personal and small-group piety has made Sufism especially well-suited for contexts characterized by religious pluralism and secularist perspectives.\nIn the modern world, the classical interpretation of Sunni orthodoxy, which sees in Sufism an essential dimension of Islam alongside the disciplines of jurisprudence and theology, is represented by institutions such as Egypt's Al-Azhar University and Zaytuna College, with Al-Azhar's current Grand Imam Ahmed el-Tayeb recently defining \"Sunni orthodoxy\" as being a follower \"of any of the four schools of [legal] thought (Hanafi, Shafi\u2019i, Maliki or Hanbali) and ... [also] of the Sufism of Imam Junayd of Baghdad in doctrines, manners and [spiritual] purification.\"\nThe relationship of Sufi orders to modern societies is usually defined by their relationship to governments.\nTurkey, Persia and The Indian Subcontinent have all been a center for many Sufi lineages and orders. The Bektashi were closely affiliated with the Ottoman Janissaries and are the heart of Turkey's large and mostly liberal Alevi population. They have spread westwards to Cyprus, Greece, Albania, Bulgaria, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, and, more recently, to the United States, via Albania. Sufism is popular in such African countries as Egypt, Tunisia, Algeria, Sudan, Morocco, and Senegal, where it is seen as a mystical expression of Islam. Mbacke suggests that one reason Sufism has taken hold in Senegal is because it can accommodate local beliefs and customs, which tend toward the mystical.\nThe life of the Algerian Sufi master Abdelkader El Djezairi is instructive in this regard. Notable as well are the lives of Amadou Bamba and El Hadj Umar Tall in West Africa, and Sheikh Mansur and Imam Shamil in the Caucasus. In the twentieth century, some Muslims have called Sufism a superstitious religion which holds back Islamic achievement in the fields of science and technology.\nA number of Westerners have embarked with varying degrees of success on the path of Sufism. One of the first to return to Europe as an official representative of a Sufi order, and with the specific purpose to spread Sufism in Western Europe, was the Swedish-born wandering Sufi Ivan Agu\u00e9li. Ren\u00e9 Gu\u00e9non, the French scholar, became a Sufi in the early twentieth century and was known as Sheikh Abdul Wahid Yahya. His manifold writings defined the practice of Sufism as the essence of Islam, but also pointed to the universality of its message. Spiritualists, such as George Gurdjieff, may or may not conform to the tenets of Sufism as understood by orthodox Muslims.\nSufi orders.\nSilsila.\nThis chart explains the spiritual chain (\"silsila\") of major Sufi orders and their connection to the Prophet Muhammad.\n\"Note: This chart is intended to help illustrate how spiritual masters are connected through the lineage. To keep it less cluttered, the names of intermediate spiritual masters have been omitted. For a detailed lineage of the spiritual orders, please visit their respective pages.\"\nSpiritual Chain of Major Sufi Orders.\n1. QADIRIYYA.\nShaykh Abdul Qadir al-Jilani \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b Sa\u02bf\u012bd al-Mukharram\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan al-Qurash\u012b (al-\u1e24akk\u0101r\u012b) \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b al-Faraj al-\u1e6cars\u016bs\u012b \u2192 Shaykh \u02bfAbd al-W\u0101\u1e25id al-Tam\u012bm\u012b \u2192 Shaykh \u02bfAbd al-\u02bfAz\u012bz al-Tam\u012bm\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b Bakr al-Shibl\u012b \u2192 Shaykh al-Junayd al-Baghd\u0101d\u012b \u2192 Shaykh al-Sar\u012b al-Saqa\u1e6d\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ma\u02bfr\u016bf al-Karkh\u012b \u2192 Imam \u02bfAl\u012b al-Ri\u1e0d\u0101 \u2192 Imam M\u016bs\u0101 al-K\u0101\u1e93im \u2192 Imam Ja\u02bffar al-\u1e62\u0101diq \u2192 Imam Mu\u1e25ammad al-B\u0101qir \u2192 Imam Zayn al-\u02bf\u0100bid\u012bn \u2192 Imam al-\u1e24usayn \u2192 Imam \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\n2. CHISHTI.\nKhwaja Muinuddin Chishti \u2192 Khw\u0101ja \u02bfUthm\u0101n Harv\u0101n\u012b \u2192 \u1e24\u0101jj\u012b Shar\u012bf Zind\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Mu\u1e25ammad Maud\u016bd Chisht\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Y\u016bsuf Chisht\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Mu\u1e25ammad ibn Ab\u012b A\u1e25mad \u2192 Ab\u016b A\u1e25mad \u02bfAbd\u0101l Chisht\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Is\u1e25\u0101q Sh\u0101m\u012b Chisht\u012b \u2192 Mamsh\u0101d \u02bfUlw D\u012bnawar\u012b \u2192 Am\u012bnudd\u012bn Ab\u016b Hubayrah Ba\u1e63r\u012b \u2192 Sa\u02bfdudd\u012bn Hu\u1e0dhayfah Mar\u02bfash\u012b \u2192 Ibr\u0101h\u012bm ibn Adham al-Balkh\u012b \u2192 Fu\u1e0dayl ibn \u02bfIy\u0101\u1e0d \u2192 \u02bfAbd al-W\u0101\u1e25id ibn Zayd \u2192 al-\u1e24asan al-Ba\u1e63r\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\n3. NAQSHBANDI.\nBaha' al-din Naqshband \u2192 Sayyid Am\u012br Kul\u0101l \u2192 Mu\u1e25ammad B\u0101b\u0101 Samm\u0101s\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b R\u0101mitan\u012b (Az\u012bz\u0101n) \u2192 Ma\u1e25m\u016bd Anj\u012br Faghnaw\u012b \u2192 \u02bf\u0100rif Riwgar\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAbd al-Kh\u0101liq Ghujduw\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Ya\u02bfq\u016bb Y\u016bsuf al-Hamad\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b al-Farmad\u012b al-\u1e6c\u016bs\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan \u02bfAl\u012b al-Kharaq\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Yaz\u012bd al-Bis\u1e6d\u0101m\u012b \u2192 Im\u0101m Ja\u02bffar al-\u1e62\u0101diq \u2192 Q\u0101sim ibn Mu\u1e25ammad ibn Ab\u012b Bakr \u2192 Salm\u0101n al-F\u0101ris\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Bakr al-\u1e62idd\u012bq \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\n4. SUHRAWARDI.\nShihab ad-din Suhrawardi \u2192 Ab\u016b Naj\u012bb \u02bfAbd al-Q\u0101dir Suhraward\u012b \u2192 Khw\u0101ja A\u1e25mad Ghazz\u0101l\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b Bakr Nis\u0101j \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b al-Q\u0101sim Gurg\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Khw\u0101ja Usm\u0101n Maghrib\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b K\u0101tib \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b Rudhb\u0101r\u012b \u2192 Im\u0101m Junayd Baghd\u0101d\u012b \u2192 Sarr\u012b Saqa\u1e6d\u012b \u2192 Ma\u02bfr\u016bf Karkh\u012b \u2192 D\u0101w\u016bd \u1e6c\u0101\u02be\u012b \u2192 \u1e24ab\u012bb al-\u02bfAjam\u012b \u2192 al-\u1e24asan al-Ba\u1e63r\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa \ufdfa\n5. KUBRAWIYA.\nNajm ad-D\u012bn Kubr\u0101 \u2192 Shaykh R\u016bzbah\u0101n Baql\u012b \u2192 Khw\u0101ja \u02bfAmm\u0101r Y\u0101sir \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b Naj\u012bb Suhraward\u012b \u2192 Khw\u0101ja A\u1e25mad Ghazz\u0101l\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b Bakr Nis\u0101j \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b al-Q\u0101sim Gurg\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Khw\u0101ja Usm\u0101n Maghrib\u012b \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b K\u0101tib \u2192 Shaykh Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b Rudhb\u0101r\u012b \u2192 Im\u0101m Junayd Baghd\u0101d\u012b \u2192 Sarr\u012b Saqa\u1e6d\u012b \u2192 Ma\u02bfr\u016bf Karkh\u012b \u2192 D\u0101w\u016bd \u1e6c\u0101\u02be\u012b \u2192 \u1e24ab\u012bb al-\u02bfAjam\u012b \u2192 al-\u1e24asan al-Ba\u1e63r\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\n6. SHADHILI.\nN\u016brudd\u012bn Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan al-Sh\u0101dhil\u012b \u2192 \u02bfAbd al-Sal\u0101m ibn Mash\u012bsh \u2192 \u02bfAbd al-Ra\u1e25m\u0101n al-Madan\u012b \u2192 Taq\u012budd\u012bn al-\u1e62\u016bf\u012b \u2192 Fakhrudd\u012bn \u2192 Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan \u02bfAl\u012b \u2192 T\u0101judd\u012bn \u2192 Shamsudd\u012bn \u2192 Zaynudd\u012bn Ma\u1e25m\u016bd al-Qazw\u012bn\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Is\u1e25\u0101q Ibr\u0101h\u012bm al-Ba\u1e63r\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b al-Q\u0101sim Mirw\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Mu\u1e25ammad Sa\u02bf\u012bd \u2192 Ab\u016b Mu\u1e25ammad Sa\u02bfd \u2192 F\u0101ti\u1e25 al-Mas\u02bf\u016bd\u012b \u2192 Sa\u02bf\u012bd al-Qirw\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Ab\u016b Mu\u1e25ammad J\u0101bir \u2192 Im\u0101m al-\u1e24asan \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\n7. RIFA'I.\nSayyid A\u1e25mad ar-Rif\u0101\u02bf\u012b \u2192 Sayyid Ab\u016b al-\u1e24asan \u02bfAl\u012b ar-Rif\u0101\u02bf\u012b \u2192 Sayyid Ya\u1e25y\u0101 Naq\u012bb \u2192 Sayyid Th\u0101bit \u2192 Sayyid \u02bfAl\u012b H\u0101zim Ab\u016b al-Faw\u0101ris \u2192 Sayyid Ab\u016b \u02bfAl\u012b al-Murta\u1e0d\u0101 \u2192 Sayyid Ab\u016b al-Fa\u1e0d\u0101\u02beil \u2192 Sayyid Ab\u016b al-Mak\u0101rim al-\u1e24asan \u2192 Sayyid al-Mahd\u012b al-Makk\u012b \u2192 Sayyid Mu\u1e25ammad Ab\u016b al-Q\u0101sim \u2192 Sayyid \u1e24asan Q\u0101sim Ab\u016b M\u016bs\u0101 \u2192 Sayyid Ab\u016b \u02bfAbdull\u0101h \u1e24usayn \u2192 Sayyid A\u1e25mad \u1e62\u0101li\u1e25 al-Akbar \u2192 Sayyid M\u016bs\u0101 S\u0101n\u012b \u2192 Sayyid Ibr\u0101h\u012bm al-Murta\u1e0d\u0101 \u2192 Im\u0101m M\u016bs\u0101 al-K\u0101\u1e93im \u2192 Im\u0101m Ja\u02bffar al-\u1e62\u0101diq \u2192 Im\u0101m Mu\u1e25ammad al-B\u0101qir \u2192 Im\u0101m Zayn al-\u02bf\u0100bid\u012bn \u2192 Im\u0101m al-\u1e24usayn \u2192 \u02bfAl\u012b ibn Ab\u012b \u1e6c\u0101lib \u2192 Prophet Mu\u1e25ammad \ufdfa\nAims and objectives.\nWhile all Muslims believe that they are on the pathway to Allah and hope to become close to God in Paradise\u2014after death and after the Last Judgment\u2014Sufis also believe that it is possible to draw closer to God and to more fully embrace the divine presence in this life. The chief aim of all Sufis is to seek the pleasure of God by working to restore within themselves the primordial state of \"fitra\".\nTo Sufis, the outer law consists of rules pertaining to worship, transactions, marriage, judicial rulings, and criminal law\u2014what is often referred to, broadly, as \"qanun\". The inner law of Sufism consists of rules about repentance from sin, the purging of contemptible qualities and evil traits of character, and adornment with virtues and good character.\nTeachings.\nTo the Sufi, it is the transmission of divine light from the teacher's heart to the heart of the student, rather than worldly knowledge, that allows the adept to progress. They further believe that the teacher should attempt inerrantly to follow the Divine Law.\nAccording to Moojan Momen \"one of the most important doctrines of Sufism is the concept of \"al-Insan al-Kamil\" (\"the Perfect Man\"). This doctrine states that there will always exist upon the earth a \"qutb\" (pole or axis of the Universe)\u2014a man who is the perfect channel of grace from God to man and in a state of wilayah (sanctity, being under the protection of Allah). The concept of the Sufi \"qutb\" is similar to that of the Shi'i imam. However, this belief puts Sufism in \"direct conflict\" with Shia Islam, since both the \"qutb\" (who for most Sufi orders is the head of the order) and the imam fulfill the role of \"the purveyor of spiritual guidance and of Allah's grace to mankind\". The vow of obedience to the shaykh or \"qutb\" which is taken by Sufis is considered incompatible with devotion to the imam.\nAs a further example, the prospective adherent of the Mevlevi Order would have been ordered to serve in the kitchens of a hospice for the poor for 1001 days prior to being accepted for spiritual instruction, and a further 1,001 days in solitary retreat as a precondition of completing that instruction.\nSome teachers, especially when addressing more general audiences, or mixed groups of Muslims and non-Muslims, make extensive use of parable, allegory, and metaphor. Although approaches to teaching vary among different Sufi orders, Sufism as a whole is primarily concerned with direct personal experience, and as such has sometimes been compared to other, non-Islamic forms of mysticism (e.g., as in the books of Seyyed Hossein Nasr).\nMany Sufi believe that to reach the highest levels of success in Sufism typically requires that the disciple live with and serve the teacher for a long period of time. An example is the folk story about Baha-ud-Din Naqshband Bukhari, who gave his name to the Naqshbandi Order. He is believed to have served his first teacher, Sayyid Muhammad Baba As-Samasi, for 20 years, until as-Samasi died. He is said to then have served several other teachers for lengthy periods of time. He is said to have helped the poorer members of the community for many years, and after this concluded his teacher directed him to care for animals cleaning their wounds, and assisting them.\nMuhammad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nDevotion to Muhammad is the strongest practice within Sufism. Sufis have historically revered Muhammad as the prime personality of spiritual greatness. The Sufi poet Saadi Shirazi stated, \"He who chooses a path contrary to that of the prophet shall never reach the destination. O Saadi, do not think that one can treat that way of purity except in the wake of the chosen one.\" Rumi attributes his self-control and abstinence from worldly desires as qualities attained by him through the guidance of Muhammad. Rumi states, \"I 'sewed' my two eyes shut from [desires for] this world and the next \u2013 this I learned from Muhammad.\" Ibn Arabi regards Muhammad as the greatest man and states, \"Muhammad's wisdom is uniqueness (\"fardiya\") because he is the most perfect existent creature of this human species. For this reason, the command began with him and was sealed with him. He was a Prophet while Adam was between water and clay, and his elemental structure is the Seal of the Prophets.\" Attar of Nishapur claimed that he praised Muhammad in such a manner that was not done before by any poet, in his book the \"Ilahi-nama\". Fariduddin Attar stated, \"Muhammad is the exemplar to both worlds, the guide of the descendants of Adam. He is the sun of creation, the moon of the celestial spheres, the all-seeing eye...The seven heavens and the eight gardens of paradise were created for him; he is both the eye and the light in the light of our eyes.\" Sufis have historically stressed the importance of Muhammad's perfection and his ability to intercede. The persona of Muhammad has historically been and remains an integral and critical aspect of Sufi belief and practice. Bayazid Bastami is recorded to have been so devoted to the \"sunnah\" of Muhammad that he refused to eat a watermelon because he could not establish that Muhammad ever ate one.\nIn the 13th century, a Sufi poet from Egypt, Al-Busiri, wrote the \"al-Kaw\u0101kib ad-Durr\u012bya f\u012b Mad\u1e25 Khayr al-Bar\u012bya\" ('The Celestial Lights in Praise of the Best of Creation'), commonly referred to as \"Qa\u1e63\u012bdat al-Burda\" ('Poem of the Mantle'), in which he extensively praised Muhammad. This poem is still widely recited and sung amongst Sufi groups and lay Muslims alike all over the world.\nSufi beliefs about Muhammad.\nAccording to Ibn Arabi, Islam is the best religion because of Muhammad. Ibn Arabi regards that the first entity that was brought into existence is the reality or essence of Muhammad (\"al-\u1e25aq\u012bqa al-Muhammadiyya\"). Ibn Arabi regards Muhammad as the supreme human being and master of all creatures. Muhammad is therefore the primary role model for human beings to aspire to emulate. Ibn Arabi believes that God's attributes and names are manifested in this world and that the most complete and perfect display of these divine attributes and names are seen in Muhammad. Ibn Arabi believes that one may see God in the mirror of Muhammad, meaning that the divine attributes of God are manifested through Muhammad. Ibn Arabi maintains that Muhammad is the best proof of God, and by knowing Muhammad one knows God. Ibn Arabi also maintains that Muhammad is the master of all of humanity in both this world and the afterlife. In this view, Islam is the best religion because Muhammad is Islam.\nSufism and Islamic law.\nSufis believe the \"sharia\" (exoteric \"canon\"), \"tariqa\" (\"order\") and \"haqiqa\" (\"truth\") are mutually interdependent. Sufism leads the adept, called \"salik\" or \"wayfarer\", in his \"sul\u00fbk\" or \"road\" through different stations (\"maq\u0101m\u0101t\") until he reaches his goal, the perfect \"tawhid\", the existential confession that God is One. Ibn Arabi says, \"When we see someone in this Community who claims to be able to guide others to God, but is remiss in but one rule of the Sacred Law\u2014even if he manifests miracles that stagger the mind\u2014asserting that his shortcoming is a special dispensation for him, we do not even turn to look at him, for such a person is not a sheikh, nor is he speaking the truth, for no one is entrusted with the secrets of God Most High save one in whom the ordinances of the Sacred Law are preserved. (\"Jami\u02bf karamat al-awliya\u02be\")\".\nIt is related, moreover, that Malik, one of the founders of the four schools of Sunni law, was a strong proponent of combining the \"inward science\" (\"'ilm al-b\u0101tin\") of mystical knowledge with the \"outward science\" of jurisprudence. For example, the famous twelfth-century Maliki jurist and judge Qadi Iyad, later venerated as a saint throughout the Iberian Peninsula, narrated a tradition in which a man asked Malik \"about something in the inward science\", to which Malik replied: \"Truly none knows the inward science except those who know the outward science! When he knows the outward science and puts it into practice, God shall open for him the inward science\u00a0\u2013 and that will not take place except by the opening of his heart and its enlightenment.\" In other similar traditions, it is related that Malik said: \"He who practices Sufism (\"tasawwuf\") without learning Sacred Law corrupts his faith (\"tazandaqa\"), while he who learns Sacred Law without practicing Sufism corrupts himself (\"tafassaqa\"). Only he who combines the two proves true (\"tahaqqaqa\")\".\nThe Amman Message, a detailed statement issued by 200 leading Islamic scholars in 2005 in Amman, specifically recognized the validity of Sufism as a part of Islam. This was adopted by the Islamic world's political and temporal leaderships at the Organisation of the Islamic Conference summit at Mecca in December 2005, and by six other international Islamic scholarly assemblies including the International Islamic Fiqh Academy of Jeddah, in July 2006. The definition of Sufism can vary drastically between different traditions (what may be intended is simple tazkiah as opposed to the various manifestations of Sufism around the Islamic world).\nTraditional Islamic thought and Sufism.\nThe literature of Sufism emphasizes highly subjective matters that resist outside observation, such as the subtle states of the heart. Often these resist direct reference or description, with the consequence that the authors of various Sufi treatises took recourse to allegorical language. For instance, much Sufi poetry refers to intoxication, which Islam expressly forbids. This usage of indirect language and the existence of interpretations by people who had no training in Islam or Sufism led to doubts being cast over the validity of Sufism as a part of Islam. Also, some groups emerged that considered themselves above the \"sharia\" and discussed Sufism as a method of bypassing the rules of Islam in order to attain salvation directly. This was disapproved of by traditional scholars.\nFor these and other reasons, the relationship between traditional Islamic scholars and Sufism is complex, and a range of scholarly opinion on Sufism in Islam has been the norm. Some scholars, such as Al-Ghazali, helped its propagation while other scholars opposed it. William Chittick explains the position of Sufism and Sufis this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In short, Muslim scholars who focused their energies on understanding the normative guidelines for the body came to be known as jurists, and those who held that the most important task was to train the mind in achieving correct understanding came to be divided into three main schools of thought: theology, philosophy, and Sufism. This leaves us with the third domain of human existence, the spirit. Most Muslims who devoted their major efforts to developing the spiritual dimensions of the human person came to be known as Sufis.\nPersian influence on Sufism.\nPersians played a huge role in developing and systematising Islamic mysticism. One of the first to formalise Sufi principles was Junayd of Baghdad \u2013 a Persian from Baghdad. Other great Persian Sufi poets include Rudaki, Rumi, Attar, Nizami, Hafez, Sanai, Shamz Tabrizi and Jami. Famous poems that still resonate across the Muslim world include \"The Masnavi of Rumi\"\", The Bustan by Saadi, The Conference of the Birds by Attar and The Div\u0101n of Hafez.\"\nNeo-Sufism.\nThe term \"neo-Sufism\" was originally coined by Fazlur Rahman and used by other scholars to describe reformist currents among 18th century Sufi orders, whose goal was to remove some of the more ecstatic and pantheistic elements of the Sufi tradition and reassert the importance of Islamic law as the basis for inner spirituality and social activism. In recent times, it has been increasingly used by scholars like Mark Sedgwick in the opposite sense, to describe various forms of Sufi-influenced spirituality in the West, in particular the deconfessionalized spiritual movements which emphasize universal elements of the Sufi tradition and de-emphasize its Islamic context.\nDevotional practices.\nThe devotional practices of Sufis vary widely. Prerequisites to practice include rigorous adherence to Islamic norms (ritual prayer in its five prescribed times each day, the fast of Ramadan, and so forth). Additionally, the seeker ought to be firmly grounded in supererogatory practices known from the life of Muhammad (such as the \"sunnah prayers\"). This is in accordance with the words, attributed to God, of the following, a famous \"Hadith Qudsi\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My servant draws near to Me through nothing I love more than that which I have made obligatory for him. My servant never ceases drawing near to Me through supererogatory works until I love him. Then, when I love him, I am his hearing through which he hears, his sight through which he sees, his hand through which he grasps, and his foot through which he walks.\nIt is also necessary for the seeker to have a correct creed (\"aqidah\"), and to embrace with certainty its tenets. The seeker must also, of necessity, turn away from sins, love of this world, the love of company and renown, obedience to satanic impulse, and the promptings of the lower self. (The way in which this purification of the heart is achieved is outlined in certain books, but must be prescribed in detail by a Sufi master.) The seeker must also be trained to prevent the corruption of those good deeds which have accrued to his or her credit by overcoming the traps of ostentation, pride, arrogance, envy, and long hopes (meaning the hope for a long life allowing us to mend our ways later, rather than immediately, here and now).\nSufi practices, while attractive to some, are not a \"means\" for gaining knowledge. The traditional scholars of Sufism hold it as absolutely axiomatic that knowledge of God is not a psychological state generated through breath control. Thus, practice of \"techniques\" is not the cause, but instead the \"occasion\" for such knowledge to be obtained (if at all), given proper prerequisites and proper guidance by a master of the way. Furthermore, the emphasis on practices may obscure a far more important fact: The seeker is, in a sense, to become a broken person, stripped of all habits through the practice of (in the words of Imam Al-Ghazali) solitude, silence, sleeplessness, and hunger.\nDhikr.\n\"Dhikr\" is the remembrance of Allah commanded in the Quran for all Muslims through a specific devotional act, such as the repetition of divine names, supplications and aphorisms from \"hadith\" literature and the Quran. More generally, \"dhikr\" takes a wide range and various layers of meaning. This includes \"dhikr\" as any activity in which the Muslim maintains awareness of Allah. To engage in \"dhikr\" is to practice consciousness of the Divine Presence and love, or \"to seek a state of godwariness\". The Quran refers to Muhammad as the very embodiment of \"dhikr\" of Allah (65:10\u201311). Some types of \"dhikr\" are prescribed for all Muslims and do not require Sufi initiation or the prescription of a Sufi master because they are deemed to be good for every seeker under every circumstance.\nThe \"dhikr\" may slightly vary among each order. Some Sufi orders engage in ritualized \"dhikr\" ceremonies, or \"sema\". \"Sema\" includes various forms of worship such as recitation, singing (the most well known being the Qawwali music of the Indian subcontinent), instrumental music, dance (most famously the Sufi whirling of the Mevlevi order), incense, meditation, ecstasy, and trance.\nSome Sufi orders stress and place extensive reliance upon \"dhikr\". This practice of \"dhikr\" is called \"Dhikr-e-Qulb\" (invocation of Allah within the heartbeats). The basic idea in this practice is to visualize the Allah as having been written on the disciple's heart.\nMuraqaba.\nThe practice of \"muraqaba\" can be likened to the practices of meditation attested in many faith communities. While variation exists, one description of the practice within a Naqshbandi lineage reads as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He is to collect all of his bodily senses in concentration, and to cut himself off from all preoccupation and notions that inflict themselves upon the heart. And thus he is to turn his full consciousness towards God Most High while saying three times: \"\"Ilah\u00ee anta maqs\u00fbd\u00ee wa-rid\u00e2ka matl\u00fbb\u00ee\"\u2014my God, you are my Goal and Your good pleasure is what I seek\". Then he brings to his heart the Name of the Essence\u2014All\u00e2h\u2014and as it courses through his heart he remains attentive to its meaning, which is \"Essence without likeness\". The seeker remains aware that He is Present, Watchful, Encompassing of all, thereby exemplifying the meaning of his saying (may God bless him and grant him peace): \"Worship God as though you see Him, for if you do not see Him, He sees you\". And likewise the prophetic tradition: \"The most favored level of faith is to know that God is witness over you, wherever you may be\".\nSufi whirling.\nSufi whirling (or Sufi spinning) is a form of \"Sama\" or physically active meditation which originated among some Sufis, and practised by the Sufi Dervishes of the Mevlevi order. It is a customary dance performed within the \"sema\", through which dervishes (also called \"semazens\", from Persian ) aim to reach the source of all perfection, or \"kemal\". This is sought through abandoning one's \"nafs\", egos or personal desires, by listening to the music, focusing on God, and spinning one's body in repetitive circles, which has been seen as a symbolic imitation of planets in the Solar System orbiting the Sun.\nAs explained by Mevlevi practitioners:\nIn the symbolism of the Sema ritual, the semazen's camel's hair hat (sikke) represents the tombstone of the ego; his wide, white skirt (\"tennure\") represents the ego's shroud. By removing his black cloak (\"h\u0131rka\"), he is spiritually reborn to the truth. At the beginning of the Sema, by holding his arms crosswise, the semazen appears to represent the number one, thus testifying to God's unity. While whirling, his arms are open: his right arm is directed to the sky, ready to receive God's beneficence; his left hand, upon which his eyes are fastened, is turned toward the earth. The semazen conveys God's spiritual gift to those who are witnessing the Sema. Revolving from right to left around the heart, the semazen embraces all humanity with love. The human being has been created with love in order to love. Mevl\u00e2na Jal\u00e2ludd\u00een Rumi says, \"All loves are a bridge to Divine love. Yet, those who have not had a taste of it do not know!\"The traditional view of most orthodox Sunni Sufi orders, such as the Qadiriyya and the Chisti, as well as Sunni Muslim scholars in general, is that dancing with intent during dhikr or whilst listening to Sema is prohibited.\nSinging.\nMusical instruments (except the \"Daf\") have traditionally been considered as prohibited by the four orthodox Sunni schools, and the more orthodox Sufi tariqas also continued to prohibit their use. Throughout history most Sufi saints have stressed that musical instruments are forbidden. However some Sufi Saints permitted and encouraged it, whilst maintaining that musical instruments and female voices should not be introduced, although these are common practice today.\nFor example \"Qawwali\" was originally a form of Sufi devotional singing popular in the Indian subcontinent, and is now usually performed at \"dargahs\". Sufi saint Amir Khusrau is said to have infused Persian, Arabic Turkish and Indian classical melodic styles to create the genre in the 13th century. The songs are classified into hamd, na'at, manqabat, marsiya or ghazal, among others.\nNowadays, the songs last for about 15 to 30 minutes, are performed by a group of singers, and instruments including the harmonium, tabla and dholak are used. Pakistani singing maestro Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan is credited with popularizing qawwali all over the world.\nSaints.\n\"Wal\u012b\" (, plural ) is an Arabic word whose literal meanings include \"custodian\", \"protector\", \"helper\", and \"friend\". In the vernacular, it is most commonly used by Muslims to indicate an Islamic saint, otherwise referred to by the more literal \"friend of God\". In the traditional Islamic understanding of saints, the saint is portrayed as someone \"marked by [special] divine favor ... [and] holiness\", and who is specifically \"chosen by God and endowed with exceptional gifts, such as the ability to work miracles.\" The doctrine of saints was articulated by Islamic scholars very early on in Muslim history, and particular verses of the Quran and certain \"hadith\" were interpreted by early Muslim thinkers as \"documentary evidence\" of the existence of saints.\nSince the first Muslim hagiographies were written during the period when Sufism began its rapid expansion, many of the figures who later came to be regarded as the major saints in Sunni Islam were the early Sufi mystics, like Hasan of Basra (d. 728), Farqad Sabakhi (d. 729), Dawud Tai (d. 777-81), Rabi'a al-'Adawiyya (d. 801), Ma'ruf al-Karkhi (d. 815), and Junayd of Baghdad (d. 910). From the twelfth to the fourteenth century, \"the general veneration of saints, among both people and sovereigns, reached its definitive form with the organization of Sufism ... into orders or brotherhoods.\" In the common expressions of Islamic piety of this period, the saint was understood to be \"a contemplative whose state of spiritual perfection ... [found] permanent expression in the teaching bequeathed to his disciples.\"\nVisitation.\nIn popular Sufism (i.e. devotional practices that have achieved currency in world cultures through Sufi influence), one common practice is to visit or make pilgrimages to the tombs of saints, renowned scholars, and righteous people. This is a particularly common practice in South Asia, where famous tombs include such saints as Sayyid Ali Hamadani in Kulob, Tajikistan; Af\u0101q Khoja, near Kashgar, China; Lal Shahbaz Qalandar in Sindh; Ali Hujwari in Lahore, Pakistan; Bahauddin Zakariya in Multan Pakistan; Moinuddin Chishti in Ajmer, India; Nizamuddin Auliya in Delhi, India; and Shah Jalal in Sylhet, Bangladesh.\nLikewise, in Fes, Morocco, a popular destination for such pious visitation is the Zaouia Moulay Idriss II and the yearly visitation to see the current sheikh of the Qadiri Boutchichi Tariqah, Sheikh Sidi Hamza al Qadiri al Boutchichi to celebrate the Mawlid (which is usually televised on Moroccan National television). This action has voiced particular condemnation by the Salafis.\nMiracles.\nIn Islamic mysticism, \"karamat\" ( \"kar\u0101m\u0101t\", pl. of \"kar\u0101mah\", lit. generosity, high-mindedness) refers to supernatural wonders performed by Muslim saints. In the technical vocabulary of Islamic religious sciences, the singular form \"karama\" has a sense similar to \"charism\", a favor or spiritual gift freely bestowed by God. The marvels ascribed to Islamic saints have included supernatural physical actions, predictions of the future, and \"interpretation of the secrets of hearts\". Historically, a \"belief in the miracles of saints (\"kar\u0101m\u0101t al-awliy\u0101\u02be\", literally 'marvels of the friends [of God]')\" has been \"a requirement in Sunni Islam\".\nShrines.\nA \"dargah\" (Persian: \u062f\u0631\u06af\u0627\u0647 \"darg\u00e2h\" or \u062f\u0631\u06af\u0647 \"dargah\", also in Punjabi and Urdu) is a shrine built over the grave of a revered religious figure, often a Sufi saint or dervish. Sufis often visit the shrine for \"ziyarat\", a term associated with religious visits and pilgrimages. \"Dargah\"s are often associated with Sufi eating and meeting rooms and hostels, called \"khanqah\" or hospices. They usually include a mosque, meeting rooms, Islamic religious schools (madrassas), residences for a teacher or caretaker, hospitals, and other buildings for community purposes.\nTheoretical perspectives.\nTraditional Islamic scholars have recognized two major branches within the practice of Sufism and use this as one key to differentiating among the approaches of different masters and devotional lineages.\nOn the one hand there is the order from the signs to the Signifier (or from the arts to the Artisan). In this branch, the seeker begins by purifying the lower self of every corrupting influence that stands in the way of recognizing all of creation as the work of God, as God's active self-disclosure or theophany. This is the way of Imam Al-Ghazali and of the majority of the Sufi orders.\nOn the other hand, there is the order from the Signifier to his signs, from the Artisan to his works. In this branch the seeker experiences divine attraction (\"jadhba\"), and is able to enter the order with a glimpse of its endpoint, of direct apprehension of the Divine Presence towards which all spiritual striving is directed. This does not replace the striving to purify the heart, as in the other branch; it simply stems from a different point of entry into the path. This is the way primarily of the masters of the Naqshbandi and Shadhili orders.\nContemporary scholars may also recognize a third branch, attributed to the late Ottoman scholar Said Nursi and explicated in his vast Qur'an commentary called the Risale-i Nur. This approach entails strict adherence to the way of Muhammad, in the understanding that this wont, or \"sunnah\", proposes a complete devotional spirituality adequate to those without access to a master of the Sufi way.\nContributions to other domains of scholarship.\nSufism has contributed significantly to the elaboration of theoretical perspectives in many domains of intellectual endeavor. For instance, the doctrine of \"subtle centers\" or centers of subtle cognition (known as \"Lataif-e-sitta\") addresses the matter of the awakening of spiritual intuition. In general, these subtle centers or \"lat\u00e2'if\" are thought of as faculties that are to be purified sequentially in order to bring the seeker's wayfaring to completion. A concise and useful summary of this system from a living exponent of this tradition has been published by Muhammad Emin Er.\nSufi psychology has influenced many areas of thinking both within and outside of Islam, drawing primarily upon three concepts. Ja'far al-Sadiq (both an imam in the Shia tradition and a respected scholar and link in chains of Sufi transmission in all Islamic sects) held that human beings are dominated by a lower self called the nafs (self, ego, person), a faculty of spiritual intuition called the qalb (heart), and ruh (soul). These interact in various ways, producing the spiritual types of the tyrant (dominated by \"nafs\"), the person of faith and moderation (dominated by the spiritual heart), and the person lost in love for God (dominated by the \"ruh\").\nOf note with regard to the spread of Sufi psychology in the West is Robert Frager, a Sufi teacher authorized in the Jerrahi order. Frager was a trained psychologist, born in the United States, who converted to Islam in the course of his practice of Sufism and wrote extensively on Sufism and psychology.\nSufi cosmology and Sufi metaphysics are also noteworthy areas of intellectual accomplishment.\nProminent Sufis.\nRabi'a Al-'Adawiyya.\nR\u0101bi\u02bca al-\u02bcAdawiyya or Rabia Basri was a Sufi saint, one of the earliest Sufi mystics and an influential religious figure from Iraq. Rabi'a was born of very poor origin, but was captured by bandits at a later age and sold into slavery. She was, however, released by her master when he awoke one night to see the light of sanctity shining above her head. Prominent Sufi leader Hasan of Basra is said \"I passed one whole night and day with Rabi'a\u00a0... it never passed through my mind that I was a man nor did it occur to her that she was a woman... when I saw her I saw myself as bankrupt and Rabi'a as truly sincere.\" Rabi'a al-Adawiyya is known for her teachings and emphasis on the centrality of the love of God to a holy life. She is said to have proclaimed, running down the streets of Basra, Iraq:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;O God! If I worship You for fear of Hell, burn me in Hell, and if I worship You in hope of Paradise, exclude me from Paradise. But if I worship You for Your Own sake, grudge me not Your everlasting Beauty.\u2014\u200a\nThere are different opinions about the death and resting place of Rabia Basri. Some believe her resting place to be Jerusalem whereas others believe it to be Basra.\nJunayd of Baghdad.\nJunayd al-Baghdadi (830\u2013910) was one of the earlier Sufis. He was a Persian Sufi and one of the most famous of the early Islamic saints and is a central figure in the spiritual lineages of many Sufi orders. Junayd al-Baghdadi taught in Baghdad throughout his lifetime and was an important figure in the development of Sufi beliefs. Like Hasan of Basra before him, was widely revered by his students and disciples as well as quoted by other mystics. Because of his importance among Sufis, Junayd was often referred to as the \"Sultan\".\nBayazid Bastami.\nBayazid Bastami was a recognized and influential Sufi personality from the Tayfuriyya order. Bastami was born in 804 in Bastam. Bayazid is regarded for his devout commitment to the Sunnah and his dedication to fundamental Islamic principles and practices.\nShaykh Abdul Qadir Gilani.\nShaykh Abdul Qadir Gilani (1077\u20131166) was a Mesopotamian-born Hanbali jurist and prominent Sufi scholar based in Baghdad, with Persian roots. Gilani spent his early life in Na'if, a town just East of Baghdad, also the town of his birth. There, he pursued the study of Hanbali law. Abu Saeed Mubarak Makhzoomi gave Gilani lessons in fiqh. He was given lessons about hadith by Abu Bakr ibn Muzaffar. He was given lessons about Tafsir by Abu Muhammad Ja'far, a commentator. His Sufi spiritual instructor was Abu'l-Khair Hammad ibn Muslim al-Dabbas. After completing his education, Gilani left Baghdad. He spent twenty-five years as a reclusive wanderer in the desert regions of Iraq. In 1127, Gilani returned to Baghdad and began to preach to the public. He joined the teaching staff of the school belonging to his own teacher, Abu Saeed Mubarak Makhzoomi, and was popular with students. In the morning he taught hadith and \"tafsir\", and in the afternoon held discourse on the science of the heart and the virtues of the Quran. He is the founder of the Qadiriyya order, of which its eponym is his patronym.\nAbul Hasan ash-Shadhili.\nAbul Hasan ash-Shadhili (died 1258) was the founder of the Shadhiliyya order, and introduced \"dhikr jahri\" (the remembrance of God out loud, as opposed to the silent \"dhikr\"). He taught that his followers need not abstain from what Islam has not forbidden, but to be grateful for what God has bestowed upon them, in contrast to the majority of Sufis, who preach to deny oneself and to destroy the ego-self (\"nafs\"). The \"Order of Patience\" (Tariqus-Sabr), Shadhiliyya is formulated to be \"Order of Gratitude\" (Tariqush-Shukr). Imam Shadhili also gave eighteen valuable \"hizbs\" (litanies) to his followers, out of which the notable \"Hizb al-Bahr\" is recited worldwide even today.\nMoinuddin Chishti.\nMoinuddin Chishti (1141\u20131236), known as \"Ghar\u012bb Naw\u0101z\" (\"Benefactor of the Poor\"), was the most famous Sufi saint of the Chishti Order. Moinuddin Chishti introduced and established the order in the Indian subcontinent. The initial spiritual chain or silsila of the Chishti order in India, comprising Moinuddin Chishti, Bakhtiyar Kaki, Baba Farid, Nizamuddin Auliya (each successive person being the disciple of the previous one), constitutes the great Sufi saints of Indian history. Moinuddin Chisht\u012b turned towards India, reputedly after a dream in which Muhammad blessed him to do so. After a brief stay at Lahore, he reached Ajmer along with Sultan Shah\u0101b-ud-Din Muhammad Ghori, and settled down there. In Ajmer, he attracted a substantial following, acquiring a great deal of respect amongst the residents of the city. Moinuddin Chisht\u012b practiced the Sufi \"Sulh-e-Kul\" (peace to all) concept to promote understanding between Muslims and non-Muslims.\nBahauddin Naqshband.\nBahauddin Naqshband (1318\u20131389) was a prominent Sufi master of the 14th century who founded the Naqshbandi Sufi order. Born in the village of Qasr-i Hinduvan near Bukhara, Uzbekistan, he was a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad. His early life was marked by a deep spiritual inclination. He sought out the guidance of renowned Sufi teachers and quickly demonstrated exceptional talent and understanding. His primary teacher was Mohammad Baba As-Samasi, who initiated him into the spiritual path. His approach to Sufism emphasized inner contemplation, discipline, and a focus on the unseen. He advocated for a balanced lifestyle, combining spiritual practices with worldly responsibilities. His teachings were rooted in the Quran and the Sunnah, and he emphasized the importance of following the example of the Prophet Muhammad.\nThe Naqshbandi order became one of the most influential Sufi orders in Islamic history. It spread throughout Central Asia, the Middle East, and eventually to South Asia and the West. The order's emphasis on spiritual discipline, inner work, and social engagement resonated with many seekers.\nAhmad Al-Tijani.\nAhmed Tijani (1737\u20131815), in Arabic \u0633\u064a\u062f\u064a \u0623\u062d\u0645\u062f \u0627\u0644\u062a\u062c\u0627\u0646\u064a (\"Sidi Ahmed Tijani\"), was the founder of the Tijaniyya Sufi order. He was born in a Berber family, in A\u00efn Madhi, present-day Algeria, and died at the age of 78 in Fez.\nAl-Ghaz\u0101l\u012b.\nal-Ghazali (c.\u20091058 \u2013 1111) was a Sunni Muslim polymath. He was a prominent Sufi, jurisconsult, legal theoretician, mufti, philosopher, theologian, logician and mystic. He is considered to be the 11th century's \"mujaddid\", a renewer of the faith, who appears once every 100 years. Al-Ghazali's works were so highly acclaimed by his contemporaries that he was awarded the honorific title \"Proof of Islam\". He was a prominent mujtahid in the Shafi'i school of law. His magnum opus was I\u1e25y\u0101\u2019 \u2018ul\u016bm ad-d\u012bn (\"The Revival of the Religious Sciences\"). His works include Tah\u0101fut al-Fal\u0101sifa (\"Incoherence of the Philosophers\"), a landmark in the history of philosophy.\nSayyed Badiuddin.\nSayyid Badiuddin was a Sufi saint who founded the Madariyya Silsila and order. He was also known by the title Qutb-ul-Madar.\nHe hailed originally from Syria, and was born in Aleppo to a Syed Hussaini family. His teacher was Bayazid Tayfur al-Bistami. After making a pilgrimage to Medina, he journeyed to India to spread the Islamic faith, where he founded the Madariyya order. His tomb is at Makanpur.\nIbn Arabi.\nIbn 'Arabi (or Ibn al-'Arabi) (AH 561 \u2013 AH 638; 1165\u20131240) was one of the most influential Sufis, revered for his profound spiritual insight, refined taste, and deep knowledge of God. Over the centuries, he has been honored with the title \"The Grand Master\" (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0634\u064a\u062e \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0643\u0628\u0631). Ibn Arabi founded the Sufi order known as \"Al Akbariyya\" (Arabic: \u0627\u0644\u0623\u0643\u0628\u0631\u064a\u0629), which remains active to this day. The order, based in Cairo, continues to spread his teachings and principles through its own sheikh. Ibn Arabi's writings, especially al-Futuhat al-Makkiyya and Fusus al-Hikam, have been studied within all Sufi orders as the clearest expression of \"tawhid\" (Divine Unity), though because of their recondite nature they were often only given to initiates. His teachings later became known as the school of \"wahdat al-wujud\" (the Oneness of Being). He himself considered his writings to have been divinely inspired. As he expressed the way to one of his close disciples, his legacy is that \"you should never ever abandon your servant-hood (\"ubudiyya\"), and that there may never be in your soul a longing for any existing thing\".\nMansur Al-Hallaj.\nMansur Al-Hallaj (died 922) is renowned for his claim, \"Ana-l-Haqq\" (\"I am the Truth\"), his ecstatic Sufism and state-trial. His refusal to recant this utterance, which was regarded as apostasy, led to a long trial. He was imprisoned for 11 years in a Baghdad prison, before being tortured and publicly beheaded on 26 March 922. He is still revered by Sufis for his willingness to embrace torture and death rather than recant. It is said that during his prayers, he would say \"O Lord! You are the guide of those who are passing through the Valley of Bewilderment. If I am a heretic, enlarge my heresy\".\nYusuf Abu al-Haggag.\nYusuf Abu al-Haggag (c. 1150 \u2013 c. 1245) was a Sufi scholar and sheikh preaching principally in Luxor, Egypt. He devoted himself to knowledge, asceticism and worship. In his pursuits, he earned the nickname \"Father of the Pilgrim\". His birthday is celebrated today annually in Luxor, with people convening at the Abu Haggag Mosque.\nNotable Sufi works.\nAmong the most popular Sufi works are:\nSufi commentaries on the Qur'an.\nSufis have also made contributions to the Qur'anic exegetical literature, expounding the inner esoteric meanings of the Qur'an. Among such works are the following:\nReception.\nPersecution of Sufi Muslims.\nThe persecution of Sufism and Sufi Muslims over the course of centuries has included acts of religious discrimination, persecution and violence, such as the destruction of Sufi shrines, tombs, and mosques, suppression of Sufi orders, and discrimination against adherents of Sufism in a number of Muslim-majority countries. The Republic of Turkey banned all Sufi orders and abolished their institutions in 1925, after Sufis opposed the new secular order. The Islamic Republic of Iran has harassed Shia Sufis, reportedly for their lack of support for the government doctrine of \"\" (i.e., that the supreme Shiite jurist should be the nation's political leader).\nIn most other Muslim-majority countries, attacks on Sufis and especially their shrines have come from adherents of puritanical fundamentalist Islamic movements (Salafism and Wahhabism), who believe that practices such as visitation to and veneration of the tombs of Sufi saints, celebration of the birthdays of Sufi saints, and \"dhikr\" (\"remembrance\" of God) ceremonies are \"bid\u2018ah\" (impure \"innovation\") and \"shirk\" (\"polytheistic\").\nIn Egypt, at least 305 people were killed and more than 100 wounded during the November 2017 Islamic terrorist attack on a Sufi mosque located in Sinai; it is considered one of the worst terrorist attacks in the history of modern Egypt. Most of the victims were Sufis.\nPerception outside Islam.\nSufi mysticism has long exercised a fascination upon the Western world, and especially its Orientalist scholars. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, European orientalists treated Sufism and Islam as distinct subjects, leading to \"an over-emphasis on the translation of classical Sufi mystical literature\" in the academic study of Sufism at the expense of the lived practices in Islam, as well as a separation of Sufism from its Islamic roots in the development of Sufism as a religious form in the West. Figures like Rumi have become well known in the United States, where Sufism is perceived as a peaceful and apolitical form of Islam. Seyyed Hossein Nasr states that the preceding theories are false according to the point of view of Sufism.\nThe Islamic Institute in Mannheim, Germany, which works towards the integration of Europe and Muslims, sees Sufism as particularly suited for interreligious dialogue and intercultural harmonisation in democratic and pluralist societies; it has described Sufism as a symbol of tolerance and humanism\u2014nondogmatic, flexible and non-violent. According to Philip Jenkins, a professor at Baylor University, \"the Sufis are much more than tactical allies for the West: they are, potentially, the greatest hope for pluralism and democracy within Muslim nations.\" Likewise, several governments and organisations have advocated the promotion of Sufism as a means of combating intolerant and violent strains of Islam. For example, the Chinese and Russian governments openly favor Sufism as the best means of protecting against Islamist subversion. The British government, especially following the 7 July 2005 London bombings, has favoured Sufi groups in its battle against Muslim extremist currents. The influential RAND Corporation, an American think-tank, issued a major report titled \"Building Moderate Muslim Networks\", which urged the US government to form links with and bolster Muslim groups that opposed Islamist extremism. The report stressed the Sufi role as moderate traditionalists open to change, and thus as allies against violence. News organisations such as the BBC, Economist and Boston Globe have also seen Sufism as a means to deal with violent Muslim extremists.\nIdries Shah states that Sufism is universal in nature, its roots predating the rise of Islam and Christianity. He quotes Suhrawardi as saying that \"this (Sufism) was a form of wisdom known to and practiced by a succession of sages including the mysterious ancient Hermes of Egypt.\", and that Ibn al-Farid \"stresses that Sufism lies behind and before systematization; that 'our wine existed before what you call the grape and the vine' (the school and the system)...\" Shah's views have however been rejected by modern scholars. Such modern trends of neo-Sufis in Western countries allow non-Muslims to receive \"instructions on following the Sufi path\", not without opposition by Muslims who consider such instruction outside the sphere of Islam.\nSimilarities with Eastern religions.\nNumerous comparisons have been made between Sufism and the mystic components of some Eastern religions.\nThe tenth-century Persian polymath Al-Biruni in his book \"Tahaqeeq Ma Lilhind Min Makulat Makulat Fi Aliaqbal Am Marzula\" (Critical Study of Indian Speech: Rationally Acceptable or Rejected) discusses the similarity of some Sufism concepts with aspects of Hinduism, such as: Atma with ruh, tanasukh with reincarnation, Mokhsha with Fanafillah, Ittihad with Nirvana: union between Paramatma in Jivatma, Avatar or Incarnation with Hulul, Vedanta with Wahdatul Ujud, Mujahadah with Sadhana.\nOther scholars have likewise compared the Sufi concept of Wa\u1e25dat al-Wuj\u016bd to Advaita Vedanta, Fanaa to Samadhi, Muraqaba to Dhyana, and tariqa to the Noble Eightfold Path.\nThe ninth-century Iranian mystic Bayazid Bostami is alleged to have imported certain concepts from Hindusim into his version of Sufism under the conceptual umbrella of baqaa, meaning perfection. Ibn al-Arabi and Mansur al-Hallaj both referred to Muhammad as having attained perfection and titled him as \"Al-Ins\u0101n al-K\u0101mil\". Inayat Khan believed that the God worshipped by Sufis is not specific to any particular religion or creed, but is the same God worshipped by people of all beliefs. This God is not limited by any name, whether it be Allah, God, Gott, Dieu, Khuda, Brahma, or Bhagwan.\nBuddhist stories also circulated in Sufi circles. One of them being a story about blind men trying to describe an elephant.\nInfluence on Judaism.\nThere is evidence that Sufism influenced the development of some schools of Jewish philosophy and ethics. In the first writing of this kind, we see \"Kitab al-Hidayah ila Fara'i\u1e0d al-\u1e32ulub\", \"Duties of the Heart\", of Bahya ibn Paquda. This book was translated by Judah ibn Tibbon into Hebrew under the title \"Chovot HaLevavot\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The precepts prescribed by the Torah number 613 only; those dictated by the intellect are innumerable.\u2014\u200a\nIn the ethical writings of the Sufis Al-Kusajri and Al-Harawi there are sections which treat of the same subjects as those treated in the \"Chovot ha-Lebabot\" and which bear the same titles: e.g., \"Bab al-Tawakkul\"; \"Bab al-Taubah\"; \"Bab al-Mu\u1e25asabah\"; \"Bab al-Tawa\u1e0du'\"; \"Bab al-Zuhd\". In the ninth gate, Ba\u1e25ya directly quotes sayings of the Sufis, whom he calls \"Perushim\". However, the author of the \"Chovot HaLevavot\" did not go so far as to approve of the asceticism of the Sufis, although he showed a marked predilection for their ethical principles.\nAbraham Maimonides, the son of the Jewish philosopher Maimonides, believed that Sufi practices and doctrines continue the tradition of the biblical prophets.\nAbraham Maimonides' principal work was originally composed in Judeo-Arabic and entitled \"\u05db\u05ea\u05d0\u05d1 \u05db\u05e4\u05d0\u05d9\u05d4 \u05d0\u05dc\u05e2\u05d0\u05d1\u05d3\u05d9\u05df\" \"Kit\u0101b Kif\u0101yah al-'\u0100bid\u012bn\" (\"A Comprehensive Guide for the Servants of God\"). From the extant surviving portion it is conjectured that the treatise was three times as long as his father's \"Guide for the Perplexed\". In the book, he evidences a great appreciation for, and affinity to, Sufism. Followers of his path continued to foster a Jewish-Sufi form of pietism for at least a century, and he is rightly considered the founder of this pietistic school, which was centered in Egypt.\nThe followers of this path, which they called \"Hasidism\" (not to be confused with the [later] Jewish Hasidic movement) or Sufism (\"Tasawwuf\"), practiced spiritual retreats, solitude, fasting and sleep deprivation. The Jewish Sufis maintained their own brotherhood, guided by a religious leader like a Sufi sheikh.\n\"The Jewish Encyclopedia\", in its entry on Sufism, states that the revival of Jewish mysticism in Muslim countries is probably due to the spread of Sufism in the same geographical areas. The entry details many parallels to Sufic concepts found in the writings of prominent Kabbalists during the Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain.\nCulture.\nLiterature.\nThe 13th century Persian poet Rumi is considered one of the most influential figures of Sufism, as well as one of the greatest poets of all time. He has become one of the most widely read poets in the United States, thanks largely to the interpretative translations published by Coleman Barks. Elif \u015eafak's novel \"The Forty Rules of Love\" is a fictionalized account of Rumi's encounter with the Persian dervish Shams Tabrizi.\nMuhammad Iqbal, one of the greatest Urdu poets, has discussed Sufism, philosophy and Islam in his English work \"The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam\".\nSama.\nSama is regarded as an important element in different Sufi orders. In South Asia, it is affiliated mostly with Chishti Order. It develops into a distinct art form, especially during the reign of Khwaja Amir Khusrau and his contemporary Sufi masters, such as Khwaja Nizamuddin Auliya and others. Spiritual experiences were desired by Sufis through Sama, listening to poetry or Islamic mystical verses with the use of different musical instruments, aiming to attain ecstasy in divine love of Allah and his Prophet.\nVisual art.\nMany painters and visual artists have explored the Sufi motif through various disciplines. One of the outstanding pieces in the Brooklyn Museum's Islamic gallery has been the museum's associate curator of Islamic art, is a large 19th- or early-20th-century portrayal of the Battle of Karbala painted by Abbas Al-Musavi, which was a violent episode in the disagreement between the Sunni and Shia branches of Islam; during this battle, Husayn ibn Ali, a pious grandson of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, died and is considered a martyr in Islam.\nIn July 2016, at International Sufi Festival held in Noida Film City, UP, India, H.E. Abdul Basit who was the High Commissioner of Pakistan to India at that time, while inaugurating the exhibition of Farkhananda Khan \u2018Fida\u2019 said, \"There is no barrier of words or explanation about the paintings or rather there is a soothing message of brotherhood, peace in Sufism\".\nScientific research.\nA systematic review published in 2023 examined the relationship between Islamic-Sufi spirituality and mental health outcomes, revealing a positive connection between Sufi spirituality and reductions in anxiety and depression among patients.\nA study on political Sufism in contemporary Kazakhstan examined patterns of religious continuity and the role of Sufi networks in political mobilization.\nAn overview of Sufi studies at American universities indicated that Sufism has become a significant area of scholarly inquiry, with dedicated programs and research centers focusing on its various aspects.\nRecent bibliometric analyses have also mapped the intellectual structure and global trends in Sufi studies.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28248", "revid": "3188090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28248", "title": "Saints", "text": ""}
{"id": "28249", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28249", "title": "Search algorithm", "text": "Any algorithm which solves the search problem\nIn computer science, a search algorithm is an algorithm designed to solve a search problem. Search algorithms work to retrieve information stored within particular data structure, or calculated in the search space of a problem domain, with either discrete or continuous values.\nAlthough search engines use search algorithms, they belong to the study of information retrieval, not algorithmics.\nThe appropriate search algorithm to use often depends on the data structure being searched, and may also include prior knowledge about the data. Search algorithms can be made faster or more efficient by specially constructed database structures, such as search trees, hash maps, and database indexes.\nSearch algorithms can be classified based on their mechanism of searching into three types of algorithms: linear, binary, and hashing. Linear search algorithms check every record for the one associated with a target key in a linear fashion. Binary, or half-interval, searches repeatedly target the center of the search structure and divide the search space in half. Comparison search algorithms improve on linear searching by successively eliminating records based on comparisons of the keys until the target record is found, and can be applied on data structures with a defined order. Digital search algorithms work based on the properties of digits in data structures by using numerical keys. Finally, hashing directly maps keys to records based on a hash function.\nAlgorithms are often evaluated by their computational complexity, or maximum theoretical run time. Binary search functions, for example, have a maximum complexity of \"O\"(log \"n\"), or logarithmic time. In simple terms, the maximum number of operations needed to find the search target is a logarithmic function of the size of the search space.\nApplications of search algorithms.\nSpecific applications of search algorithms include:\nClasses.\nFor virtual search spaces.\nAlgorithms for searching virtual spaces are used in the constraint satisfaction problem, where the goal is to find a set of value assignments to certain variables that will satisfy specific mathematical equations and inequations / equalities. They are also used when the goal is to find a variable assignment that will maximize or minimize a certain function of those variables. Algorithms for these problems include the basic brute-force search (also called \"na\u00efve\" or \"uninformed\" search), and a variety of heuristics that try to exploit partial knowledge about the structure of this space, such as linear relaxation, constraint generation, and constraint propagation.\nAn important subclass are the local search methods, that view the elements of the search space as the vertices of a graph, with edges defined by a set of heuristics applicable to the case; and scan the space by moving from item to item along the edges, for example according to the steepest descent or best-first criterion, or in a stochastic search. This category includes a great variety of general metaheuristic methods, such as simulated annealing, tabu search, A-teams, and genetic programming, that combine arbitrary heuristics in specific ways. The opposite of local search would be global search methods. This method is applicable when the search space is not limited and all aspects of the given network are available to the entity running the search algorithm.\nThis class also includes various tree search algorithms, that view the elements as vertices of a tree, and traverse that tree in some special order. Examples of the latter include the exhaustive methods such as depth-first search and breadth-first search, as well as various heuristic-based search tree pruning methods such as backtracking and branch and bound. Unlike general metaheuristics, which at best work only in a probabilistic sense, many of these tree-search methods are guaranteed to find the exact or optimal solution, if given enough time. This is called \"completeness\".\nAnother important sub-class consists of algorithms for exploring the game tree of multiple-player games, such as chess or backgammon, whose nodes consist of all possible game situations that could result from the current situation. The goal in these problems is to find the move that provides the best chance of a win, taking into account all possible moves of the opponent(s). Similar problems occur when humans or machines have to make successive decisions whose outcomes are not entirely under one's control, such as in robot guidance or in marketing, financial, or military strategy planning. This kind of problem \u2014 combinatorial search \u2014 has been extensively studied in the context of artificial intelligence. Examples of algorithms for this class are the minimax algorithm, alpha\u2013beta pruning, and the A* algorithm and its variants.\nFor sub-structures of a given structure.\nAn important and extensively studied subclass are the graph algorithms, in particular graph traversal algorithms, for finding specific sub-structures in a given graph \u2014 such as subgraphs, paths, circuits, and so on. Examples include Dijkstra's algorithm, Kruskal's algorithm, the nearest neighbour algorithm, and Prim's algorithm.\nAnother important subclass of this category are the string searching algorithms, that search for patterns within strings. Two famous examples are the Boyer\u2013Moore and Knuth\u2013Morris\u2013Pratt algorithms, and several algorithms based on the suffix tree data structure.\nSearch for the maximum of a function.\nIn 1953, American statistician Jack Kiefer devised Fibonacci search which can be used to find the maximum of a unimodal function and has many other applications in computer science.\nFor quantum computers.\nThere are also search methods designed for quantum computers, like Grover's algorithm, that are theoretically faster than linear or brute-force search even without the help of data structures or heuristics. While the ideas and applications behind quantum computers are still entirely theoretical, studies have been conducted with algorithms like Grover's that accurately replicate the hypothetical physical versions of quantum computing systems.\nSee also.\nCategories:\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28251", "revid": "4246661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28251", "title": "Software package", "text": "Software package may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28254", "revid": "612852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28254", "title": "Safe semantics", "text": "Safe semantics is a computer hardware consistency model. It describes one type of guarantee that a data register provides when it is shared by several processors in a parallel computer or in a network of computers working together.\nHistory.\nSafe semantics was first defined by Leslie Lamport in 1985. It was formally defined in Lamport's \"On Interprocess Communication\" in 1986.\nSafe register has been implemented in many distributed systems.\nDescription.\nSafe semantics are defined for a variable with a single writer but multiple readers (SWMR). A SWMR register is safe if each read operation satisfies these properties:\nIn particular, given concurrency of a read and a write operation, the read can return a value that has not been written by a write. The return value need only belong to the register domain.\nA binary safe register can be seen as modeling a bit flickering. Whatever the previous value of the register is, its value could flicker until the write finishes. Therefore, the read that overlaps with a write could return 0 or 1.\n\"Churn\" refers to the entry and exit of servers to/from a distributed system. Baldoni et al. show that no register can have the stronger property of regular semantics in a synchronous system under continuous churn. However, a safe register can be implemented under continuous churn in a non-synchronous system. Modeling and implementing a type of storage memory (Safe Register) under non-quiescent churn requires some system models such as client and server systems. Client systems contains a finite, arbitrary number of processes that are responsible for reading and writing the server system. However, the server system must ensure that read and write operations happen properly.\nImplementation.\nSafe register implementation involves:\nSafe register is maintained by the set of active servers.\nClients maintain no register information.\nEventually synchronous system\nQuora (set of server or client systems)\nSize of the Read and Write operation executed on quora = \"n\" \u2013 \"f\" \u2013 \"J\" (n is the number of servers, J is the number of servers that enter and exit, and f is the number of Byzantine failures.\nAlgorithms such as join, read, and write.\nJoin.\nA server (\"si\") that wants to enter a server system broadcasts an inquiry message to other servers to inform them of its entry, si requests a current value of the register. Once other server receive this inquiry they send reply messages to si. After si receives enough replies from other servers, it collects the replies and saves them into a reply set. Si waits until it gets enough replies (n-f-j) from other servers then it picks the most frequently received value. Si also:\nRead.\nThe read algorithm is a basic version of join. The difference is the broadcast mechanism used by the read operation. A client (\"cw\") broadcasts a message to the system and once a server receives the inquiry, it sends a reply message to the client. Once the client receives enough replies (n-f-j) it stops sending an inquiry. \nWrite.\nClient (\"cw\") sends an inquiry into the system in different rounds and waits until it receives two acknowledgment. (\"sn\" =sequence number)\nThe reason for receiving two acknowledgments is to avoid danger in a system. When a process sends an acknowledgement (\"ack\"), it may die after one millisecond. Therefore, no confirmation is received by the client.\nThe validity of the safe register (If a read is not concurrent with any write, return the last value written) was proved based on the quorum system. Given two quorum systems (Qw, Qr) Qw indicates the servers that know about the latest value, and Qr indicates values of read responses. The size of each quorum is equal to n-f-j. Proving the safe register's validity requires proving\nformula_1\nwere \"B\" is the number of Byzantine failures.\nProof: Red region indicates (Qw\u2229Qr)\\B and the blue region indicates Qr\u2229B. From the assumption, the size of each quorum is n-f-j, so the red region has n-3f-2j active servers. Therefore,\nformula_2 is strictly greater than f. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28258", "revid": "22678971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28258", "title": "Sarawak", "text": "State in East Malaysia\nSarawak ( , ) is a state of Malaysia. It is the largest among the 13 states, with an area almost equal to that of Peninsular Malaysia. Sarawak is located in East Malaysia in northwest Borneo, and is bordered by the Malaysian state of Sabah to the northeast, Kalimantan (the Indonesian portion of Borneo) to the south, and Brunei in the north. The state capital, Kuching, is the largest city in Sarawak, the economic centre of the state, and the seat of the Sarawak state government. Other cities and towns in Sarawak include Miri, Sibu, and Bintulu. As of 2020 Malaysia census, the population of Sarawak was 2.453 million. Sarawak has an equatorial climate with tropical rainforests and abundant animal and plant species. It has several prominent cave systems at Gunung Mulu National Park. Rajang River is the longest river in Malaysia; Bakun Dam, one of the largest dams in Southeast Asia, is located on one of its tributaries, the Balui River. Mount Murud is the highest point in the state. Sarawak is the only state of Malaysia with a Christian majority.\nThe earliest known human settlement in Sarawak at the Niah Caves dates back 40,000 years. A series of Chinese ceramics dated from the 8th to 13th century AD was uncovered at the archaeological site of Santubong. The coastal regions of Sarawak came under the influence of the Bruneian Empire in the 16th century. In 1839, James Brooke, a British explorer, arrived in Sarawak. He, and his descendants, governed the state from 1841 to 1946. During World War II, it was occupied by the Japanese for three years. After the war, the last White Rajah, Charles Vyner Brooke, ceded Sarawak to Britain, and in 1946 it became a British Crown Colony. On 22 July 1963, Sarawak was granted self-government by the British and subsequently became one of the founding members of Malaysia, established on 16 September 1963. However, the federation was opposed by Indonesia, leading to a three-year confrontation. The creation of Malaysia also prompted a communist insurgency that lasted until 1990.\nThe head of state is the governor, also known as the Yang di-Pertua Negeri, while the head of government is the premier. Sarawak is divided into administrative divisions and districts, governed by a system that is closely modelled on the Westminster parliamentary system and was the earliest state legislature system in Malaysia. Under the Malaysian constitution, Sarawak has greater autonomy than the states in Peninsular Malaysia.\nBecause of its natural resources, Sarawak specialises in the export of oil and gas, timber and palm oil, but also possesses strong manufacturing, energy and tourism sectors. It is ethnically, culturally, religiously and linguistically diverse; its ethnic groups include Iban, Chinese, Malay, Bidayuh, Melanau, Orang Ulu, Indian, Eurasian and Kedayan. English and Malay are the two official languages of the state; there is no official religion.\nEtymology.\nThe generally-accepted explanation of the state's name is that it is derived from the Sarawak Malay word \"Serawak\", which means antimony. A popular alternative explanation is that it is a contraction of the four Malay words purportedly uttered by Pangeran Muda Hashim (uncle to the Sultan of Brunei), \"Saya serah pada awak\" (I surrender it to you), when he gave Sarawak to James Brooke, an English explorer, in 1841. However, the latter explanation is incorrect: the territory had been named Sarawak before the arrival of James Brooke, and the word \"awak\" was not in the vocabulary of Sarawak Malay before the formation of Malaysia. The area of today's Sarawak was known as Cerava by Portuguese cartographers in the 16th century.\nSarawak is nicknamed \"Land of the Hornbills\" (\"Bumi Kenyalang\"). These birds are important cultural symbols for the Dayak people, representing the spirit of God. It is also believed that if a hornbill is seen flying over residences, it will bring good luck to the local community. Sarawak has eight of the world's fifty-four species of hornbills, and the Rhinoceros hornbill is the state bird of Sarawak.\nHistory.\nForagers are known to have lived around the west mouth of the Niah Caves (located southwest of Miri) 40,000 years ago. A modern human skull found near the Niah Caves is the oldest example of human remains found in Malaysia and the oldest modern human skull from Southeast Asia. Chinese ceramics dating to the Tang and Song dynasties (8th to 13th century AD, respectively) found at Santubong (near Kuching) hint at its significance as a seaport.\nOne of the earliest Chinese records of an independent kingdom in Borneo is the 977 AD letter to the Chinese emperor from the ruler of Boni, which some scholars believe to refer to Borneo. The Bruneians regained their independence from Srivijaya due to the onset of a Javanese-Sumatran war. In 1225, the Chinese official Zhao Rukuo reported that Boni had 100 warships to protect its trade, and that there was great wealth in the kingdom. Marco Polo suggested in his memoirs that the Great Khan or the ruler of the Mongol Empire, attempted and failed many times in invading \"Great Java\" which was the European name for Bruneian controlled Borneo. In the 1300s the Chinese annals, \"Nanhai zhi\", reported that Brunei invaded or administered Sarawak and Sabah as well as the Philippine kingdoms of Butuan, Sulu, Ma-i (Mindoro), Malilu \u9ebb\u88cf\u8606 (present-day Manila), Shahuchong \u6c99\u80e1\u91cd (present-day Siocon), Yachen \u555e\u9673 (Oton), and \u6587\u675c\u9675 Wenduling (present-day Mindanao), which would regain their independence at a later date.\nThe Melano kingdom existed from about 1300 to 1400 AD and was centred at the Mukah River. Rajah Tugau was a King in Sarawak who was mentioned in both Bruneian and Filipino (Madja-as) sources. His kingdom covered coastal Sarawak until Belait and consisted of groups of similar Melanau and Kajang language speakers who shared an almost identical culture and heritage. \"Nagarakertagama\", written in 1365 during Hayam Wuruk, mentions Malano and Barune(ng) among the 14 tributaries of Majapahit. After the fall of Majapahit, Barune(ng) expanded its territory along the northern coast of Borneo. According to the manuscript of Brunei's rulers, following the fall of Majapahit, Barunai led by Awang Semaun being reinforced by the Iban, conquered Tutong under its chief Mawanga and the whole of the Melano kingdom until Igan under its chief Basiung despite reinforcement from Sambas. Barunai continued the conquest of the entire south and then north of Borneo, after which he conquered the whole of Sulu and the Philippines.\nIn the 14th century, the Javanese manuscript \"Nagarakretagama\", written by Prapanca in 1365, mentioned \"Barune\" as the constituent state of Hindu Majapahit, which had to make an annual tribute of forty katis of camphor. In 1369, Sulu which was also formerly part of Majapahit, successfully rebelled and then attacked Boni, and had invaded the Northeast Coast of Borneo and afterwards had looted the capital of its treasure and gold including sacking two sacred pearls. A fleet from Majapahit succeeded in driving away the Sulus, but Boni was left weaker after the attack. A Chinese report from 1371 described Boni as poor and totally controlled by Majapahit.\nThe Bruneian Empire was established in the coastal regions of Sarawak by the mid-15th century, and the Kuching area was known to Portuguese cartographers during the 16th century as \"Cerava\", one of the five great seaports of Borneo. The Sultanate of Sarawak was established during this time and lasted for almost half a century before being reunited with Brunei in 1641. By the early 19th century, the Bruneian Empire was in decline, retaining only a tenuous hold on the coastal regions of Sarawak which were otherwise controlled by semi-independent Malay leaders. Away from the coast, territorial wars were fought between the Iban and a Kenyah-Kayan alliance.\nThe discovery of antimony ore in the Kuching region led Pengiran Indera Mahkota, a representative of the Sultan of Brunei, to increase development in the territory between 1824 and 1830. Increasing antimony production in the region led the Brunei Sultanate to demand higher taxes, which ultimately led to civil unrest. In 1839, Sultan Omar Ali Saifuddin II (1827\u20131852) assigned his uncle Pengiran Muda Hashim the task of restoring order but his inability to do so caused him to request the aid of British sailor James Brooke. Brooke's success in quelling the revolt was rewarded with antimony, property and the governorship of Sarawak, which at that time consisted only of a small area centred on Kuching.\nThe Brooke family, later called the White Rajahs, set about expanding the territory they had been ceded. With expansion came the need for efficient governance and thus, beginning in 1841, Sarawak was separated into the first of its administrative divisions and the Sarawak dollar, entered circulation in 1858. By 1912, a total of five divisions had been established in Sarawak, each headed by a Resident. The Brooke family generally practised a paternalistic form of government with minimal bureaucracy, but were pressured to establish some form of legal framework. Since they were unfamiliar with local customs, the Brooke government created an advisory Supreme Council, mostly consisting of Malay chiefs. This council is the oldest state legislative assembly in Malaysia, with the first general council meeting taking place at Bintulu in 1867. In 1928, a judicial commissioner, Thomas Stirling Boyd, was appointed as the first legally trained judge. A similar system relating to matters concerning various Chinese communities was also formed. Members of the local community were encouraged by the Brooke regime to focus on particular functions within the territory; the Ibans and other Dayak people were hired as militia while Malays were primarily administrators. Chinese, both local and immigrant, were mostly employed in plantations, mines and as bureaucrats. Expanding trade led to the formation of the Borneo Company Limited in 1856. The company was involved in a wide range of businesses in Sarawak including trade, banking, agriculture, mineral exploration, and development.\nBetween 1853 and 1862, there were a number of uprisings against the Brooke government but all were successfully contained with the aid of local tribes. To guard against future uprisings, a series of forts were constructed to protect Kuching, including Fort Margherita, completed in 1871. By that time Brooke's control of Sarawak was such that defences were largely unnecessary.\nCharles Anthoni Brooke succeeded his uncle as White Rajah in 1868. Under his rule, Sarawak gained Limbang and the Baram and Trusan valleys from the Sultan of Brunei. The Raj became a British protectorate in 1888 with the imperial power responsible for foreign policy and the Brooke government maintaining its local administration. Domestically, Brooke established the Sarawak Museum \u2013 the oldest museum in Borneo \u2013 in 1891, and brokered a peace in Marudi by ending intertribal wars there. Economic development continued, with oil wells being drilled from 1910 and the Brooke Dockyard opening two years later. Anthony Brooke would become Rajah Muda (heir apparent) in 1939.\nA centenary celebration of Brooke rule in Sarawak was held in 1941. During the celebration, a new constitution was introduced that would limit the power of the rajah and grant the Sarawak people a greater role in running the government. However, this constitution was never fully implemented due to the occupation of Sarawak by Japan. That same year saw the United Kingdom withdraw its defensive maritime and air units to Singapore. After the departure of most of the military defenses from Sarawak, the Brooke regime adopted a scorched earth policy: The oil production facilities in Miri and the Kuching airfield were to be destroyed, after the airfield had been held for as long as possible. A Japanese invasion force led by Kiyotake Kawaguchi landed in Miri on 16 December 1941 and captured Kuching on 24 December 1941, with British ground forces retreating to Singkawang in neighbouring Dutch Borneo. There, after ten weeks of fighting, the Allied forces surrendered on 1 April 1942. Charles Vyner Brooke, the last Rajah of Sarawak, had already left for Sydney, Australia; his officers were captured by the Japanese and interned at the Batu Lintang camp.\nSarawak remained part of the Empire of Japan for three years and eight months. During this time it was divided into three provinces \u2013 Kuching-shu, Sibu-shu, and Miri-shu \u2013 each under their respective Provincial Governor. The Japanese otherwise preserved the Brooke administrative structure and appointed Japanese people to important government positions. Allied forces later carried out Operation Semut to sabotage Japanese operations in Sarawak. During the Battle of North Borneo, the Australian forces landed at Lutong-Miri area on 20 June 1945 and penetrated as far as Marudi and Limbang before halting their operations in Sarawak. After the surrender of Japan, the Japanese surrendered to the Australian forces at Labuan on 10 September 1945. The following day, the Japanese forces at Kuching surrendered, and the Batu Lintang camp was liberated. Sarawak was immediately placed under British Military Administration and managed by the Australian Imperial Force until April 1946.\nLacking the resources to rebuild Sarawak after the war, Charles Vyner Brooke decided to cede Sarawak as British Crown Colony and a cession bill was put forth in the Council Negri (now Sarawak State Legislative Assembly), which was debated for three days. The bill passed on 17 May 1946 with 19 votes to 16. Hundreds of Malay civil servants resigned in protest, sparking an anti-cession movement and the assassination of the second colonial governor of Sarawak, Sir Duncan Stewart. Despite the resistance, Sarawak became a British Crown colony on 1 July 1946. Anthony Brooke opposed the cession of Sarawak to the British Crown, for which he was banished from Sarawak by the colonial government. He was only allowed to return 17 years later after Sarawak had become part of Malaysia. In 1950 all anti-cession movements in Sarawak ceased after a clamp-down by the colonial government.\nOn 27 May 1961, Tunku Abdul Rahman, the prime minister of the Federation of Malaya, announced a plan to form a greater federation together with Singapore, Sarawak, North Borneo and Brunei, to be called Malaysia. On 17 January 1962, the Cobbold Commission was formed to gauge the support of Sarawak and Sabah for the plan; the Commission reported 80 per cent support for federation. On 23 October 1962, five political parties in Sarawak formed a united front that supported the formation of Malaysia. Sarawak was officially granted self-government on 22 July 1963, and federated with Malaya, North Borneo (now Sabah), and Singapore to form the Federation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963. The governments of the Philippines and Indonesia opposed the new federation, as did the Brunei People's Party and Sarawak-based communist groups, and in 1962, the Brunei Revolt broke out. Indonesian president Sukarno responded by deploying armed volunteers and, later, military forces into Sarawak. Thousands of Sarawak communist members went to Kalimantan, Indonesian Borneo, and underwent training with the Communist Party of Indonesia. The most significant engagement of the confrontation was fought at Plaman Mapu in April 1965. The defeat at Plaman Mapu ultimately resulted in the fall of Sukarno and his replacement with Suharto as President of Indonesia. Negotiations were restarted between Malaysia and Indonesia and led to the end of the confrontation on 11 August 1966. Following continued disagreements with the federal government over proportions of taxes to be paid by Singapore to the federation government, Singapore separated from Malaysia on 9 August 1965 and became an independent and sovereign nation while both Sarawak and Sabah remain in the federation.\nA number of communist groups existed in Sarawak, the first of which, the Sarawak Overseas Chinese Democratic Youth League, formed in 1951. Another group, the North Kalimantan Communist Party (NKCP, also known as Clandestine Communist Organisation (CCO) by government sources) was formally set up in 1970. Weng Min Chyuan and Bong Kee Chok were two of the more notable communist leaders involved in the insurgency. As the political scene changed, it grew progressively more difficult for the communists to operate. This led to Bong opening talks with chief minister Abdul Rahman Ya'kub in 1973 and eventually signing an agreement with the government. Weng, who had moved to China in the mid-1960s but nonetheless retained control of the CCO, pushed for a continued armed insurrection against the government in spite of this agreement. The conflict continued mostly in the Rajang Delta region but eventually ended when, on 17 October 1990, the NKCP signed a peace agreement with the Government of Sarawak.\nPolitics.\nGovernment.\nThe head of the Sarawak state is the Yang di-Pertua Negeri (also known as TYT or Governor), a largely symbolic position appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King of Malaysia) on the advice of the Malaysian federal government. The position has been held by Wan Junaidi Tuanku Jaafar since 2024. The TYT appoints the Premier, currently held by Abang Johari Openg (GPS), as the head of government. Generally, the leader of the party that commands the majority of the state Legislative Assembly is appointed as the chief minister; democratically elected representatives are known as state assemblymen. The state assembly passes laws on subjects that are not under the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Malaysia such as land administration, employment, forests, immigration, merchant shipping and fisheries. The state government is constituted by the premier, the cabinet ministers and their deputy ministers.\nTo protect the interests of the Sarawakians in the Malaysian federation, special safeguards have been included in the Constitution of Malaysia. These include: control over immigration in and out of the state as well as the residence status of non-Sarawakians and Sabahans, limitations on the practice of law to resident lawyers, independence of the Sarawak High Court from the High Court Peninsular Malaysia, a requirement that the Sarawak Chief Minister be consulted prior to the appointment of the chief judge of the Sarawak High Court, the existence of Native Courts in Sarawak and the power to levy sales tax. Natives in Sarawak enjoy special privileges such as quotas and employment in public service, scholarships, university placements, and business permits. Local governments in Sarawak are exempt from local council laws enacted by the Malaysian parliament. This level of autonomy means Sarawak is sometimes referred to as a \"region\", to differentiate it from less autonomous states.\nMajor political parties in Sarawak can be divided into three categories: native Sarawak Bumiputera (PBB and PBM), native Sarawak Dayak (PRS, PDP, PBDSB, etc.), and non-Bumiputera (SUPP, PSB, PBK, etc.); Parties, however, may also include members from more than one group. The first political party, the Sarawak United Peoples' Party (SUPP), was established in 1959, followed by the Parti Negara Sarawak (PANAS) in 1960 and the Sarawak National Party (SNAP) in 1961. Other major political parties such as Parti Pesaka Sarawak (PESAKA) appeared by 1962. These parties later joined the national coalition of the Alliance Party. The Alliance Party (later regrouped into Barisan Nasional) has ruled Sarawak since the formation of Malaysia. The opposition in Sarawak has consistently alleged that the ruling coalition uses various types of vote-buying tactics in order to win elections. Stephen Kalong Ningkan was the first Chief Minister of Sarawak from 1963 to 1966 following his landslide victory in local council elections. However, he was ousted in 1966 by Tawi Sli with the help of the Malaysian federal government, causing the 1966 Sarawak constitutional crisis.\nIn 1969, the first Sarawak state election was held, with members of the Council Negri being directly elected by the voters. This election marked the beginning of ethnic Melanau domination in Sarawak politics by Abdul Rahman Ya'kub and Abdul Taib Mahmud. In the same year, the North Kalimantan Communist Party (NKCP) which subsequently waged a guerrilla war against the newly elected Sarawak state government, was formed. The party was dissolved after the signing of a peace agreement in 1990. 1973 saw the birth of Parti Pesaka Bumiputera Bersatu (PBB) following a merger of several parties. This party would later become the backbone of the Sarawak BN coalition. In 1978, the Democratic Action Party (DAP) was the first West Malaysia-based party to open its branches in Sarawak. Sarawak originally held state elections together with national parliamentary elections. However, the then chief minister Abdul Rahman Ya'kub delayed the dissolution of the state assembly by a year to prepare for the challenges posed by opposition parties. This made Sarawak the only state in Malaysia to hold state elections separate from the national parliamentary elections since 1979. In 1983, SNAP started to fragment into several splinter parties due to recurrent leadership crises. The political climate in the state was stable until the 1987 Ming Court Affair, a political coup initiated by Abdul Taib Mahmud's uncle to topple the Taib-led BN coalition. However, the coup was unsuccessful and Taib retained his position as chief minister.\nSince the 2006 state election, the Democratic Action Party (DAP) has derived the majority of its support from urban centres and became the largest opposition party in Sarawak. In 2010, it formed the Pakatan Rakyat coalition with Parti Keadilan Rakyat (PKR) and Parti Islam Se-Malaysia (PAS); the latter two parties had become active in Sarawak between 1996 and 2001. Sarawak is the only state in Malaysia where West Malaysia-based component parties in the BN coalition, especially the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), have not been active in state politics.\nOn 12 June 2018, the Sarawak Parties Alliance was formed by the BN parties in the state in the aftermath of an historic meeting of party leaders in Kuching, where they decided that in light of the BN defeat in the 2018 Malaysian general election and the changing national situation and a new government, the parties will leave the BN altogether. In conjunction with the celebration of Malaysia Day in 2018 under the new government, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has promised to restore the status of Sarawak (together with Sabah) as an equal partner to Malaya, where all three parties (and then, Singapore) formed Malaysia in accordance to the Malaysia Agreement. However, through the process of the proposed amendment to the Constitution of Malaysia in 2019, the bill for the amendment failed to pass following the failure to reach two-thirds majority support (148 votes) in the Parliament with only 138 agreed with the move while 59 abstained from the voting. On 14 December 2021, the proposed amendment was passed in the Parliament unanimously with 199 votes in favour, and 21 MPs absent from the 6-hour long debate.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUnlike states in Peninsular Malaysia, Sarawak is divided into 12 divisions, each headed by an appointed resident.\nOn 26 November 2015, it was announced that the Kuching Division district of Serian would become Sarawak's 12th division and it had officiated by Adenan Satem at its formal creation on 11 April 2015.\nA division is divided into districts, each headed by a district officer, which are in turn divided into sub-districts, each headed by a Sarawak Administrative Officer (SAO). There is also one development officer for each division and district to implement development projects. The state government appoints a headman (known as \"ketua kampung\" or \"penghulu\") for each village. There are a total of 26 sub-districts in Sarawak all under the jurisdiction of the Sarawak Ministry of Local Government and Community Development. The list of divisions, districts, sub-districts and their local authorities is shown in the table below:\nSecurity.\nMilitary.\nThe first paramilitary armed forces in Sarawak, a regiment formed by the Brooke regime in 1862, were known as the Sarawak Rangers. The regiment, renowned for its jungle tracking skills, served in the campaign to end the intertribal wars in Sarawak. It also engaged in guerrilla warfare against the Japanese, in the Malayan Emergency (in West Malaysia) and the Sarawak Communist Insurgency against the communists. Following the formation of Malaysia, the regiment was absorbed into the Malaysian military forces and is now known as the Royal Ranger Regiment.\nIn 1888, Sarawak, together with neighbouring North Borneo, and Brunei, became British protectorates, and the responsibility for foreign policy was handed over to the British in exchange for military protection. Since the formation of Malaysia, the Malaysian federal government has been solely responsible for foreign policy and military forces in the country.\nTerritorial disputes.\nSeveral border disputes between Malaysia and its neighbouring countries concern Sarawak. Land and maritime disputes exist with Brunei. In 2009, Malaysian prime minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi claimed that in a meeting with Sultan of Brunei, Brunei agreed to drop its claim over Limbang. This was however denied by the second Foreign Minister of Brunei Lim Jock Seng, stating the issue was never discussed during the meeting. James Shoal (Betting Serupai) and the Luconia Shoals (Betting Raja Jarum/Patinggi Ali), islands in the South China Sea, fall within Sarawak's exclusive economic zone, but concerns have been raised about Chinese incursions. There are also several Sarawak\u2013Kalimantan border issues with Indonesia.\nGeography.\nThe total land area of Sarawak is nearly , making up 37.5 per cent of the total area of Malaysia, and lies between the northern latitudes 0\u00b0 50\u2032 and 5\u00b0 and eastern longitudes 109\u00b0 36\u2032 and 115\u00b0 40\u2032 E. Its of coastline is interrupted in the north by about of Bruneian coast. A total of its coastline have been eroding. In 1961, Sarawak including neighbouring Sabah, which had been included in the International Maritime Organization (IMO) through the participation of the United Kingdom, became joint associate members of the IMO. Sarawak is separated from Kalimantan Borneo by ranges of high hills and mountains that are part of the central mountain range of Borneo. These become loftier to the north, and are highest near the source of the Baram River at the steep Mount Batu Lawi and Mount Mulu. Mount Murud is the highest point in Sarawak.\nSarawak has a tropical geography with an equatorial climate and experiences two monsoon seasons: a northeast monsoon and a southwest monsoon. The northeast monsoon occurs between November and February, bringing heavy rainfall while the southwest monsoon, which occurs between March and October, brings somewhat less rainfall. The climate is stable throughout the year except for the two monsoons, with average daily temperature varying between in the morning to in the afternoon at coastal areas. Miri has the lowest average temperatures in comparison to other major towns in Sarawak and has the longest daylight hours (more than six hours a day), while other areas receive sunshine for five to six hours a day. Humidity is usually high, exceeding 68 per cent, with annual rainfall varying between and for up to 220 days a year. At highland areas, the temperature can vary from to during the day and as low as during the night.\nSarawak is divided into three ecoregions. The coastal region is rather low-lying and flat with large areas of swamp and other wet environments. Beaches in Sarawak include Pasir Panjang and Damai beaches in Kuching, Tanjung Batu beach in Bintulu, and Tanjung Lobang and Hawaii beaches in Miri. Hilly terrain accounts for much of the inhabited land and is where most of the cities and towns are found. The ports of Kuching and Sibu are built some distance from the coast on rivers while Bintulu and Miri are close to the coastline where the hills stretch right to the South China Sea. The third region is the mountainous region along the Sarawak\u2013Kalimantan border, where a number of villages such as Bario, Ba'kelalan, and Usun Apau Plieran are located. A number of rivers flow through Sarawak, with the Sarawak River being the main river flowing through Kuching. The Rajang River is the longest river in Malaysia, measuring including its tributary, Balleh River. To the north, the Baram, Limbang and Trusan Rivers drain into the Brunei Bay.\nSarawak can be divided into two geological zones: the Sunda Shield, which extends southwest from the Batang Lupar River (near Sri Aman) and forms the southern tip of Sarawak, and the geosyncline region, which extends northeast to the Batang Lupar River, forming the central and northern regions of Sarawak. The oldest rock type in southern Sarawak is schist formed during the Carboniferous and Lower Permian times, while the youngest igneous rock in this region, andesite, can be found at Sematan. Geological formation of the central and northern regions started during the late Cretaceous period. Other types of stone that can be found in central and northern Sarawak are shale, sandstone, and chert. The Miri Division in eastern Sarawak is the region of Neogene strata containing organic rich rock formations which are the prolific oil and gas reserves. The rocks enriched in organic components are mudstones in Lambir, Miri and Tukau Formations of Middle Miocene-Lower Pliocene age. Significant quantities of Sarawak soil are lithosols, up to 60 per cent, and podsols, around 12 per cent, while abundant alluvial soil is found in coastal and riverine regions. 12 per cent of Sarawak is covered with peat swamp forest. Limestone with well-developed karst topography and cave systems is found scattered from west to east Sarawak, but concentrated in certain regions such as in the Bau district in the west and southwards near the Kalimantan border.\nThere are thirty national parks, among which are Niah with its eponymous caves, the highly developed ecosystem around Lambir Hills, and the World Heritage Site of Gunung Mulu. The last contains Sarawak Chamber, one of the world's largest underground chambers, Deer Cave, the largest cave passage in the world, and Clearwater Cave, the longest cave system in Southeast Asia.\nBiodiversity.\nSarawak contains large tracts of tropical rainforest with diverse plant species, which has led to a number of them being studied for medicinal properties. Mangrove and nipah forests lining its estuaries comprise 2% of its forested area, peat swamp forests along other parts of its coastline cover 16%, Kerangas forest covers 5% and Dipterocarpaceae forests cover most mountainous areas. The major trees found in estuary forests include \"bako\" and \"nibong\", while those in the peat swamp forests include \"ramin\" (\"Gonystylus bancanus\"), \"meranti\" (\"Shorea\"), and \"medang jongkong\" (\"Dactylocladus stenostachys\").\nAnimal species are also highly varied, with 185 species of mammals, 530 species of birds, 166 species of snakes, 104 species of lizards, and 113 species of amphibians, of which 19 per cent of the mammals, 6 per cent of the birds, 20 per cent of the snakes and 32 per cent of the lizards are endemic. These species are largely found in Totally Protected Areas. There are over 2,000 tree species in Sarawak. Other plants includes 1,000 species of orchids, 757 species of ferns, and 260 species of palm. The state is the habitat of endangered animals, including the borneo pygmy elephant, proboscis monkey, orangutans and Sumatran rhinoceroses. Matang Wildlife Centre, Semenggoh Nature Reserve, and Lanjak Entimau Wildlife Sanctuary are noted for their orangutan protection programmes. Talang\u2013Satang National Park is notable for its turtle conservation initiatives. Birdwatching is a common activity in various national parks such as Gunung Mulu National Park, Lambir Hills National Park, and Similajau National Park. Miri\u2013Sibuti National Park is known for its coral reefs and Gunung Gading National Park for its \"Rafflesia\" flowers. Bako National Park, the oldest national park in Sarawak, is known for its 275 proboscis monkeys, and Padawan Pitcher Garden for its various carnivorous pitcher plants. In 1854, Alfred Russel Wallace visited Sarawak. A year later, he formulated the \"Sarawak Law\" which foreshadowed the formulation of his (and Darwin's) theory of evolution by natural selection three years later.\nThe Sarawak state government has enacted several laws to protect its forests and endangered wildlife species. Some of the protected species are the orangutan, green sea turtle, flying lemur, and piping hornbill. Under the Wild Life Protection Ordinance 1998, Sarawak natives are given permissions to hunt for a restricted range of wild animals in the jungles but should not possess more than of meat. The Sarawak Forest Department was established in 1919 to conserve forest resources in the state. Following international criticism of the logging industry in Sarawak, the state government decided to downsize the Sarawak Forest Department and created the Sarawak Forestry Corporation in 1995. The Sarawak Biodiversity Centre was set up in 1997 for the conservation, protection, and sustainable development of biodiversity in the state.\nConservation issues.\nSarawak's rain forests are primarily threatened by the logging industry and palm oil plantations. The issue of human rights of the Penan and deforestation in Sarawak became an international environmental issue when Swiss activist Bruno Manser visited Sarawak regularly between 1984 and 2000. Deforestation has affected the life of indigenous tribes, especially the Penan, whose livelihood is heavily dependent on forest produce. This led to several blockades by indigenous tribes during the 1980s and 1990s against logging companies encroaching on their lands. Indeed, illegal logging in particular has decimated the forest regions indigenous populations depend on for their livelihoods, depleting fish, wildlife, but also traditional medicinal herbs and construction staples like Palm. There have also been cases where Native Customary Rights (NCR) lands have been given to timber and plantation companies without the permission of the locals. The indigenous people have resorted to legal means to reinstate their NCR. In 2001 the High Court of Sarawak fully reinstated the NCR land claimed by the Rumah Nor people, but this was overturned partially in 2005. However, this case has served as a precedent, leading to more NCR being upheld by the high court in the following years. Sarawak's mega-dam policies, such as the Bakun Dam and Murum Dam projects, have submerged thousands of hectares of forest and displaced thousands of indigenous people. Since 2013, the proposed Baram Dam project has been delayed due to ongoing protests from local indigenous tribes. Since 2014, the Sarawak government under chief minister Adenan Satem started to take action against illegal logging in the state and to diversify the economy of the state. Through the course of 2016 over 2 million acres of forest, much of it in orangutan habitats, were declared protected areas.\nSources vary as to Sarawak's remaining forest cover: former chief minister Abdul Taib Mahmud declared that it fell from 70% to 48% between 2011 and 2012, the Sarawak Forest Department and the Ministry of Resource Planning and Environment both held that it remained at 80% in 2012, and Wetlands International reported that it fell by 10% between 2005 and 2010, 3.5 times faster than the rest of Asia combined.\nEconomy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHistorically, Sarawak's economy was stagnant during the rule of previous three white Rajahs. After the formation of Malaysia, Sarawak GDP growth rate has risen due to increase in petroleum output and the rise in global petroleum prices. However, the state economy is less diversified and still heavily dependent upon the export of primary commodities when compared to Malaysia overall. The per capita GDP in Sarawak was lower than the national average from 1970 to 1990. As of 2021, GDP per capita for Sarawak stands at RM 65,971 (US$15,173), which is the third highest in Malaysia. However, the urban-rural income gap remained a major problem in Sarawak.\nSarawak is abundant in natural resources, and primary industries such as mining, agriculture, and forestry accounted for 32.8% of its economy in 2013. It also specialises in the manufacture of food and beverages, wood-based and rattan products, basic metal products, and petrochemicals, as well as cargo and air services and tourism.\nThe state's gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 40.5% per year on average from 2010 to 2021, but became very more volatile later on, ranging from \u22123.0% in 2009 to 35.0% in 2021. Sarawak contributed 9.5% of Malaysia's GDP in the nine years leading up to 2020, making it the third largest contributor after Selangor and Kuala Lumpur. From 2015 to 2021, the oil and gas industry accounted for 55.2% of the Sarawak government's revenue. It attracted RM\u00a080 billion (US$17.85\u00a0billion) in foreign investments, with 95% going to the Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy (SCORE), the second largest economic corridor in Malaysia.\nSarawak has an estimate of 800 million barrels of proven oil reserves with further are to be discovered based on recent findings. The export-oriented economy is dominated by liquefied natural gas (LNG), which accounts for more than half of total exports. Crude petroleum accounts for 45.1%, while palm oil, sawlogs, and sawn timber account for 12.0% collectively. The state receives a 5% royalty from Petronas over oil explorations in its territorial waters. Most of the oil and gas deposits are located offshore next to Bintulu and Miri at Balingian basin, Baram basin, and around Luconia Shoals.\nSarawak is one of the world's largest exporters of tropical hardwood timber, constituting 65% of the total Malaysian log exports in 2000. The last United Nations statistics in 2001 estimated Sarawak's sawlog exports at an average of per year between 1996 and 2000.\nIn 1955, OCBC became the first foreign bank to operate in Sarawak, with other overseas banks following suit. Other notable Sarawak-based companies include Cahya Mata Sarawak Berhad, Naim Holdings, and Rimbunan Hijau.\nEnergy.\nElectricity in Sarawak, supplied by the state-owned Sarawak Energy Berhad (SEB), is primarily sourced from traditional coal fired power plants and thermal power stations using LNG, but diesel based sources and hydroelectricity are also utilised. There are 3 hydroelectric dams as of 2015[ [update]] at Batang Ai, Bakun, and Murum, with several others under construction. In early 2016, SEB signed Malaysia's first energy export deal to supply electricity to neighbouring West Kalimantan in Indonesia.\nIn 2008, SCORE was established as a framework to develop the energy sector in the state, specifically the Murum, Baram, and Baleh Dams as well as potential coal-based power plants, and 10high priority industries out to 2030. The Regional Corridor Development Authority is the government agency responsible for managing SCORE. The entire central region of Sarawak is covered under SCORE, including areas such as Samalaju (near Bintulu), Tanjung Manis, and Mukah. Samalaju will be developed as an industrial park, with Tanjung Manis as a halal food hub, and Mukah as the administrative centre for SCORE with a focus on resource-based research and development.\nTourism.\nTourism plays a major role in the economy of Sarawak and contributed 7.9% of the state's GDP in 2016.\nForeign visitors to Sarawak are predominantly from Brunei, Indonesia, the Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Germany, Australia, Belgium, South Korea, and United Kingdom. A number of different organisations, both state and private, are involved in the promotion of tourism in Sarawak: the Sarawak Tourism Board is the state body responsible for tourism promotion in the state, various private tourism groups are united under the Sarawak Tourism Federation, and the Sarawak Convention Bureau is responsible for attracting conventions, conferences, and corporate events which are held in the Borneo Convention Centre in Kuching. The public and private bodies in Sarawak hold a biannual event to award the Sarawak Hornbill Tourism Award, an award for achievements within various categories, to recognise businesses and individuals for their efforts in the development of tourism within the state.\nThe Rainforest World Music Festival is the region's primary musical event, attracting more than 50,000 people annually. Other events that are held regularly in Sarawak are the Anugerah Seri Angkasa (ASA), ASEAN International Film Festival, Borneo Music Festival Live, Borneo Jazz Festival, Borneo Cultural Festival, and Borneo International Kite Festival. Major shopping complexes in Sarawak include The Spring, Boulevard, VivaCity, Plaza Merdeka, City One, and AEON shopping malls in Kuching, Bintang Megamall, Boulevard, Imperial Mall, and Miri Plaza shopping malls in Miri and NAIM Bintulu Paragon Street Mall, The Spring, Boulevard Shopping Mall, Crown Pacific Mall, Commerce Square Mall, Times Square Megamall, and Parkcity Mall in Bintulu.\nInfrastructure.\nInfrastructure development in Sarawak is overseen by the Ministry of Infrastructure Development and Transportation, successor to the Ministry of Infrastructure Development and Communications (MIDCom) after it was renamed in 2016. Despite this ministerial oversight, infrastructure in Sarawak remains relatively underdeveloped compared to Peninsular Malaysia.\nIn 2009, 94% of urban Sarawak was supplied with electricity, but only 67% of rural areas had electricity. However, this had increased to 91% by 2014. According to a 2015 article, household internet penetration in Sarawak was lower than Malaysian national average, 41.2% versus 58.6%, with 58.5% of internet use being in urban areas and 29.9% in rural areas. In comparison, mobile telecommunication uptake in Sarawak was comparable to the national average, 93.3% against a national average of 94.2%, and on par with neighbouring Sabah. Mobile telecommunication infrastructure, specifically broadcast towers, are built and managed by SacofaSdnBhd (Sacofa Private Limited), which enjoys a monopoly in Sarawak after the company was granted a 20-year exclusivity deal on the provision, maintenance and leasing of towers in the state.\nA number of different bodies manage the supply of water depending on their region of responsibility, including the Kuching Water Board (KWB) which manages Kuching water supply, Sibu Water Board (SWB) which manages Sibu water supply, LAKU Management SdnBhd, which handle water supply in Miri, Bintulu, and Limbang and the Rural Water Supply Department managing the water supply for the remaining areas. As of 2014[ [update]], 82% of the rural areas have a fresh water supply.\nBroadcasting.\nSarawak launched its radio service on 7 June 1954, which became a part of Radio Malaysia when it joined Malaysia in 1963 and later part of the bigger Radio Televisyen Malaysia (RTM) in 1969 when the nation's radio and television operations merged. It did not have television service until 30 August 1975, when RTM TV1 was made available for East Malaysian viewers. RTM has six branches in the state - a main office in capital city Kuching and five other offices in Simanggang, Sibu, Bintulu, Miri and Limbang. The main office produces news and shows for RTM's television channels and operates four state radio channels, namely Sarawak FM, Red FM and Wai FM Iban and Bidayuh networks, whereas five other offices operate district radio channels such as Sri Aman FM, Sibu FM, Bintulu FM, Miri FM and Limbang FM. On 7 April 1998, NTV7 was launched by Sarawakian businessman Mohd Effendi Norwawi under the ownership of Natseven TV Sdn Bhd. Before its acquisition by Media Prima Berhad in 2005, it had a studio in the state capital. However, Sarawak didn't have its own true TV station until 10 October 2020, when it launched TVS, thus becoming the first region in Malaysia to own its TV station. It is currently available in Astro, Astro NJOI and myFreeview (MYTV Broadcasting) and available in 4 languages: Malay, English, Iban and Chinese (Mandarin). Commercial radio channels based in the state include Cats FM and TEA FM, respectively launched on 8 August 1996 and 1 August 2015.\nTransportation.\nMuch like many former British territories, Sarawak uses a dual carriageway with the left-hand traffic rule. As of 2013, Sarawak had a total of of connected roadways, with being paved state routes, of dirt tracks, of gravel roads, and of paved federal highway. The primary route in Sarawak is the Pan Borneo Highway, which runs from Sematan, Sarawak, through Brunei to Tawau, Sabah. Despite being a major highway, the condition of the road is poor leading to numerous accidents and fatalities. 16 billion ringgit worth of contracts were awarded to a number of local companies in December 2016 to add new vehicle and pedestrian bridges, interchanges and bus shelters to the highway as part of a multi-phase project.\nA railway line existed before World War II, but the last remnants of the line were dismantled in 1959. A rail project was announced in 2008 to be in line with the transport needs of SCORE, but as yet no construction work has begun despite an anticipated completion date in 2015. In 2017, the Sarawak government proposed a light rail system (Kuching Line) connecting Kuching, Samarahan and Serian divisions with anticipated completion in 2020. Currently, buses are the primary mode of public transportation in Sarawak with interstate services connecting the state to Sabah, Brunei, and Pontianak (Indonesia).\nSarawak is served by a number of airports with Kuching International Airport, located south west of Kuching, being the largest. Flights from Kuching are mainly to Kuala Lumpur but also to Johor Bahru, Penang, Sabah, Kelantan, Singapore and Pontianak, Indonesia. A second airport at Miri serves flights primarily to other Malaysian states as well as services to Singapore. Other smaller airports such as Sibu Airport, Bintulu Airport, Mukah Airport, Marudi Airport, Mulu Airport, and Limbang Airport provide domestic services within Malaysia. There are also a number of remote airstrips serving rural communities in the state. Three airlines serve flights in Sarawak, Malaysia Airlines, Air Asia, and MASwings all of which use Kuching Airport as their main hub. The state owned Hornbill Skyways is an aviation company that largely provides private chartered flights and flight services for public servants.\nSarawak has four primary ports located at Kuching, Sibu, Bintulu, and Miri. The busiest seaport at Bintulu is under the jurisdiction of the Malaysian federal government and mainly handles LNG products and regular cargo. The remaining ports are under the respective state port authorities. The combined throughput of the four primary ports was 61.04million freight weight tonnes (FWT) in 2013. Sarawak has 55 navigable river networks with a combined length of . For centuries, the rivers of Sarawak have been a primary means of transport as well as a route for timber and other agricultural goods moving downriver for export at the country's major ports. Sibu port, located from the river's mouth, is the main hub along the Rajang River mainly handling timber products. However, the throughput of Sibu port has declined over the years after Tanjung Manis Industrial Port (TIMP) began operating further downriver.\nHealthcare.\nHealth care in provided by three major government hospitals, Sarawak General Hospital, Sibu Hospital, and Miri Hospital, as well as numerous district hospitals, public health clinics, community clinics, and rural clinics. Sarawak Heart Centre was set up in 2011 in Kota Samarahan to provide cardiology services to patients. Besides government-owned hospitals and clinics, there are several private hospitals in Sarawak such as the Normah Medical Specialists Centre, Timberland Medical Specialists Centre, and Sibu Specialist Medical Centre. Hospitals in Sarawak typically provide the full gamut of health care options, from triage to palliative care for the terminally ill. In 1994, Sarawak General Hospital Department of Radiotherapy, Oncology &amp; Palliative Care instituted an at-home care, or hospice care, program for cancer patients. The non profit Sarawak Hospice Society was established in 1998 to promote this program.\nIn comparison to the number of other medical facilities, mental health is only serviced by a single facility, Hospital Sentosa. This abundance of medical services has made Sarawak a medical tourism destination for visitors from neighbouring Brunei and Indonesia.\nIn comparison to the prevalence of health services in urban regions, much of rural Sarawak is only accessible by river transport, which limits access. Remote rural areas that are beyond the operating areas of health clinics, about , and inaccessible by land or river are serviced by a monthly flying doctor service, which was established in 1973.\nA village health promoter program, where volunteers are provided with basic medical training, was established in 1981 but difficulty in providing medical supplies to remote villages, as well as a lack of incentive, resulted in a decline of the program. A variety of traditional medicine practices are still being used by the various communities in Sarawak to supplement modern medical practices but this practice is also declining. However, since 2004, there has been a resurgence in traditional medicine in Malaysia resulting in the establishment of a traditional medicine division within the Ministry of Health. A 2006 government program to have integrated hospitals led to numerous universities starting programs to teach traditional medicine and major hospitals, including Sarawak General Hospital, providing traditional therapies.\nEducation.\nEducation in Malaysia falls under the remit of two federal ministries; the Malaysian Ministry of Education is responsible for primary and secondary education, while the Ministry of Higher Education has oversight over public universities, polytechnic and community colleges. Early childhood education is not directly controlled by the Ministry of Education as it does with primary and secondary education. However, the ministry does oversee the licensing of private kindergartens, the main form of early childhood education, in accordance with the National Pre-School Quality Standard, which was launched in 2013.\nAround the time of Federation, overall literacy in Sarawak was quite low. In 1960, the overall literacy rate was 25%, with a heavy slant in the literacy rate towards the Chinese population, 53%, compared with that of indigenous peoples which was substantially lower, only 17%. By 2007, overall literacy in adults aged 15 and over had significantly increased to 92.3% and in 2012, this had climbed to 96%.\nThere were 1480 schools in Sarawak in 2014, of which 1271 were primary, 202 were secondary and 7 were vocational/technical secondary schools. Among these are a number of schools that date from the Brooke era, including St. Thomas's School Kuching (1848), St Mary's School Kuching (1848), and St Joseph's School Kuching (1882). As well as government schools, there are four international schools: Tunku Putra School, a primary and secondary school offering national and Cambridge curricula, Lodge International School, which is also open to local students and uses both the British National and Cambridge systems, Kidurong International School, which is owned by Shell and offers primary education mainly to children of employees but local children may enter depending on space availability, and Tenby International School, which opened in 2014 and is open to both local and expatriate children. There are also 14 Chinese independent secondary schools in Sarawak that teach in Chinese rather than English or Malay. Previously, only Chinese students were enrolled in these schools, but mobility of the workforce has led to increasing turnover of students as parents move to other areas for employment. This has led to an increasing number of Bumiputera students being enrolled in Chinese primary and preschools.\nSarawak is home to three public universities \u2013 Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Universiti Teknologi Mara at Kota Samarahan, and Universiti Putra Malaysia \u2013 as well as the private Curtin University, Malaysia and Swinburne University of Technology Sarawak Campus. The latter two are satellite campuses of Curtin University in Perth and Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, Australia.\nWith the establishment of SCORE and the associated potential of 1.6 million more jobs by 2030, the state government allocated RM1 billion from 2016 to 2020 to a Skills Development Fund for vocational education. In 2015, Petronas provided vocational scholarships to 150 underprivileged Sarawak students as part of its Vocational Institution Sponsorship and Training Assistance program, although it had been criticised for under-representing local students in its previous allocations; the company also provided support to other Sarawak vocational education centres.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2020 census of Malaysia reported a population of 2,453,677 in Sarawak, making it the fifth most populous state. However, this population is distributed over a large area resulting in Sarawak having the lowest population density in the country with only 20people per km2. The average population growth rate of 1.8%, from 2000 to 2010, is very close to the national average of 2.0%. In 2014, 58% of the population resided in urban areas with the remainder in rural areas, but over the next 10 years it is predicted that the urban population would rise to 65%. As of 2011[ [update]], the crude birth rate in Sarawak was 16.3 per 1000 individuals, the crude death rate was 4.3 per 1000 population, and the infant mortality rate was 6.5 per 1000 live births.\nUrban populations consist predominantly of Malays, Melanaus, Chinese, and a small population of urban Ibans and Bidayuhs who migrated from their home villages seeking employment. The latter two are among the more than 40 sub-ethnic groups of Sarawak, many of whom still inhabit remote areas and are referred to as Orang Asal. The Orang Asal, and Malays, of Peninsular Malaysia, Sarawak and Sabah are referred to collectively as Bumiputera (son of the soil). This classification grants them special privileges in education, jobs, finance, and political positions.\nThe registration for, and issuing of, national identity cards, a legally required document for accessing various services, to these remote tribes has been problematic for many years, and in the past had even resulted in a large number of people from the Penan ethnic group being rendered effectively stateless. In recent years, this issue has seen progressive improvement with the implementation of systems such as mobile registration units.\nSarawak has a large immigrant work force with as many as 150,000 registered foreign migrant workers working as domestic workers or in plantation, manufacturing, construction, services and agriculture. However, this population of legally registered workers is overshadowed by a large population of between 320,000 and 350,000 illegal workers.\nEthnic groups.\nSarawak has six major ethnic groups, Iban, Chinese, Malay, Bidayuh, Melanau, and Orang Ulu, as well as a number of ethnic groups with smaller but still substantial populations, such as the Kedayan, Javanese, Bugis, Murut, and Indian. In 2015, the Bidayuh and Iban, both indigenous ethnic groups of Sarawak, were officially recognised by the government of Malaysia as comprising the Dayak people. There are more than 50 tribes still existing or extinct in Sarawak but only the major tribes are listed in the Malaysian Federal Constitution.\nThe population of 1,389,926 of the Iban people in Sarawak, based on 2022 statistics, makes it the largest ethnic group in the state. The Iban were, in the past, a society that paid particular attention to social status, especially to those who displayed martial prowess as well as to those who demonstrated expertise in various fields such as farming and oratory. Specific terms were used to refer to those who belonged to particular social strata, such as the \"raja berani\" (rich and the brave), \"orang mayuh\" (ordinary people), and \"ulun\" (slaves). Despite modern influences, Iban still observe many of their traditional rituals such as Gawai Antu (festival of the dead) and Gawai Dayak (Harvest Festival).\nAlthough the presence of Chinese in Sarawak dates back to the 6th century AD when traders first came to the state, the Chinese population today largely consists of communities originating from immigrants during the Brooke era. This migration was driven by the employment opportunities at gold mines in Bau.\nSarawak Chinese are primarily Buddhist and Christian, and speak a multitude of southern Chinese languages: Cantonese, Fuzhou, Hakka, Hokkien, Teochew, and Henghua (Putian people), in addition to Mandarin. They celebrate major cultural festivals such as Hungry Ghost Festival and the Chinese New Year much as their ancestors did. Chinese settlers in Sarawak were not limited to any one area. Those who settled in Kuching did so near the Sarawak River in an area that is now referred to as Chinatown. Fuzhounese immigrants from Fuzhou, Fujian, led by Wong Nai Siong in 1901, settled along the Rajang River in what is now Sibu, as due to Boxer Rebellion, while those who arrived in Miri sought work in the coal mines and oilfields.\nDuring the Brooke era, Sarawak Malays were predominantly fishermen, leading to their villages being concentrated along river banks. However, with the advent of urban development, many Malays have migrated to seek employment in public and private sectors. Traditionally, they are known for their silver and brass crafts, wood carvings, and textiles.\nThe Melanau are a native people of Sarawak that lived in areas primarily around the modern city of Mukah, where they worked as fishermen and craftsmen as well renowned boatbuilders. Historically the Melanau practised Animism, a belief that spirits inhabited objects in their environment, and while this is still practised today, most Melanau have since been converted to Christianity and Islam.\nThe Bidayuh are a southern Sarawak people, that were referred to by early European settlers as Land Dayaks because they traditionally live on steep limestone mountains. They account for 7.3 per cent of the population of Sarawak and are the second most numerous of the indigenous Dayak people, after the Iban. The Bidayuh are indigenous to the areas that comprise the modern day divisions of Kuching and Serian. Their language comprises five major dialects: Biatah (Padawan, Penrissen and Kuching areas), Bau, formerly known as Jagoi or Bau-Jagoi (Bau district), Serian, formerly called Bukar-Sadong (Serian\ndistrict), and Salako and Rara (Lundu district). All these dialects are not mutually intelligible\ndue to insufficient lexicostatistical overlap between them for developing one standard\nBidayuh with a unified orthography. Since there is no common standardised Bidayuh language, the sociolinguistic norms of the younger generation of Bidayuhs today are influenced by Malaysian language, with both English and Sarawak Malay also being the lingua franca. Like many other indigenous peoples, the majority of the Bidayuh have been converted to Christianity,\nbut still live in villages consisting of longhouses, with the addition of the distinctive round \"baruk\" where communal gatherings were held.\nThe numerous tribes who reside in Sarawak's interior such as the Kenyah, Kayan, Lun Bawang, Kelabit, Penan, Bisaya, and Berawan are collectively referred to as Orang Ulu. In the Iban language, this name means \"Upriver People\", reflecting the location these tribes settled in; most of them reside near the drainage basin of the Baram River. Both woodworking and artistry are highly visible aspects of Orang Ulu culture exemplified by mural covered longhouses, carved wooden boats, and tattooing. Well-known musical instruments from the Orang Ulu are the Kayans' sapeh and Kenyah's sampe' and Lun Bawang's bamboo band. The Kelabit and Lun Bawang people are known for their production of fragrant rice. As with the many other indigenous peoples of Sarawak, the majority of Orang Ulu are Christians.\nThe Indians, predominantly the Tamils were brought by the British Government to work in estates as labourers and clerks. Besides, the Malayalee community too exist in the cities in Sarawak. Today, many among the Indians are known to be employed as professionals (mainly doctors) in Sarawak.\nLanguages.\nEnglish was the official language of Sarawak from 1963 to 1974 due to opposition from First Chief Minister of Sarawak Stephen Kalong Ningkan to the use of the Malaysian language in Sarawak. In 1974, the new Chief Minister Abdul Rahman Ya'kub recognised Malay alongside English as an official language of Sarawak. This new status given to the Malay language was further reinforced by new education standards transitioning curriculum to Malay. In 1985 English lost the status of an official language, leaving only Malay. Despite official policy, Sarawak opposition members argue that English remained the \"de facto\" official language of Sarawak. English is still spoken in the legal courts, and state legislative assembly. In 2015, Chief Minister Adenan Satem reinstated English as an official language. Sarawak's language autonomy does not extend to the educational system, with the language syllabus controlled by the federal government.\nAlthough the official form of Malay, Bahasa Malaysia, is spoken by the government administration, it is used infrequently in colloquial conversation. The local dialect of \"Bahasa Sarawak\" (Sarawak Malay) dominates the vernacular. Bahasa Sarawak is the most common language of Sarawak Malays and other indigenous tribes. The Iban language, which has minor regional variations, is the most widely spoken native language, with 60 per cent of the Sarawak population speaking it as a first language. The Bidayuh language, with six major dialects, is spoken by 10 per cent of the population. The Orang Ulu have about 30 different language dialects. While the ethnic Chinese originate from a variety of backgrounds and speak many different Southern Chinese languages such as Cantonese, Hokkien, Hakka, Fuzhou, and Teochew, they also converse in Malaysian Mandarin. Tamil language is spoken by the Indians in Sarawak.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the largest religion in Sarawak, representing 50.1% of the total population according to the 2020 census. This makes Sarawak the only Malaysian state with a Christian majority. The earliest Christian missionaries in Sarawak were Church of England (Anglicans) in 1848, followed by Roman Catholics a few years later, and Methodists in 1903. Evangelization first took place among the Chinese immigrants before spreading to indigenous animists. Other Christian denominations in Sarawak are Borneo Evangelical Mission (or Sidang Injil Borneo), and Baptists. Indigenous people such as the Iban, Bidayuh, and Orang Ulu have adopted Christianity, although they do retain some of their traditional religious rites. Many Muslims come from the Malay and Melanau. Buddhism, Taoism, and Chinese folk religion are predominantly practised by Chinese Malaysians. Other minor religions in Sarawak are the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Hinduism, Sikhism, and animism.\nAlthough Islam is the official religion of Malaysia, Sarawak has no official state religion. However, during the chieftainship of Abdul Rahman Ya'kub, the Constitution of Sarawak was amended to make the Yang di-Pertuan Agong the head of Islam in Sarawak and empower the state assembly to pass laws regarding Islamic affairs. With such provisions, Islamic policies can be formulated in Sarawak and the establishment of Islamic state agencies is possible. The 1978 Majlis Islam Bill enabled the setting up of Syariah Courts in Sarawak with jurisdictions over matrimonial, child custody, betrothal, inheritance, and criminal cases in the state. An appeals court and Courts of Kadi were also formed.\nCulture.\nThe location and history of Sarawak has resulted in a broad diversity of ethnicity, culture and languages. Among the indigenous peoples of Sarawak, outside influences have led to many changes over time. The Iban tribal culture in Sarawak centred on the concept of the warrior and the ability to take heads from other tribes in battle. This practice, central as it was to the Iban people, was made illegal under James Brooke's rule and ultimately faded away although reminders of the practice are still seen in some long houses. Two other tribal peoples of the Sarawak Highlands, the Kelabit and Lun Bawang, have seen fundamental changes to their ethnic identities as a direct result of their conversion to Christianity. One major change was the shift in the focal point of their social interactions from the traditional long house to the local church. Their religious devotion has also helped shape their worldview outside of their village, particularly in response to change. For the Penan people, one of the last tribes to still be practising a nomadic lifestyle within the jungle, outside influence, particularly education, has resulted in a significant decline in the population that practice the nomadic lifestyle. Others settle down after intermixing with members of different tribes, such as the Orang Ulu. One direct result of this diversity in cultures, engendered by a policy of tolerance to all races, is the increasing numbers of tribal peoples marrying not only other Sarawakian tribes, but also to Chinese, Malays as well as citizens of European or American descent.\nThe indigenous tribes of Sarawak traditionally used oratory to pass on their culture from one generation to the next; examples of these traditional practices include the Iban's Ngajat dances, \"Renong\" (Iban vocal repertory), \"Ensera\" (Iban oral narratives), and epic storytelling by the Kayan and Kenyah.\nIn the years before federation, the colonial government recognised that British education and indigenous culture was influencing a new generation of Iban teachers. Thus, on 15 September 1958, the Borneo Literature Bureau was inaugurated with a charter to nurture and encourage local literature while also supporting the government in its release of documentation, particularly in technical and instructional manuscripts that were to be distributed to the indigenous peoples of Sarawak and Sabah. As well as indigenous languages, documents would also be published in English, Chinese and Malay. In 1977, the bureau came under the authority of the federal government language planning and development agency, the Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka (DBP), which advocated publication only in Malay ultimately causing the demise of fledgling indigenous literature.\nIt was a number of decades before print media began to appear in Sarawak. The \"Sarawak Gazette\", published by the Brooke government, recorded a variety of news relating to economics, agriculture, anthropology, archaeology, began circulation in 1870 and continues in modern times.\nHowever, in the decades following federation, restrictive laws and connections to businesses have meant that the media is a largely state-owned enterprise. One of the earliest known text publications in Borneo, \"Hikayat Panglima Nikosa\" (Story of Nikosa the Warrior), was first printed in Kuching, 1876.\nThere are a number of museums in Sarawak that preserve and maintain artefacts of Sarawak's culture. At the foot of Mount Santubong, Kuching, is Sarawak Cultural Village, a \"living museum\" that showcases the various ethnic groups carrying out traditional activities in their respective traditional houses. The Sarawak State Museum houses a collection of artefacts such as pottery, textiles, and woodcarving tools from various ethnic tribes in Sarawak, as well as ethnographic materials of local cultures. Orang Ulu's sapeh (a dug-out guitar) is the best known traditional musical instrument in Sarawak and was played for Queen Elizabeth II during her official visit to Sarawak in 1972.\nCuisine.\nSarawak being home to diverse communities, has a variety of ethnically influenced cuisines and cooking styles rarely found elsewhere in Malaysia. Notable dishes in the state include Sarawak laksa, kolo mee, and ayam pansuh. The state is also known for its Sarawak layer cake dessert.\nPortrayal in media.\nA number of international films, documentaries, television series had made Sarawak as a principal photography location, with \"Farewell to the King\" (1989), \"The Sleeping Dictionary\" (2003), and \"Edge of the World\" (2021) being most notable. Among the first locally produced movies were the Iban language film \"Bejalai\" that was featured in the Berlin Film Festival in 1989 and the horror film \"Possessed\" screened in 2006.\nHolidays and festivals.\nSarawakians observe a number of holidays and festivals throughout the year. Apart from national Independence Day and Malaysia Day celebrations, the state also celebrates its Independence Day on 22 July and the State Governor's birthday. Ethnic groups also celebrate their own festivals. The open house tradition allows other ethnic groups to join in the celebrations. Sarawak is the only state in Malaysia to declare the Gawai Dayak celebration a public holiday.\nSports.\nSarawak sent its own teams to participate in the 1958 and 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games, and 1962 Asian Games; after 1963, Sarawakians competed as part of the Malaysian team. Sarawak hosted the Malaysian SUKMA Games in 1990, 2016 and 2024, and was overall champion in the 1990, 1992, 1994 and 2024 SUKMA games. It also hosted the Para SUKMA Games in 1996, 2016 and 2024, and was overall champion for 13 consecutive editions from 1994 until 2018, before losing the title to Sabah in the 2022 edition and regained it in the 2024 edition. In 2019, both Sabah and Sarawak Sports Ministries work together to establish the East Malaysia Sports Commission to facilitate the organisation of more sports programmes in the two territories including other places in the Borneo islands. The Sarawak government also plans to make Sarawak an e-sports hub in the region.\nInternational relations.\nSarawak is a sister state/province to Fujian Province in China.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28259", "revid": "40982560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28259", "title": "Seneca", "text": "Seneca may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\n* Seneca the Elder (c.\u200954 BC \u2013 c. AD 39), a Roman rhetorician, writer, and father of the stoic philosopher Seneca\n* Seneca the Younger (c.\u20094 BC \u2013 AD 65), a Roman Stoic philosopher, statesman, and dramatist\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "28260", "revid": "32122377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28260", "title": "Sonnet", "text": "Poetic form, traditionally fourteen specifically rhymed lines\nA sonnet is a fixed poetic form with a structure traditionally consisting of fourteen lines adhering to a set rhyming scheme. The term derives from the Italian word \"sonetto\" (lit.\u2009'little song', from the Latin word \"sonus\", lit.\u2009'sound'). Originating in 13th-century Sicily, the sonnet was in time taken up in many European-language areas, mainly to express romantic love at first, although eventually any subject was considered acceptable. Many formal variations were also introduced, including abandonment of the quatorzain limit \u2013 and even of rhyme altogether in modern times.\nRomance languages.\nSicilian.\nGiacomo da Lentini is credited with the sonnet's invention at the Court of Frederick II in the Sicilian city of Palermo. The Sicilian School of poets who surrounded Lentini then spread the form to the mainland. Those earliest sonnets no longer survive in the original Sicilian language, however, but only after being translated into Tuscan dialect. The form consisted of a pair of quatrains followed by a pair of tercets with the symmetrical rhyme scheme formula_1, where the sense is carried forward in a new direction after the midway break.\nPeter Dronke has commented that there was something intrinsic to its flexible form that contributed to the sonnet's survival far beyond its region of origin. William Baer suggests that the first eight lines of the earliest Sicilian sonnets are identical to the eight-line Sicilian folksong stanza known as the \"Strambotto\". To this, da Lentini (or whoever else invented the form) added two tercets to the \"Strambotto\" in order to create the new 14-line sonnet form.\nIn contrast, Hassanally Ladha has argued that the Sicilian sonnet's structure and content drew upon Arabic poetry and cannot be explained as the \"invention\" of the Sicilian School of poets. Ladha notes that \"in its Sicilian beginnings, the sonnet evinces literary and epistemological contact with the \"qasida\"\", and emphasizes that the sonnet did not emerge simultaneously with its supposedly defining 14-line structure. \"Tellingly, attempts to close off the sonnet from its Arabic predecessors depend upon a definition of the new lyric to which Giacomo's poetry does not conform: surviving in thirteenth-century recensions, his poems appear not in fourteen, but rather six lines, including four rows, each with two hemistiches and two 'tercets' each in a line extending over two rows.\" In Ladha's view, the sonnet emerges as the continuation of a broader tradition of love poetry throughout the Mediterranean world and relates to such other forms as the Sicilian \"strambotto\", the Proven\u00e7al \"canso\", the Andalusi Arabic \"muwashshah\" and \"zajal\", as well as the \"qasida\".\nItalian.\nGuittone d'Arezzo rediscovered the sonnet form and brought it to Tuscany, where he adapted it to Tuscan dialect when he founded the Siculo-Tuscan, or Guittonian school of poetry (1235\u20131294). He wrote almost 250 sonnets. Among the host of other Italian poets that followed, the sonnets of Dante Alighieri and Guido Cavalcanti stand out, but later the most famous and widely influential was Petrarch.\nThe structure of a typical Italian sonnet as it developed included two parts that together formed a compact form of \"argument\". First, the octave forms the \"proposition\", which describes a \"problem\" or \"question\", followed by a sestet (two tercets) that proposes a \"resolution\". Typically, the ninth line initiates what is called the \"turn\", or \"volta\", which signals the move from proposition to resolution. Even in sonnets that do not strictly follow the problem/resolution structure, the ninth line still often marks a \"turn\" by signaling a change in the tone, mood, or stance of the poem.\nLater, the formula_2 pattern became the standard for Italian sonnets. For the sestet, there were two different possibilities: formula_3 and formula_4. In time, other variants on this rhyming scheme were introduced, such as formula_5 or formula_6. Petrarch typically used an formula_2 pattern for the octave, followed by either formula_8 or formula_4 rhymes in the sestet.\nAt the turn of the 14th century there arrive early examples of the sonnet sequence unified about a single theme. This is represented by Folgore da San Gimignano's series on the months of the year, followed by his sequence on the days of the week. At a slightly earlier date, Dante had published his \"La Vita Nuova\", a narrative commentary in which appear sonnets and other lyrical forms centred on the poet's love for Beatrice. Most of the sonnets there are Petrarchan (here used as a purely stylistic term since Dante predated Petrarch). Chapter VII gives the sonnet \"O voi che per la via\", with two sestets (formula_10) and two quatrains (formula_11), and Ch. VIII, \"Morte villana\", with two sestets (formula_12) and two quatrains (formula_11). Petrarch followed in his footsteps later in the next century with the 366 sonnets of the \"Canzionere\", which chronicle his life-long love for Laura.\nWidespread as sonnet writing became in Italian society, among practitioners were to be found some better known for other things: the painters Giotto and Michelangelo, for example, and the astronomer Galileo. The academician Giovanni Mario Crescimbeni lists 661 poets just in the 16th century. So common were they that eventually, in the words of a literary historian: \"No event was so trivial, none so commonplace, a tradesman could not open a larger shop, a government clerk could not obtain a few additional \"scudi\" of salary, but all his friends and acquaintance must celebrate the event, and clothe their congratulations in a copy of verses, which almost invariably assumed this shape.\"\nOccitan.\nThe sole confirmed surviving sonnet in the Occitan language is by Paolo Lanfranchi da Pistoia and confidently dated to 1284. This employs the rhyme scheme formula_14 and has a political theme, as do some others of dubious authenticity or merit ascribed to \"William of Almarichi\" and Dante de Maiano.\nCatalan.\nOne of the earliest sonnets in Catalan was written by Pere Torroella (1436\u20131486). In the 16th century, the most prolific and subtle Catalan writer of sonnets was Pere Seraf\u00ed, author of over 60 published between 1560 and 1565.\nSpanish.\nThe poet \u00cd\u00f1igo L\u00f3pez de Mendoza, 1st Marquis of Santillana is credited as among the foremost to attempt \"sonnets written in the Italian manner\" (\"sonetos fechos al it\u00e1lico modo\") towards the middle of the 15th century. Since the Castilian language and prosody were in a transitional state at the time, the experiment was unsuccessful. It was therefore not until after 1526 that the form was reintroduced by Juan Bosc\u00e1n. According to his account, he met Andrea Navagero, the Venetian Ambassador to the Spanish Court, in that year while the latter was accompanying King Carlos V on a visit to the Alhambra. In the course of their literary discussion, Navagero then suggested that the poet might attempt the sonnet and other Italian forms in his own language.\nBosc\u00e1n not only took up the Venetian's advice but did so in association with the more talented Garcilaso de la Vega, a friend to whom some of his sonnets are addressed and whose early death is mourned in another. The poems of both followed the Petrarchan model, employed the hitherto unfamiliar hendecasyllable, and when writing of love were based on the neoplatonic ideal championed in \"The Book of the Courtier\" (\"Il Cortegiano\") that Bosc\u00e1n had also translated. Their reputation was consolidated by the later 1580 edition of Fernando de Herrera, who was himself accounted \"the first major Spanish sonneteer after Garcilaso\". During the Baroque period that followed, two notable writers of sonnets headed rival stylistic schools. The culteranismo of Luis de G\u00f3ngora, later known as 'Gongorismo' after him, was distinguished by an artificial style and the use of elaborate vocabulary, complex syntactical order and involved metaphors. The verbal usage of his opponent, Francisco de Quevedo, was equally self-conscious, deploying wordplay and metaphysical conceits, after which the style was known as conceptismo.\nAnother key figure at this period was Lope de Vega, who was responsible for writing some 3,000 sonnets, a large proportion of them incorporated into his dramas. One of the best known and most imitated was \"Un soneto me manda hacer Violante\" (Violante orders me to write a sonnet), which occupies a pivotal position in literary history. At its first appearance in his 1617 comedy \"La ni\u00f1a de Plata\" (Act 3), the character there pretends to be a novice whose text is a running commentary on the poem's creation. Although the poet himself is portrayed as composing it as a light-hearted impromptu in the biographical film \"Lope\" (2010), there had in fact been precedents. In Spanish, some fifty years before, Diego Hurtado de Mendoza had written the pretended impromptu, \"Ped\u00eds, Reina, un soneto\"; and even earlier in Italian there had been the similarly themed \"Qualunque vuol saper fare un sonetto\" (Whoever to make a sonnet aspires) by the Florentine poet Pieraccio Tedaldi (b. ca. 1285\u20131290; d. ca. 1350). Later imitations in other languages include one in Italian by Giambattista Marino and another in French by Fran\u00e7ois-S\u00e9raphin R\u00e9gnier-Desmarais, as well as an adaptation of the idea applied to the rondeau by Vincent Voiture. The poem's fascination for U.S. writers is evidenced by no less than five translations in the second half of the 20th century alone.\nThe sonnet form crossed the Atlantic quite early in the Spanish colonial enterprise when Francisco de Terrazas, the son of a 16th-century conquistador, was among its Mexican pioneers. Later came two sonnet writers in holy orders, Bishop Miguel de Guevara (1585\u20131646) and, especially, Sister Juana In\u00e9s de la Cruz. But though sonnets continued to be written in both the old world and the new, innovation was mainly limited to the Americas, where the sonnet was used to express a different and post-colonial reality. In the 19th century, for example, there were two poets who wrote memorable sonnets dedicated to Mexican landscapes, Joaqu\u00edn Acadio Pagaza y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez in the torrid zone to the south and Manuel Jos\u00e9 Oth\u00f3n in the desolate north. In South America, too, the sonnet was used to invoke landscape, particularly in the major collections of the Uruguayan Julio Herrera y Reissig, such as \"Los Parques Abandonados\" (Deserted Parks, 1902\u201308) and \"Los \u00e9xtasis de la monta\u00f1a\" (Mountain Ecstasies, 1904\u201307), whose recognisably authentic pastoral scenes went on to serve as example for C\u00e9sar Vallejo in his evocations of Andean Peru.\nSoon afterwards, the sonnet form was deconstructed as part of the modernist questioning of the past. Thus, in the Argentine poet Alfonsina Storni's \"Mascarilla y tr\u00e9bol\" (Mask and Clover, 1938), a section of unrhymed poems using many of the traditional versification structures of the form are presented under the title \"antisonnets\".\nPortuguese.\nDom Pedro, a son of King John I, has been credited with translations of sonnets by Petrarch into Portuguese, but the form did not come into its own until the start of the 16th century. It was then that S\u00e1 de Miranda introduced the sonnet and other Italian forms, after returning from a five-year stay in Italy. However, the greatest sonneteer of this period was the slightly younger Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es, though in his work the influence of the Spanish pioneers of the form has also been discerned. Among later writers, the comic sonnets of Thomas de Noronha were once appreciated, and the love sonnets of Barbosa Bacellar (c.1610\u20131663), also known for his learned glosses on the sonnets of Cam\u00f5es.\nThe introduction later of a purified sonnet style to Brazilian literature was due to Cl\u00e1udio Manuel da Costa, who also composed Petrarchan sonnets in Italian during his stay in Europe. However, it was in the wake of French Parnassianism that there developed a similar movement in Brazil, which included the notable sonneteers Alberto de Oliveira, Raimundo Correia and, especially, Olavo Bilac. Others writing sonnets in that style included the now overlooked Francisca J\u00falia da Silva Munster (1871\u20131920) and the Symbolist Afro-Brazilian poet Cruz e Sousa.\nFrench.\nIn French prosody, sonnets are traditionally composed in the French alexandrine, which consists of lines of twelve syllables with a central caesura. Imitations of Petrarch were first introduced by Cl\u00e9ment Marot, and Mellin de Saint-Gelais also took up the form near the start of the 16th century. They were later followed by Pierre de Ronsard, Joachim du Bellay and Jean Antoine de Ba\u00eff, around whom formed a group of radical young noble poets of the court, generally known today as La Pl\u00e9iade. They employed, amongst other forms of poetry, the Petrarchan sonnet cycle, developed around an amorous encounter or an idealized woman. The character of the group's literary program was given in Du Bellay's manifesto, the \"Defense and Illustration of the French Language\" (1549), which maintained that French (like the Tuscan of Petrarch and Dante) was a worthy language for literary expression, and which promulgated a program of linguistic and literary production and purification.\nIn the aftermath of the Wars of Religion, French Catholic jurist and poet Jean de La Cepp\u00e8de published the \"Theorems\", a sequence of 515 sonnets with non-traditional rhyme schemes, about the Passion and Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Drawing upon the Gospels, Greek and Roman mythology, and the Fathers of the Church, La Cepp\u00e8de's poetry was praised by Saint Francis de Sales for transforming \"the Pagan Muses into Christian ones\". La Cepp\u00e8de's sonnets often attack the Calvinist doctrine of a judgmental and unforgiving God by focusing on Christ's passionate love for the human race. Afterwards the work was long forgotten, until the 20th century witnessed a revival of interest in the poet, and his sonnets are now regarded as classic works of French poetry.\nBy the late 17th century, the sonnet had fallen out of fashion but was revived by the Romantics in the 19th century. Charles Augustin Sainte-Beuve then published his imitation of William Wordsworth's \"Scorn not the sonnet\" where, in addition to the poets enumerated in the English original \u2013 Shakespeare, Petrarch, Tasso, Camoens, Dante, Spenser, Milton \u2013 Sainte-Beuve announces his own intention to revive the form and adds the names of Du Bellay and Ronsard in the final tercet. The form was little used, however, until the Parnassians brought it back into favour, and following them the Symbolist poets. Overseas in Canada, the teenaged \u00c9mile Nelligan is particularly noted among the French language poets who wrote sonnets in that style. \nDuring the latter half of the 19th century, there were many deviations from the traditional sonnet form. Charles Baudelaire was responsible for significant variations in rhyme-scheme and line-length in the poems included in \"Les Fleurs du mal\". Among the variations made by others, Th\u00e9odore de Banville's \"Sur une dame blonde\" limited itself to a four-syllable line, while in \"\u00c0 une jeune morte\" Jules de Ress\u00e9guier (1788\u20131862) composed a sonnet monosyllabically lined.\nGermanic languages.\nEnglish.\nTudor and Stuart period.\nSir Thomas Wyatt and Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, have been described as \"the first English Petrarchans\" from their pioneering the sonnet form in English. In addition, some 25 of Wyatt's poems are dependent on Petrarch, either as translations or imitations, while, of Surrey's five, three of them are translations and two imitations. In one instance, both poets translated the same poem, \"Rime\" 140. From these examples, as elsewhere in their prosodic practice, a difference between their style can be observed. Wyatt's verse metre, though in general decasyllabic, is irregular and proceeds by way of significantly stressed phrasal units. But, in addition, Wyatt's sonnets are generally closer in construction to those of Petrarch.\nProsodically, Surrey is more adept at composing in iambic pentameter and his sonnets are written in what has come to be known anachronistically as Shakespearean measure. This version of the sonnet form, characterised by three alternately rhymed quatrains terminating in a final couple (formula_15), became the favourite during Elizabethan times, when it was widely used. It was particularly so in whole series of amatory sequences, beginning with Sir Philip Sidney's \"Astrophel and Stella\" (1591) and continuing over a period of two decades. About four thousand sonnets were composed during this time. However, with such a volume, much there that was conventional and repetitious came to be viewed with a sceptical eye. Sir John Davies mocked these in a series of nine \"gulling sonnets\" and William Shakespeare was also to dismiss some of them in his Sonnet 130, \"My mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun\".\nShakespeare's sequence of 154 sonnets departs from the norm in addressing more than one person in its course, male as well as female. In addition, other sonnets by him were incorporated into some of his plays. Another exception at this time was the form used in Edmund Spenser's \"Amoretti\", which has the interlaced rhyme scheme formula_16. \nDuring the 1590s there began a change of focus from amatory to religious subject matter. This was announced in the opening line of the \"Divine Centurie of Spirituall Sonnets\" of Barnabe Barnes (1595): \"No more lewde laies of lighter loues I sing\". Other sequences in this line include Henry Lok's series of sonnets added to his translation of Ecclesiastes (1597), Henry Constable's \"Spirituall Sonnettes to the Honour Of God and hys Sayntes\" (c. 1600), and the sonnets collected with other poems in Nicholas Breton's \"The Soule's Harmony\" (1602). John Donne's series of \"Holy Sonnets\" followed soon after and, as in some of his Elizabethan predecessors and French religious sonnet sequences such as the \"Sonnets spirituels\" of Jacques de Billy (1577) and Jean de La Cepp\u00e8de's \"Th\u00e9or\u00e8mes spirituels\" (1613-21), are characterised by their use of Baroque conceits.\nJohn Milton's sonnets demonstrate another stylistic transition. Two youthful examples written in English and five in Italian are Petrarchan in spirit. But the seventeen sonnets of his maturity address personal and political themes. It has been observed of their intimate tone, and the way the sense overrides the volta within the poem in some cases, that Milton is here adapting the sonnet form to that of the Horatian ode. He also seems to have been the first to introduce an Italian variation of the form, the caudate sonnet, into English in his prolongation of \"On the New Forcers of Conscience Under the Long Parliament\".\n18th\u201319th centuries.\nThe fashion for the sonnet went out with the Restoration, and hardly any were written between 1670 and the second half of the 18th century. Amongst the first to revive the form was Thomas Warton, who took Milton for his model. Around him at Oxford were grouped those associated with him in this revival, including John Codrington Bampfylde, Thomas Russell, Thomas Warwick and Henry Headley, some of whom published small collections of sonnets alone. Many women, too, now took up the sonnet form, in particular Charlotte Smith, whose lachrymose \"Elegiac Sonnets\" (1784 onwards) are credited with helping create the 'school of sensibility' characteristic of the time. William Lisle Bowles was also a close follower, but the success of both stirred up resistance in the poetic politics of the time.\nWilliam Beckford parodied Smith's melancholy manner and archaic diction in an \"Elegiac sonnet to a mopstick\". In the preface to his 1796 collection \"Poems on Various Subjects\", Samuel Taylor Coleridge commented of his series of \"Effusions\" that \"I was fearful that the title \"Sonnet\" might have reminded my reader of the Poems of the Rev. W. L. Bowles \u2013 a comparison with whom would have sunk me below that mediocrity, on the surface of which I am at present enabled to float\". There were formal objections too. Where most of the early revivalists had used Milton's sonnets as the model for theirs, Smith and Bowles had preferred the Shakespearean form. This led to Mary Robinson's fighting preface to her sequence \"Sappho and Phaon\", in which she asserted the legitimacy of the Petrarchan form as used by Milton over \"the non-descript ephemera from the heated brains of self-important poetasters\" that pass as sonnets in the literary reviews of her day.\nAt the start of the 19th century, Capel Lofft expressed his sense of the importance of the sonnet's history to the new generation of English poets. In the long preface to his idiosyncratic \"Laura, or an anthology of sonnets (on the Petrarchan model) and elegiac quatorzains\" (London 1814), the thesis is developed that beyond the sonnet's Sicilian origin lies the system of musical notation developed by the mediaeval Guido of Arezzo, and before that the musical arrangement of the Greek ode. The young Milton, he noted, had learned the mature Italian style while travelling in Italy and conversing on equal terms with its writers (as well as writing five sonnets in Italian as well). In form, his are modelled on Petrarch's and, dealing as they do with both personal and contemporary issues, are reminiscent in their organisation of the Horatian ode. \nImpressed too by Milton's sonnets, Wordsworth described the form as having \"an energetic and varied flow of sound, crowding into narrow room more of the combined effect of rhyme and blank verse, than can be done by any other kind of verse I know of\". In that its compression could be adapted to a great variety of themes, he eventually wrote some 523 sonnets which were to exert a powerful stylistic influence throughout the first half of the 19th century. Part of his appeal to others was the way in which he used the sonnet as a focus for new subject matter, frequently in sequences. From his series on the River Duddon sprang reflections on any number of regional natural features; his travel tour effusions, though not always confined to sonnet form, found many imitators. What eventually became three series of \"Ecclesiastical Sonnets\" started a vogue for sonnets on religious and devotional themes. Milton's predilection for political themes, continuing through Wordsworth's \"Sonnets dedicated to liberty and order\", now became an example for contemporaries too. Barely had the process begun, however, before a sceptical alarmist in \"The New Monthly Magazine\" for 1821 was diagnosing \"sonnettomania\" as a new sickness akin to \"the bite of a rabid animal\".\nAnother arm of the propaganda on behalf of the sonnet in Romantic times was the reflexive strategy of recommending it in sonnet form as a demonstration of its possibility of variation. In Wordsworth's \"Nuns fret not at their narrow room\" (1807), the volta comes after the seventh line, dividing the poem into two equal parts. Keats makes use of frequent enjambment in \"If by dull rhymes our English must be chained\" (1816) and divides its sense units into four tercets and a couplet. What Keats is recommending there is the more intricate rhyming system formula_17 that he demonstrates in its course as a means of giving the form greater breathing room. Wordsworth later accomplishes this in \"Scorn not the Sonnet\" (1827), which is without midway division, and where enjambment is so managed that the sense overrides from line to line in an ode-like movement. With the similar aim of freeing the form from its fetters, Matthew Arnold turns his \"Austerity of poetry\" (1867) into a narrative carried forward over an enjambed eighth line to a conclusion that is limited to the final three lines.\nBy the time the second half of the 19th century was reached, sonnets become chiefly interesting for their publication in long sequences. It was during this period that attempts to renew the form were continually being made. Elizabeth Barrett Browning's autobiographical \"Sonnets from the Portuguese\" (1845\u201350), for example, is described as the first depiction of a successful courtship since Elizabethan times. It comprises 44 sonnets of dramatised first person narrative, the enjambed lines in which frequently avoid resting at the volta. Through this means the work is distinguished by \"the flexibility and control with which the verse bends to the argument and to the rhythms of thought and speech\".\nThat sequence was followed in 1862 by George Meredith's \"Modern Love\", based in part on the breakdown of his first marriage. It employs a 16-line form, described as (and working like) a sonnet, linking together the work's fifty narrative episodes. Essentially the stanza is made up of four quatrains of enclosed rhyme, rhythmically driven forward over these divisions so as to allow a greater syntactical complexity \"more readily associated with the realist novel than with lyric poetry\". As other work by both the writers above demonstrates, they were capable of more straightforward fictions. In adapting the sonnet to the narrative mode, the main interest for them is in overcoming the technical challenge that they set themselves and proving the new possibilities of the form in which they are working.\nWhere the first quatrain in \"Sonnets from the Portuguese\" began with a reminiscence of lines from a pastoral of Theocritus, Edward Cracroft Lefroy (1855\u20131891) responded by reaching beyond the narrative mode towards the dramatic in the thirty adaptations from the Greek of his \"Echoes from Theocritus\" (1885, reprint 1922). Beyond this, though the idea of arranging such material in a sequence was original to Lefroy, Thomas Warwick had anticipated the approach a century before in his sonnet \"From Bacchylides\", equally based on a fragment of an ancient Greek author. On the other hand, Eugene Lee-Hamilton's exploration of the sonnet's dramatic possibilities was through creating historical monologues in his hundred \"Imaginary Sonnets\" (1888), based on episodes chosen from the seven centuries between 1120 \u2013 1820. Neither sequence was anywhere the equal of those of Barrett Browning or Meredith, but they illustrate a contemporary urge to make new a form that was fast running out of steam.\n20th century.\nAs part of his attempted renewal of poetic prosody, Gerard Manley Hopkins had applied his experimental sprung rhythm to the composition of the sonnet, amplifying the number of unstressed syllables within a five- (or occasionally six-) stressed line \u2013 as in the rhetorical \"The Windhover\", for example. He also introduced variations in the proportions of the sonnet, from the 10&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 lines of the curtal sonnet \"Pied Beauty\" to the amplified 24-line caudate sonnet \"That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire\". Though they were written in the later Victorian era, the poems remained virtually unknown until they were published in 1918.\nThe undergraduate W. H. Auden is sometimes credited with dispensing with rhyme altogether in \"The Secret Agent\". He went on to write many conventional sonnets later, including two long sequences during the time of international crisis: \"In Time of War\" (1939) and \"The Quest\" (1940), in which \"the use of geography and landscape to symbolise spiritual and mental states\" owes something to the earlier example of Rilke. Sequences by some other poets have been more experimental and looser in form, of which a radical example was \"Altarwise by owl-light\" (1935), ten irregular and barely rhyming quatorzains by Dylan Thomas in his most opaque manner. \nIn 1978 two later innovatory sequences were published at a period when it was considered that \"the sonnet seems to want to lie fallow, exhausted\", in the words of one commentator. Peter Dale's book-length \"One Another\" contains a dialogue of some sixty sonnets in which the variety of rhyming methods are as diverse as the emotions expressed between the speakers there. At the same time, Geoffrey Hill's \"An Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture in England\" appeared in \"Tenebrae\" (1978), where the challenging thirteen poems of the sequence employ half-rhyme and generally ignore the volta. Seamus Heaney also wrote two sequences during this period: the personal \"Glanmore Sonnets\" in \"Field Work\" (1975); and the more freely constructed elegiac sonnets of \"Clearances\" in \"The Haw Lantern\" (1987).\nIn North America.\nUSA.\nThe earliest American sonnet is David Humphreys's 1776 sonnet \"Addressed to my Friends at Yale College, on my Leaving them to join the Army\". The sonnet form was used widely thereafter, including by William Lloyd Garrison and William Cullen Bryant. Later, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and others followed suit. His were characterised by a \"purple richness of diction\" and by their use of material images to illustrate niceties of thought and emotion. He also translated several sonnets, including seven by Michelangelo. Later on, among Emma Lazarus' many sonnets, perhaps the best-known is \"The New Colossus\" of 1883, which celebrates the Statue of Liberty and its role in welcoming immigrants to the New World.\nIn the 19th century, sonnets written by American poets began to be anthologised as such. They were included in a separate section in Leigh Hunt and S. Adams' \"The Book of the Sonnet\" (London and Boston, 1867), which included an essay by Adams on \"American Sonnets and Sonneteers\" and a section devoted only to sonnets by American women. Later came William Sharp's anthology of \"American Sonnets\" (1889) and Charles H. Crandall's \"Representative sonnets by American poets, with an essay on the sonnet, its nature and history\" (Houghton Mifflin &amp; Co., 1890). The essay also surveyed the whole history of the sonnet, including English examples and European examples in translation, in order to contextualise the American achievement.\nRecent scholarship has recovered many African American sonnets that were not anthologised in standard American poetry volumes. Important nineteenth and early twentieth century writers have included Paul Laurence Dunbar, Countee Cullen, Sterling A. Brown, and Jamaican-born Claude McKay. Some of their sonnets were personal responses to experience of displacement and racial prejudice. Cullen\u2019s \"At the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem\" (1927), for example, suggests a parallel between the history of his race and that of the Jewish diaspora. And McKay's sonnets of 1921 respond defiantly to the deadly Red Summer riots two years before. There were also several African American women poets who won prizes for volumes that included sonnets, including Margaret Walker (Yale Poetry Series) Gwendolyn Brooks (Pulitzer Prize), Rita Dove (Pulitzer Prize), and Natasha Trethewey (Pulitzer Prize). But there were other writers - like Langston Hughes and Amiri Baraka, for example - who, despite publishing some themselves, questioned the appropriateness of sonnets for Black poets. In the opinion of Hughes, the emergence of truly individual writing based on folk genres and experience was hindered by the imposition of genteel \"white\" verse forms irrelevant to them.\nOne aspect of the American sonnet during the 20th century was the publication of sequences which had to wait decades for critical recognition. One instance is \"This Man's Army: A War in Fifty-Odd Sonnets\" (1928) by John Allan Wyeth. A series of irregular sonnets that recorded impressions of his military service with the American Expeditionary Force during the First World War, it was scarcely noticed when it first appeared. Yet on its republication in 2008, Dana Gioia asserted in his introduction that Wyeth is the only American poet of the Great War who can stand comparison to British war poets, a claim later corroborated by Jon Stallworthy in his review of the work.\nShortly after the publication of Wyeth's, H. P. Lovecraft wrote his very different sonnet sequence, sections of which first appeared in genre magazines. It was not until 1943 that it saw complete publication as Fungi from Yuggoth. These 36 poems were written in a hybrid form based on the Petrarchan sonnet that invariably ends with a rhyming couplet reminiscent of the Shakespearean sonnet. Most of these poems are discontinuous, though unified by theme, being vignettes descriptive of the kinds of dreamed and otherworldly scenarios found in Lovecraft's fiction. Their unmannered style was once compared to Edward Arlington Robinson's, but since then a case has been made for the work as minor poetry of contemporary importance in its own right.\nIn the case of John Berryman, he initially wrote a series of some hundred modernistic love sonnets during the 1940s. These, however, remained uncollected until 1967, when they appeared as \"Berryman\u2019s Sonnets\", fleshed out with a few additions to give them the form of a sequence. In her 2014 survey of the book for \"Poetry\", April Bernard suggests that he was there making of 'Berryman' a similar semi-fictional character to the 'Henry' in The Dream Songs (1964). She also identifies an ancient ancestry for the disordered syntax of the work through the English poets Thomas Wyatt and Gerard Manley Hopkins.\nBut at this time too began to appear sequences of quatorzains with only a tenuous relationship to the sonnet form. Ted Berrigan's \"The Sonnets\" (1964) discard metre and rhyme but retain the dynamics of a 14-line structure with a change of direction at the volta. Berrigan claimed to have been inspired by \"Shakespeare\u2019s sonnets because they were quick, musical, witty and short\". Others have described Berrigan's work as a postmodern collage using \"repetition, rearrangement, and the use of 'found' phrases and text\", that functions as a \"radical deconstruction of the sonnet\". From 1969 Robert Lowell too began publishing a less radical deconstruction of the form in his series of five collections of blank verse sonnets, including his Pulitzer Prize volume \"The Dolphin\" (1973). These he described as having \"the eloquence at best of iambic pentameter, and often the structure and climaxes of sonnets\".\nThe contemporary reaction against the strict form is described in the introduction to William Baer's anthology \"Sonnets: 150 Contemporary Sonnets\" (2005). But for all that a number of writers were declaring then that the sonnet was dead, others \u2013 including Richard Wilbur, Howard Nemerov and Anthony Hecht \u2013 continued to write sonnets and eventually became associated with the magazines \"The Formalist\" and then \"Measure\". These journals, champions of the New Formalism between the years 1994 and 2017, sponsored the annual Howard Nemerov Sonnet Award.\nCanada.\nIn Canada during the last decades of the 19th century, the Confederation Poets and especially Archibald Lampman were known for their sonnets, which were mainly on pastoral themes.\nCanadian poet Seymour Mayne has published a few collections of word sonnets, and is one of the chief innovators of a form using a single word per line to capture its honed perception.\nIn German.\nPaulus Melissus was the first to introduce the sonnet into German poetry. But the man who did most to raise the sonnet to German consciousness was Martin Opitz, who in two works, \"Buch von der deutschen Poeterey\" (1624) and \"Acht B\u00fccher Deutscher Poematum\" (1625), established the sonnet as a separate genre and its rules of composition. It was to be written in iambic alexandrines, with alternating masculine and feminine enclosed rhymes in the octave and a more flexible sestet with three rhymes. Reinforcing them were translated examples from Petrarch, Ronsard and Daniel Heinsius. Thereafter in the 18th century, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe wrote several love sonnets, using a rhyme scheme derived from Italian poetry. After his death, Goethe's followers created the freer 'German sonnet', which is rhymed formula_18.\nThe sonnet tradition was then continued by August Wilhelm von Schlegel, Paul von Heyse and others, reaching fruition in Rainer Maria Rilke's \"Sonnets to Orpheus\", which has been described as \"one of the great modern poems, not to mention a monumental addition to the literature of the sonnet sequence\". A cycle of 55 sonnets, it was written in two parts in 1922 while Rilke was in the midst of completing his Duino Elegies. The full title in German is \"Die Sonette an Orpheus: Geschrieben als ein Grab-Mal f\u00fcr Wera Ouckama Knoop\" (translated as \"Sonnets to Orpheus: Written as a Monument for Wera Ouckama Knoop\"), commemorating the recent death of a young dancer from leukaemia. The \"\" (literally \"grave-marker\") of the title brings to mind the series of \"Tombeaux\" written by St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9, translated (among others) by Rilke in 1919, also coinciding with the sonnets of Michelangelo which Rilke had been translating in 1921. Rilke's own sonnets are fluidly structured as a transposition of the dead girl's dancing and encompass themes of life and death and art's relation to them. As well as having varied rhyme schemes, line lengths also vary and are irregularly metred, even within the same sonnet at times.\nResponses to turbulent times form a distinct category among German sonnets. They include Friedrich R\u00fcckert's 72 \"Sonnets in Armour\" (\"Geharnischte Sonneten\", 1814), stirring up resistance to Napoleonic domination; and sonnets by Emanuel Geibel written during the German revolutions of 1848\u20131849 and the First Schleswig War. In the wake of the First World War, Anton Schnack, described by one anthologist as \"the only German language poet whose work can be compared with that of Wilfred Owen\", published the sonnet sequence, \"Tier rang gewaltig mit Tier\" (\"Beast Strove Mightily with Beast\", 1920). The 60 poems there have the typical German sonnet form, but are written in the long-lined free rhythms developed by Ernst Stadler. Patrick Bridgwater, writing in 1985, called the work \"without question the best single collection produced by a German war poet in 1914\u201318,\" but adds that it \"is to this day virtually unknown even in Germany.\"\nIn Dutch.\nIn the Netherlands Pieter Corneliszoon Hooft introduced sonnets in the Baroque style, of which \"Mijn lief, mijn lief, mijn lief: soo sprack mijn lief mij toe\" presents a notable example of sound and word play. Another of his\nsonnets, dedicated to Hugo Grotius, was later translated by Edmund Gosse. In later centuries the sonnet form was dropped and then returned to by successive waves of innovators in an attempt to breathe new life into Dutch poetry when, in their eyes, it had lost its way. For the generation of the 1880s it was Jacques Perk's sonnet sequence \"Mathilde\" which served as a rallying cry. And for a while in the early years of the new century, Martinus Nijhoff wrote notable sonnets before turning to more modernistic models.\nFollowing the Second World War, avant-garde poets declared war on all formalism, reacting particularly against the extreme subjectivity and self-aggrandisement of representatives of the 1880s style like Willem Kloos, who had once begun a sonnet \"In my deepest being I'm a god\". In reaction, Lucebert satirised such writing in the \"sonnet\" with which his first collection opened: &lt;poem&gt;::I/ me/ I/ me// me/ I/ me/ I// I/ I/ my// my/ my/ I&lt;/poem&gt; But by the end of the 20th century, formalist poets such as Gerrit Komrij and Jan Kal were writing sonnets again as part of their own reaction to the experimentalism of earlier decades.\nJewish languages.\nFor three millennia there has been a literature in the various languages developed by the scattered communities of Jewish origin. So far as the sonnet is concerned, two languages were involved, mostly written in the European areas where that form was taken up and taken elsewhere in the world by emigrants.\nHebrew.\nThe Hebrew name for a sonnet is \"shir zahav\", deriving from a numerological play on words. Literally 'golden song', the consonants of \"zahav\" also stand for numbers adding up to fourteen, so that the term can also mean 'song of fourteen lines'.\nThe first sonnets in Medieval Hebrew poetry were probably composed in Rome by Immanuel the Roman around the year 1300, less than a century after the advent of the Italian sonnet. 38 sonnets are included in his maqama collection \"Mahberot Immanuel\" that combine elements of both the quantitative metre traditional to Hebrew and Arabic verse and Italian syllabic metre. Predominantly dealing with love, they were rhymedformula_19.\nImmanuel's work provided a ready model for the second wave of Italo-Hebrew sonnet writers. The first printed edition of \"Mahberot Immanuel\" appeared in Brescia in 1492, followed by a second edition published in Constantinople in 1535. The new crop therefore coincided with the adoption of the sonnet in other European literatures at the start of the 16th century and persisted into the Baroque period of the following century, with more than eighty poets taking up the form. Though there was now a shift of focus to religious themes, love poetry was not excluded, particularly in the sonnets of David Okineira of Salonika. The Baroque practice of incorporating sonnets along with other verse into plays, as had Shakespeare in England and Lope da Vega in Spain, was also to be found in Moses ben Mordecai Zacuto's \"Yesod Olam\" (Foundation of the World, 1642) and in \"Asirei ha-Tiqva\" (Prisoners of Hope, 1673), an allegorical play by Joseph de la Vega. A further revival of the Hebrew sonnet followed in the 18th century, associated with Samson Cohen Modon (1679\u20131727), Moshe Chaim Luzzatto and his cousin, Ephraim Luzzatto (1729\u20131792), who are regarded as founders of modern Hebrew literature.\nThat the form persisted into the 20th century was celebrated by Shaul Tchernichovsky in his \"Ma\u1e25beret ha-Sonetot\" (Berlin 1923), in which appeared a sonnet of his own celebrating its continuity since the time of Immanuel of Rome: \"Thou art dear to me, how dear to me, \"Sonetot, O shir zahav\"\". The same author was responsible for introducing the crown of sonnets into Hebrew poetry. \nYiddish.\nYiddish, the name given to a continuum of Judaeo-German dialects spoken particularly across Eastern Europe, has had a literature since the Middle Ages. The sonnet, however, arriving late in the surrounding Slavic areas, was at first viewed as an alien genre among Jewish writers in Yiddish. Its adoption came only slowly with greater access to secular education and with emigration. \nThe first poets to use the form are credited as Dovid Kenigsberg (1891-1942) and Fradl Shtok. The former published \"Soneten\" (Lemberg 1913) and later his hundred sonnets (\"Hundert Soneten\", Vienna, 1921). Shtok emigrated to the US while young and began publishing poetry soon after her arrival in New York in 1910. In reality, earlier sonnets dating from the 1890s were written in the US by Morris Vintshevski (1856-1932); and in Vilnius those written by Leib Naidus, starting from 1910, demonstrated the westward-spreading influence of Symbolist-inspired modernism. Those poets in Europe who authored entire collections of sonnets include Gershon-Peysekh Vayland (1869\u20131942), published in Warsaw in 1938 and 1939; Yankev Gotlib (1911\u20131945), published in Kaunas in 1938; and the Polish Abraham Nahum Stencl , whose \"Londoner Sonetn\" were published after his arrival in London in 1937. \nLater examples of those writing substantial numbers of sonnets in the US number the scholar N. B. Minkoff, who included a sonnet cycle in \"Lieder\" (1924), his first publication after immigrating, and Aron Glantz-Leyeles (1899\u20131968), who published a whole collection of poems in mediaeval forms in 1926. This included \"Autumn\", a densely rhymed garland of fifteen sonnets. In 1932 Yoysef-Leyzer Kalushiner (1893\u20131968) published a whole book of sonnets in New York. He was followed by the little known M. Freed, who had already published a sonnet collection, \"The Narcissi\" (\"\u05e0\u05d0\u05e8\u05e6\u05d9\u05e1\u05df\", Czernowitz, 1937), in Bukovina before making his way to the US, where he published \"An evening by the Prut\" (\u05de. \u05e4\u05e8\u05d9\u05d3\u05d5\u05d5\u05d9\u05d9\u05e0\u05d9\u05e0\u05d2\u05e2\u05e8, New York, 1942). Later collections of sonnets include \"Sonetn fun toye-voye\" (Sonnets of chaos, New York, 1957) by Yirmye Hesheles, (1910\u20132010) and Mani Leib's \"Sonetn\" (1961), considered the crowning achievement of his work and \"one of the last great works of Yiddish poetry\". To these post-war collections may be added \"Meksike, finf un draysik sonetn\" (Mexico, 35 sonnets, 1949), which was published in Mexico City after Austridan Oystriak (1911-92) had fled there from Europe in 1940.\nYiddish sonnets published in Israel, where the preferred language was Hebrew, were comparatively rare. Samuel Jacob Taubes (1898-1975) had already published religious sonnets in Europe before emigrating to Israel after a wandering literary career. Shlomo Roitman (1913-85) began writing in Russia and published sonnet collections after his arrival in Israel.\nSlavic languages.\nCzech.\nThe sonnet was introduced into Czech literature at the beginning of the 19th century. The first great Czech sonneteer was J\u00e1n Koll\u00e1r, who wrote a cycle of sonnets named \"Sl\u00e1vy Dcera\" (\"The daughter of Sl\u00e1va\"\u00a0/\u00a0\"The daughter of fame\"). While Koll\u00e1r was Slovak, he was a supporter of Pan-Slavism and wrote in Czech, as he disagreed that Slovak should be a separate language. Koll\u00e1r's magnum opus was planned as a Slavic epic poem as great as Dante's \"Divine Comedy\". It consists of \"The Prelude\" written in quantitative hexameters, and sonnets. The number of poems increased in subsequent editions and came up to 645. The greatest Czech romantic poet, Karel Hynek M\u00e1cha also wrote many sonnets. In the second half of the 19th century Jaroslav Vrchlick\u00fd published \"Sonety samot\u00e1\u0159e\" (\"Sonnets of a Solitudinarian\"). Another poet, who wrote many sonnets was Josef Svatopluk Machar. He published \"\u010cty\u0159i knihy sonet\u016f\" (\"The Four Books of Sonnets\"). In the 20th century V\u00edt\u011bzslav Nezval wrote the cycle \"100 sonet\u016f zachr\u00e1nkyni v\u011b\u010dn\u00e9ho studenta Roberta Davida\" (\"One Hundred Sonnets for the Woman who Rescued Perpetual Student Robert David\"). After the Second World War the sonnet was the favourite form of Old\u0159ich Vyhl\u00eddal. Czech poets use different metres for sonnets, Koll\u00e1r and M\u00e1cha used decasyllables, Vrchlick\u00fd iambic pentameter, Anton\u00edn Sova free verse, and Ji\u0159\u00ed Orten the Czech alexandrine. Ond\u0159ej Hanus, himself the author of distinguished sonnets, wrote a monograph about Czech sonnets in the first half of the twentieth century.\nPolish.\nThe sonnet was introduced into Polish literature in the 16th century by Jan Kochanowski, Miko\u0142aj S\u0119p-Szarzy\u0144ski and Sebastian Grabowiecki.\nIn 1826, Poland's national poet, Adam Mickiewicz, wrote a sonnet sequence known as the \"Crimean Sonnets\", after \nthe Tsar sentenced him to exile in the Crimean Peninsula. Mickiewicz's sonnet sequence focuses heavily on the culture and Islamic religion of the Crimean Tatars. The sequence was translated into English by Edna Worthley Underwood.\nRussian.\nIn the 18th century, after the westernizing reforms of Peter the Great, Russian poets (among others Alexander Sumarokov and Mikhail Kheraskov) began to experiment with sonnets, but the form was soon overtaken in popularity by the more flexible Onegin stanza. This was used by Alexander Pushkin for his novel in verse \"Eugene Onegin\" and has also been described as the 'Onegin sonnet', since it consists of fourteen lines. It is, however, aberrant in rhyme scheme and the number of stresses per line and is better described as having only a family resemblance to the sonnet. The form was adapted by other poets later, including by Mikhail Lermontov in his narrative of \"The Tambov Treasurer's Wife\".\nSlovenian.\nIn Slovenia the sonnet became a national verse form, using iambic pentameter with feminine rhymes, based both on the Italian endecasillabo and German iambic pentameter.\nThe greatest Slovenian poet, France Pre\u0161eren, wrote several sonnet sequences from 1831 onwards and is particularly known for his crown of sonnets, \"Sonetni venec\" (\"A Wreath of Sonnets\"). Many later poets followed him in using the sonnet form. After the Second World War, Slovenian poets wrote both traditional rhymed sonnets and postmodern ones, unrhymed and in free verse. Among such writers are Milan Jesih and Ale\u0161 Debeljak.\nCeltic languages.\nIn Irish.\nAlthough sonnets had long been written in English by poets of Irish heritage such as Sir Aubrey de Vere, Oscar Wilde, William Butler Yeats, Tom Kettle, and Patrick Kavanagh, the sonnet form failed to enter Irish poetry in the Irish language. This changed, however, during the Gaelic revival when Dublin-born Liam G\u00f3gan (1891\u20131979) was dismissed from his post in the National Museum of Ireland and imprisoned at Frongoch internment camp following the Easter Rising. There he became the first poet to write sonnets in the Irish language.\nIn 2009, poet Muiris Sion\u00f3id published a complete translation of William Shakespeare's 154 sonnets into Irish under the title \"Rotha M\u00f3r an Ghr\u00e1\" (\"The Great Wheel of Love\"). In an article about his translations, Sion\u00f3id wrote that Irish poetic forms are completely different from those of other languages and that both the sonnet form and the iambic pentameter line had long been considered \"entirely unsuitable\" for composing poetry in Irish. In his translations, Soin\u00f3id chose to closely reproduce Shakespeare's rhyme scheme and rhythms while rendering into Irish.\nIn Welsh.\nAccording to Jan Morris, \"When Welsh poets speak of Free Verse, they mean forms like the sonnet or the ode, which obey the same rules as English poesy. Strict Metres verse still honours the complex rules laid down for correct poetic composition 600 years ago.\" Nevertheless, several of the greatest recent Welsh language poets have also written sonnets, including Welsh nationalist and Traditionalist Catholic poet Saunders Lewis and Far-left poet Thomas Evan Nicholas.\nIndian languages.\nIn the Indian subcontinent, sonnets have been written in the Assamese, Bengali, Dogri, English, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Oriya, Sindhi and Urdu languages.\nIn Urdu.\nUrdu poets, also influenced by English and other European poets, took to introducing the sonnet into Urdu poetry rather late. Azmatullah Khan (1887\u20131923) is believed to have introduced this format to Urdu literature in the very early part of the 20th century. The other renowned Urdu poets who wrote sonnets were Akhtar Junagarhi, Akhtar Sheerani, Noon Meem Rashid, Mehr Lal Soni Zia Fatehabadi, Salaam Machhalishahari and Wazir Agha.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28261", "revid": "5532431", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28261", "title": "Samba", "text": "Brazilian musical genre\nSamba () is a broad term for many of the rhythms that compose the better known Brazilian music genres that originated in the Afro Brazilian communities of Bahia in the late 19th century and early 20th century, It is a name or prefix used for several rhythmic variants, such as samba urbano carioca (\"urban Carioca samba\"), samba de roda (sometimes also called \"rural samba\"), among many other forms of samba, mostly originated in the Rio de Janeiro and Bahia states. Having its roots in Brazilian folk traditions, especially those linked to the primitive rural samba of the colonial and imperial periods, is considered one of the most important cultural phenomena in Brazil and one of the country symbols. Present in the Portuguese language at least since the 19th century, the word \"samba\" was originally used to designate a \"popular dance\". Over time, its meaning has been extended to a \"batuque-like circle dance\", a dance style, and also to a \"music genre\". This process of establishing itself as a musical genre began in the 1910s and it had its inaugural landmark in the song \"Pelo Telefone\", launched in 1917. Despite being identified by its creators, the public, and the Brazilian music industry as \"samba\", this pioneering style was much more connected from the rhythmic and instrumental point of view to maxixe than to samba itself.\nSamba was modernly structured as a musical genre only in the late 1920s from the neighborhood of Est\u00e1cio and soon extended to Oswaldo Cruz and other parts of Rio through its commuter rail. Today synonymous with the rhythm of samba, this new samba brought innovations in rhythm, melody and also in thematic aspects. Its rhythmic change based on a new percussive instrumental pattern resulted in a more drummed and syncopated style \u2013 as opposed to the inaugural \"samba\u2013maxixe\" \u2013 notably characterized by a faster tempo, longer notes and a characterized cadence far beyond the simple ones used till then. Also the \"Est\u00e1cio paradigm\" innovated in the formatting of samba as a song, with its musical organization in first and second parts in both melody and lyrics. In this way, the sambistas of Est\u00e1cio created, structured and redefined the urban Carioca samba as a genre in a modern and finished way. In this process of establishment as an urban and modern musical expression, the Carioca samba had the decisive role of samba schools, responsible for defining and legitimizing definitively the aesthetic bases of rhythm, and radio broadcasting, which greatly contributed to the diffusion and popularization of the genre and its song singers. Thus, samba has achieved major projection throughout Brazil and has become one of the main symbols of Brazilian national identity. Once criminalized and rejected for its Afro Brazilian origins, and definitely working-class music in its mythic origins, the genre has also received support from members of the upper classes and the country's cultural elite.\nAt the same time that it established itself as the genesis of samba, the \"Est\u00e1cio paradigm\" paved the way for its fragmentation into new sub-genres and styles of composition and interpretation throughout the 20th century. Mainly from the so-called \"golden age\" of Brazilian music, samba received abundant categorizations, some of which denote solid and well-accepted derivative strands, such as bossa nova, pagode, partido alto, samba de breque, samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o, samba de enredo and samba de terreiro, while other nomenclatures were somewhat more imprecise, such as samba do barulho (literally \"noise samba\"), samba epistolar (\"epistolary samba\") ou samba fon\u00e9tico (\"phonetic samba\") \u2013 and some merely derogatory \u2013 such as sambalada, sambolero or samb\u00e3o joia.\nThe modern samba that emerged at the beginning of the 20th century is predominantly in a time signature varied with the conscious use of a sung chorus to a batucada rhythm, with various stanzas of declaratory verses. Its traditional instrumentation is composed of percussion instruments such as the pandeiro, cu\u00edca, tamborim, ganz\u00e1 and surdo accompaniment \u2013 whose inspiration is choro \u2013 such as classical guitar and cavaquinho. In 2005 UNESCO declared Samba de Roda part of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, and in 2007, the Brazilian National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage declared Carioca samba and three of its matrices \u2013 samba de terreiro, partido-alto and samba de enredo \u2013 as cultural heritage in Brazil.\nEtymology and definition.\nThere is no consensus among experts on the etymology of the term \"samba\". A traditionalist view that defends that the etymon comes from the Bantu was in the \"Di\u00e1rio de Pernambuco\" in 1830. The term was documented in the publication in a note opposing the sending of soldiers to the \"c\"ountryside of Pernambuco State as a disciplinary measure, as there they could be idle and entertained with \"fishing of corrals [traps to catch fish], and climbing coconut trees, in whose hobbies viola and samba will be welcomed \". Another old appearance was recorded in the humorous Recife newspaper \"O Carapuceiro\", dated February 1838, when Father Miguel Lopes Gama of Sacramento wrote against what he called \"the samba d'almocreve\" \u2013 not referring to the future musical genre, but a kind of merriment (dance drama) popular for black people of that time. According to Hiram Ara\u00fajo da Costa, over the centuries, the festival of dances of enslaved people in Bahia were called samba. In Rio de Janeiro, the word only became known at the end of the 19th century, when it was linked to rural festivities, to the area of Black people and to the \"north\" of the country, that is, the Brazilian Northeast.\nFor many years of the Brazilian colonial and imperial history, the terms \"batuque\" or \"samba\" were used in any manifestation of African origins that brought together dances (mainly umbigada), songs and uses of Black people instruments. At the end of the 19th century, \"samba\" was present in the Portuguese language, designating different types of popular dances performed by African slaves (xiba, fandango, cateret\u00e9, candombl\u00e9, bai\u00e3o) that assumed its own characteristics in each Brazilian state, not only by the diversity of the ethnic groups of the African diaspora, but also the peculiarity of each region in which they were settlers. In the twentieth century, the term was gaining new meanings, as for a \"circle dance similar to batuque\" and a \"genre of popular song\".\nThe use of the word in a musical context was documented as early as 1913 in the song \"Em casa de baiana\", registered as a \"samba de partido-alto\"; then in the following year, for the works \"A viola est\u00e1 magoada\" and \"Moleque vagabundo;\" finally, in 1916, for the famous song \"Pelo Telefone\", released as \"samba carnavalesco\" (\"carnival samba\") and regarded as the founding landmark of modern Carioca samba.\nRoots.\nRural tradition.\nDuring a folkloric research mission in the Northeast Region of 1938, the writer M\u00e1rio de Andrade noticed that, in rural areas, the term \"samba\" was associated with the event where the dance was performed, the way of dancing the samba and the music performed for the dance. Urban Carioca samba was influenced by several traditions associated with the universe of rural communities throughout Brazil. The folklorist Oneida Alvarenga was the first expert to list primitive popular dances of the type: , , , or , , , , , and . To this list, Jorge Sabino and Raul Lody added , (also called ), , , and .\nOne of the most important forms of dance in the constitution of Carioca samba choreography, the , practiced in Bahia's Rec\u00f4ncavo, was typically danced outdoors by a soloist, while other participants of the circle would take charge of the singing \u2013 alternating between solo and chorus parts \u2013 and of accompanying instrumental performance. The three basic dance-steps of Bahian circle samba were named , , and (literally and respectively, \"cut-the-jackfruit\", \"separate-the-birdlime\", and \"pick-the-grape\"), in addition to one intended to be danced by women only. In their research on Bahian samba, Roberto Mendes and Waldomiro Junior examined that some elements from other cultures, such as the Arab pandeiro and the Portuguese viola, were gradually incorporated into the singing and rhythm of African batuques, whose best-known variants were and .\nIn the S\u00e3o Paulo state, another primitive modality of known rural samba developed, practiced basically in cities along the Tiet\u00ea River \u2013 from S\u00e3o Paulo city to the river's middle course \u2013 and traditionally divided into , characterized by instrumental percussion with a bass drum, and , with tambu, quinjengue and guai\u00e1 for the instrumentation.\nEssentially made up of two parts (choir and solo) usually performed on the fly, the partido alto was \u2013 and still is \u2013 the most traditional sung variant of rural samba in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Originating in Greater Rio de Janeiro, it is the combination, according to Lopes and Simas, of Bahian circle-samba, singing, and a kind of transition from rural samba to what would come to be urban 20th century Rio samba.\nCriminalization.\nIn its beginnings, samba was heavily criminalized by the Brazilian government. Born in the favelas, it was a distinctly Afro Brazilian musical genre that brought people together in community and celebration, which was not well-seen or -received by the Brazilian elite, who deemed it tasteless, immoral and inferior. Such attitude was grounded in racism and classism, besides religious intolerance: samba's incorporation of African drumming was commonly associated with Afro Brazilian religions, which have long been demonized and discriminated against in Brazil, especially so in the early 20th century, when samba was gaining traction.\nMany early composers were thought to be leaders of cults of African origin, therefore samba faced policed persecution. Any samba gathering would be swiftly shut down, with musicians arrested and their instruments destroyed. As a result, samba had to go underground, relying on community members to assume the risk of persecution to have samba parties out of their homes. Ultimately, the genre became a hallmark of Brazilian culture and a highlight of Carnival, but it was not ever thus, as in its origins practicing samba was defiance against the government.\nRoots of the Carioca Carnival.\nDuring colonial Brazil, many public Catholic events used to attract all social segments, including Black and enslaved people, who took the celebrations as opportunities to express themselves authentically, in their original, native way, with such cultural manifestations as the crowning revelry of the Congo Kings, and the Bantu revelry (called ) in Rio de Janeiro. Gradually were those once exclusively Black celebrations being disconnected from the Catholic roots and rites of Carnival, eventually morphing into the Brazilian Carnival. From the cucumbis emerged the samba school called (lit.\u2009'Carioca strings'), which celebrated Brazilianness, or the mixed heritage of the Brazilian people, e.g. by presenting Black people in indigenous dress. At the end of the 19th century, on the initiative of composer and samba pioneer Hil\u00e1rio Jovino, the samba ranch (later known as ), was created in the state of Pernambuco. One of the most important ranches in Rio's Carnival was Ameno Resed\u00e1. Created in 1907, the self-titled (\"ranch-school\") became a model for Carnival performances-in-procession and for future samba schools to be founded in the hills and outskirts of Rio de Janeiro.\nThe urban Carioca samba.\nBeginnings in a Bahian.\nA political and sociocultural epicenter of Brazil, based on slavery, Rio de Janeiro was strongly influenced by African culture. In the middle of the 19th century, more than half the population of the city \u2013 then capital of the Brazilian Empire \u2013 was formed by black slaves. In the early 1890s, Rio had more than half a million inhabitants, of whom only half were born in the city, while the other part came from the old Brazilian imperial provinces, mainly from Bahia. In search of better living conditions, this influx of black Bahians to Rio lands increased considerably after the abolition of slavery in Brazil. Called \"Pequena Africa\" (\"Little Africa\") by Heitor dos Prazeres, this Afro-Bahian diaspora community in the country's capital settled in the vicinity of the Rio de Janeiro port area and, after the urban reforms of Mayor Pereira Passos, in the neighborhoods of Sa\u00fade and Cidade Nova. Through the action of black Bahians living in Rio, new habits, customs and values of Afro-Bahian matrixes were introduced that influenced the culture of Rio, especially in popular events such as the traditional Festa da Penha and Carnival. Black women from Salvador and Bahia's Rec\u00f4ncavo, the \"Tias Baianas\" (literally, \"Bahian Aunts\") founded the first Candombl\u00e9 terreiros, introduced the cowrie-shell divination and disseminated the mysteries of the African-based religions of the Jeje-Nag\u00f4 tradition in the city. In addition to candombl\u00e9, the residences or terreiros of the aunts of Bahia hosted various community activities, such as cooking and the pagodes, where urban Rio samba would develop.\nAmong the most well-known Bahian aunts in Rio, were the Tias Sadata, Bibiana, F\u00ea, Rosa Ol\u00e9, Am\u00e9lia do Arag\u00e3o, Veridiana, M\u00f4nica, Perciliana de Santo Amaro and Ciata. A place for meetings around religion, cuisine, dance and music, Tia Ciata's home was frequented both by samba musicians and pais-de-santo as well as by influential intellectuals and politicians from Rio de Janeiro society. Among some of its members regulars were Sinh\u00f4, Pixinguinha, Heitor dos Prazeres, Jo\u00e3o da Baiana, Donga and Caninha, as well as some journalists and intellectuals, such as Jo\u00e3o do Rio, Manuel Bandeira, M\u00e1rio de Andrade and Francisco Guimar\u00e3es (popularly known as Vagalume). It was in this environment that Vagalume, then a columnist for Jornal do Brasil, witnessed the birth of \"O Macaco \u00c9 Outro\" in October 1916. According to the journalist, this samba immediately won the support of the popular people who left singing the music in an animated block. Donga registered the work in sheet music and, on 27 November of that year, declared himself as its author in the National Library, where it was registered as \"carnival samba\" called \"Pelo Telefone\". Shortly after, the score was used in three recordings at Casa Edison record label. One of them interpreted by Baiano with the accompaniment of classical guitar, cavaquinho and clarinet. Released in 78 rpm format on 19 January 1917, \"Pelo Telefone\" became a huge hit in that year's Rio carnival. Two instrumental versions were also released \u2013 recorded by Banda Odeon and Banda de 1\u00ba Battalion of the Police of Bahia \u2013 in 1917 and 1918 respectively.\nThe success of \"Pelo Telefone\" marked the official beginning of samba as a song genre. Its primacy as \"the first samba in history\" has, however, been questioned by some scholars, on the grounds that the work was only the first samba under this categorization to be successful. Before, \"Em casa da baiana\" was recorded by Alfredo Carlos Bricio, declared to the National Library as \"samba de partido-alto\" in 1913, \"A viola est\u00e1 magoada\", by Catulo da Paix\u00e3o Cearense, released as \"samba\" by Baiano and J\u00falia the following year, and \"Moleque vagabundo\", \"samba\" by Lourival de Carvalho, also in 1914.\nAnother debate related to \"Pelo Telefone\" concerns Donga's exclusive authorship, which was soon contested by some of his contemporaries who accused him of appropriating a collective, anonymous creation, registering it as his own. The central part of the song would have been conceived in the traditional improvisations in meetings at Tia Ciata's house. Sinh\u00f4 claimed the authorship of the chorus \"ai, se rolinha, sinh\u00f4, sinh\u00f4\" and created another song lyrics in response to Donga. However, Sinh\u00f4 himself, who would consolidate himself in the 1920s as the first important figure of samba, was accused of appropriating other people's songs or verses \u2013 to which he justified himself with the famous maxim that samba was \"like a bird\" in the air, it is \"whoever gets it first\". This defense is part of a period in which the figure of the popular composer was not that of the individual who composed or organized sounds, but the one who registered and disseminated the songs. In the era of mechanical recordings, musical compositions \u2013 under the pretext of ensuring that there was no plagiarism \u2013 did not belong to composers, but to publishers and, later, to record labels, a reality modified only with the advent of electrical recordings, when the right to intellectual property of the work became individual and inalienable to the composer. In any case, it was because \"Pelo Telefone\" that samba gained notoriety as a product in the Brazilian music industry. Gradually, the nascent urban samba was gaining popularity in Rio de Janeiro, especially at the Festa da Penha and Carnival. In October, the Festa da Penha became a great event for composers from Cidade Nova who wanted to publicize their compositions in the expectation that they would be released at the following carnival. Another promoter during this period was the Revue shows, a place that enshrined Aracy Cortes as one of the first successful singers of the new popular song genre.\nThe solidification of the electric recording system made it possible for the recording industry to launch new sambas by singers with less powerful voices, such as Carmen Miranda and M\u00e1rio Reis, performers who became references when creating a new way of interpreting the most natural and spontaneous samba, without so many ornaments, as opposed to the tradition of belcanto style. These recordings followed an aesthetic pattern characterized by structural similarities to the lundu and, mainly, to the maxixe. Because of this, this type of samba is considered by scholars as \"samba-maxixe\" or \"samba amaxixado\". Although the samba practiced in the festivities of Bahian communities in Rio was an urban stylization of the ancestral \"samba de roda\" in Bahia, characterized by a high party samba with refrains sung to the marked rhythm of the palms and the plates shaved with knives, this samba it was also influenced by the maxixe. It was in the following decade that a new model of samba would be born, from the hills of Rio de Janeiro, quite distinct from that of the amaxixado style associated with the communities of Cidade Nova.\nSamba do Est\u00e1cio, the genesis of urban samba.\nBetween the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, in the context of the First Brazilian Republic, the poor strata of Rio de Janeiro faced serious economic issues related to their survival in the federal capital, such as the imposition of new taxes resulting from the provision of public services (such as electric lighting, water and sewage, modern pavements), new legislation that imposed architectural norms and restrictions for urban buildings, and the prohibition on the exercise of certain professions or economic practices linked to subsistence, especially of the poorest. The situation of this population worsened further with the urban reforms in the center of Rio, whose widening or opening of roads required the destruction of several tenements and popular housing in the region.\nAs a result, these homeless residents were temporarily occupying slopes in the vicinity of these old demolished buildings, such as Morro da Provid\u00eancia (mainly occupied by former residents of the Cabe\u00e7a de Porco tenement and former soldiers of the War of Canudos) and Morro de Santo Antonio (especially by ex-combatants of the Brazilian Naval Revolts). In a short time, this type of temporary housing was permanently established in the urban landscape of Rio, originating the first favelas in the city. From the increase in the populations expelled from the tenements and the arrival of new poor migrants to the capital of the Republic, the favelas grew rapidly and spread through the hills settlements and suburban areas of Rio.\nIt was in this scenario that a new type of samba would be born during the second half of the 1920s, called \"samba do Est\u00e1cio\", which would constitute the genesis of urban Carioca samba by creating a new pattern so revolutionary that its innovations last until the days current. Located close to Pra\u00e7a Onze and housing Morro do S\u00e3o Carlos, the neighborhood of Est\u00e1cio was a center of convergence of public transport, mainly of trams that served the North Zone of the city. Its proximity to the nascent hills settlements as well as its primacy in the formation of this new samba ended up linking its musical production, from urban train lines, to the favelas and suburbs of Rio, such as Morro da Mangueira, and the suburban neighborhood of Osvaldo Cruz.\nEst\u00e1cio's samba was distinguished from Cidade Nova's samba both in thematic aspects, as well as in the melody and rhythm. Made for the parades of the carnival blocs in the neighborhood, the samba do Est\u00e1cio innovated with a faster tempo, longer notes and a cadence beyond the traditional palms. Another structural change resulting from this samba was the valorization of the \"second part\" of the compositions: instead of using the typical improvisation of the samba circles of the alto party or carnival parades, there was the consolidation of pre-established sequences, which would have a theme \u2013 for example, everyday problems \u2013 and the possibility of fitting everything within the standards of the phonograph recordings of 78 rpm at the time \u2013 something like three minutes on 10-inch discs. In comparison to the works of the first generation of Donga, Sinh\u00f4 and company, the sambas produced by the Est\u00e1cio group also stood out for a greater countermetricity, which can be evidenced in a testimony by Ismael Silva about the innovations introduced by him and his companions in the new urban samba in Rio:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At that time, samba did not work for carnival groups to walk on the street as we see today. I started noticing that there was this thing. The samba was like this: \"tan tantan tan tantan\". It was not possible. How would a bloc get out on the street like that? Then, we started making a samba like this: \"bum bum paticumbum pugurumdum\".\u2014\u200a\nThe intuitive onomatopoeia built by Ismael Silva tried to explain the rhythmic change operated by the sambistas of Est\u00e1cio with the \"bum bum paticumbum pugurumdum\" of the surdo in marking the cadence of the samba, making it a more syncopated rhythm. It was, therefore, a break with the samba \"tan tantan tan tantan\" irradiated from the Bahian aunts meetings.\nThus, at the end of the 1920s, the modern carioca samba had two distinct models: the primitive urban samba of Cidade Nova and the new syncopated samba of the Est\u00e1cio group. However, while the Bahian community enjoyed a certain social legitimacy, including the protection of important personalities of Rio society who supported and frequented the musical circles of the \"Pequena Africa\", the new Estaciano sambistas suffered socio-cultural discrimination, including through police repression. A popular neighborhood with a large Black/mixed contingent , Est\u00e1cio was one of the great strongholds of poor samba musicians situated between marginality and social integration, who ended up being stigmatized by the upper classes in Rio as \"dangerous\" rascals. Because of this infamous brand, the Estaciano samba suffered great social prejudice in its origin.\nTo avoid police harassment and gain social legitimacy, Est\u00e1cio's samba musicians decided to link their batucadas to carnival samba and organized themselves in what they christened as samba schools.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the end of the carnival, samba has continued because we did samba all year. At Caf\u00e9 Apolo, Caf\u00e9 do Compadre, across the street, at the backyard feijoadas or at dawn, on street corners and in bars. Then the police used to come and bother us. But it didn't bother the guys of (carnival rancho) Amor, which had a headquarter and license to parade at the carnival. We decided to organize a carnival bloc, even without a license, that could allow us to go out at the carnival and do samba all year round. Organization and respect, without fights or huffing, were important. It was called \"Deixa Falar\" as it despises the middle class ladies of the neighborhood who used to call people a vagabond. We were malandros, in a good way, but vagabonds weren't.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to Ismael Silva \u2013 also a founder of Deixa Falar and the creator of the expression \"samba school\" \u2013 the term was inspired by the Normal school that once existed in Est\u00e1cio, and therefore the samba schools would form \"samba teachers\". Although the primacy of the country's first samba school is contested by Portela and Mangueira, Deixa Falar was a pioneer in spreading the term in its quest to establish a different organization from the carnival blocks of that time and also the first carnival association to use the group in the future known as bateria, a unit made up of percussion instruments such as the surdo, tamborims and cu\u00edcas, which \u2013 when joining the already used pandeiros and shakers \u2013 gave a more \"marching\" characteristic to the samba of the parades.\nIn 1929, the sambista and babalawo Z\u00e9 Espinguela organized the first contest among the first samba schools in Rio: Deixa Falar, Mangueira and Oswaldo Cruz (later Portela). The dispute did not involve parede, but a competition to choose the best samba theme among these carnival groups \u2013 whose winner is the samba \"A Tristeza Me Persegue\", by Heitor dos Prazeres, one of Oswaldo Cruz's representatives. Deixa Falar was disqualified for the use of a flute and tie by Benedito Lacerda, then representative of the Est\u00e1cio group. This veto on wind instruments became the rule from then on \u2013 including for the first parade between them, organized in 1932 by journalist Mario Filho and sponsored by the daily Mundo Sportivo -, because it differentiated schools from carnival ranchos with the appreciation of batucadas, which would definitely mark the aesthetic bases of samba from then on.\nEst\u00e1cio's batucado and syncopated samba represented an aesthetic break with Cidade Nova's maxixe-style samba. In turn, the first generation of samba did not accept the innovations created by the samba musicians of the hill, seen as a misrepresentation of the genre or even designated as \"march\". For musicians such as Donga and Sinh\u00f4, samba was synonymous with maxixe \u2013 a kind of the last Brazilian stage of European polka. For the samba musicians from the hills of Rio, samba was the last Brazilian stage of Angolan drumming that they proposed to teach to Brazilian society through samba schools. This generational conflict, however, did not last for long, and Est\u00e1cio's samba established itself as the rhythm par excellence of Rio's urban samba during the 1930s.\nBetween 1931 and 1940 samba was the most recorded genre music in Brazil, with almost 1/3 of the total repertoire \u2013 2,176 sambas songs in a universe of 6,706 compositions. Sambas and marchinhas together made up the percentages just over half of the repertoire recorded in that period. Thanks to the new electric recording technology, it was possible to capture the percussive instruments present in samba schools. The samba \"Na Pavuna\", performed by Bando de Tangar\u00e1s, was the first recorded in studio with the percussion that would characterize the genre from there: tamborim, surdo, pandeiro, ganz\u00e1, cu\u00edca, among others. Although there was the presence of these percussive instruments, the samba recordings in the studio were characterized by the predominance of musical arrangements of orchestrated tone with brass and string instruments. This orchestral pattern was mainly printed by European arrangers, among them Simon Bountman, Romeu Ghipsmanm, Isaac Kolman and Arnold Gluckman, conductors whose erudite formation ended up giving a European symphonic sound in the counter-metric rhythm and batucada of the samba from Estacio.\nAnother reason for the success of the new samba in the music industry was the introduction of the \"second part\", which stimulated the establishment of partnerships between the composers. For example, one composer created the chorus of a samba and another composer conceived the second part, as occurred in the partnership between Ismael Silva and Noel Rosa in \"Para Me Livrar do Mal\". With the growing demand for new sambas by the singers, the practice of buying and selling compositions has also become common. This transaction usually took place in two different ways: the author negotiated only the sale of the samba recording \u2013 that is, he remained as the author of the composition, but he would not receive any part of the gains obtained from the sales of the records, which were divided between the buyer and the record label \u2013 or the entire composition \u2013 that is, the real author completely lost the rights to his samba, including authorship. In some cases, the sambista sold the partnership to the buyer and also received a portion of the profits from the sales of the records. Selling a samba meant the composer had a chance to see his production publicized \u2013 especially when he did not yet enjoy the same prestige acquired by the first generation samba composers \u2013 and also a way to make up for his own financial difficulties. For the buyer, it was the possibility to renew his repertoire, record more records and earn sales, and further consolidate his artistic career. Artists with good contact with record labels, the popular singers Francisco Alves and M\u00e1rio Reis were adepts of this practicea, having acquired sambas from composers such as Cartola and Ismael Silva.\nRadio era and popularization of samba.\nThe 1930s in Brazilian music marked the rise of Est\u00e1cio's samba as a musical genre to the detriment of maxixe-style samba. If the samba schools were crucial to delimit, publicize and legitimize the new Estaciano samba as the authentic expression of the Rio's urban samba, the radio also played a decisive role in popularizing it nationwide.\nAlthough broadcasting in Brazil was officially inaugurated in 1922, it was still an incipient and technical, experimental and restricted telecommunication medium. In the 1920s, Rio de Janeiro was home to only two short-range radio stations whose programming was basically limited to broadcast educational content or classical music. This panorama changed radically in the 1930s, with the political rise of Get\u00falio Vargas, who identified the media as a tool of public interest for economic, educational, cultural or political purposes, as well as for the national integration of the country.\nA 1932 Vargas decree regulating radio advertising was crucial to the commercial, professional and popular transformation of Brazilian broadcasting. With the authorization that ads could occupy 20% (and then 25%) of the programming, the radio became more attractive and safe for advertisers and \u2013 added to the increase in sales of radio sets in the period \u2013 transformed this telecommunication medium of its function once educational for an entertainment powerhouse. With the contribution of financial resources from advertising, the broadcasters began to invest in musical programming, turning the radio into the great popularizer of popular music in the Brazil \u2013 whether phonograph record or live recordings directly from the stations' auditoriums and studios. With samba as a great attraction, the radio gave space to the genre with the \"sambas de carnaval\", released for the carnival celebrations, and the \"sambas de meio de ano\" (\"mid-year sambas\"), launched throughout the year.\nThis expansion of radio as a medium of mass communication enabled the formation of professional technicians linked to sound activities, as well as for singers, arrangers and composers. From this scenario, broadcasters Ademar Cas\u00e9 (in Rio) and C\u00e9sar Ladeira (in S\u00e3o Paulo) stood out as pioneers in the establishment of exclusive contracts with singers for presentation in live programs. That is, instead of receiving only one fee per presentation, the monthly remuneration was fixed to pay the artists, a model that triggered a fierce dispute between radio stations to form its professional and exclusive casts with popular stars of Brazilian music and also philharmonic orchestras. The most important samba singers, such as Carmen Miranda, started signing advantageous contracts to work exclusively with a certain radio station. The institution of auditorium programs created the need to set up big radio orchestras, conducted by arranging conductors, which gave a more sophisticated look to Brazilian popular music. One of the most notorious orchestral formations on the radio was the Orquestra Brasileira \u2013 under the command of conductor Radam\u00e9s Gnatalli and with a team of musicians such as the sambistas Jo\u00e3o da Baiana, Bide and Heitor dos Prazeres in percussion -, which combined standards of the international song at that time with popular instruments in Brazilian music, such as the cavaquinho. The Orquestra Brasileira was notable for the success of the program \"Um milh\u00e3o de melodias (One million melodies\"), by R\u00e1dio Nacional, one of the most popular in the history of Brazilian radio.\nIn this golden age of radio broadcasting in Brazil, a new generation of composers from the middle class emerged, such as Ary Barroso, Ataulfo Alves, Braguinha, Lamartine Babo and Noel Rosa, who have built successful careers in this media. Grown up in the Vila Isabel middle-class neighborhood, Noel Rosa was instrumental in destigmatizing the samba do Est\u00e1cio. Although he started his musical trajectory by composing Northeastern emboladas and similar Brazilian rural music genres, the composer changed his style by having contact with the samba made and sung by the sambistas from Est\u00e1cio and others hills of Rio. This meeting resulted in friendships and partnerships between Noel and names as Ismael Silva and Cartola. Among singers, in addition to Noel himself, a new generation of performers broke out, such as Jonjoca, Castro Barbosa, Lu\u00eds Barbosa, Cyro Monteiro, Dilermando Pinheiro, Aracy de Almeida, Mar\u00edlia Batista. Another highlight was the singer Carmen Miranda, the greatest star of Brazilian popular music at that time and the first artist to promote samba internationally. Renowned in Brazil, Carmen continued her successful artistic career in the United States, where she worked in musicals in New York City and, later, in Hollywood cinema. Her popularity was such that she even performed at the White House for President Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nThe consolidation of samba as the flagship of the radio programming of Rio de Janeiro was characterized by the association of the musical genre with the image of white artists, who, even when proletarianized, were more palatable to the preference of the public, while the poor black sambistas remained normally on the sidelines of this process as a mere supplier of compositions for the white performers or as instrumentalists accompanying them. This strong presence of white singers and composers was also decisive for the acceptance and appreciation of samba by the economic and cultural elites of Brazil. From this, the middle class started to recognize the value of the rhythm invented by black Brazilians. The Municipal Theater of Rio became the stage for elegant carnival balls attended by the high society. Having contact with the popular genre through samba and choro circles meetings, the renowned conductor Heitor Villa-Lobos promoted a musical meeting between the American maestro Leopold Stokowski with the sambistas Cartola, Z\u00e9 da Zilda, Z\u00e9 Espinguela, Donga, Jo\u00e3o da Baiana and others. The recording results were edited in the United States on several 78 rpm discs. Another privileged space for the white, rich elite in the Brazilian society was the casinos, which peaked in Brazil during the 1930s and 1940s. In addition to working with games of chance, these elegant amusement houses offered restaurant and bar services and were the stage for shows \u2013 among which samba also featured prominently. Thus, the casinos signed exclusive contracts with major artists, as was the case with Carmen Miranda as a big star at Cassino da Urca. In an unusual event for the universe of sambistas on the hill, composer Cartola performed for a month at the luxurious Casino Atl\u00e2ntico, in Copacabana, in 1940.\nThe consolidation of samba among Brazilian elites was also influenced by the valorization of the ideology of miscegenation in vogue with the construction of nationalism under the Getulio Vargas regime. From an image of a symbol of national backwardness, the mestizo became a representative of Brazilian singularities, and samba, with its mestizo origin, ended up linked to the construction of national identity. Having acted decisively for the growth of radio in Brazil, the Vargas government perceived samba as a vital element in the construction of this idea of miscegenation. Samba's triumph over the airwaves allowed it to penetrate all sectors of Brazilian society.\nEspecially under the Estado Novo, whose ideological cultural policy of reconceptualizing the popular and extolling everything that was considered an authentic national expression, samba was elevated to the position of major national symbol of the country and the official pace of the country. However, one of the concerns of the Vargas regime was to interfere in music production to promote samba as a means of \"pedagogical\" socialization, that is, by banning compositions that confront the regime's ethics. In this quest to \"civilize\" samba, political bodies such as the Department of Press and Propaganda (DIP, \"Departamento de Imprensa e Propaganda\") took action to order sambas that would exalt the work and censor lyrics that addressed bohemia and \"malandragem\", two of the most common themes in the tradition of the urban Carioca samba. Musical contests were also instituted through which public opinion elected its favorite composers and performers.\nUnder Vargas, samba had an expressive weight in the construction of an image of Brazil abroad and was an important means of cultural and tourist dissemination of the country. In an attempt to reinforce a positive national image, the presence of renowned singers of the kind in presidential committees to Latin American countries has become frequent. At the end of 1937, the sambistas Paulo da Portela and Heitor dos Prazeres participated in a caravan of Brazilian artists to Montevideo that performed at the Gran Exposici\u00f3n Feria Internacional del Uruguay. The Brazilian government also financed an information and popular music program called \"Uma Hora do Brasil\", produced and broadcast by Radio El Mundo, from Buenos Aires, which had at least one broadcast to Nazi Germany. When the Vargas regime approached the United States, DIP made an agreement to broadcast Brazilian radio programs on hundreds of CBS radio network. Under this context, the samba \"Aquarela do Brasil\" (by Ary Barroso) was released in the United States market, becoming the first Brazilian song that was very successful abroad and one of the most popular works of the Brazilian popular songbook. In the midst of the good neighborhood policy, the animator Walt Disney visited Portela samba school during his visit to Brazil in 1941, from which he hypothesized that Z\u00e9 Carioca, a character created by the cartoonist to express the Brazilian way, would have been inspired by the figure of the sambista Paulo da Portela.\nThe rise of samba as a popular musical genre in Brazil also relied on its dissemination in Brazilian cinema, especially in musical comedies, being an integral part of the soundtrack, the plot or even the main theme of the cinematographic work. The good public acceptance of the short film \"A Voz do Carnaval\" (by Adhemar Gonzaga) paved the way for several other cinematographic works related to rhythm, many of which had a strong presence of radio idol singers in the cast, such as \"Al\u00f4, Al\u00f4, Brasil! \", which had sisters Carmen and Aurora Miranda, Francisco Alves, M\u00e1rio Reis, Dircinha Batista, Bando da Lua, Almirante, Lamartine Babo, among others. The advent of the popular chanchada films made Brazilian cinema one of the biggest promoters of carnival music. In one of the rare moments when sambistas from the hill starred in radio programs, Paulo da Portela, Heitor dos Prazeres and Cartola led the program \"A Voz do Morro\", at R\u00e1dio Cruzeiro do Sul, in 1941. There, they presented unpublished sambas whose titles were given by listeners. However, over the course of the decade, the samba made by these genuine sambistas was losing space on Brazilian radio to new sub-genres that were being formed, while figures such as Cartola and Ismael Silva were ostracized until they left the music scene in the late 1940s.\nNew sub-genres of samba.\nThanks to its economic exploitation through the radio and the records, samba not only became professional, but also diversified into new sub-genres, many of which were different from the hues originating in the hills of Rio de Janeiro and established by the interests of the Brazilian music industry. The period of Brazilian music between 1929 and 1945 marked by the arrival of radio and electromagnetic recording of sound in the country and by the notability of major composers and singers, \u2013 the so-called \"golden age\" registered several styles of samba, some with greater and others with less solidity.\nPublications devoted to the topic disseminated a broad conceptual terminology, including denominations later enshrined in new sub-genres \u2013 such as samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o, samba-choro, samba-enredo, samba-exalta\u00e7\u00e3o, samba-de-terreiro, samba de breque -, as well as registered scores and released labels and album covers printed various nomenclatures for samba in an attempt to express a functional, rhythmic or thematic trend \u2013 such as \"samba \u00e0 moda baiana\" (samba in the Bahian style), \"samba-batucada\", \"samba-jongo\", \"samba-maxixe\" -, although some sounded quite inconsistent \u2013 such as \"samba \u00e0 moda agri\u00e3o\" (samba in the watercress style), \"samba epistolar\" (epistolary samba) and \"samba fon\u00e9tico\" (phonetic samba). In other cases, it was music critics that imputed pejorative labels with a view to disapproving certain aesthetic changes or fashion trends \u2013 as in the disparagingly called sambalada and sambolero for stylistic nuances the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o.\nEstablished in the radio era as one of the main sub-genres of samba, the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o style emerged among professional musicians who played in the revues of Rio de Janeiro in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Although the term began to circulating in the press in 1929 to mistakenly designate \"Jura\", by Sinh\u00f4, and \"Diz que me amas\", by J. Machado, the starting point of the line was \"Linda Flor (Ai, Ioi\u00f4)\", a melody by Henrique Vogeler and lyrics by Luis Peixoto, released in the revue and on disc by singer Aracy Cortes. In general, the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o was characterized as a slower tempo variant, with a dominance of the melodic line over the rhythmic marking that basically explores the subjectivity of subjectivity and feeling. As their releases took place outside the carnival season, the trend was linked to the so-called \"mid-year samba\". However, during the 1930s, the term samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o was used arbitrarily to designate many compositions contained under the name of \"samba de meio de ano\" (\"mid-year samba\"), but which did not fit as samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o themselves. On the other hand, many sambas at the time of their releases would later be recognized as samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o, as in the case of works by Noel Rosa and Ary Barroso. Not by chance, Zuza Homem de Mello and Jairo Severiano consider that this samba style was truly inaugurated with the second version of the song \"No rancho fundo\", with melody by Ary Barroso and lyrics by Lamartine Babo.\nBasically, Carnaval was reserved for the launch of marchinhas and sambas-enredo, a sub-genre typified in this way in the 1930s because of the lyrics and melody, which must comprise the poetic summary of the theme chosen by the samba school for its carnival parade. Samba-de-terreiro \u2013 or also samba de quadra \u2013 was a short-tempo samba modality, with the second most measured part that prepares the bateria for a more lively return to the beginning. Its format was also consolidated in the 1930s.\nAlso from that time, samba-choro \u2013 at first called choro-can\u00e7\u00e3o or choro-cantado \u2013 was a syncopated hybrid sub-genre of samba with the instrumental music genre choro, but with medium tempo and presence of lyrics. Created by the Brazilian music industry, it was released, with all indications, with \"Amor em excesso\", by Gad\u00e9 and Valfrido Silva, in 1932. One of the most popular sambas of this variant is \"Carinhoso\", by Pixinguinha, released as choro in 1917, received lyrics and ended up relaunched two decades later, in the voice of Orlando Silva, with great commercial success. In the following decade, Waldir Azevedo would popularize chorinho, a kind of fast-moving instrumental samba.\nWidespread during the Estado Novo, samba-exalta\u00e7\u00e3o was a sub-genre marked by the character of grandeur, expressed notably by the extensive melody, the lyrics with a patriotic-ufanist theme and by the lavish orchestral arrangement. Its great paradigm was \"Aquarela do Brasil\", by Ary Barroso. From the huge success of the first version recorded by Francisco Alves, in 1939, samba-exalta\u00e7\u00e3o started to be well cultivated by professional composers in the musical theater and in the music industry and radio media. Another well-known samba of this type was \"Brasil Pandeiro\", by Assis Valente, a huge hit with the vocal group Anjos do Inferno in 1941.\nAt the turn of the 1940s, samba de breque emerged, a sub-genre marked by a markedly syncopated rhythm and sudden stops called \"breques\" (from English word \"break\", Brazilian term for car brakes), to which the singer added spoken comments, generally humorous in character, alluding to the theme. The singer Moreira da Silva consolidated himself as the great name of this sub-genre.\nSamba-can\u00e7\u00e3o hegemony and influences of foreign music.\nAfter the end of the World War II and the consequent growth in the production of consumer goods, radio sets spread in the Brazilian market in different models and at affordable prices to the different social class of the Brazilian population. Within this context, Brazilian radio broadcasting also went through a moment of change in language and audience that made radio an even more popular media in Brazil. In search of easier communication with the listener, the programming standard became more sensational, melodramatic and appealing. One of the best expressions of this new format and the new popular audience was the auditorium programs and the \"kings\" and \"radio queen\" contests. Although they played a role in legitimizing samba as a cultural product and national symbol music and also transforming popular musical culture with the circulation of new musical genres and more extroverted performances, auditorium programs such as the paradigmatic \"Programa C\u00e9sar de Alencar\" and \"Programa Manoel Barcelos\" \u2013 both on Radio Nacional, leader in audience and main media of communication in Brazil \u2013 stimulated the cult of personality and the private life of artists, whose apex was the collective frenzy generated around the fan clubs of popular music stars during the concourses of kings and queens of the radio.\nFor the samba more linked to the traditions of Est\u00e1cio and the hills, the 1950s was characterized by the vitalizing presence of old and new composers who led the renewal of the genre for the next years. This renewal was present in the sambas of well-known authors from the general public, such as Geraldo Pereira and Wilson Batista, of lesser-known sambistas but active in their communities, such as Z\u00e9 Keti and Nelson Cavaquinho \u2013 a composer who would establish a great partnership with Guilherme de Brito \u2013 and also of new composers, such as Monsueto. The samba de breque by Jorge Veiga also stood out and, in S\u00e3o Paulo, the Dem\u00f4nios da Garoa enshrined the sambas by Adoniran Barbosa. Missing for many years, samba composer Cartola was found washing cars in Ipanema by journalist S\u00e9rgio Porto, who took him to sing on R\u00e1dio Mayrink Veiga and got him a job at a newspaper. As part of the celebrations of the Fourth Centenary of the city of S\u00e3o Paulo, the composer Almirante organized the \"Festival da Velha Guarda\" (\"Old Guard Festival\"), which brought together great names of Brazilian popular music then forgotten, such as Donga, Ismael Silva, and Pixinguinha.\nHowever, the period between the second half of the 1940s and the end of the 1950s \u2013 well known as post-war \u2013 was deeply characterized by the prestige and dominance of samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o in the Brazilian music scene. Although in its time of appearance there were not so many releases characteristic of this aspect, many achieved huge commercial success and, in the mid-1940s, this sub-genre began to dominate Brazilian radio programming and be the most played style outside the carnival era. This rise of samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o as a hegemonic musical style was also accompanied mainly by the avalanche of foreign musical genres \u2013 imported to Brazil under the political-cultural context of World War II \u2013 that began to compete in the country's market with the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o itself. Tango and, especially, bolero, which occupied a significant part of radio programming, proliferated in clubs and dance halls in Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo. Music from the United States has also come to occupy a large part of the programming of Brazilian radio stations. With big bands in evidence, some radio stations made great publicity about jazz, a genre that was gaining more and more appreciation among some musicians from Rio de Janeiro, especially those who worked in nightclubs. In a samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o rhythm, many boleros, foxtrots and French songs were also part of the repertoire of nightclub pianists.\nUnder the influence of the strong penetration of these imported genres, the post-war samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o itself was influenced by these rhythms. In certain cases, the change occurred through a musical treatment based on the cool jazz tones and more restrained vocal performances, and more complex melodic-harmonic structures, distinct, therefore, from the rhythmic-bodily sensuality of traditional samba. In other cases, it was due to the strong passionate exercised by bolero and foreign sentimental ballads. Both influences displeased the more traditionalist critics: in the first, they accused the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o of having \"jazzed up\", especially for the sophisticated orchestra arrangements; in the second, the slower and more romantic progress of the slope led to pejorative labels such as \"sambolero\" or \"sambalada\". In fact, the orchestral accompaniments of the samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o at that time were marked by arrangements containing woodwinds and strings that replaced the traditional regional musical ensemble and made it possible to dramatize the arrangements in accordance with the theme of the songs and the expressiveness of the singers. If, for some critics, these orchestral and melodic-harmonic attributes of modern 1950s samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o came from post-war American culture, for others this influence was much more Latin American than North American. Another aesthetic mark of the period was the vocal performance of the singers of this style of samba, sometimes more inclined to the lyrical power and expressiveness, sometimes more supported by an intonation and close to the colloquial dynamics.\nWith a new generation of performers that emerged in the post-war period, the Brazilian music scene was taken over by emotional and painful samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o songs in the 1950s. This sub-genre was divided between a more traditional and a more modern generation. If in the first group there were composers such as Lupic\u00ednio Rodrigues and Herivelto Martins and interpreters such as Nelson Gon\u00e7alves, Dalva de Oliveira, Angela Maria, Jamel\u00e3o, Cauby Peixoto and Elizeth Cardoso, the second group had as main exponents Dick Farney, L\u00facio Alves, Tito Madi, Nora Ney, Dolores Duran, Maysa and Sylvia Telles, among others. The modern samba-can\u00e7\u00e3o was also part of a phase of Dorival Caymmi's career and the beginning of the musical work of Antonio Carlos Jobim, one of the great names of the new style of samba that would stylistically mark the genre and Brazilian music in the coming years.\nBossa nova, the new revolution in samba.\nThe period between Juscelino Kubitschek's inauguration in 1956, until the political crisis in the Jo\u00e3o Goulart government that culminated in the 1964 Brazilian coup d'\u00e9tat, was characterized by great effervescence on the Brazilian music scene, especially in Rio de Janeiro. Although it lost its status as the country's capital after the inauguration of Bras\u00edlia, the city maintained its position as a major cultural hub in the country and urban samba, whose transformations on the radio, the music industry, nightclubs and among the circles of university middle class youth resulted in bossa nova \u2013 a term by which a new style of rhythmic accompaniment and interpretation of samba spread from the South Zone of Rio de Janeiro became known.\nAt a time when the appeal to the traditional was gaining new momentum, bossa nova would mark the entire structure of creation and listening supported by established genres, considering that it sought a renewal within the tradition of samba. Initially called \"modern samba\" by the Brazilian music critic, this new sub-genre was officially inaugurated with the composition \"Chega de Saudade\", by Antonio Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de Moraes, released in 1958 in two versions: one sung by Elizeth Cardoso and the other with the singer, songwriter, and guitarist Jo\u00e3o Gilberto. A Bahian-born living in Rio, Gilberto radically changed the way of interpreting samba until then, changing the harmonies with the introduction of unconventional guitar chords and revolutionizing the classic syncope of the genre with a unique rhythmic division. These formal Gilbertian experiences were consolidated in the studio album Chega de Saudade, released in 1959, and triggered the emergence of an artistic movement around Gilberto and others professional artists such as Antonio Carlos Jobim, Vinicius de Moraes, Baden Powell, Ala\u00edde Costa, Sylvia Telles, among others, which attracted young amateur musicians from the South Zone of Rio \u2013 almost all from the middle class and with university degrees \u2013 such as Carlos Lyra, Roberto Menescal, Ronaldo Boscoli and Nara Le\u00e3o.\nConsolidated in the following years as a type of concert samba, non-dancing, and comparable to American cool jazz, bossa nova has become a sambistic sub-genre of great reputation on the Brazilian music scene and, with its rhythm, more assimilable abroad than traditional samba, became known worldwide. After being released on the American market in a series of concerts in New York City in late 1962, Brazilian bossa nova albums were reissued in several countries, while new songs and albums were recorded, including with foreign artists. Several of these works \u2013 with the samba \"The Girl from Ipanema\", by Antonio Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de Moraes, at the frontline \u2013 became major international successes. However, in the midst of the turbulence that marked the Brazilian political scene at the time, the movement suffered a dissent, which resulted in the so-called \"nationalist current\". With the intention of carrying out a work more engaged and aligned with the social context of the period, the nationalist bossa-novistas formed around Nara Le\u00e3o, Carlos Lyra, S\u00e9rgio Ricardo, Edu Lobo, and the partnership between Vinicius de Moraes and Baden Powell, the latter two signing a fertile partnership that resulted in the studio album \"Os Afro-sambas\", with positive international impact.\nIn addition to bossa nova, other new samba sub-genres emerged in this period between the late 1950s and early 1960s. The rise of nightclubs as the main nightlife venues in Rio disseminated variety shows with the participation of sambistas and samba dancers, mainly performed by instrumental musical ensemble with keyboard, electric guitar, acoustic bass guitar, drums and percussion, and performed by crooners. A trend in the 1960s live music in Brazil, this format of \"samba to dance\" resulted in styles such as the sambalan\u00e7o \u2013 a very lively and dancing type of samba, from which musicians such as Ed Lincoln and performers such as S\u00edlvio C\u00e9sar, Pedrinho Rodrigues, Orlandivo, Miltinho and Elza Soares stood out. In this same environment, samba-jazz also emerged, consolidated with the success of bossa nova that brought samba and bebop closer together, initially based on the piano-bass-drums musical ensemble and later broader formations. Also under this context, the composer Jorge Ben emerged with his peculiar and hybrid way of playing samba, mixing elements of bossa nova and American blues and rock'n'roll that would even take samba songs such as \"Mas que Nada\" and \"Chove Chuva\", released by S\u00e9rgio Mendes &amp; Brazil '66, to the Billboard charts. And at the end of the 1960s, samba funk emerged, led by pianist Dom Salvador, which mixed the two beats to the bar of samba and the four beats to the bar of American funk that had just arrived in the Brazilian music market at that time.\nThe period was also characterized by the profusion of some partner dance samba styles. These were the cases of Samba de Gafieira, a dance style developed in the ballroom dance of suburban clubs in Rio de Janeiro frequented by people with low purchasing power throughout the 1940s and 1950s and which also became a fad among upper-middle-class people in the 1960s, and the samba rock, a dance style born in the S\u00e3o Paulo suburban parties in the 1960s, mixing steps from samba, rock and Caribbean rhythms such as rumba and salsa. The \"bailes blacks\" (\"black balls\") experienced their peak notably in Rio and S\u00e3o Paulo in the 1970s, a time of great diffusion of the American black music in Brazil, which were frequently disseminated at these \"bailes blacks\". This also generated a new debate among the Brazilian music critic about the foreign influence on Brazilian music and also on samba itself.\nTraditional samba as \"resistance music\".\nIn 1962, the \"Carta do samba\" (\"The samba letter\") was made public, a document written by the writer Edison Carneiro that expressed the need to preserve traditional features of samba, such as the syncopa, without, however, \"denying or taking away spontaneity and prospects for progress\". This letter came to meet a series of circumstances that made traditional urban samba not only revalued in different Brazilian cultural circles, but also started to be considered by them as a kind of \"counter-hegemonic\" and \"resistance music\" in the Brazilian music scene. In a decade characterized in the Brazilian music industry by the domination of international rock music and its Brazilian variant, Jovem Guarda, the traditional samba would have started to be seen as an expression of the greatest authenticity and purity of the genre, which led to the creation of terms such as \"samba aut\u00eantico\" (\"authentic samba\"), \"samba de morro\" (\"samba of the hill\"), \"samba de raiz\" (\"roots samba\"), or \"samba de verdade\" (\"real samba\").\nOne of the major expressions of this \"resistance samba\" in the first half of the 1960s was Zicartola, a bar opened by sambista Cartola and his wife Dona Zica in 1963. which transformed in a short time at a famous meeting point of veteran sambistas, attracted the attendance of many left-wing intellectuals and students, and became famous for its samba nights that, in addition to revealing new talents, such as Paulinho da Viola, revived the careers of former composers then ostracized from the music industry. In February 1964, the year of the Brazilian military coup d'\u00e9tat, Nara Le\u00e3o's debut album was released, which included sambas by traditional samba composers such as Cartola, Elton Medeiros, Nelson Cavaquinho and Z\u00e9 Keti, as well as samba songs from the bossa nova nationalist branch. And at the end of that year, Nara Le\u00e3o met with Z\u00e9 Keti and Jo\u00e3o do Vale for the musical Show Opini\u00e3o, which became a reference as an artistic manifestation in protest to the authoritarian regime established.\nThe following year, the composer Herm\u00ednio Bello de Carvalho produced Rosa de Ouro, a musical that launched the sixty-year-old Clementina de Jesus to the general public. It was the birth of the professional artistic career of one of the most expressive voices in the samba history, characterized by a repertoire aimed at the African music matrixes, such as jongos, curimbas, lundus and sambas of the rural tradition. The music ensemble to accompany Clementina in this show was composed by Paulinho da Viola, Elton Medeiros, Anescarzinho do Salgueiro, Jair do Cavaquinho and Nelson Sargento. Known at the time as \"regional\", these musical ensemble based on classical guitar, cavaquinho and pandeiro, and occasionally some wind instrument, were revalued and became associated with the idea of a more authentic and genuine samba. From then on, the idea of forming samba vocal-instrumental groups for professional presentations matured and, with the success obtained by groups such as A Voz do Morro and Os Cinco Crioulos, boosted the creation of other groups composed only by sambistas with direct or indirect ties with the samba schools in the following years, such as the groups Os Originais do Samba, Nosso Samba, Brazil Ritmo 67, Os Batuqueiros, Exporta-samba, among others. Two other significant performances from this moment of aesthetic revaluation of traditional urban samba were \"Telecoteco opus N \u00b0 1\", with Cyro Monteiro and Dilermando Pinheiro, which was shown at Teatro Opini\u00e3o, and \"O samba pede passagem\", which brought together veterans Ismael Silva and Aracy de Almeida with the young artists Baden Powell, Sidney Miller and MPB4, among others.\nIn this context of the effervescence of the samba resistance movements, the radio show \"Adelzon Alves, o amigo da madrugada\" (\"Adelzon Alves, the friend of the dawn\") has appeared. Presented by radio broadcaster Adelzon Alves on R\u00e1dio Globo in Rio de Janeiro, the radio program dedicated a repertoire exclusively dedicated to the samba \u2013 in a scenario in which radio before the supremacy of television as a major means of communication in Brazil had become a disseminator of music recorded on disc. Faced with the hegemony of Anglo-American rock and Jovem Guarda, especially due to the influence of record labels on commercial broadcasters in the country, Adelzon Alves' radio show became the main spokesman for samba and sambistas from Rio de Janeiro on the media and a major propagator of terms, which reverberate until today, referring to the legacy of the universe of \"samba do morro\" as national music \"of resistance\" and \"root\".\nIn addition to the strength of Jovem Guarda, a movement catapulted by the eponymous program shown by TV Record, Brazilian music at that time experienced the emergence of a new generation of post-bossa-nova artists who, reknowed in the scope of the \"Brazilian song festivals\" era, became the embryo of the so-called MPB. One of those most notable names was the composer Chico Buarque, author of sambas such as \"Apesar de Voc\u00ea\", which became classics of the genre. Against the ideological disputes between the acoustic guitar (an instrument traditional in Brazilian music genres and synonymous with national music) and electric guitars (seen as an \"Americanized\" instrument in Brazilian music) that characterized these Brazilian song festivals, the beginning sambista Martinho da Vila entered \"Menina mo\u00e7a\", a stylized samba de partido-alto, in the third Festival of Brazilian Popular Music in 1967. Although its early eliminated in this contest, this samba projected Martinho's name on the music scene of that time, whose subsequent successes paved the way for the affirmation in the music industry of this type of samba characterized by strong chorus and, normally, three solo parts.\nAs the aesthetic orientation towards young music of that time, these \"song festivals\" practically ignored the samba, which generated criticism from sambistas such as Elton Medeiros, who claimed the inclusion of the \"truly Brazilian music\" in these musical contests. Against this trend, the first Bienal do Samba took place in 1968, a year also characterized by the release of Paulinho da Viola's first solo album and also of another studio album by this composer in a duet with Elton Medeiros. At the beginning of the following decade, Paulinho consolidated his prestige with the commercial success of the samba \"Foi um rio que passou na minha vida\" and also as a producer of the first studio album of the Velha Guarda da Portela samba group.\nSamba and the expansion of the Brazilian music industry.\nBetween 1968 and 1979, Brazil experienced a huge growth in the production and consumption of cultural goods. During this period, there was a strong expansion of the music industry in the country, which consolidated itself as one of the largest world markets. Among the main factors for the expansion of the Brazilian market were: the consolidation of MPB production stimulated by artists such as Elis Regina, Chico Buarque, Caetano Veloso, Gilberto Gil, Gal Costa, Maria Bethania, and also in the segment of sentimental songs, drawn sales champion Roberto Carlos; the establishment of LP as a dominant medium format, where it was possible to insert several compositions on the same record, and also made the artist more important than his songs individually; the significant participation of foreign music in the Brazilian market, with the predominance of young music on the country charts, and the growth of the international repertoire on the soap opera soundtracks, mainly on TV Globo.\nAnother important aspect in the phonographic sector of the period was technological, with a modernization of recording studios in Brazil that approached international technical standards, and the consolidation of foreign record labels in the country, such as EMI and the WEA. This Brazilian entry in the scope of the global cultural industry also profoundly affected the samba universe, which became one of the mass phenomena of the national music market of that decade represented by the appearance, on the list of best selling records of the period, of studio albums by artists such as Martinho da Vila, Originals of Samba, Agep\u00ea, Beth Carvalho, Clara Nunes, Alcione, Jair Rodrigues and Benito de Paula, among others, and of sambas-enredo of Rio samba schools.\nIn the stronghold of traditional samba, the first LPs of veteran composers Donga, Cartola and Nelson Cavaquinho were released. Two other composers already established in this environment, Candeia and Dona Ivone Lara also debuted with solo works in the phonographic market. The same happened in S\u00e3o Paulo with the releases of the first Adoniran Barbosa and Paulo Vanzolini studio albums. Revealed in the previous decade, the sambistas Paulinho da Viola and Martinho da Vila consolidated themselves as two of the great names of success in the samba in the 1970s, which also saw the emergence of singers-songwriters Roberto Ribeiro and Jo\u00e3o Nogueira. Among the singers of the new generation, the names of Clara Nunes, Beth Carvalho and Alcione emerged as the great female samba singers in the Brazilian music industry, whose good record sales \u2013 marked by the appreciation of songs by the composers of the Rio de Janeiro samba schools \u2013 contributed greatly for the popularity of samba. In addition to this triad of singers were also added Leci Brand\u00e3o, who was already a member of the composer wing of Esta\u00e7\u00e3o Primeira de Mangueira, and Cristina Buarque (sister of Chico Buarque), with a rescue effort for samba and sambistas from samba schools. Among the new composers, Paulo Cesar Pinheiro, Nei Lopes, Wilson Moreira stood out, in addition to the duo Aldir Blanc and Jo\u00e3o Bosco.\nUnder this same context of the expansion of samba in the Brazilian phonographic market of the 1970s, the music industry invested in a less traditional and more sentimental line of samba, whose simplified rhythmic structure left percussion \u2013 the main feature of samba \u2013 a little sideways. Rejected as tacky and kitsch by both the most respected musicians in the country and by critics, this formula was stigmatized under the derogatory term of \"samb\u00e3o-joia\". Despite this, this most romantic samba has become a great commercial success in the repertoire of singers such as Luiz Ayr\u00e3o, Luiz Am\u00e9rico, Gilson de Souza, Benito Di Paula and Agep\u00ea, as well as the duo Ant\u00f4nio Carlos e Joc\u00e1fi, authors of the world famous samba \"Voc\u00ea abusou\".\nAnother bet of the phonographic industry of the time was partido-alto collective records, a traditional form of samba that is often sung in the terreiros (the samba school headquarters) in Rio de Janeiro and in the usual \"pagodes\" \u2013 festive gatherings, with music, food and drink \u2013 since the first decades of the 20th century. With remote African roots, this sub-genre is characterized by a highly percussive pandeiro beat (using the palm of the hand in the center of the instrument for snapping), a greater tone harmony (usually played by a set of percussion instruments normally surdo, pandeiro and tamborim and accompanied by a cavaquinho and/or classical guitar) and the art of singing and creating improvised verses, almost always in the character of challenge or contest. This essence based on improvisation was taken to the record studios, where partido-alto became a style with more musicality and made with more concise verses and written solos, instead of improvised and spontaneous singing according to traditional canons. This stylized partido-alto was released on several collective LPs, released during the 1970s, whose titles included the subgenre's own name, such as \"Bambas do Partido Alto\", \"A Fina Flor do Partido Alto\" and \"Isto Que \u00c9 Partido Alto\", which included samba composers such as An\u00e9zio, Aniceto, Candeia, Casquinha, Jo\u00e3ozinho da Pecadora, Luiz Grande and Wilson Moreira, although not all were versed in the art of improvisation. Another artist who stood out as a \"partideiro\" was Bezerra da Silva, a singer who would be noteworthy in the following decade with sambas similar to the partido-alto and themed in the world and in the underworld of Rio's favelas.\nThe 1970s were also a time of major changes in Rio de Janeiro samba schools, and the music industry began to invest in the annual production of LPs of the sambas de enredo presented at the carnival parades. In the early years, it was common to release up to two albums, the first containing the sambas-enredo of the parades and the second with sambas depicting the history of each samba school. Beginning in 1974, the annual release began to focus on a single LP for each first and second division of Rio carnival parades\nEven during this period, \"rodas de samba\" (\"samba circles\") began to spread as a fever throughout Rio de Janeiro and other Brazilian cities. Originally restricted to the backyards of sambistas' residences and the samba school headquarters, these informal meetings have taken on a new meaning in clubs, theaters, steakhouses, among others, with the promotion of \"rodas de samba\" with stage and microphones and the participation of sambistas linked to samba schools. Meanwhile, new \"rodas de samba\" were formed informally in the suburbs of Rio de Janeiro, the result of which would lead to the germ, in the late 1970s, of a new and successful sub-genre of modern samba in the 1980s.\nPagode, a new samba renewal.\nOriginally designated in the samba universe for the musical meetings of sambistas and, soon, also extending to the sambas sung in them, the term pagode became popular with the resignification of the \"rodas de samba\" in Rio de Janeiro, from the 1970s, with the \"pagodes\" or \"pagodes de mesa\" (\"pagode circles\"), where sambistas gathered around a large table, often located in a residential \"backyard\", in opposition to the fashionable samba circles made in clubs and the like. Some of the most famous pagodes in the city were the Pagode of Clube do Samba (made at Jo\u00e3o Nogueira's residence in M\u00e9ier), Terreir\u00e3o da Tia Doca (with the rehearsals of the Portela old guard sambists in Oswaldo Cruz), of Pagode of Arlindinho (organized by Arlindo Cruz em Cascadura) and, mainly, the pagode of the carnival block Cacique de Ramos, in the suburban area of Leopoldina.\nIn the 1980s, pagodes became a fever throughout Rio de Janeiro. And, far beyond simple places of entertainment, they became radiating centers of a new musical language that expressed itself with a new interpretive and totally renewed style of samba that was embedded in the tradition of the partido-alto. Among the innovations of this new samba and marked by refinement in melodies and innovations in harmony and percussion with the accompaniment of instruments such as tan-tan (in place of the surdo), the hand-repique and the four-string banjo with cavaquinho tuning.\nThe debut of this kind of samba in the recording studios occurred in 1980 with Fundo de Quintal, musical group sponsored by Beth Carvalho. In its first works, Fundo de Quintal gave visibility not only to this new samba, but also to composers such as Almir Guineto, Arlindo Cruz, Jorge Arag\u00e3o \u2013 all members of the group \u2013 and Luiz Carlos da Vila \u2013 this one linked to the Cacique de Ramos pagodes. On this way opened by Fundo de Quintal, in 1985 the collective studio album called \"Ra\u00e7a Brasileira\" was released, which revealed to the general public singers such as Jovelina P\u00e9rola Negra and Zeca Pagodinho. Especially prioritizing partido-alto sambas, this LP, as well as the works since 1979 by Beth Carvalho, Almir Guineto and the group Fundo de Quintal, formed the new sub-genre that ended up being called pagode by the Brazilian music industry.\nThe novelty of the pagode in the Brazilian music scene occurred at a time of major reorganization of the music industry in the country, whose investments in the first half of the 1980s had been concentrated mainly on Brazilian rock and children's music. Although some samba artists had some commercial success in the period, such as Bezerra da Silva, Almir Guineto and Agep\u00ea \u2013 who, in 1984, became the first samba singer to surpass the mark of 1 million copies sold on a single LP -, the moment was not promising for samba in the commercial scope. Very popular performers like Beth Carvalho, Clara Nunes, Jo\u00e3o Nogueira and Roberto Ribeiro pulled the drop in sales of records of the genre. Disgusted by the little recognition and interest in promoting his work, Paulinho da Viola left the Warner Music label in 1984 and only returned to having an album released at the end of that decade.\nWith the success of the LP \"Ra\u00e7a Brasileira\", the pagode phenomenon experienced a period of commercial growth in the Brazilian phonographic market. The main artists in this sub-genre reached the top of the success charts and became known nationally thanks to exposure in the mainstream media and the growing investments of record labels stimulated by huge sales since 1986, pulled by both the LPs of the already established Almir Guineto and Fundo de Quintal \u2013 the great paradigm of the subgenre \u2013 and for the debut works of Zeca Pagodinho, Marquinhos Sat\u00e3 and Jovelina P\u00e9rola Negra. Although there was a certain cooling of the interest of record labels and the media even during the second half of the 1980s, pagode established itself as an important subgenre of samba.\nIn the 1990s, a new generation of artists emerged who shared, to some extent, similar characteristics, such as the incorporation of musical elements traditionally uncommon in the traditional samba, and a repertoire devoted largely to romantic lyrics. Initially seen by the phonographic industry and by the media as a continuation of the pagode of the previous decade, this new wave was later characterized under the label of \"pagode rom\u00e2ntico\" (\"romantic pagode\") \u2013 or also \"pagode paulista\", due to the large number of artists of this scene that emerged mainly from S\u00e3o Paulo state, although there were also names from Minas Gerais and Rio de Janeiro states.\nThis distinction was established precisely because the samba made by these new artists and musical groups \u2013 although it maintained some similarities with the standard enshrined in the Fundo de Quintal \u2013 did not have the samba musicians of the previous decade as a major musical reference nor did it keep traditional and informal aspects of matrixes of urban samba. For example, the studio recordings of a large part of these samba bands, such as Ra\u00e7a Negra, gave up the use of instruments common to the 1980s pagode \u2013 such as hand-repique, tan-tan and banjo \u2013 in exchange for instrumentation characteristic of international pop music from that period, especially the saxophone and the electronic keyboard. The use of these pop music instruments was less or more common to each group, but their purpose was the same, that is, the use of samplers and keyboards to reproduce the sound of various instruments. Despite these dilutions, the \"romantic pagode\" achieved great commercial success in the Brazilian phonographic market and in the mass media, highlighting samba groups such as Art Popular, Negritude J\u00fanior, Exaltasamba, Katinguel\u00ea, Ra\u00e7a Negra, S\u00f3 Pra Contrariar, Soweto, among others.\nSamba in the 21st century.\nDuring the second half of the 1990s, the increase in the illegal sale of cassette tapes and, mainly, compact discs caused a deep crisis in the music industry in Brazil, which worsened, from the 2000s, with the possibility of digital download, often free of charge, of musical works via the internet. In this context, there was a sharp drop in the commercialization of official samba records and their sub-genres, especially pagode. Samba groups of huge commercial success in the 1990s, such as Ra\u00e7a Negra and S\u00f3 Pra Contrariar, saw their sales drop substantially at the turn of the 21st century. In addition, in a space of a few decades, samba songs played in the media have declined, with the genre it is almost always represented by the sub-genre pagode in the Brazilian charts. Of the 100 most heard artists on Brazilian radio between 2010 and 2019 on the Crowley Official Broadcast Chart, only 11 were from samba \u2013 and all from pagode. In another survey, carried out jointly between Kantar Ibope Media and Crowley Broadcast Analysis, the pagode corresponded to only 9% of the radio audience in Brazil in 2019, too far from the dominant sertanejo (Brazilian country music genre), whose slice represented about one third of the radio audience in the country.\nEven so, the first two decades of the 21st century confirmed the pagode as the hegemonic reference of samba in the Brazilian music industry. In the first decade of this century, new artists emerged commercially, such as the samba bands Grupo Revela\u00e7\u00e3o, Sorriso Maroto and Turma do Pagode, and some singers who left their original samba groups to launch a solo career, such as P\u00e9ricles (former Exaltasamba), Belo (former Soweto) and Alexandre Pires (formerly of S\u00f3 Pra Contrariar). In the following decade, it was the turn of Xande de Pilares and Thiaguinho, former vocalists of Revela\u00e7\u00e3o and Exaltasamba respectively, and of singers Mumuzinho, Ferrugem and Dilsinho. A characteristic common to all these artists was the significant amount of live album releases instead of traditional studio albums. This gained even more strength with the development of streaming media, a platform for digital music that became popular in the 2010s.\nOutside the hegemonic commercial scope of the subgenre pagode, the late 1990s was also a period of great visibility and notoriety for the most traditional samba in Rio de Janeiro. A new generation of musicians emerged in \"rodas de samba\" that spread through several neighborhoods in the city, especially in Lapa, the central region of the city that started to concentrate several bars and restaurants with live music. For having identified with the bohemian neighborhood, this movement became known informally as \"samba da Lapa\". With a repertoire composed of classics sambas and without concessions to more modern sub-genres, this new circuit promoted the meeting between beginning and veteran musicians from several generations of sambistas, all identified with the traditional elements that make up the urban Carioca samba. Among some artists who acted in the scope of samba circles in this neighborhood, were Teresa Cristina and Semente group, Nilze Carvalho and Sururu na Roda group, Luciane Menezes and Dobrando a Esquina group, Eduardo Gallotti and Anjos da Lua group, among others, besides veterans such as \u00c1urea Martins. And later, Edu Krieger and Moyseis Marques has appeared. Other new artists linked to the samba traditions, but without direct ties to the Lapa carioca movement, emerged such as Dudu Nobre and Diogo Nogueira, in addition to Fabiana Cozza in S\u00e3o Paulo.\nIn the institutional field, the Brazilian National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage declared in 2007 the modern Carioca samba and its matrixes samba de terreiro, partido-alto and samba-enredo as Intangible Cultural Heritage in Brazil.\nUrban samba instruments.\nWith basically rhythm and varied tempo, the urban samba is played by percussion instruments and accompanied by string instruments. In certain areas, other wind instruments were added.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPapers and theses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPress.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "28262", "revid": "16949691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28262", "title": "Snowboard", "text": "Winter sport equipment\nSnowboard is a specially designed board used for the winter sport, snowboarding, where the rider places both feet on a single board, typically secured with bindings. Unlike skis, which are used in pairs, a snowboard is a single, wider piece of equipment that allows the user to glide smoothly over snow-covered surfaces. The width and shape of the board provide stability and control, enabling riders to perform various maneuvers, turns, and tricks on different types of terrain, including groomed slopes, powder, and terrain parks. Snowboards widths are between 6 and 12 inches or 15 to 30 centimeters. Snowboards are differentiated from monoskis by the stance of the user. In monoskiing, the user stands with feet inline with direction of travel (facing tip of monoski/downhill) (parallel to long axis of board), whereas in snowboarding, users stand with feet transverse (more or less) to the longitude of the board. Users of such equipment may be referred to as \"snowboarder\"s. \"Commercial snowboards\" generally require extra equipment, such as bindings and special boots which help secure both feet of a snowboarder, who generally ride in an upright position. These types of boards are commonly used by people at ski hills, mountains, backcountry, or resorts for leisure, entertainment, and competitive purposes in the activity called snowboarding.\nHistory.\nRiding a sliding plank of wood while standing was a skill demonstrated on the Turkish lazboard or toboggan in winters before 1900.\nIn 1917, 13 year old Vern Wicklund crafted a homemade board used for sliding on snow in Cloquet, Minnesota. This modified sled was dubbed a \u201cbunker,\u201d and patented twenty two years later in 1939.\nSherm Poppen from Muskegon, Michigan came up with what most consider the direct predecessor of the snowboard in 1965 called the Snurfer (a blend of \"snow\" and \"surfer\"). Commercially available Snurfers in the late 1960s and early 1970s had no bindings. The rider held onto a looped nylon lanyard attached to the front of the Snurfer, and stood upon several rows of square U-shaped staples that were partially driven into the board but protruded about 1\u00a0cm above the board's surface to provide traction even when packed with snow. Later Snurfer models replaced the staples with ridged rubber grips running longitudinally along the length of the board (originally) or, subsequently, as rectangular footpads. Dimitrije Milovich led the Winterstick company from 1972\u20131982 and 1985\u20131987, and obtained a 1974 patent. It is widely accepted that Jake Burton Carpenter (founder of Burton Snowboards) and/or Tom Sims (founder of Sims Snowboards) invented modern snowboarding by introducing bindings and steel edges to snowboards in the late 1970s. Sims was an avid skateboarder in 1963 when he built a crude \u201cski board\u201d in his seventh-grade wood shop class in Haddonfield, N.J., so he could continue to ride during the winter. Barfoot Snoboards was founded by Chuck Barfoot in 1981.\nSnowboarding began to spread internationally. In 1981, a couple of Winterstick team riders went to France at the invitation of Alain Gaimard, marketing director at Les Arcs. After seeing an early film of this event, French skiers/surfers Augustin Coppey, Olivier Lehaneur, Olivier Roland and Antoine Yarmola made their first successful attempts during the winter of 1983 in France (Val Thorens), using primitive, home-made clones of the Winterstick. Starting with pure powder, skateboard-shaped wooden-boards equipped with aluminium fins, foot-straps and leashes, their technology evolved within a few years to pressed wood/fiber composite boards fitted with polyethylene soles, steel edges and modified ski boot shells. These were more suitable for the mixed conditions encountered while snowboarding mainly off-piste, but having to get back to ski lifts on packed snow. In 1985, James Bond popularized snowboarding in the movie \"A View to a Kill\". In the scene, he escapes Soviet agents who are on skis with a makeshift snowboard made from the debris of a snowmobile that exploded. The actual snowboard used for the stunt was a Sims snowboard ridden by founder Tom Sims. By 1986, although still very much a minority sport, commercial snowboards had started appearing in French ski resorts.\nContemporaneously, the Snurfer was being turned into a snowboard on the other side of the iron curtain. In 1980, Aleksey Ostatnigrosh and Alexei Melnikov - two members of the only Snurfer club in the Soviet Union started changing the Snurfer design to allow jumping and to improve control on hard packed snow. Apparently unaware of developments in the Snurfer/snowboard world, they attached a bungee cord to the Snurfer tail which the rider could grab before jumping. Later, in 1982, they attached a foot binding to the Snurfer. The binding was only for the back foot, and had a release capability. In 1985, after several iterations of the Snurfer binding system, Aleksey Ostatnigrosh made the first Russian snowboard. The board was cut out of a single vinyl plastic sheet and had no metal edges. The bindings were attached by a central bolt and could rotate while on the move or be fixed at any angle. In 1988, OstatniGROsh and MELnikov started the first Russian snowboard manufacturing company, GROMEL\nThe first fibreglass snowboard with binding was made by Santa Cruz inventor Gary Tracy of GARSKI with the assistance of Bill Bourke in their factory in Santa Cruz in 1982. One of these original boards is still on display at Santa Cruz Skateboards in Capitola, CA. By the mid-80s, snowboarding had considerable commercial success with multiple competing companies. Burton had established a European Division by the mid-1980s. In Canada in 1983, a teenager named David Kemper began building his first snowboards in his garage in Ontario, Canada. By 1987, https:// was launched and became one of the top snowboard brands among Burton, Sims, and Barfoot.\nThe International Ski Federation (FIS) recognized snowboarding as a discipline in 1994. Snowboarding made its Olympic debut at the 1998 Nagano Winter Games. Men's and Women's halfpipe and giant slalom competitions were an instant success due to their overwhelming popularity with spectators. However, FIS was responsible for the scoring system and course design which were riddled with issues. FIS did not consult snowboarding pioneers and experts, and instead deciding to leave the contest rules and governing up to inexperienced FIS professionals. The giant slalom course was not properly maintained and the snowboarding events were scheduled right after the skiing events, which posed dangers to contestants due to ice and chop. At the 2002 winter games held in Salt Lake City, UT, FIS decided to consult US snowboard industry experts and together they made the competition safer for the athletes and added a viable scoring system. The 2006 Winter Games in Turin saw the addition of snowboard cross. Slopestyle events were added in 2014, and Big Air in 2018.\nBy 2008 snowboarding was a $487 million industry with average equipment costs running to around $540 for board, boots, and bindings.\nBoard types.\nThe bottom or 'base' of the snowboard is generally made of UHMW and is surrounded by a thin strip of steel, known as the 'edge'. Artwork was primarily printed on PBT using a sublimation process in the 1990s, but poor color retention and fade after moderate use moved high-end producers to longer-lasting materials.\nSnowboards come in several different styles, depending on the type of riding intended.\nSnowboards are generally constructed of a hardwood core which is sandwiched between multiple layers of fibreglass. Some snowboards incorporate the use of more exotic materials such as carbon fiber, Kevlar, aluminium (as a honeycomb core structure), and have incorporated piezo dampers. The front (or \"nose\") of the board is upturned to help the board glide over uneven snow. The back (or \"tail\") of the board is also upturned to enable backwards (or \"switch\") riding. The base (the side of the board which contacts the ground) is made of Polyethylene plastic. The two major types of base construction are extruded and sintered. An extruded base is a basic, low-maintenance design which basically consists of the plastic base material melted into its form. A sintered base uses the same material as an extruded base, but first grinds the material into a powder, then, using heat and pressure, molds the material into its desired form. A sintered base is generally softer than its extruded counterpart, but has a porous structure which enables it to absorb wax. This wax absorption (along with a properly done 'hot wax'), greatly reduces surface friction between the base and the snow, allowing the snowboard to travel on a thin layer of water. Snowboards with sintered bases are much faster, but require semi-regular maintenance and are easier to damage. The bottom edges of the snowboard are fitted with a thin strip of steel, just a couple of millimeters wide. This steel edge allows the board to grab or 'dig into' hard snow and ice (like the blade of an ice skate), and also protects the boards internal structure. The top of the board is typically a layer of acrylic with some form of graphic designed to attract attention, showcase artwork, or serve the purpose similar to that of any other form of printed media. Flite Snowboards, an early designer, pressed the first closed-molded boards from a garage in Newport, Rhode Island, in the mid-1980s. Snowboard topsheet graphics can be a highly personal statement and many riders spend many hours customizing the look of their boards. The top of some boards may even include thin inlays with other materials, and some are made entirely of epoxy-impregnated wood. The base of the board may also feature graphics, often designed in a manner to make the board's manufacturer recognizable in photos.\nBoard construction.\nThe various components of a snowboard are:\n Extruded: The Polyethylene base material is cut from a large sheet, or squeezed out of a machine much like \"Play-Doh\". A low maintenance base, it is the least expensive and easiest to repair. Extruded bases are smoother and less porous than other bases. They do not saturate with wax well, and tend to slide slower than other bases. But left unwaxed they do not lose much overall performance. Extruded P-Tex is also cheaper than sintered P-Tex\n Sintered: Polyethylene base material is ground to powder then reformed with pressure and heat, and cut to shape. A sintered base is very porous and absorbs wax well. Sintered bases slide faster than extruded bases when waxed, but will be slower if unwaxed for a period. They are more expensive, and harder to repair.\n Sintered Hybrid: Sintered bases may have graphite, gallium, indium or other materials added. These materials are used increase glide, strength, \"wax hold\" and other desired characteristics.\n Regular: As described above the board flexes up when laid down flat. This is the original design and still the most widely used board form as it is the oldest.\n Reverse: The exact opposite of regular. The board is bent upwards starting at the middle, so that when laid flat the nose and tail are significantly off the ground. This design is ideal for park and freestyle as it allows a much smoother 360-degree rotation on both snow and rails. When standing on the board it is flexed down at the contact points by your weight, but can easily be lifted by shifting your weight off either foot. Sims first released this design in 1985, however, it was popularized recently by companies such as Lib-Tech and K2 Snowboarding.\n De-cambered: The idea is similar to \"Reversed\" but the lift doesn't start until after the contact points, making the board flat between your feet. This design works well in powder due to its naturally raised tips and its use of the entire edge when turning. The Kinked design also fares well in parks as it has the turning and spin benefits of the \"Reverse\" camber design. This design is the newest out of the four in terms of form.\n Flat: The board is entirely flat from nose to tail. Because there is no curve these are better suited for casual free riding and most big-air features in park (big-air jumps/pipe).\nSustainable manufacturing.\nAmongst Climate Change, the winter sports community is a growing environmentalist group, whom depend on snowy winters for the survival of their culture. This movement is, in part, being energized by a nonprofit named \"Protect Our Winters\" and the legendary rider Jeremy Jones. The organization provides education initiatives, support for community based projects, and is active in climate discussions with the government. Alongside this organization, there are many other winter sports companies who see the ensuing calamity and are striving to produce products that are less damaging to the environment. Snowboard manufacturers are adapting to decreasing supplies of petroleum and timber with ingenious designs.\nWhen it comes down to it \"the least of our worries will be that skiers and snowboarders don't get to go play,\" says Jeremy Jones.\nBoots.\nSnowboard boots are mostly considered soft boots, though alpine snowboarding uses a harder boot similar to a ski boot. A boot's primary function is to transfer the rider's energy into the board, protect the rider with support, and keep the rider's feet warm. A snowboarder shopping for boots is usually looking for a good fit, flex, and looks. Boots can have different features such as lacing styles, heat molding liners, and gel padding that the snowboarder also might be looking for. Tradeoffs include rigidity versus comfort, and built in forward lean, versus comfort.\nThere are three incompatible types:\n There are 3 main lacing systems used in snowboarding boots: traditional laces, the BOA system (a thin metal cord that is tensioned by a ratcheting dial placed on the front or side of the boot), and the fast lock system (a thin cord that is pulled and slid into a locking hook). Boots may have a single lacing system, a single lacing system that tightens the foot and the leg separately, a single lacing system with some trick to pull down the front pad in the center as you tighten the boot, 2 combined lacing systems where one tightens the whole boot and the other tightens just the center (similar to the previous one) or 2 combined lacing systems where one tightens the lower part (your foot) and the other tightens the upper part (your leg).\nBindings.\nBindings are separate components from the snowboard deck and are very important parts of the total snowboard interface. The bindings' main function is to hold the rider's boot in place tightly to transfer their energy to the board. Most bindings are attached to the board with three or four screws that are placed in the center of the binding. Although a rather new technology from Burton called Infinite channel system uses two screws, both on the outsides of the binding.\nThere are several types of bindings. Strap-in, step-in, and hybrid bindings are used by most recreational riders and all freestyle riders.\nStrap-in.\nThese are the most popular bindings in snowboarding. Before snowboard specific boots existed, snowboarders used any means necessary to attach their feet to their snowboards and gain the leverage needed for turning. Typical boots used in these early days of snowboarding were Sorels or snowmobile boots. These boots were not designed for snowboarding and did not provide the support desired for doing turns on the heel edge of a snowboard. As a result, early innovators such as Louis Fournier conceived the \"high-back\" binding design which was later commercialized and patented by Jeff Grell. The highback binding is the technology produced by most binding equipment manufacturers in the snowboard industry. The leverage provided by highbacks greatly improved board control. Snowboarders such as Craig Kelly adapted plastic \"tongues\" to their boots to provide the same support for toe-side turns that the highback provided for heel-side turns. In response, companies such as Burton and Gnu began to offer \"tongues\".\nWith modern strap bindings, the rider wears a boot which has a thick but flexible sole, and padded uppers. The foot is held onto the board with two buckle straps \u2013 one strapped across the top of the toe area, and one across the ankle area. They can be tightly ratcheted closed for a tight fit and good rider control of the board. Straps are typically padded to more evenly distribute pressure across the foot. While nowhere near as popular as two-strap bindings, some people prefer three-strap bindings for more specialized riding such as carving. The third strap tends to provide additional stiffness to the binding.\nCap-strap bindings are a recent modification that provide a very tight fit to the toe of the boot, and seats the boot more securely in the binding. Numerous companies have adopted various versions of the cap strap.\nStep-in.\nInnovators of step-in systems produced prototypes and designed proprietary step-in boot and binding systems with the goal of improving the performance of snowboard boots and bindings, and as a result, the mid-90s saw an explosion of step-in binding and boot development. New companies, Switch and Device, were built on new step-in binding technology. Existing companies Shimano, K2 and Emery were also quick to market with new step-in technology. Meanwhile, early market leaders Burton and Sims were noticeably absent from the step-in market. Sims was the first established industry leader to market with a step-in binding. Sims licensed a step-in system called DNR which was produced by the established ski-binding company Marker. Marker never improved the product which was eventually discontinued. Sims never re-entered the step-in market.\nThe risk of commercial failure from a poorly performing Step-in binding presented serious risk to established market leaders. This was evidenced by Airwalk who enjoyed 30% market share in snowboard boot sales when they began development of their step-in binding system. The Airwalk step-in System experienced serious product failure at the first dealer demonstrations, seriously damaging the company's credibility and heralded a decline in the company's former position as the market leader in Snowboard boots. Established snowboarding brands seeking to gain market share while reducing risk, purchased proven step-in innovators. For example, snowboard boot company Vans purchased the Switch step-in company, while Device step-in company was purchased by Ride Snowboards.\nAlthough initially refusing to expose themselves to the risk and expense associated with bringing a step-in system to market, Burton chose to focus primarily on improvements to existing strap-in technology. However, Burton eventually released 2 models of step-in systems, the SI and the PSI, Burton's SI system enjoyed moderate success, yet never matched the performance of the company's strap-in products and was never improved upon. Burton never marketed any improvements to either of their step-in binding systems and eventually discontinued the products.\nMost Popular (and incompatible) step-in systems used unique and proprietary mechanisms, such as the step-ins produced by Burton, Rossignol and Switch. Shimano and K2 used a technology similar to clipless bicycle pedals. By the early-to-mid 2010s, Burton, Rossignol, and K2 Clicker step-in binding systems were no longer in production as the companies had opted to focus on the strap-in binding system. Burton later resumed production and sales of step-in bindings with the development of their brand new \"Step On\" binding and boot system.\nSpeed entry (hybrid).\nThere are also proprietary systems that seek to combine the convenience of step-in systems with the control levels attainable with strap-ins. An example is the Flow binding system, which is similar to a strap-in binding, except that the foot enters the binding through the back. The back flips down and allows the boot to slide in; it's then flipped up and locked into place with a clamp, eliminating the need to loosen and then re-tighten straps every time the rider frees and then re-secures their rear foot. The rider's boot is held down by an adjustable webbing that covers most of the foot. Newer Flow models have connected straps in place of the webbing found on older models; these straps are also micro adjustable. In 2004, K2 released the Cinch series, a similar rear-entry binding; riders slip their foot in as they would a Flow binding, however rather than webbing, the foot is held down by straps.\nHighback.\nA stiff molded support behind the heel and up the calf area. The HyBak was originally designed by inventor Jeff Grell and built by Flite Snowboards. This allows the rider to apply pressure and effect a \"heelside\" turn. Some high backs are stiff vertically but provide some flex for twisting of the riders legs. The highback adjustments allow the rider to implement a higher degree of forward lean. These settings are usually calibrated between F1 (the lowest lean) to F5 (the highest lean). Implementing higher levels of lean are directly proportional to the riders skillset and type of terrain.\nPlate.\nPlate bindings are used with hardboots on Alpine or racing snowboards. Extreme carvers and some Boarder Cross racers also use plate bindings. The stiff bindings and boots give much more control over the board and allow the board to be carved much more easily than with softer bindings. Alpine snowboards tend to be longer and thinner with a much stiffer flex for greater edge hold and better carving performance.\nSnowboard bindings, unlike ski bindings, do not automatically release upon impact or after falling over. With skis, this mechanism is designed to protect from injuries (particularly to the knee) caused by skis torn in different directions. Automatic release is not required in snowboarding, as the rider's legs are fixed in a static position and twisting of the knee joint cannot occur to the same extent. Furthermore, it reduces the dangerous prospect of a board hurtling downhill riderless, and the rider slipping downhill on his back with no means to maintain grip on a steep slope. Nevertheless, some ski areas require the use of a \"leash\" that connects the snowboard to the rider's leg or boot, in case the snowboard manages to get away from its rider. This is most likely to happen when the rider removes the board at the top or the bottom of a run (or while on a chairlift, which could be dangerous).\nA Noboard is a snowboard binding alternative with only peel and stick pads applied directly to any snowboard deck and no attachment.\nStep-On.\nThe newest innovation and public desire of bindings are step-ons with the purpose of ease and accessibility while maintaining performance and safety. Step-ons were originally made from the company Burton inspired from their previous design step-in bindings. These strapless bindings were launched in 2017 and came with a lot of concern. Step-on bindings have a hook on either side of the toes as well as a buckle on the heel. The step on boots have a cleat on the side of both toes as well as a heel clip on the back of the heel. This creates a three point contact connection between the boots and the bindings and locks the rider into the snowboard. To get into the bindings the rider would step their heel into the heel buckle first and then their toe into the toe hooks. Step ons have a lever on the side of the bindings that lifts up when pulled on that releases the heel buckle allowing the rider to get out with ease.\nStomp pad.\nStomp pads, which are placed between the bindings closer to the rear binding, allow the rider to better control the board with only one boot strapped in, such as when maneuvering onto a chair lift, riding a ski tow or performing a one footed trick. Whereas the upper surface of the board is smooth, the stomp pad has a textured pattern which provides grip to the underside of the boot. Stomp pads can be decorative and vary in their size, shape and the kind and number of small spikes or friction points they provide.\nStances.\nThere are two types of stance-direction used by snowboarders. A \"regular\" stance places the rider's left foot at the front of the snowboard. \"Goofy\", the opposite stance direction, places the rider's right foot at the front, as in skateboarding. Regular is the most common. There are different ways to determine whether a rider is \"regular\" or \"goofy\". One method used for first time riders is to observe the first step forward when walking or climbing up stairs. The first foot forward would be the foot set up at the front of the snowboard. Another method used for first time riders is to use the same foot that you kick a football with as your back foot (though this can be an inaccurate sign for some, as there are people who prefer goofy though are right handed, and therefore naturally kick a football with their right foot). This is a good method for setting up the snowboard stance for a new snowboarder. However having a surfing or skateboarding background will also help a person determine their preferred stance, although not all riders will have the same stance skateboarding and snowboarding. Another way to determine a rider's stance is to get the rider to run and slide on a tiled or wooden floor, wearing only socks, and observe which foot the person puts forward during the slide. This simulates the motion of riding a snowboard and exposes that persons natural tendency to put a particular foot forward. Another method is to stand behind the first-timer and give them a shove, enough for them to put one foot forward to stop themselves from falling. Other good ways of determining which way you ride are rushing a door (leading shoulder equals leading foot) or going into a defensive boxing stance (see which foot goes forward).\nMost experienced riders are able to ride in the opposite direction to their usual stance (i.e. a \"regular\" rider would lead with their right foot instead of their left foot). This is called riding \"fakie\" or \"switch\".\nStance width.\nStance width helps determine the rider's balance on the board. The size of the rider is an important factor as well as the style of their riding when determining a proper stance width. A common measurement used for new riders is to position the bindings so that the feet are placed a little wider than shoulder width apart. Another, less orthodox form of measurement may be taken by putting your feet together and place your hands, palm down, on the ground in a straight line with your body by squatting down. This generally gives a good natural measurement for how wide of a base your body uses to properly balance itself when knees are bent. However, personal preference and comfort are important and most experienced riders will adjust the stance width to personal preference. Skateboarders should find that their snowboarding and skateboarding stance widths are relatively similar.\nA wider stance, common for freestyle riders, gives more stability when landing a jump or jibbing a rail. Control in a wider stance is reduced when turning on the piste. Conversely a narrow stance will give the rider more control when turning on the piste but less stability when freestyling. A narrow stance is more common for riders looking for quicker turn edge-hold (i.e. small radius turns). The narrow stance will give the rider a concentrated stability between the bindings allowing the board to dig into the snow quicker than a wider stance so the rider is less prone to wash out.\nBinding angle.\nBinding angle is defined by the degrees off of perpendicular from the length of the snowboard. A binding angle of 0\u00b0 is when the foot is perpendicular to the length of the snowboard. Positive angles are pointed towards the front of the board, whereas negative angles are pointed towards the back of the board. The question of \"how much\" the bindings are angled depends on the rider's purpose and preference. Different binding angles can be used for different types of snowboarding. Someone who participates in freestyle competition would have a much different \"stance\" than someone who explores backcountry and powder. The recent advancement and boom of snowboard culture and technology has made binding angle adjustments relatively easy. Binding companies design their bindings with similar baseplates that can easily mount onto any type of snowboard regardless of the brand. With the exception of Burton, and their newly released \"channel system\", adjusting bindings is something that remains constant among all snowboarders. Done with a small screw-driver or a snowboard tool, the base plates on bindings can be easily rotated to whatever preferred stance. One must un-screw the baseplate, pick their degree angles, and then re-screw the baseplates. Bindings should also regularly be checked to ensure that the screws don't come undone from the movements of snowboarding.\nSkiboarding.\nSkiboarding is a type of freestyle skiing using short, double-tipped skis, most commonly using regular ski boots, non release skiboard bindings, and no ski poles. By using \"risers\" which serve as adapters, standard ski or snowboard bindings are sometimes used.\nThe term \"skiboarding\" generally refers to the use of a wider version of a short double tipped ski, while \"snowblades\" or \"skiblades\" are usually the width of an average ski or thinner.\nSkiboarding is a recreational sport with no governing body or competition.\nThe first mass-produced skiboard was pioneered and invented by Michael Canon, Stephanie Simon and Tayt Tindal. The company was called Klimax Skiboards. After coining the name of the sport \"Skiboarding\" Michael Canon and Micah Fisher spun off to create Canon Skiboards which quickly became the 800 lb gorilla in the sport. More American manufacturers followed Canon such as Line, Salomon and Groove, and the sport grew in popularity. From 1997 to 2000, skiboarding was part of the winter X Games in the slopestyle and big air. As the sport evolved, skiboards became longer and evolved into twin tip skiing, and many skiboarding companies switched to freestyle skiing on twin-tip skis.\nToday skiboards are still available from brands such as Rvl8, Summit, Spruce Mountain, Bluemoris, K2, and Head.\nSkiboards and snowblades/skiblades are from about in length, with a parabolic shape like a snowboard, and a solid wood or foam core. Length and width are a function of rider weight, skiing style, and conditions.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "28263", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28263", "title": "Stanza", "text": "Group of lines within a poem\nIn poetry, a stanza (; from Italian \"stanza\", ; lit.\u2009'room') is a group of lines within a poem, usually set off from others by a blank line or indentation. Stanzas can have regular rhyme and metrical schemes, but they are not required to have either. There are many different . Some stanzaic forms are simple, such as four-line quatrains. Other forms are more complex, such as the Spenserian stanza. Fixed verse poems, such as sestinas, can be defined by the number and form of their stanzas.\nThe stanza has also been known by terms such as \"batch\", \"fit\", and \"stave\".\nThe term \"stanza\" has a similar meaning to \"strophe\", though \"strophe\" sometimes refers to an irregular set of lines, as opposed to regular, rhymed stanzas.\nEven though the term \"stanza\" is taken from Italian, in the Italian language the word \"strofa\" is more commonly used.\nIn music, groups of lines are typically referred to as \"verses\". The stanza in poetry is analogous with the paragraph in prose: related thoughts are grouped into units.\nExample 1.\nThis short poem by Emily Dickinson has two stanzas of four lines each:\n&lt;poem&gt;I had no time to hate, because\nThe grave would hinder me,\nAnd life was not so ample I\nCould finish enmity.\nNor had I time to love; but since\nSome industry must be, \nThe little toil of love, I thought,\nwas large enough for me.&lt;/poem&gt;\nExample 2.\nThis poem by Andrew John Young has three stanzas of six lines each:\n&lt;poem&gt;Frost called to the water Halt \nAnd crusted the moist snow with sparkling salt;\nBrooks, their one bridges, stop, \nAnd icicles in long stalactites drop. \nAnd tench in water-holes \nLurk under gluey glass-like fish in bowls.\nIn the hard-rutted lane \nAt every footstep breaks a brittle pane, \nAnd tinkling trees ice-bound, \nChanged into weeping willows, sweep the ground; \nDead boughs take root in ponds \nAnd ferns on windows shoot their ghostly fronds.\nBut vainly the fierce frost \nInterns poor fish, ranks trees in an armed host, \nHangs daggers from house-eaves \nAnd on the windows ferny am bush weaves; \nIn the long war grown warmer \nThe sun will strike him dead and strip his armour.&lt;/poem&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28264", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28264", "title": "Shoemaker-Levy 9 Comet", "text": ""}
{"id": "28265", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28265", "title": "Spanish\u2013American War", "text": "1898 conflict between Spain and the United States\nThe Spanish\u2013American War (April 21 \u2013 August 13, 1898) was fought between Spain and the United States in 1898. It began with the sinking of the USS \"Maine\" in Havana Harbor in Cuba, and resulted in the U.S. acquiring sovereignty over Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, and establishing a protectorate over Cuba. It represented U.S. intervention in the Cuban War of Independence and Philippine Revolution, with the latter later leading to the Philippine\u2013American War. The Spanish\u2013American War brought an end to almost four centuries of Spanish presence in the Americas, Asia, and the Pacific; the United States meanwhile not only became a major world power, but also gained several island possessions spanning the globe, which provoked rancorous debate over the wisdom of expansionism.\nThe 19th century represented a clear decline for the Spanish Empire, while the United States went from a newly founded country to a rising power. In 1895, Cuban nationalists began a revolt against Spanish rule, which was brutally suppressed by the colonial authorities. W. Joseph Campbell argues that yellow journalism in the U.S. exaggerated the atrocities in Cuba to sell more newspapers and magazines, which swayed American public opinion in support of the rebels. But historian Andrea Pitzer also points to the actual shift toward savagery of the Spanish military leadership, who adopted the brutal reconcentration policy after replacing the relatively conservative Governor-General of Cuba Arsenio Mart\u00ednez Campos with the more unscrupulous and aggressive Valeriano Weyler, nicknamed \"The Butcher.\" President Grover Cleveland resisted mounting demands for U.S. intervention, as did his successor William McKinley. Though not seeking a war, McKinley made preparations in readiness for one.\nIn January 1898, the U.S. Navy armored cruiser USS \"Maine\" was sent to Havana to provide protection for U.S. citizens. After the \"Maine\" was sunk by a mysterious explosion in the harbor on February 15, 1898, political pressures pushed McKinley to receive congressional authority to use military force. On April 21, the U.S. began a blockade of Cuba, and soon after Spain and the U.S. declared war. The war was fought in both the Caribbean and the Pacific, where American war advocates correctly anticipated that U.S. naval power would prove decisive. On May 1, a squadron of U.S. warships destroyed the Spanish fleet at Manila Bay in the Philippines and captured the harbor. The first U.S. Marines landed in Cuba on June 10 in the island's southeast, moving west and engaging in the Battles of El Caney and San Juan Hill on July 1 and then destroying the fleet at and capturing Santiago de Cuba on July 17. On June 20, the island of Guam surrendered without resistance, and on July 25, U.S. troops landed on Puerto Rico, of which a blockade had begun on May 8 and where fighting continued until an armistice was signed on August 13.\nThe war formally ended with the 1898 Treaty of Paris, signed on December 10 with terms favorable to the U.S. The treaty ceded ownership of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines to the U.S., and set Cuba up to become an independent state in 1902, although in practice it became a U.S. protectorate. The cession of the Philippines involved payment of $20\u00a0million ($\u00a0million today) to Spain by the U.S. to cover infrastructure owned by Spain. In Spain, the defeat in the war was a profound shock to the national psyche and provoked a thorough philosophical and artistic reevaluation of Spanish society known as the Generation of '98.\nHistorical background.\nSpain's attitude towards its colonies.\nThe combined problems arising from the Peninsular War (1807\u20131814), the loss of most of its colonies in the Americas in the early 19th-century Spanish American wars of independence, and three Carlist Wars (1832\u20131876) marked a low point for Spanish colonialism. Liberal Spanish elites like Antonio C\u00e1novas del Castillo and Emilio Castelar offered new interpretations of the concept of \"empire\" to dovetail with the emerging Spanish nationalism. C\u00e1novas made clear in an address to the University of Madrid in 1882 his view of the Spanish nation as based on shared cultural and linguistic elements\u2014on both sides of the Atlantic\u2014that tied Spain's territories together.\nC\u00e1novas saw Spanish colonialism as more \"benevolent\" than that of other European colonial powers. The prevalent opinion in Spain before the war regarded the spreading of \"civilization\" and Christianity as Spain's main objective and contribution to the New World. The concept of cultural unity bestowed special significance on Cuba, which had been Spanish for almost four hundred years, and was viewed as an integral part of the Spanish nation. The focus on preserving the empire would have negative consequences for Spain's national pride in the aftermath of the Spanish\u2013American War.\nAmerican interest in the Caribbean.\nIn 1823, the fifth American President James Monroe (1758\u20131831, served 1817\u201325) enunciated the Monroe Doctrine, which stated that the United States would not tolerate further efforts by European governments to retake or expand their colonial holdings in the Americas or to interfere with the newly independent states in the hemisphere. The U.S. would, however, respect the status of the existing European colonies. Before the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), Southern interests attempted to have the United States purchase Cuba and convert it into a new slave state. The pro-slavery element proposed the Ostend Manifesto of 1854. Anti-slavery forces rejected it.\nAfter the American Civil War and Cuba's Ten Years' War, U.S. businessmen began monopolizing the devalued sugar markets in Cuba. In 1894, 90% of Cuba's total exports went to the United States, which also provided 40% of Cuba's imports. Cuba's total exports to the U.S. were almost twelve times larger than the export to Spain. U.S. business interests indicated that while Spain still held political authority over Cuba, it was the U.S. that held economic power over Cuba.\nThe U.S. became interested in a trans-isthmus canal in either Nicaragua or Panama and realized the need for naval protection. Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan was an exceptionally influential theorist; his ideas were much admired by future 26th President Theodore Roosevelt, as the U.S. rapidly built a powerful naval fleet of steel warships in the 1880s and 1890s. Roosevelt served as Assistant Secretary of the Navy from 1897 to 1898 and was an aggressive supporter of an American war with Spain over Cuban interests.\nMeanwhile, the \"Cuba Libre\" movement, led by Cuban intellectual Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed until he died in 1895, had established offices in Florida. The face of the Cuban revolution in the U.S. was the \"Cuban Junta\", under the leadership of Tom\u00e1s Estrada Palma, who in 1902 became Cuba's first president. The Junta dealt with leading newspapers and Washington officials and held fund-raising events across the U.S. It funded and smuggled weapons. It mounted an extensive propaganda campaign that generated enormous popular support in the U.S. in favor of the Cubans. Protestant churches and most Democrats were supportive, but business interests called on Washington to negotiate a settlement and avoid war.\nCuba attracted enormous American attention, but almost no discussion involved the other Spanish colonies of Puerto Rico, also in the Caribbean, or of the Philippines or Guam. Historians note that there was no popular demand in the United States for an overseas colonial empire.\nPath to war.\nCuban struggle for independence.\nThe first serious bid for Cuban independence was the Ten Years' War, which erupted in 1868 and was subdued by the authorities a decade later. Neither the fighting nor the reforms in the Pact of Zanj\u00f3n (February 1878) quelled the desire of some revolutionaries for wider autonomy and, ultimately, independence. One such revolutionary, Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed, continued to promote Cuban financial and political freedom in exile. In early 1895, after years of organizing, Mart\u00ed launched a three-pronged invasion of the island.\nThe plan called for one group from Santo Domingo in the Dominican Republic led by M\u00e1ximo G\u00f3mez, one group from Costa Rica led by Antonio Maceo Grajales, and another from the United States (preemptively thwarted by U.S. officials in Florida) to land in different places on the island and provoke an uprising. While their call for revolution, the \"grito de Baire\", was successful, the result was not the grand show of force Mart\u00ed had expected. With a quick victory effectively lost, the revolutionaries settled in to fight a protracted guerrilla campaign.\nAntonio C\u00e1novas del Castillo, the architect of Spain's Restoration constitution and the prime minister at the time, ordered General Arsenio Mart\u00ednez-Campos, a distinguished veteran of the war against the previous uprising in Cuba, to quell the revolt. Campos's reluctance to accept his new assignment and his method of containing the revolt to the province of Oriente earned him criticism in the Spanish press.\nThe mounting pressure forced C\u00e1novas to replace General Campos with General Valeriano Weyler, a soldier who had experience in quelling rebellions in overseas provinces and the Spanish metropole. Weyler deprived the insurgency of weaponry, supplies, and assistance by ordering the residents of some Cuban districts to move to reconcentration areas near the military headquarters. This strategy was effective in slowing the spread of rebellion. In the United States, this fueled the fire of anti-Spanish propaganda. In a political speech, President William McKinley used this to ram Spanish actions against armed rebels. He even said this \"was not civilized warfare\" but \"extermination\".\nSpanish attitude.\nSpain depended on Cuba for prestige and trade, and used it as a training ground for its army. Spanish Prime Minister Antonio C\u00e1novas del Castillo announced that \"the Spanish nation is disposed to sacrifice to the last peseta of its treasure and to the last drop of blood of the last Spaniard before consenting that anyone snatch from it even one piece of its territory\". He had long dominated and stabilized Spanish politics. He was assassinated in 1897 by Italian anarchist Michele Angiolillo, leaving a Spanish political system that was not stable and could not risk a blow to its prestige.\nUS response.\nThe eruption of the Cuban revolt, Weyler's measures, and the popular fury these events whipped up proved to be a boon to the newspaper industry in New York City. Joseph Pulitzer of the \"New York World\" and William Randolph Hearst of the \"New York Journal\" recognized the potential for great headlines and stories that would sell copies. Both papers denounced Spain but had little influence outside New York. American opinion generally saw Spain as a hopelessly backward power that was unable to deal fairly with Cuba. American Catholics were divided before the war began but supported it enthusiastically once it started.\nThe U.S. had important economic interests that were being harmed by the prolonged conflict and deepening uncertainty about Cuba's future. Shipping firms that had relied heavily on trade with Cuba now suffered losses as the conflict continued unresolved. These firms pressed Congress and McKinley to seek an end to the revolt. Other American business concerns, specifically those who had invested in Cuban sugar, looked to the Spanish to restore order. Stability, not war, was the goal of both interests. How stability would be achieved would depend largely on the ability of Spain and the U.S. to work out their issues diplomatically.\nLieutenant Commander Charles Train, in 1894, in his preparatory notes in an outlook of an armed conflict between Spain and the United States, wrote that Cuba was entirely dependent on the outside world for food supplies, coal, and maritime supplies and that Spain would not be able to resupply a naval expeditionary force locally.\nWhile tension increased among the Cubans and Spanish government, popular support of intervention began to spring up in the United States. Many Americans likened the Cuban revolt to the American Revolution, and they viewed the Spanish government as a tyrannical oppressor. Historian Louis P\u00e9rez notes that \"The proposition of war in behalf of Cuban independence took hold immediately and held on thereafter. Such was the sense of the public mood.\" Many poems and songs were written in the United States to express support of the \"Cuba Libre\" movement. At the same time, many African Americans, facing growing racial discrimination and increasing retardation of their civil rights, wanted to take part in the war. They saw it as a way to advance the cause of equality, service to country hopefully helping to gain political and public respect amongst the wider population.\nPresident McKinley, well aware of the political complexity surrounding the conflict, wanted to end the revolt peacefully. He began to negotiate with the Spanish government, hoping that the talks would dampen yellow journalism in the United States and soften support for war with Spain. An attempt was made to negotiate a peace before McKinley took office. However, the Spanish refused to take part in the negotiations. In 1897 McKinley appointed Stewart L. Woodford as the new minister to Spain, who again offered to negotiate a peace. In October 1897, the Spanish government refused the United States' offer to negotiate between the Spanish and the Cubans, but promised the U.S. it would give the Cubans more autonomy. However, with the election of a more liberal Spanish government in November, Spain began to change its policies in Cuba. First, the new Spanish government told the United States that it was willing to offer a change in the Reconcentration policies if the Cuban rebels agreed to a cessation of hostilities. This time the rebels refused the terms in hopes that continued conflict would lead to U.S. intervention and the creation of an independent Cuba. The liberal Spanish government also recalled the Spanish Governor-General Valeriano Weyler from Cuba. This action alarmed many Cubans loyal to Spain.\nThe Cubans loyal to Weyler began planning large demonstrations to take place when the next Governor General, Ram\u00f3n Blanco, arrived in Cuba. U.S. consul Fitzhugh Lee learned of these plans and sent a request to the U.S. State Department to send a U.S. warship to Cuba. This request led to the armored cruiser being sent to Cuba. While \"Maine\" was docked in Havana harbor, a spontaneous explosion sank the ship. The sinking of \"Maine\" was blamed on the Spanish and made the possibility of a negotiated peace very slim. Throughout the negotiation process, the major European powers, especially Britain, France, and Russia, generally supported the American position and urged Spain to give in. Spain repeatedly promised specific reforms that would pacify Cuba but failed to deliver; American patience ran out.\nUSS \"Maine\" dispatch to Havana and loss.\nMcKinley sent USS \"Maine\" to Havana to ensure the safety of American citizens and interests, and to underscore the urgent need for reform. Naval forces were moved in position to attack simultaneously on several fronts if the war was not avoided. As \"Maine\" left Florida, a large part of the North Atlantic Squadron was moved to Key West and the Gulf of Mexico. Others were also moved just off the shore of Lisbon, and others were moved to Hong Kong.\nAt 9:40 P.M. on February 15, 1898, \"Maine\" sank in Havana Harbor after suffering a massive explosion. More than 3/4 of the ship's crew of 355 sailors, officers and Marines died as a result of the explosion. Of the 94 survivors only 16 were uninjured. In total, 260 servicemen were killed in the initial explosion, and six more died shortly thereafter from injuries.\nWhile McKinley urged patience and did not declare that Spain had caused the explosion, the deaths of hundreds of American sailors held the public's attention. McKinley asked Congress to appropriate $50\u00a0million for defense, and Congress unanimously obliged. Most American leaders believed that the cause of the explosion was unknown. Still, public attention was now riveted on the situation and Spain could not find a diplomatic solution to avoid war. Spain appealed to the European powers, most of whom advised it to accept U.S. conditions for Cuba in order to avoid war. Germany urged a united European stand against the United States but took no action.\nThe U.S. Navy's investigation, made public on March 28, concluded that the ship's powder magazines were ignited when an external explosion was set off under the ship's hull. Report investigation omitted to place responsibility for the external explosion but nonetheless poured fuel on popular indignation in the U.S., making war virtually inevitable. Spain's investigation came to the opposite conclusion: the explosion originated within the ship. Other investigations in later years came to various contradictory conclusions, but had no bearing on the coming of the war. In 1974, Admiral Hyman George Rickover had his staff look at the documents and decided there was an internal explosion. A study commissioned by \"National Geographic\" magazine in 1999, using AME computer modeling, reported: \"By examining the bottom plating of the ship and how it bent and folded, AME concluded that the destruction could have been caused by a mine.\"\nDeclaring war.\nAfter \"Maine\" was destroyed, New York City newspaper publishers Hearst and Pulitzer decided that the Spanish were to blame, and they publicized this theory as fact in their papers. Even prior to the explosion, both had published sensationalistic accounts of \"atrocities\" committed by the Spanish in Cuba; headlines such as \"Spanish Murderers\" were commonplace in their newspapers. Following the explosion, this tone escalated with the headline \"Remember The Maine, To Hell with Spain!\", quickly appearing. Their press exaggerated what was happening and how the Spanish were treating the Cuban prisoners. The stories were based on factual accounts, but most of the time, the articles that were published were embellished and written with incendiary language causing emotional and often heated responses among readers. A common myth falsely states that when illustrator Frederic Remington said there was no war brewing in Cuba, Hearst responded: \"You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war.\"\nHowever, this new \"yellow journalism\" was uncommon outside New York City, and historians no longer consider it the major force shaping the national mood. Public opinion nationwide did demand immediate action, overwhelming the efforts of President McKinley, Speaker of the House Thomas Brackett Reed, and the business community to find a negotiated solution. Wall Street, big business, high finance and Main Street businesses across the country were vocally opposed to war and demanded peace. After years of severe depression, the economic outlook for the domestic economy was suddenly bright again in 1897. However, the uncertainties of warfare posed a serious threat to full economic recovery. \"War would impede the march of prosperity and put the country back many years,\" warned the \"New Jersey Trade Review.\" The leading railroad magazine editorialized, \"From a commercial and mercenary standpoint it seems peculiarly bitter that this war should come when the country had already suffered so much and so needed rest and peace.\" McKinley paid close attention to the strong antiwar consensus of the business community, and strengthened his resolve to use diplomacy and negotiation rather than brute force to end the Spanish tyranny in Cuba. Historian Nick Kapur argues that McKinley's actions as he moved toward war were rooted not in various pressure groups but in his deeply held \"Victorian\" values, especially arbitration, pacifism, humanitarianism, and manly self-restraint.\nA speech delivered by Republican Senator Redfield Proctor of Vermont on March 17, 1898, thoroughly analyzed the situation and greatly strengthened the pro-war cause. Proctor concluded that war was the only answer. Many in the business and religious communities which had until then opposed war, switched sides, leaving McKinley and Speaker Reed almost alone in their resistance to a war. On April 11, McKinley ended his resistance and asked Congress for authority to send American troops to Cuba to end the civil war there, knowing that Congress would force a war.\nOn April 19, while Congress was considering joint resolutions supporting Cuban independence, Republican Senator Henry M. Teller of Colorado proposed the Teller Amendment to ensure that the U.S. would not establish permanent control over Cuba after the war. The amendment, disclaiming any intention to annex Cuba, passed the Senate 42 to 35; the House concurred the same day, 311 to 6. The amended resolution demanded Spanish withdrawal and authorized the President to use as much military force as he thought necessary to help Cuba gain independence from Spain. President McKinley signed the joint resolution on April 20, 1898, and the ultimatum was sent to Spain. In response, Spain severed diplomatic relations with the United States on April 21. On the same day, the U.S. Navy began a blockade of Cuba.\nOn April 25, the U.S. Congress responded in kind, declaring that a state of war between the U.S. and Spain had \"de facto\" existed since April 21, the day the blockade of Cuba had begun. It was the embodiment of the naval plan created by Lieutenant Commander Charles Train four years ago, stating once the US enacted a proclamation of war against Spain, it would mobilize its North Atlantic Squadron to form an efficient blockade in Havana, Matanzas and Sagua La Grande.\nThe Navy was ready, but the Army was not well-prepared for the war and made radical changes in plans and quickly purchased supplies. In the spring of 1898, the strength of the U.S. Regular Army was just 24,593 soldiers. The Army wanted 50,000 new men but received over 220,000 through volunteers and the mobilization of state National Guard units, even gaining nearly 100,000 men on the first night after the explosion of USS \"Maine\".\nPresident McKinley issued two calls for volunteers, the first on April 23 which called for 125,000 men to enlist, followed by a second appeal for a further 75,000 volunteers. States in the Northeast, Midwest, and the West quickly filled their volunteer quota. In response to the surplus influx of volunteers, several Northern states had their quotas increased. Contrastingly, some Southern states struggled to fulfil even the first mandated quota, namely Alabama, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia.\nThe majority of states did not allow African-American men to volunteer, which impeded recruitment in Southern states, especially those with large African-American populations. Quota requirements, based on total population, were unmanageable, as they were disproportionate compared to the actual population permitted to volunteer. This was especially evident in some states, such as Kentucky and Mississippi, which accepted out-of-state volunteers to aid in meeting their quotas.\nThis Southern apprehension towards enlistment can also be attributed to \"a war weariness derived from the Confederacy's defeat in the Civil War.\" Many in the South were still recuperating financially after their losses in the Civil War, and the upcoming war did not provide much hope for economic prosperity in the South. The prospect of a naval war gave anxiety to those in the South. The financial security of those working and living in the cotton belt relied heavily upon trade across the Atlantic, which would be disrupted by a nautical war, the prospect of which fostered a reluctance to enlist. Potential volunteers were also not financially incentivized, with pay per month initially being $13.00, which then was then raised to $15.60 for combat pay. It was more economically promising for most Southern men to continue in their own enterprises rather than enlist.\nHistoriography.\nThe overwhelming consensus of observers in the 1890s, and historians ever since, is that an upsurge of humanitarian concern with the plight of the Cubans was the main motivating force that caused the war with Spain in 1898. McKinley put it succinctly in late 1897 that if Spain failed to resolve its crisis, the United States would see \"a duty imposed by our obligations to ourselves, to civilization and humanity to intervene with force\". Intervention in terms of negotiating a settlement proved impossible\u2014neither Spain nor the insurgents would agree. Louis Perez states, \"Certainly the moralistic determinants of war in 1898 has been accorded preponderant explanatory weight in the historiography.\" By the 1950s, however, American political scientists began attacking the war as a mistake based on idealism, arguing that a better policy would be realism. They discredited the idealism by suggesting the people were deliberately misled by propaganda and sensationalist yellow journalism. Political scientist Robert Osgood, writing in 1953, led the attack on the American decision process as a confused mix of \"self-righteousness and genuine moral fervor,\" in the form of a \"crusade\" and a combination of \"knight-errantry and national self- assertiveness.\" Osgood argued:\nA war to free Cuba from Spanish despotism, corruption, and cruelty, from the filth and disease and barbarity of General 'Butcher' Weyler's reconcentration camps, from the devastation of haciendas, the extermination of families, and the outraging of women; that would be a blow for humanity and democracy... No one could doubt it if he believed\u2014and skepticism was not popular\u2014the exaggerations of the Cuban \"Junta's\" propaganda and the lurid distortions and imaginative lies pervade by the \"yellow sheets\" of Hearst and Pulitzer at the combined rate of 2 million [newspaper copies] a day.\nIn his \"War and Empire\", Prof. Paul Atwood of the University of Massachusetts (Boston) writes:\nThe Spanish\u2013American War was fomented on outright lies and trumped up accusations against the intended enemy.\u00a0... War fever in the general population never reached a critical temperature until the accidental sinking of the \"USS Maine\" was deliberately, and falsely, attributed to Spanish villainy.\u00a0... In a cryptic message\u00a0... Senator Lodge wrote that 'There may be an explosion any day in Cuba which would settle a great many things. We have got a battleship in the harbor of Havana, and our fleet, which overmatches anything the Spanish have, is masked at the Dry Tortugas.\nIn his autobiography, Theodore Roosevelt gave his views of the origins of the war:\nOur own direct interests were great, because of the Cuban tobacco and sugar, and especially because of Cuba's relation to the projected Isthmian [Panama] Canal. But even greater were our interests from the standpoint of humanity.\u00a0... It was our duty, even more from the standpoint of National honor than from the standpoint of National interest, to stop the devastation and destruction. Because of these considerations I favored war.\nIn the article 'Meaning of the Main', Louis A. Perez Jr. challenges Roosevelt's assertion:\nThe Maine incident fits well into a larger idealized view of a political universe. It lends itself easily to the service of validating normative democratic theory. It adds credence to commonly shared values of the national mission. This indeed may be a central if unspoken element of much of the historiography and the larger ideological role of the Maine: a plausible denial of the proposition of war as an instrument of policy-war, in short, deliberate and by design, for the purpose of territorial expansion.\nPacific theater.\nPhilippines.\nIn the 333 years of Spanish rule, the Philippines developed from a small overseas colony governed from the Mexico-based Viceroyalty of New Spain to a land with modern elements in the cities. The Spanish-speaking middle classes of the 19th century were mostly educated in the liberal ideas coming from Europe. Among these Ilustrados was the Filipino national hero Jos\u00e9 Rizal, who demanded larger reforms from the Spanish authorities. This movement eventually led to the Philippine Revolution against Spanish colonial rule. The revolution had been in a state of truce since the signing of the Pact of Biak-na-Bato in 1897, with revolutionary leaders having accepted exile outside of the country.\nLt. William Warren Kimball, Staff Intelligence Officer with the Naval War College prepared a plan for war with Spain including the Philippines on June 1, 1896, known as \"the Kimball Plan\".\nOn April 23, 1898, a document from Governor General Basilio August\u00edn appeared in the \"Manila Gazette\" newspaper warning of the impending war and calling for Filipinos to participate on the side of Spain.\nRoosevelt, who was at that time Assistant Secretary of the Navy, ordered Commodore George Dewey, commanding the Asiatic Squadron of the United States Navy: \"Order the squadron ...to Hong Kong. Keep full of coal. In the event of declaration of war with Spain, your duty will be to see that the Spanish squadron does not leave the Asiatic coast, and then offensive operations in Philippine Islands.\" Dewey's squadron departed on April 27 for the Philippines, reaching Manila Bay on the evening of April 30.\nThe first battle between American and Spanish forces was at Manila Bay where, on May 1, Commodore Dewey, commanding the Asiatic Squadron aboard , in a matter of hours defeated a Spanish squadron under Admiral Patricio Montojo. Dewey managed this with only nine wounded. With the German seizure of Qingdao in 1897, Dewey's squadron had become the only naval force in the Far East without a local base of its own, and was beset with coal and ammunition problems. Despite these problems, the Asiatic Squadron destroyed the Spanish fleet and captured Manila's harbor.\nFollowing Dewey's victory, Manila Bay became filled with the warships of other naval powers. The German squadron of eight ships, ostensibly in Philippine waters to protect German interests, acted provocatively\u2014cutting in front of American ships, refusing to salute the American flag (according to customs of naval courtesy), taking soundings of the harbor, and landing supplies for the besieged Spanish.\nWith interests of their own, Germany was eager to take advantage of whatever opportunities the conflict in the islands might afford. There was a fear at the time that the islands would become a German possession. The Americans called Germany's bluff and threatened conflict if the aggression continued. The Germans backed down. At the time, the Germans expected the confrontation in the Philippines to end in an American defeat, with the revolutionaries capturing Manila and leaving the Philippines ripe for German picking. The United States government had concerns about the self-government capability of the Filipinos, fearing that a power such as Germany or Japan might take control if the United States did not do so.\nCommodore Dewey transported Emilio Aguinaldo, a Filipino leader who led rebellion against Spanish rule in the Philippines in 1896, from exile in Hong Kong to the Philippines to rally more Filipinos against the Spanish colonial government. By June 9, Aguinaldo's forces controlled the provinces of Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna, Batangas, Bataan, Zambales, Pampanga, Pangasinan, and Mindoro, and had laid siege to Manila. On June 12, Aguinaldo proclaimed the independence of the Philippines. While Aguinaldo's revolutionary forces were fighting, preparations were underway in the U.S. to send land forces to supplement Dewey's naval forces. Troops began departing San Francisco on May 25 and arriving on Manila on June 30, having been officially formed as the U.S. Army the U.S. Eighth Army Corps on June 21 while they were in transit.\nOn August 5, upon instruction from Spain, Governor-General Basilio Augustin turned over the command of the Philippines to his deputy, Fermin Jaudenes. On August 13, with American commanders unaware that a peace protocol had been signed between Spain and the U.S. on the previous day in Washington D.C., American forces captured the city of Manila from the Spanish in the Battle of Manila. This battle marked the end of Filipino\u2013American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos. This later led to the Philippine\u2013American War, which would prove to be more deadly and costly than the Spanish\u2013American War.\nThe U.S. had sent a force of some 11,000 ground troops to the Philippines. On August 14, 1898, Spanish Captain-General Jaudenes formally capitulated and U.S. General Merritt formally accepted the surrender and declared the establishment of a U.S. military government in occupation. The capitulation document declared, \"The surrender of the Philippine Archipelago.\" and set forth a mechanism for its physical accomplishment. That same day, the Schurman Commission recommended that the U.S. retain control of the Philippines, possibly granting independence in the future. On December 10, 1898, the Spanish government ceded the Philippines to the United States in the Treaty of Paris. Armed conflict broke out between U.S. forces and the Filipinos when U.S. troops began to take the place of the Spanish in control of the country after the end of the war, quickly escalating into the Philippine\u2013American War.\nGuam.\nOn June 20, 1898, the protected cruiser commanded by Captain Henry Glass, and three transports carrying troops to the Philippines, entered Guam's Apra Harbor. Captain Glass had opened sealed orders instructing him to proceed to Guam and capture it while en route to the Philippines. \"Charleston\" fired a few rounds at the abandoned Fort Santa Cruz without receiving return fire. Two local officials, not knowing that war had been declared and believing the firing had been a salute, came out to \"Charleston\" to apologize for their inability to return the salute as they were out of gunpowder. Glass informed them that the U.S. and Spain were at war.\nThe following day, Glass sent Lieutenant William Braunersreuther to meet the Spanish Governor to arrange the surrender of the island and the Spanish garrison there. Two officers, 54 Spanish infantrymen as well as the governor-general and his staff were taken prisoner and transported to the Philippines as prisoners of war. No U.S. forces were left on Guam, but the only U.S. citizen on the island, Frank Portusach, told Captain Glass that he would look after things until U.S. forces returned.\nCaribbean theater.\nCuba.\nTheodore Roosevelt advocated intervention in Cuba, both for the Cuban people and to promote the Monroe Doctrine. While Assistant Secretary of the Navy, he placed the Navy on a war-time footing and prepared Dewey's Asiatic Squadron for battle. He also worked with Leonard Wood in convincing the Army to raise an all-volunteer regiment, the 1st U.S. Volunteer Cavalry. Wood was given command of the regiment that quickly became known as the \"Rough Riders\".\nThe Americans planned to destroy Spain's army forces in Cuba, capture the port city of Santiago de Cuba, and destroy the Spanish Caribbean Squadron (also known as the Flota de Ultramar). To reach Santiago they had to pass through concentrated Spanish defenses in the San Juan Hills and a small town in El Caney. The American forces were aided in Cuba by the pro-independence rebels led by General Calixto Garc\u00eda.\nCuban sentiment.\nFor quite some time the Cuban public believed the United States government to possibly hold the key to its independence, and even annexation was considered for a time, which historian Louis P\u00e9rez explored in his book \"Cuba and the United States: Ties of Singular Intimacy\". The Cubans harbored a great deal of discontent towards the Spanish government, a result of years of manipulation on the part of the Spanish. The prospect of getting the United States involved in the fight was considered by many Cubans as a step in the right direction. While the Cubans were wary of the United States' intentions, the overwhelming support from the American public provided the Cubans with some peace of mind, because they believed that the United States was committed to helping them achieve their independence.\nAction at Cienfuegos.\nThe first combat between American and Spanish forces in the Caribbean occurred on May 11, 1898, in the harbor near the city of Cienfuegos. The city was the southern terminus for undersea communication cables that connected Cuba to Spain and other Spanish holdings in the Caribbean. American Naval officers needed to destroy these cables to cut communications into and out of Cuba, in preparation for later operations against the major city of Santiago. The and the were dispatched to cut these cables early on the morning of May 11. To cut the cables, two steam cutters, with a crew of eight sailors and six Marines each, and two sailing launches, with a crew of fourteen sailors each, maneuvered into harbor and within 200 feet from shore.\nWhile the boats moved towards shore, the \"Marblehead\" and \"Nashville\" shelled Spanish trenches dug to protect the cables from sabotage attempts. They succeeded in destroying support buildings for the cables and drove the Spanish force back away from the beach. The boats' crews pulled one cable up and began trying to cut through its metal jacket while Spanish soldiers started firing from cover. Marine sharpshooters returned fire from the boats and the \"Marblehead\" and \"Nashville\" began firing shrapnel shells in an attempt to force the Spanish completely out of the area. The sailors finished cutting one cable and pulled up a second one to begin severing it too. Spanish fire began to take a toll on the Marines and sailors with multiple casualties in the small boats, but the Americans were still able to cut a second wire. They began working on the final wire and succeeded in partially cutting it until the still heavy Spanish fire and mounting casualties forced the Navy officer in command, Lieutenant E. A. Anderson, to order the boats to return to the cover of the larger vessels.\nIn the almost three hours of combat, two men were killed, two mortally wounded, and four more seriously wounded and they succeeded in severing two of the three cables running out of Cienfuegos. This relatively brief fight significantly disrupted communications between Cuba, Santiago, and Spain and contributed to the overall American goal of isolating Cuba from outside support. It also provided a major boost to American morale because it was the first combat American servicemen had seen close to home. For their brave actions, all the Marines and sailors in the four small boats received the Medal of Honor.\nLand campaign.\nThe first American landings in Cuba occurred on June 10 with the landing of the First Marine Battalion at Fisherman's Point in Guant\u00e1namo Bay. This was followed on June 22 to 24, when the Fifth Army Corps under General William R. Shafter landed at Daiquir\u00ed and Siboney, east of Santiago, and established an American base of operations. A contingent of Spanish troops, having fought a skirmish with the Americans near Siboney on June 23, had retired to their lightly entrenched positions at Las Guasimas. An advance guard of U.S. forces under former Confederate General Joseph Wheeler ignored Cuban scouting parties and orders to proceed with caution. They caught up with and engaged the Spanish rearguard of about 2,000 soldiers led by General Antero Rub\u00edn who effectively ambushed them, in the Battle of Las Guasimas on June 24. The battle ended indecisively in favor of Spain and the Spanish left Las Guasimas on their planned retreat to Santiago.\nThe U.S. Army employed Civil War\u2013era skirmishers at the head of the advancing columns. Three of four of the U.S. soldiers who had volunteered to act as skirmishers walking point at the head of the American column were killed, including Hamilton Fish II (grandson of Hamilton Fish, the Secretary of State under Ulysses S. Grant), and Captain Allyn K. Capron, whom Theodore Roosevelt would describe as one of the finest natural leaders and soldiers he ever met. Only Oklahoma Territory Pawnee Indian, Tom Isbell, wounded seven times, survived.\nRegular Spanish troops were mostly armed with modern charger-loaded, 7mm 1893 Spanish Mauser rifles and using smokeless powder. The high-speed 7\u00d757mm Mauser round was termed the \"Spanish Hornet\" by the Americans because of the supersonic crack as it passed overhead. Other irregular troops were armed with Remington Rolling Block rifles in .43 Spanish using smokeless powder and brass-jacketed bullets. U.S. regular infantry were armed with the .30\u201340 Krag\u2013J\u00f8rgensen, a bolt-action rifle with a complex magazine. Both the U.S. regular cavalry and the volunteer cavalry used smokeless ammunition. In later battles, state volunteers used the .45\u201370 Springfield, a single-shot black powder rifle.\nOn July 1, a combined force of about 15,000 American troops in regular infantry and cavalry regiments, including all four of the army's \"Colored\" Buffalo Soldier regiments, and volunteer regiments, among them Roosevelt and his \"Rough Riders\", the 71st New York, the 2nd Massachusetts Infantry, and 1st North Carolina, and rebel Cuban forces attacked 1,270 entrenched Spaniards in dangerous Civil War-style frontal assaults at the Battle of El Caney and Battle of San Juan Hill outside of Santiago. More than 200 U.S. soldiers were killed and close to 1,200 wounded in the fighting, thanks to the high rate of fire the Spanish put down range at the Americans. Charles A. Wikoff, a U.S. Army colonel who was killed in action, was the most senior U.S. Army officer killed in the Spanish\u2013American War. Supporting fire by Gatling guns was critical to the success of the assault. Cervera decided to escape Santiago two days later. First Lieutenant John J. Pershing, nicknamed \"Black Jack\", oversaw the 10th Cavalry Unit during the war. Pershing and his unit fought in the Battle of San Juan Hill. Pershing was cited for his gallantry during the battle.\nThe Spanish forces at Guant\u00e1namo were so isolated by Marines and Cuban forces that they did not know that Santiago was under siege, and their forces in the northern part of the province could not break through Cuban lines. This was not true of the Escario relief column from Manzanillo, which fought its way past determined Cuban resistance but arrived too late to participate in the siege.\nAfter the battles of San Juan Hill and El Caney, the American advance halted. Spanish troops successfully defended Fort Canosa, allowing them to stabilize their line and bar the entry to Santiago. The Americans and Cubans forcibly began a bloody, strangling siege of the city. During the nights, Cuban troops dug successive series of \"trenches\" (raised parapets), toward the Spanish positions. Once completed, these parapets were occupied by U.S. soldiers and a new set of excavations went forward. American troops, while suffering daily losses from Spanish fire, suffered far more casualties from heat exhaustion and mosquito-borne disease. At the western approaches to the city, Cuban general Calixto Garcia began to encroach on the city, causing much panic and fear of reprisals among the Spanish forces.\nBattle of Tayacoba.\nLieutenant Carter P. Johnson of the Buffalo Soldiers' 10th Cavalry, with experience in special operations roles as head of the 10th Cavalry's attached Apache scouts in the Apache Wars, chose 50 soldiers from the regiment to lead a deployment mission with at least 375 Cuban soldiers under Cuban Brigadier General Emilio Nunez and other supplies to the mouth of the San Juan River east of Cienfuegos. On June 29, 1898, a reconnaissance team in landing boats from the transports \"Florida\" and \"Fanita\" attempted to land on the beach, but were repelled by Spanish fire. A second attempt was made on June 30, 1898, but a team of reconnaissance soldiers was trapped on the beach near the mouth of the Tallabacoa River. A team of four soldiers saved this group and were awarded Medals of Honor. The and the recently arrived then shelled the beach to distract the Spanish while the Cuban deployment landed 40 miles east at Palo Alto, where they linked up with Cuban General Gomez.\nNaval operations.\nThe major port of Santiago de Cuba was the main target of naval operations during the war. The U.S. fleet attacking Santiago needed shelter from the summer hurricane season; Guant\u00e1namo Bay, with its excellent harbor, was chosen. The 1898 invasion of Guant\u00e1namo Bay happened between June 6 and 10, with the first U.S. naval attack and subsequent successful landing of U.S. Marines with naval support.\nOn April 23, a council of senior admirals of the Spanish Navy had decided to order Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete's squadron of four armored cruisers and three torpedo boat destroyers to proceed from their present location in Cape Verde (having left from C\u00e1diz, Spain) to the West Indies.\nIn May, the fleet of Spanish Admiral Pascual Cervera y Topete had been spotted in Santiago harbor by American forces, where they had taken shelter for protection from sea attack. A two-month stand-off between Spanish and American naval forces followed.\nU.S. Assistant Naval Constructor, Lieutenant Richmond Pearson Hobson was ordered by Rear Admiral William T. Sampson to sink the collier in the harbor to bottle up the Spanish fleet. The mission was a failure, and Hobson and his crew were captured though Hobson soon became a national hero for leading what was widely reported as a suicide mission. Upon release, Hobson was presented with the Congressional Medal of Honor and promoted to Captain.\nThe Battle of Santiago de Cuba on July 3, was the largest naval engagement of the Spanish\u2013American War. When the Spanish squadron finally attempted to leave the harbor on July 3, the American forces destroyed or grounded five of the six ships. Only one Spanish vessel, the new armored cruiser , survived, but her captain hauled down her flag and scuttled her when the Americans finally caught up with her. The 1,612 Spanish sailors who were captured and sent to Seavey's Island at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, Maine, where they were confined at Camp Long as prisoners of war from July 11 until mid-September. The Americans treated Spain's officers, soldiers, and sailors with great respect. Ultimately, Spanish prisoners were returned to Spain with their \"honors of war\" on American ships. Admiral Cervera received different treatment from the sailors taken to Portsmouth. For a time, he was held at Annapolis, Maryland, where he was received with great enthusiasm by the people of that city.\nU.S. withdrawal.\nYellow fever had spread quickly among the American occupation force, crippling it. A group of concerned officers of the American army chose Theodore Roosevelt to draft a request to Washington that it withdraw the Army, a request that paralleled a similar one from General Shafter, who described his force as an \"army of convalescents\". By the time of his letter, 75% of the force in Cuba was unfit for service.\nOn August 7, the American invasion force started to leave Cuba. The evacuation was not total. The U.S. Army kept the black Ninth U.S. Cavalry Regiment in Cuba to support the occupation. The logic was that their race and the fact that many black volunteers came from southern states would protect them from disease; this logic led to these soldiers being nicknamed \"Immunes\". Still, when the Ninth left, 73 of its 984 soldiers had contracted the disease.\nPuerto Rico.\nOn May 24, 1898, in a letter to Theodore Roosevelt, Henry Cabot Lodge wrote, \"Porto Rico is not forgotten and we mean to have it\".\nIn the same month, Lt. Henry H. Whitney of the United States Fourth Artillery was sent to Puerto Rico on a reconnaissance mission, sponsored by the Army's Bureau of Military Intelligence. He provided maps and information on the Spanish military forces to the U.S. government before the invasion.\nThe American offensive began on May 12, 1898, when a squadron of 12 U.S. ships commanded by Rear Adm. William T. Sampson of the United States Navy attacked the archipelago's capital, San Juan. Though the damage inflicted on the city was minimal, the Americans established a blockade in the city's harbor, San Juan Bay. On June 22, the cruiser and the destroyer delivered a Spanish counterattack, but were unable to break the blockade and \"Terror\" was damaged.\nThe land offensive began on July 25, when 1,300 infantry soldiers led by Nelson A. Miles disembarked off the coast of Gu\u00e1nica. The first organized armed opposition occurred in Yauco in what became known as the Battle of Yauco.\nThis encounter was followed by the Battle of Fajardo. The United States seized control of Fajardo on August 1, but were forced to withdraw on August 5 after a group of 200 Puerto Rican-Spanish soldiers led by Pedro del Pino gained control of the city, while most civilian inhabitants fled to a nearby lighthouse. The Americans encountered larger opposition during the Battle of Guayama and as they advanced towards the main island's interior. They engaged in crossfire at Guaman\u00ed River Bridge, Coamo and Silva Heights and finally at the Battle of Asomante. The battles were inconclusive as the allied soldiers retreated.\nA battle in San Germ\u00e1n concluded in a similar fashion with the Spanish retreating to Lares. On August 9, 1898, American troops that were pursuing units retreating from Coamo encountered heavy resistance in Aibonito in a mountain known as \"Cerro Gervasio del Asomante\" and retreated after six of their soldiers were injured. They returned three days later, reinforced with artillery units and attempted a surprise attack. In the subsequent crossfire, confused soldiers reported seeing Spanish reinforcements nearby and five American officers were gravely injured, which prompted a retreat order. All military actions in Puerto Rico were suspended on August 13, after U.S. President William McKinley and French ambassador Jules Cambon, acting on behalf of the Spanish government, signed an armistice whereby Spain relinquished its sovereignty over Puerto Rico.\nC\u00e1mara's squadron.\nShortly after the war began in April, the Spanish Navy ordered major units of its fleet to concentrate at C\u00e1diz in southern Spain to form the 2nd Squadron under the command of Rear Admiral Manuel de la C\u00e1mara y Livermoore. Two of Spain's most powerful warships, the battleship and the brand-new armored cruiser , were not available when the war began\u2014the former undergoing reconstruction in a French shipyard and the latter not yet delivered from her builders\u2014but both were rushed into service and assigned to C\u00e1mara's squadron. The squadron was ordered to guard the Spanish coast against raids by the U.S. Navy. No such raids materialized. While C\u00e1mara's squadron lay idle at C\u00e1diz, U.S. Navy forces destroyed Montojo's squadron at Manila Bay on 1 May and bottled up Cervera's squadron at Santiago de Cuba on 27 May.\nDuring May, the Spanish Ministry of the Navy considered options for employing C\u00e1mara's squadron. Minister of the Navy Ram\u00f3n Au\u00f1\u00f3n y Villal\u00f3n made plans for C\u00e1mara to take a portion of his squadron across the Atlantic Ocean and bombard a city on the East Coast of the United States, preferably Charleston, South Carolina, and then head for the Caribbean to make port at San Juan, Havana, or Santiago de Cuba, but in the end this idea was dropped. Meanwhile, U.S. intelligence reported rumors as early as 15 May that Spain also was considering sending C\u00e1mara's squadron to the Philippines to destroy Dewey's squadron and reinforce the Spanish forces there with fresh troops. \"Pelayo\" and \"Emperador Carlos V\" each were more powerful than any of Dewey's ships, and the possibility of their arrival in the Philippines was of great concern to the United States, which hastily arranged to dispatch 10,000 additional U.S. Army troops to the Philippines and send two U.S. Navy monitors to reinforce Dewey.\nOn 15 June, C\u00e1mara finally received orders to depart immediately for the Philippines. His squadron, made up of \"Pelayo\" (his flagship), \"Emperador Carlos V\", two auxiliary cruisers, three destroyers, and four colliers, was to depart C\u00e1diz escorting four transports. After detaching two of the transports to steam independently to the Caribbean, his squadron was to proceed to the Philippines, escorting the other two transports, which carried 4,000 Spanish Army troops to reinforce Spanish forces there. He then was to destroy Dewey's squadron. Accordingly, he sortied from C\u00e1diz on 16 June and, after detaching two of the transports for their voyages to the Caribbean, passed Gibraltar on 17 June and arrived at Port Said, at the northern end of the Suez Canal, on 26 June. There he found that U.S. operatives had purchased all the coal available at the other end of the canal in Suez to prevent his ships from coaling with it. He also received word on 29 June from the British government, which controlled Egypt at the time, that his squadron was not permitted to coal in Egyptian waters because to do so would violate Egyptian and British neutrality.\nOrdered to continue, C\u00e1mara's squadron passed through the Suez Canal on 5\u20136 July. By that time, word had reached Spain of the annihilation of Cervera's squadron off Santiago de Cuba on 3 July, freeing up the U.S. Navy's heavy forces from the blockade there, and the United States Department of the Navy had announced that a U.S. Navy \"armored squadron with cruisers\" would assemble and \"proceed at once to the Spanish coast.\" Fearing for the safety of the Spanish coast, the Spanish Ministry of the Navy recalled C\u00e1mara's squadron, which by then had reached the Red Sea, on 7 July 1898. C\u00e1mara's squadron returned to Spain, making stops at Mah\u00f3n on Menorca in the Balearic Islands on 18\u00a0July and at Cartagena on either , according to different sources, before arriving at Cadiz, where it was dissolved on 25\u00a0July 1898. No U.S. Navy forces subsequently threatened the coast of Spain, and C\u00e1mara and Spain's two most powerful warships thus never saw combat during the war.\nMaking peace.\nWith defeats in Cuba and the Philippines, and its fleets in both places destroyed, Spain sued for peace and negotiations were opened between the two parties. After the sickness and death of British consul Edward Henry Rawson-Walker, American admiral Dewey requested the Belgian consul to Manila, \u00c9douard Andr\u00e9, to take Rawson-Walker's place as intermediary with the Spanish government.\nHostilities were halted on August 12, 1898, with the signing in Washington of a Protocol of Peace between the United States and Spain. After over two months of difficult negotiations, the formal peace treaty, the Treaty of Paris, was signed in Paris on December 10, 1898, the United States acquired Spain's colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines in the treaty, and Cuba became a U.S. protectorate. The treaty came into force in Cuba on April 11, 1899, with Cubans participating only as observers. Having been occupied since July 17, 1898, and thus under the jurisdiction of the U.S. military government, Cuba formed its own civil government and gained independence on May 20, 1902, with the announced end of U.S. military government jurisdiction over the island. However, the U.S. imposed various restrictions on the new government, including prohibiting alliances with other countries, and reserved the right to intervene. The U.S. also established a \"de facto\" perpetual lease of Guant\u00e1namo Bay.\nMedical disaster.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War was a medical disaster for American and Spanish forces. While combat casualties were low, disease took a devastating toll on American troops. The central medical crisis of the war was the typhoid fever epidemic that ravaged military camps. The war exposed serious deficiencies in American military medical preparedness and sanitation practices and led to long-term reforms.\nTyphoid fever.\nWhile typhoid was the primary killer, other diseases also plagued American forces. Yellow fever struck over 2,000 troops during the Cuban campaign. Malaria and dysentery were widespread among soldiers. About 55,000 Spanish troops in Cuba (out of 230,000) were incapacitated by illness.\nCauses.\nMultiple interacting factors contributed to the disaster:\n&lt;br&gt;\nLack of preparedness: Many medical officers lacked experience in camp sanitation and disease prevention. The previous Army experience in numerous small frontier camps left it unprepared. Poor sanitation: Camps were often filthy, with inadequate waste disposal systems. Insufficient medical supplies: Chaos during embarkation left many units without proper medical equipment. Inexperience: Many volunteer regiments were hastily organized, leading to increased sickness early on.\nLong term impact.\nThe medical crisis of the Spanish\u2013American War had far-reaching consequences: More soldiers died from disease than from combat (fewer than 400 killed in action vs. thousands from illness) This led to significant reforms in military medicine and sanitation practices. Special boards, such as the U.S. Army Typhoid Board, were established to study the outbreaks and recommend preventive measures.\nAftermath.\nThe war lasted 16 weeks. John Hay (the U.S. ambassador in London) boasted that it had been \"a splendid little war\". The press showed Northerners and Southerners, blacks and whites fighting against a common foe, helping to ease the scars left from the American Civil War. Exemplary of this was that four former Confederate States Army generals had served in the war, now in the U.S. Army and all of them again carrying similar ranks. These officers were Matthew Butler, Fitzhugh Lee, Thomas L. Rosser and Joseph Wheeler, though only the latter had seen action. Still, in an exciting moment during the Battle of San Juan Hill, Wheeler apparently forgot for a moment which war he was fighting, having supposedly called out \"Let's go, boys! We've got the damn Yankees on the run again!\"\nThe war marked American entry into world affairs. Since then, the U.S. has had a significant hand in various conflicts around the world, and entered many treaties and agreements. The Panic of 1893 was over by this point, and the U.S. entered a long and prosperous period of economic and population growth, and technological innovation that lasted through the 1920s.\nThe war redefined national identity, served as a solution of sorts to the social divisions plaguing the American mind, and provided a model for all future news reporting.\nThe idea of American imperialism changed in the public's mind after the short and successful Spanish\u2013American War. Because of the United States' powerful influence diplomatically and militarily, Cuba's status after the war relied heavily upon American actions. Two major developments emerged from the Spanish\u2013American War: one, it firmly established the United States' vision of itself as a \"defender of democracy\" and as a major world power, and two, it had severe implications for Cuba\u2013United States relations in the future. As historian Louis P\u00e9rez argued in his book \"Cuba in the American Imagination: Metaphor and the Imperial Ethos\", the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898 \"fixed permanently how Americans came to think of themselves: a righteous people given to the service of righteous purpose\".\nThe 1898 war marks a turning point in American foreign relations, where the aftermath saw a change of policy away from an isolationist country to one that was willing to engage with European powers and their empires. Some historians have argued that that annexing the territories from Spain following the war, including the Philippines and Guam, suggests the US taking on a more varied foreign policy afterwards, and that the US used these as a foothold to rival the emerging German and Japanese empires interested in East Asian resources. Also saying the aftermath of changes to US foreign policy, producing a more aggressive role in its relations with other countries culminated later with US involvement in the Chinese Boxer Rebellion of 1900.\nAftermath in Spain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Described as absurd and useless by much of historiography, the war against the United States was sustained by an internal logic, in the idea that it was not possible to maintain the monarchical regime if it was not from a more than predictable military defeat\u2014\u200a A similar point of view that is shared by Carlos Dard\u00e9:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Once the war was raised, the Spanish government believed that it had no other solution than to fight, and lose. They thought that defeat \u2014certain\u2014 was preferable to revolution \u2014also certain\u2014. [...] Granting independence to Cuba, without being defeated militarily... it would have implied in Spain, more than likely, a military coup d'\u00e9tat with broad popular support, and the fall of the monarchy; that is, the revolution\u2014\u200a\nAs the head of the Spanish delegation to the Paris peace negotiations, the liberal Eugenio Montero R\u00edos, said: \"Everything has been lost, except the Monarchy\". Or as the U.S. ambassador in Madrid said: the politicians of the dynastic parties preferred \"the odds of a war, with the certainty of losing Cuba, to the dethronement of the monarchy\". There were Spanish officers in Cuba who expressed \"the conviction that the government of Madrid had the deliberate intention that the squadron be destroyed as soon as possible, in order to quickly reach peace\".\nAlthough there was nothing exceptional about the defeat in the context of the time (Fachoda incident, 1890 British Ultimatum, First Italo-Ethiopian War, Greco-Turkish War (1897), Century of humiliation, Russo-Japanese War...among other examples), in Spain the result of the war caused a national trauma due to the affinity of peninsular Spaniards with Cuba, but only in the \"intellectual class\" (which gave rise to Regenerationism and the Generation of '98), because the majority of the population was illiterate and lived under the regime of \"caciquismo\".\nThe war greatly reduced the Spanish Empire. Spain had been declining as an imperial power since the early 19th century as a result of Napoleon's invasion. Spain retained only a handful of overseas holdings: Spanish West Africa (Spanish Sahara), Spanish Guinea, Spanish Morocco, and the Canary Islands. With the loss of the Philippines, Spain's remaining Pacific possessions in the Caroline Islands and Mariana Islands became untenable and were sold to Germany in the German\u2013Spanish Treaty (1899).\nThe Spanish soldier Julio Cervera Baviera, who served in the Puerto Rican campaign, published a pamphlet in which he blamed the natives of that colony for its occupation by the Americans, saying, \"I have never seen such a servile, ungrateful country [i.e., Puerto Rico]\u00a0... In twenty-four hours, the people of Puerto Rico went from being fervently Spanish to enthusiastically American... They humiliated themselves, giving in to the invader as the slave bows to the powerful lord.\" He was purportedly challenged to a duel by a group of young Puerto Ricans for writing this pamphlet.\nCulturally, a new wave called the Generation of '98 originated as a response to this trauma, marking a renaissance in Spanish culture. Economically, the war benefited Spain, because after the war large sums of capital held by Spaniards in Cuba and the United States were returned to the peninsula and invested in Spain. This massive flow of capital (equivalent to 25% of the gross domestic product of one year) helped to develop the large modern firms in Spain in the steel, chemical, financial, mechanical, textile, shipyard, and electrical power industries. However, the political consequences were serious. The defeat in the war began the weakening of the fragile political stability that had been established earlier by the rule of Alfonso XII.\nA few years after the war, during the reign of Alfonso XIII, Spain improved its commercial position and maintained close relations with the United States, which led to the signing of commercial treaties between the two countries in 1902, 1906 and 1910. Spain would turn its attention to its possessions in Africa (especially northern Morocco, Spanish Sahara and Spanish Guinea) and would begin to rehabilitate itself internationally after the Algeciras Conference of 1906. In 1907, it signed a kind of defensive alliance with France and the United Kingdom, known as the Pact of Cartagena in case of war against the Triple Alliance. Spain improved economically because of its neutrality in the First World War.\nTeller and Platt Amendments.\nThe Teller Amendment was passed in the Senate on April 19, 1898, with a vote of 42 for versus 35 against. On April 20, it was passed by the House of Representatives with a vote of 311 for versus 6 against and signed into law by President William McKinley. Effectively, it was a promise from the United States to the Cuban people that it was not declaring war to annex Cuba, but would help in gaining its independence from Spain. The Platt Amendment, was a move by the United States' government to shape Cuban affairs to promote American interests without violating the Teller Amendment.\nThe Platt Amendment granted the United States the right to stabilize Cuba militarily as needed. It permitted the United States to deploy Marines to Cuba if Cuban freedom and independence were ever threatened or jeopardized by an external or internal force. Passed as a rider to an Army appropriations bill which was signed into law on 2 March 1903, it effectively prohibited Cuba from signing treaties with other nations or contracting a public debt. It also provided for a permanent American naval base in Cuba. Guant\u00e1namo Bay was established after the signing of the Cuban\u2013American Treaty of Relations in 1903. Thus, despite that Cuba technically gained its independence after the war ended, the United States government ensured that it had some form of power and control over Cuban affairs.\nAftermath in the United States.\nThe U.S. annexed the former Spanish colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. The notion of the United States as an imperial power, with colonies, was hotly debated domestically with President McKinley and the Pro-Imperialists winning their way over vocal opposition led by Democrat William Jennings Bryan, who had supported the war. The American public largely supported the possession of colonies, but there were many outspoken critics such as Mark Twain, who wrote \"The War Prayer\" in protest. Roosevelt returned to the United States a war hero, and he was soon elected governor of New York and then became the vice president. At the age of 42, he became the youngest person to become president after the assassination of President McKinley.\nThe war served to further repair relations between the American North and South. The war gave both sides a common enemy for the first time since the end of the Civil War in 1865, and many friendships were formed between soldiers of northern and southern states during their tours of duty. This was an important development, since many soldiers in this war were the children of Civil War veterans on both sides.\nThe African American community strongly supported the rebels in Cuba, supported entry into the war, and gained prestige from their wartime performance in the Army. Spokesmen noted that 33 African American seamen had died in the \"Maine\" explosion. The most influential Black leader, Booker T. Washington, argued that his race was ready to fight. War offered them a chance \"to render service to our country that no other race can\", because, \"unlike Whites\", they were \"accustomed\" to the \"peculiar and dangerous climate\" of Cuba. One of the Black units that served in the war was the 9th Cavalry Regiment. In March 1898, Washington promised the Secretary of the Navy that war would be answered by \"at least ten thousand loyal, brave, strong black men in the south who crave an opportunity to show their loyalty to our land, and would gladly take this method of showing their gratitude for the lives laid down, and the sacrifices made, that Blacks might have their freedom and rights.\"\nVeterans Associations.\nIn 1904, the United Spanish War Veterans was created from smaller groups of the veterans of the Spanish\u2013American War. The organization has been defunct since 1992 when its last surviving member Nathan E. Cook a veteran of the Philippine-American war died, but it left an heir in the Sons of Spanish\u2013American War Veterans, created in 1937 at the 39th National Encampment of the United Spanish War Veterans.\nThe Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States (VFW) was formed in 1914 from the merger of two veterans organizations which both arose in 1899: the American Veterans of Foreign Service and the National Society of the Army of the Philippines. The former was formed for veterans of the Spanish\u2013American War, while the latter was formed for veterans of the Philippine\u2013American War. Both organizations were formed in response to the general neglect veterans returning from the war experienced at the hands of the government.\nTo pay the costs of the war, Congress passed an excise tax on long-distance phone service. At the time, it affected only wealthy Americans who owned telephones. However, the Congress neglected to repeal the tax after the war ended four months later. The tax remained in place for over 100 years until, on August 1, 2006, it was announced that the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the IRS would no longer collect it.\nImpact on the Marine Corps.\nThe U.S. Marine Corps during the 18th and 19th centuries was primarily a ship-borne force. Marines were assigned to naval vessels to protect the ship's crew during close quarters combat, man secondary batteries, and provide landing parties when the ship's captain needed them. During the Mexican\u2013American War and the Civil War, the Marine Corps participated in some amphibious landings and had limited coordination with the Army and Navy in their operations. During the Spanish\u2013American War though, the Marines conducted several successful combined operations with both the Army and the Navy. Marine forces helped in the Army-led assault on Santiago and Marines also supported the Navy's operations by securing the entrance to Guantanamo Bay so American vessels could clear the harbor of mines and use it as a refueling station without fear of Spanish harassment. Doctrinally, the Army and the Navy did not agree on much of anything and Navy officers were often frustrated by the lack of Army support. Having the Marine Corps alleviated some of this conflict because it gave Navy commanders a force \"always under the direction of the senior naval officer\" without any \"conflict of authority\" with the Army.\nThe combined Marine Corps-Navy operations during the war also signaled the future relationship between the two services. During the Banana Wars of the early 20th century, the island-hopping campaigns in the Pacific during World War II, and into modern conflicts America is involved in, the Marine Corps and Navy operate as a team to secure American interests. Thanks to the new territorial acquisitions of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, America needed the capabilities the Marines could provide. The Spanish\u2013American War was also the first time that the Marine Corps acted as America's \"force in readiness\" because they were the first American force to land on Cuba. Being a \"body of troops which can be quickly mobilized and sent on board transports, fully equipped for service ashore and afloat\" became the Marine Corps' mission throughout the rest of the 20th century and into the 21st century.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War also served as a coming of age for several influential Marines. Lieutenants Smedley D. Butler, John A. Lejeune, and Wendell C. Neville and Captain George F. Elliott all served with distinction with the First Battalion that fought in Cuba. Lieutenant Butler would go on to earn two Medals of Honor, in Veracruz and Haiti. Lieutenants Lejeune and Neville and Captain Elliott would all become Commandants of the Marine Corps, the highest rank in the service and the leader of the entire Corps.\nMarines' actions during the Spanish\u2013American War also provided significant positive press for the Corps. The men of the First Battalion were welcomed as heroes when they returned to the States and many stories were published by journalists attached to the unit about their bravery during the Battle of Guantanamo. The Marine Corps began to be regarded as America's premier fighting force thanks in large part to the actions of Marines during the Spanish\u2013American War and to the reporters who covered their exploits. The success of the Marines also led to increased funding for the Corps from Congress during a time that many high-placed Navy officials were questioning the efficacy and necessity of the Marine Corps. This battle for Congressional funding and support would continue until the National Security Act of 1947, but Marine actions at Guantanamo and in the Philippines provided a major boost to the Corps' status.\nAftermath in acquired territories.\nArticle IX of The Treaty of Paris stated that the U.S. Congress were responsible for decisions regarding the civil and political rights of the indigenous populations of the newly acquired territories of the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam. There was initial reluctance in Congress to set firm plans for the once-Spanish islands. The debate of whether to retain the islands or give them independence eventually became the core debating and campaigning issue of the 1900 election. With McKinley's victory, Congress began to pass legislation that marked the United States' \"deliberate turn toward imperialism.\"\nPuerto Rico.\nIn 1900, Congress enacted the Foraker Act, this established that Puerto Ricans would not have U.S. citizenship, despite being under U.S. sovereignty. Instead, the Act declared that they were only \"citizens of Porto Rico,\" and therefore, would not gain the civil, political, or constitutional rights that came with U.S. citizenship. The Foraker Act also established a system of taxation. Puerto Ricans were required to pay tax to fund the imposed system of government, and goods imported from the U.S. to Puerto Rico had tariffs placed upon them.\nThe Act implemented a new system of government in Puerto Rico, with the U.S. president holding the sole power to appoint the governor and upper legislative chamber. Puerto Ricans were able to elect the lower legislative chamber delegates and a resident commissioner to represent them in Washington, although the latter role had restricted influence, as it was as a non-voting representative. Two political parties emerged, the Republicanos, co-founded by Frederico Degetau, and the Federales. The Republicanos' politics were strongly aligned with U.S. policies especially in comparison to the Federales. Before the election took place, the Federales decided to boycott the polls, this was in response to the favouritism displayed towards the Republicanos by U.S. officials. The Republicanos were subsequently elected, with Degetau becoming resident commissioner.\nThe treatment of Puerto Rico was considered unconstitutional by some due to the Citizenship Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment which declares that \"persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States.\" In response to this, a series of court cases known as the Insular Cases took place, which sought to determine if the territories acquired in the War would be given U.S. citizenship or any constitutional rights. As a result of these cases, the Doctrine of Territorial Incorporation was established. This stated that the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Guam would be categorised as \"unincorporated\" territories and would \"not form part of the United States within the meaning of the Constitution.\" This decree set a new precedent for how the U.S. government dealt with acquired territories, as they established a \"colonial formula\" in which they had total sovereignty over territories without been legally obligated to give rights to those they preside over.\nGuam.\nThe territory of Guam was placed under the control of the U.S. Navy Department. A naval base was upkept, with the commanders of the base acquiring the role of colonial governor who presided over all legislation and policies on the territory.\nPostwar American investment in Puerto Rico.\nThe change in sovereignty of Puerto Rico, like the occupation of Cuba, brought about major changes in both the insular and U.S. economies. Before 1898, the sugar industry in Puerto Rico was in decline for nearly half a century. In the second half of the nineteenth century, technological advances increased the capital requirements to remain competitive in the sugar industry. Agriculture began to shift toward coffee production, which required less capital and land accumulation. However, these trends were reversed with U.S. hegemony. Early U.S. monetary and legal policies made it both harder for local farmers to continue operations and easier for American businesses to accumulate land. This, along with the large capital reserves of American businesses, led to a resurgence in the Puerto Rican nuts and sugar industry in the form of large American owned agro-industrial complexes.\nAt the same time, the inclusion of Puerto Rico into the U.S. tariff system as a customs area, effectively treating Puerto Rico as a state with respect to internal or external trade, increased the codependence of the insular and mainland economies and benefitted sugar exports with tariff protection. In 1897, the United States purchased 19.6 percent of Puerto Rico's exports while supplying 18.5 percent of its imports. By 1905, these figures jumped to 84 percent and 85 percent, respectively. However, coffee was not protected, as it was not a product of the mainland. At the same time, Cuba and Spain, traditionally the largest importers of Puerto Rican coffee, now subjected Puerto Rico to previously nonexistent import tariffs. These two effects led to a decline in the coffee industry. From 1897 to 1901, coffee went from 65.8 percent of exports to 19.6 percent while sugar went from 21.6 percent to 55 percent. The tariff system also provided a protected market-place for Puerto Rican tobacco exports. The tobacco industry went from nearly nonexistent in Puerto Rico to a major part of the country's agricultural sector.\nIn film and television.\nThe Spanish\u2013American War was the first U.S. war in which the motion picture camera played a role. The Library of Congress archives contain many films and film clips from the war. As good footage of fighting was difficult to capture, filmed reenactments using model ships and cigar smoke were shown on vaudeville screens.\nIn addition, a few feature films have been made about the war. These include:\nMilitary decorations.\nUnited States.\nThe United States awards and decorations of the Spanish\u2013American War were as follows:\nOther countries.\nThe governments of Spain and Cuba issued a wide variety of military awards to honor Spanish, Cuban, and Philippine soldiers who had served in the conflict.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28266", "revid": "51041288", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28266", "title": "Scurvy", "text": "Disease resulting from a lack of vitamin C\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nScurvy or scorbutus is a deficiency disease (state of malnutrition) resulting from a lack of vitamin C (ascorbic acid). Early symptoms of deficiency include weakness, fatigue, and sore arms and legs. Without treatment, decreased red blood cells, gum disease, changes to hair, and bleeding from the skin may occur. As scurvy worsens, there can be poor wound healing, personality changes, and finally death from infection or bleeding.\nIt takes at least a month of little to no vitamin C in the diet before symptoms occur. In modern times, scurvy occurs most commonly in neglected children, people with mental disorders, unusual eating habits, alcoholism, and older people who live alone. Other risk factors include intestinal malabsorption and dialysis.\nWhile many animals produce their vitamin C, humans and a few others do not. Vitamin C, an antioxidant, is required to make the building blocks for collagen, carnitine, and catecholamines, and assists the intestines in the absorption of iron from foods. Diagnosis is typically based on outward appearance, X-rays, and improvement after treatment.\nTreatment is with vitamin C supplements taken by mouth, or intravenously for optimal resolution. Improvement often begins in a few days with complete recovery in a few weeks. Sources of vitamin C in the diet include raw citrus fruit and several raw vegetables, including red peppers, broccoli, and tomatoes. Cooking often decreases the residual amount of vitamin C in foods.\nScurvy is rare compared to other nutritional deficiencies. It occurs more often in the developing world in association with malnutrition. Rates among refugees are reported at 5 to 45 percent. Scurvy was described as early as the time of ancient Egypt, and historically it was a limiting factor in long-distance sea travel, often killing large numbers of people. During the later Age of Sail, it was assumed that 50 percent of the sailors would die of scurvy on a major voyage of exploration. In long sea voyages, crews were isolated from land for extended periods and these voyages relied on large staples of a limited variety of foods and the lack of fruit, vegetables, and other foods containing vitamin C in diets of sailors resulted in scurvy.\nSigns and symptoms.\nEarly symptoms are malaise and lethargy. After one to three months, patients develop shortness of breath and bone pain. Myalgias may occur because of reduced carnitine production. Other symptoms include skin changes with roughness, easy bruising, and petechiae, gum disease, loosening of teeth, poor wound healing, and emotional changes (which may appear before any physical changes). Dry mouth and dry eyes similar to Sj\u00f6gren's syndrome may occur. In the late stages, jaundice, generalised edema, oliguria, neuropathy, fever, convulsions, and eventual death are frequently seen.\nCause.\nScurvy, including subclinical scurvy, is caused by a deficiency of dietary vitamin C since the human liver is unable to synthesize vitamin C. Provided the diet contains sufficient vitamin C, the lack of working L-gulonolactone oxidase (GULO) enzyme has no significance. In modern Western societies, scurvy is seldom present in average adults, although underfed people (drug users, the homeless, neglected children and geriatrics) are affected. Virtually all commercially available baby formulas contain added vitamin C, preventing infantile scurvy. Human breast milk contains sufficient vitamin C if the mother has an adequate intake. Commercial milk is pasteurized, a heating process that destroys the natural vitamin C content of the milk.\nScurvy is one of the accompanying diseases of malnutrition (other such micronutrient deficiencies are beriberi and pellagra) and thus is still widespread in areas of the world dependent on external food aid. Although rare, there are also documented cases of scurvy due to poor dietary choices by people living in industrialized nations.\nPathogenesis.\nVitamins are essential to the production and use of enzymes in ongoing processes throughout the human body. Ascorbic acid is needed for a variety of biosynthetic pathways, by accelerating hydroxylation and amidation reactions.\nThe early symptoms of malaise and lethargy may be due to either impaired fatty acid metabolism from a lack of carnitine and/or from a lack of catecholamines, which are needed for the cAMP-dependent pathway in both glycogen metabolism and fatty acid metabolism. Impairment of either fatty acid metabolism or glycogen metabolism leads to decreased ATP (energy) production. ATP is needed for cellular functions, including muscle contraction. \"(For low ATP within the muscle cell, see also Purine nucleotide cycle.)\"\nIn the synthesis of collagen, ascorbic acid is required as a cofactor for prolyl hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase. These two enzymes are responsible for the hydroxylation of the proline and lysine amino acids in collagen. Hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine are important for stabilizing collagen by cross-linking the propeptides in collagen.\nCollagen is a primary structural protein in the human body, necessary for healthy blood vessels, muscle, skin, bone, cartilage, and other connective tissues. Defective connective tissue leads to fragile capillaries, resulting in abnormal bleeding, bruising, and internal hemorrhaging. Collagen is an important part of bone, so bone formation is also affected. Teeth loosen, bones break more easily, and once-healed breaks may recur. Defective collagen fibrillogenesis impairs wound healing. Untreated scurvy is invariably fatal.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis is typically based on physical signs, X-rays, and improvement after treatment.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nVarious childhood-onset disorders can mimic the clinical and X-ray picture of scurvy such as:\nPrevention.\nScurvy can be prevented by a diet that includes uncooked vitamin C-rich foods such as amla, bell peppers (sweet peppers), blackcurrants, broccoli, chili peppers, citrus fruits (lemon, lime, orange, etc), kiwifruit, and parsley. Other sources rich in vitamin C are dandelion, raw liver (23.6 mg/100 grams), sauerkraut, and many fruits such as guava, papaya, strawberries, and tomato. It is also found in vegetables, such as brussels sprouts, cabbage, potatoes, and spinach. Some fruits and vegetables not high in vitamin C may be pickled in lemon juice, which is high in vitamin C. Nutritional supplements that provide ascorbic acid well above what is required to prevent scurvy may cause adverse health effects.\nUncooked fresh meat from animals, notably internal organs, contains enough vitamin C to prevent scurvy, and even partly treat it.\nScott's 1902 Antarctic expedition used fresh seal meat and increased allowance of bottled fruits, whereby complete recovery from incipient scurvy was reported to have taken less than two weeks.\nTreatment.\nScurvy will improve with doses of vitamin C as low as 10\u00a0mg per day though doses of around 100\u00a0mg per day are typically recommended. Most people make a full recovery within 2 weeks.\nHistory.\nSymptoms of scurvy have been recorded in Ancient Egypt as early as 1550\u00a0BC. It was first reported amongst soldiers and sailors having inadequate access to fruits and vegetables which resulted in vitamin C deficiency. In Ancient Greece, the physician Hippocrates (460\u2013370\u00a0BC) described symptoms of scurvy, specifically a \"swelling and obstruction of the spleen.\" In 406\u00a0AD, the Chinese monk Faxian wrote that ginger was carried on Chinese ships to prevent scurvy.\nThe knowledge that consuming certain foods is a cure for scurvy has been repeatedly forgotten and rediscovered into the early 20th century. Scurvy occurred during the Great famine of Ireland in 1845 and also the American Civil War. In 2002, scurvy outbreaks were recorded in Afghanistan following the most intense phase of the war.\nEarly modern era.\nIn the 13th century Crusaders developed scurvy. In the 1497 expedition of Vasco da Gama, the curative effects of citrus fruit were already observed and were confirmed by Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral and his crew in 1507.\nThe Portuguese planted fruit trees and vegetables on Saint Helena, a stopping point for homebound voyages from Asia, and left their sick who had scurvy and other ailments to be taken home by the next ship if they recovered. In 1500, one of the pilots of Cabral's fleet bound for India noted that in Malindi, its king offered the expedition fresh supplies such as lamb, chicken, and duck, along with lemons and oranges, due to which \"some of our ill were cured of scurvy\".\nThese travel accounts did not prevent further maritime tragedies caused by scurvy, partly because of the lack of communication between travelers and those responsible for their health, and because fruits and vegetables could not be kept for long on ships.\nIn 1536, the French explorer Jacques Cartier, while exploring the St. Lawrence River, used the local St. Lawrence Iroquoians' knowledge to save his men dying of scurvy. He boiled the needles of the aneda tree (generally believed to have been eastern white cedar) to make a tea that was later shown to contain 50\u00a0mg of vitamin C per 100\u00a0grams. Such treatments were not available aboard ship, where the disease was most common. Later, possibly inspired by this incident, several European countries experimented with preparations of various conifers, such as spruce beer, as cures for scurvy.\nIn 1579, the Spanish friar and physician Agustin Farf\u00e1n published a book in which he recommended oranges and lemons for treating scurvy, a remedy that was already known in the Spanish navy.\nIn February 1601, Captain James Lancaster, while commanding the first English East India Company fleet \"en route\" to Sumatra, landed on the northern coast of Madagascar specifically to obtain lemons and oranges for his crew to stop scurvy. Captain Lancaster conducted an experiment using four ships under his command. One ship's crew received routine doses of lemon juice while the other three did not receive such treatment. As a result, members of the non-treated ships started to contract scurvy, with many dying as a result.\nResearchers have estimated that during the Age of Exploration (between 1500 and 1800), scurvy killed at least two million sailors. Jonathan Lamb wrote: \"In 1499, Vasco da Gama lost 116 of his crew of 170; In 1520, Magellan lost 208 out of 230;\u00a0... all mainly to scurvy.\"\nIn 1593, Admiral Sir Richard Hawkins advocated drinking orange and lemon juice to prevent scurvy.\nA 1609 book by Bartolom\u00e9 Leonardo de Argensola recorded several different remedies for scurvy known at this time in the Moluccas, including a kind of wine mixed with cloves and ginger, and \"certain herbs\". The Dutch sailors in the area were said to cure the same disease by drinking lime juice.\nIn 1614, John Woodall, Surgeon General of the East India Company, published \"The Surgion's Mate\" as a handbook for apprentice surgeons aboard the company's ships. He repeated the experience of mariners that the cure for scurvy was fresh food or, if not available, oranges, lemons, limes, and tamarinds. He was, however, unable to explain the reason why, and his assertion had no impact on the prevailing opinion of the influential physicians of the age, that scurvy was a digestive complaint.\nBesides afflicting ocean travelers, until the late Middle Ages scurvy was common in Europe in late winter, when few green vegetables, fruits, and root vegetables were available. This gradually improved with the introduction of potatoes from the Americas; by 1800, scurvy was virtually unheard of in Scotland, where it had previously been endemic.\n18th century.\nIn 2009, a handwritten household book authored by a Cornishwoman in 1707 was discovered in a house in Hasfield, Gloucestershire, containing a \"Recipe for the Scurvy\" amongst other largely medicinal and herbal recipes. The recipe consisted of extracts from various plants mixed with a plentiful supply of orange juice, white wine, or beer.\nIn 1734, Leiden-based physician Johann Bachstrom published a book on scurvy in which he stated, \"scurvy is solely owing to a total abstinence from fresh vegetable food, and greens; which is alone the primary cause of the disease\", and urged the use of fresh fruit and vegetables as a cure.\nIt was not until 1747 that James Lind formally demonstrated that scurvy could be treated by supplementing the diet with citrus fruit, in one of the first controlled clinical experiments reported in the history of medicine. As a naval surgeon on HMS \"Salisbury\", Lind had compared several suggested scurvy cures: hard cider, vitriol, vinegar, seawater, oranges, lemons, and a mixture of balsam of Peru, garlic, myrrh, mustard seed and radish root. In \"A Treatise on the Scurvy\" (1753)\nLind explained the details of his clinical trial and concluded \"the results of all my experiments was, that oranges and lemons were the most effectual remedies for this distemper at sea.\" However, the experiment and its results occupied only a few paragraphs in a work that was long and complex and had little impact. Lind himself never actively promoted lemon juice as a single 'cure'. He shared medical opinion at the time that scurvy had multiple causes \u2013 notably hard work, bad water, and the consumption of salt meat in a damp atmosphere which inhibited healthful perspiration and normal excretion \u2013 and therefore required multiple solutions. Lind was also sidetracked by the possibilities of producing a concentrated 'rob' of lemon juice by boiling it. This process destroyed the vitamin C and was therefore unsuccessful.\nDuring the 18th century, scurvy killed more British sailors than wartime enemy action. It was mainly by scurvy that during George Anson's voyage around the world he lost nearly two-thirds of his crew (1,300 out of 2,000) within the first 10 months of the voyage. The Royal Navy enlisted 184,899 sailors during the Seven Years' War; 133,708 were \"lost\", either dying of sickness, being discharged as physically unfit or deserting, with scurvy as the leading cause of death.\nAlthough sailors and naval surgeons were increasingly convinced that citrus fruits could cure scurvy throughout this period, the classically trained physicians who determined medical policy dismissed this evidence as merely anecdotal, as it did not conform to their theories of disease. Literature championing the cause of citrus juice had no practical impact. The medical theory was based on the assumption that scurvy was a disease of internal putrefaction brought on by faulty digestion caused by the hardships of life at sea and the naval diet. Although successive theorists gave this basic idea different emphases, the remedies they advocated (and which the navy accepted) amounted to little more than the consumption of 'fizzy drinks' to activate the digestive system, the most extreme of which was the regular consumption of 'elixir of vitriol' \u2013 sulphuric acid taken with spirits and barley water, and laced with spices.\nIn 1764, a new and similarly inaccurate theory on scurvy appeared. Advocated by Dr David MacBride and Sir John Pringle, Surgeon General of the Army and later President of the Royal Society, this idea was that scurvy was the result of a lack of 'fixed air' in the tissues which could be prevented by drinking infusions of malt and wort whose fermentation within the body would stimulate digestion and restore the missing gases. These ideas received wide and influential backing, when James Cook set off to circumnavigate the world (1768\u20131771) in , malt and wort were top of the list of the remedies he was ordered to investigate. The others were beer, Sauerkraut (a good source of vitamin C), and Lind's 'rob'. The list did not include lemons.\nCook did not lose a single man to scurvy, and his report came down in favor of malt and wort. The reason for the health of his crews on this and other voyages was Cook's regime of shipboard cleanliness, enforced by strict discipline, and frequent replenishment of fresh food and greenstuffs. Another beneficial rule implemented by Cook was his prohibition of the consumption of salt fat skimmed from the ship's copper boiling pans, then a common practice elsewhere in the Navy. In contact with air, the copper formed compounds that prevented the absorption of vitamins by the intestines.\nThe first major long-distance expedition that experienced virtually no scurvy was that of the Spanish naval officer Alessandro Malaspina, 1789\u20131794. Malaspina's medical officer, Pedro Gonz\u00e1lez, was convinced that fresh oranges and lemons were essential for preventing scurvy. Only one outbreak occurred, during a 56-day trip across the open sea. Five sailors came down with symptoms, one seriously. After three days at Guam, all five were healthy again. Spain's large empire and many ports of call made it easier to acquire fresh fruit.\nAlthough towards the end of the century, MacBride's theories were being challenged, the medical authorities in Britain remained committed to the notion that scurvy was a disease of internal 'putrefaction' and the Sick and Hurt Board, run by administrators, felt obliged to follow its advice. Within the Royal Navy, however, opinion \u2013 strengthened by first-hand experience with lemon juice at the siege of Gibraltar and during Admiral Rodney's expedition to the Caribbean \u2013 had become increasingly convinced of its efficacy. This was reinforced by the writings of experts like Gilbert Blane and Thomas Trotter and by the reports of up-and-coming naval commanders.\nWith the coming of war in 1793, the need to eliminate scurvy became more urgent. The first initiative came not from the medical establishment but from the admirals. Ordered to lead an expedition against Mauritius, Rear Admiral Gardner was uninterested in the wort, malt, and elixir of vitriol that were still being issued to ships of the Royal Navy, and demanded that he be supplied with lemons, to counteract scurvy on the voyage. Members of the Sick and Hurt Board, recently augmented by two practical naval surgeons, supported the request, and the Admiralty ordered that it be done. There was, however, a last-minute change of plan, and the expedition against Mauritius was canceled. On 2 May 1794, only and two sloops under Commodore Peter Rainier sailed for the east with an outward bound convoy, but the warships were fully supplied with lemon juice and the sugar with which it had to be mixed.\nIn March 1795, it was reported that the \"Suffolk\" had arrived in India after a four-month voyage without a trace of scurvy and with a crew that was healthier than when it set out. The effect was immediate. Fleet commanders clamored also to be supplied with lemon juice, and by June the Admiralty acknowledged the groundswell of demand in the navy and agreed to a proposal from the Sick and Hurt Board that lemon juice and sugar should in future be issued as a daily ration to the crews of all warships.\nIt took a few years before the method of distribution to all ships in the fleet had been perfected and the supply of the huge quantities of lemon juice required to be secured, but by 1800, the system was in place and functioning. This led to a remarkable health improvement among the sailors and consequently played a critical role in gaining an advantage in naval battles against enemies who had yet to introduce the measures.\nScurvy was not only a disease of seafarers. The early colonists of Australia suffered greatly because of the lack of fresh fruit and vegetables in the winter. There, the disease was called Spring fever or Spring disease and was described as an often-fatal condition associated with skin lesions, bleeding gums, and lethargy. It was eventually identified as scurvy and the remedies already in use at sea were implemented.\n19th century.\nThe surgeon-in-chief of Napoleon's army at the Siege of Alexandria (1801), Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, wrote in his memoirs that the consumption of horse meat helped the French to curb an epidemic of scurvy. The meat was cooked but was freshly obtained from young horses bought from Arabs, and was nevertheless effective. This helped to start the 19th-century tradition of horse meat consumption in France.\nLauchlin Rose patented a method used to preserve citrus juice without alcohol in 1867, creating a concentrated drink known as Rose's lime juice. The Merchant Shipping Act 1867 required all ships of the Royal Navy and Merchant Navy to provide a daily \"lime or lemon juice\" ration of one pound to sailors to prevent scurvy. The product became nearly ubiquitous, hence the term \"limey\", first for British sailors, then for English immigrants within the former British colonies (particularly America, New Zealand, and South Africa), and finally, in old American slang, all British people.\nThe plant \"Cochlearia officinalis\", also known as \"common scurvygrass\", acquired its common name from the observation that it cured scurvy, and it was taken on board ships in dried bundles or distilled extracts. Its bitter taste was usually disguised with herbs and spices; however, this did not prevent scurvygrass drinks and sandwiches from becoming a popular fad in the UK until the middle of the nineteenth century, when citrus fruits became more readily available.\nWest Indian limes began to take over from lemons, when Spain's alliance with France against Britain in the Napoleonic Wars made the supply of Mediterranean lemons problematic, and because they were more easily obtained from Britain's Caribbean colonies and were believed to be more effective because they were more acidic. It was the acid, not the (then-unknown) Vitamin C that was believed to cure scurvy. The West Indian limes were significantly lower in Vitamin C than the previous lemons and further were not served fresh but rather as lime juice, which had been exposed to light and air, and piped through copper tubing, all of which significantly reduced the Vitamin C. A 1918 animal experiment using representative samples of the Navy and Merchant Marine's lime juice showed that it had virtually no antiscorbutic power at all.\nThe belief that scurvy was fundamentally a nutritional deficiency, best treated by consumption of fresh food, particularly fresh citrus or fresh meat, was not universal in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and thus sailors and explorers continued to have scurvy into the 20th century. For example, the Belgian Antarctic Expedition of 1897\u20131899 became seriously affected by scurvy when its leader, Adrien de Gerlache, initially discouraged his men from eating penguin and seal meat.\nIn the Royal Navy's Arctic expeditions in the mid-19th century, it was widely believed that scurvy was prevented by good hygiene on board ship, regular exercise, and maintaining crew morale, rather than by a diet of fresh food. Navy expeditions continued to be plagued by scurvy even while fresh (not jerked or tinned) meat was well known as a practical antiscorbutic among civilian whalers and explorers in the Arctic. In the latter half of the 19th century, there was greater recognition of the value of eating fresh meat as a means of avoiding or treating scurvy, but the lack of available game to hunt at high latitudes in winter meant it was not always a viable remedy. Criticism also focused on the fact that some of the men most affected by scurvy on Naval polar expeditions had been heavy drinkers, with suggestions that this predisposed them to the condition. Even cooking fresh meat did not destroy its antiscorbutic properties, especially as many cooking methods failed to bring all the meat to high temperature.\nThe confusion is attributed to several factors:\nIn the resulting confusion, a new hypothesis was proposed, following the new germ theory of disease \u2013 that scurvy was caused by ptomaine, a waste product of bacteria, particularly in tainted tinned meat.\nInfantile scurvy emerged in the late 19th century because children were fed pasteurized cow's milk, particularly in the urban upper class. While pasteurization killed bacteria, it also destroyed vitamin C. This was eventually resolved by supplementing with onion juice or cooked potatoes. Native Americans helped save some newcomers from scurvy by directing them to eat wild onions.\n20th century.\nBy the early 20th century, when Robert Falcon Scott made his first expedition to the Antarctic (1901\u20131904), the prevailing theory was that scurvy was caused by \"ptomaine poisoning\", particularly in tinned meat. However, Scott discovered that a diet of fresh meat from Antarctic seals cured scurvy before any fatalities occurred. But while he saw fresh meat as a cure for scurvy, he remained confused about its underlying causes.\nIn 1907, an animal model that would eventually help to isolate and identify the \"antiscorbutic factor\" was discovered. Axel Holst and Theodor Fr\u00f8lich, two Norwegian physicians studying shipboard beriberi contracted by ship's crews in the Norwegian Fishing Fleet, wanted a small test mammal to substitute for the pigeons then used in beriberi research. They fed guinea pigs their test diet of grains and flour, which had earlier produced beriberi in their pigeons, and were surprised when classic scurvy resulted instead. This was a serendipitous choice of animal. Until that time, scurvy had not been observed in any organism apart from humans and had been considered an exclusively human disease. Certain birds, mammals, and fish are susceptible to scurvy, but pigeons are unaffected since they can synthesize ascorbic acid internally. Holst and Fr\u00f8lich found they could cure scurvy in guinea pigs with the addition of various fresh foods and extracts. This discovery of an animal experimental model for scurvy, which was made even before the essential idea of \"vitamins\" in foods had been put forward, has been called the single most important piece of vitamin C research.\nIn 1915, New Zealand troops in the Gallipoli Campaign had a lack of vitamin C in their diet which caused many of the soldiers to contract scurvy.\nVilhjalmur Stefansson, an Arctic explorer who had lived among the Inuit, proved that the all-meat diet they consumed did not lead to vitamin deficiencies. He participated in a study in New York's Bellevue Hospital in February 1928, where he and a companion ate only meat for a year while under close medical observation, yet remained in good health.\nIn 1927, Hungarian biochemist Albert Szent-Gy\u00f6rgyi isolated a compound he called \"hexuronic acid\". Szent-Gy\u00f6rgyi suspected hexuronic acid, which he had isolated from adrenal glands, to be the antiscorbutic agent, but he could not prove it without an animal-deficiency model. In 1932, the connection between hexuronic acid and scurvy was finally proven by American researcher Charles Glen King of the University of Pittsburgh. King's laboratory was given some hexuronic acid by Szent-Gy\u00f6rgyi and soon established that it was the sought-after anti-scorbutic agent. Because of this, hexuronic acid was subsequently renamed \"ascorbic acid.\"\n21st century.\nRates of scurvy in the developed world are low due to the greater access to vitamin C-rich foods. Those most commonly affected are malnourished people in the developing world and homeless people. There have been outbreaks of the condition in refugee camps. Case reports in the developing world of those with poorly healing wounds have occurred.\nIn 2020, the overall incidence of scurvy in the US was about one in 4,000 people, up significantly from even a few years before. About two-thirds of all scurvy is found in autistic people. Children and young people with autism are at risk of developing scurvy because some of them only eat a small number of foods (e.g., only rice and pasta). For some of them, the restricted diet takes the form of avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID).\nHuman trials.\nNotable human dietary studies of experimentally induced scurvy were conducted on conscientious objectors during World War\u00a0II in Britain and the United States on Iowa state prisoner volunteers in the late 1960s. These studies both found that all obvious symptoms of scurvy previously induced by an experimental scorbutic diet with extremely low vitamin C content could be completely reversed by additional vitamin C supplementation of only 10\u00a0mg per day. In these experiments, no clinical difference was noted between men given 70\u00a0mg vitamin C per day (which produced blood levels of vitamin C of about 0.55\u00a0mg/dl, about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 of tissue saturation levels), and those given 10\u00a0mg per day (which produced lower blood levels). Men in the prison study developed the first signs of scurvy about four weeks after starting the vitamin C-free diet, whereas in the British study, six to eight months were required, possibly because the subjects were pre-loaded with a 70\u00a0mg/day supplement for six weeks before the scorbutic diet was fed.\nMen in both studies, on a diet devoid or nearly devoid of vitamin C, had blood levels of vitamin C too low to be accurately measured when they developed signs of scurvy, and in the Iowa study, at this time were estimated (by labeled vitamin C dilution) to have a body pool of less than 300\u00a0mg, with daily turnover of only 2.5\u00a0mg/day.\nIn other animals.\nMost animals and plants can synthesize vitamin C through a sequence of enzyme-driven steps, which convert monosaccharides to vitamin C. However, some mammals have lost the ability to synthesize vitamin C, notably simians and tarsiers. These make up one of two major primate suborders, haplorrhini, and this group includes humans. The strepsirrhini (non-tarsier prosimians) can make their vitamin C, and these include lemurs, lorises, pottos, and galagos. Ascorbic acid is also not synthesized by at least two species of caviidae, the capybara and the guinea pig. Certain birds and fish do not synthesize their vitamin C. All species that do not synthesize ascorbate require it in the diet. Deficiency causes scurvy in humans, and somewhat similar symptoms in other animals.\nAnimals that can contract scurvy all lack the -gulonolactone oxidase (GULO) enzyme, which is required in the last step of vitamin C synthesis. The genomes of these species contain GULO as pseudogenes, which serve as insight into the evolutionary past of the species.\nName.\nIn babies, scurvy is sometimes referred to as \"Barlow's disease\", named after Thomas Barlow, a British physician who described it in 1883. However, \"Barlow's disease\" may also refer to mitral valve prolapse (Barlow's syndrome), first described by John Brereton Barlow in 1966.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28267", "revid": "39635320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28267", "title": "Sydney Harbour Bridge", "text": "Bridge across Sydney Harbour in Australia\nThe Sydney Harbour Bridge is a steel through arch bridge in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, spanning Sydney Harbour from the central business district (CBD) to the North Shore. The view of the bridge, the Harbour, and the nearby Sydney Opera House is widely regarded as an iconic image of Sydney, and of Australia itself. Nicknamed \"the Coathanger\" because of its arch-based design, the bridge carries rail, vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic.\nUnder the direction of John Bradfield of the New South Wales Department of Public Works, the bridge was designed and built by British firm Dorman Long of Middlesbrough, and opened in 1932. The bridge's general design, which Bradfield tasked the NSW Department of Public Works with producing, was a rough copy of the Hell Gate Bridge in New York City. The design chosen from the tender responses was original work created by Dorman Long, who leveraged some of the design from its own Tyne Bridge.\nIt is the eleventh-longest spanning-arch bridge in the world and the tallest steel arch bridge, measuring from top to water level. It was also the world's widest long-span bridge, at wide, until construction of the new Port Mann Bridge in Vancouver was completed in 2012.\nStructure.\nThe southern end of the bridge is located at Dawes Point in The Rocks area, and the northern end at Milsons Point on the lower North Shore. There are six original lanes of road traffic through the main roadway, plus an additional two lanes of road traffic on its eastern side, using lanes that were formerly tram tracks. Adjacent to the road traffic, a path for pedestrian use runs along the eastern side of the bridge, whilst a dedicated path for bicycle use runs along the western side. Between the main roadway and the western bicycle path lies the North Shore railway line.\nThe main roadway across the bridge is known as the Bradfield Highway and is about long, making it one of the shortest highways in Australia.\nArch.\nThe arch is composed of two 28-panel arch trusses; their heights vary from at the centre of the arch, to at the ends next to the pylons.\nThe arch has a span of , and its summit is above mean sea level; expansion of the steel structure on hot days can increase the height of the arch by . The total weight of the steelwork of the bridge, including the arch and approach spans, is , with the arch itself weighing . About 79% of the steel, specifically those technical sections constituting the curve of the arch, was imported pre-formed from England, with the rest being sourced from the Newcastle Steelworks. On site, Dorman Long &amp; Co set up two workshops at Milsons Point, at the site of the present-day Luna Park, and fabricated the steel into the girders and other required parts.\nThe bridge is held together by six million Australian-made hand-driven rivets supplied by the McPherson company of Melbourne, the last being driven through the deck on 21 January 1932. The rivets were heated red-hot and inserted into the plates; the headless end was immediately rounded over with a large pneumatic rivet gun. The largest of the rivets used weighed and was long. The practice of riveting large steel structures, rather than welding, was, at the time, a proven and understood construction technique, whilst structural welding had not at that stage been adequately developed for use on the bridge.\nPylons.\nAt each end of the arch stands a pair of concrete pylons, faced with granite. The pylons were designed by the Scottish architect Thomas S. Tait, a partner in the architectural firm John Burnet &amp; Partners.\nSome 250 Australian, Scottish, and Italian stonemasons and their families relocated to a temporary settlement at Moruya, south of Sydney, where they quarried around of granite for the bridge pylons. The stonemasons cut, dressed, and numbered the blocks, which were then transported to Sydney on three ships built specifically for this purpose. The Moruya quarry was managed by John Gilmore, a Scottish stonemason who emigrated with his young family to Australia in 1924, at the request of the project managers. The concrete used was also Australian-made and supplied from Kandos.\nAbutments at the base of the pylons are essential to support the loads from the arch and hold its span firmly in place, but the pylons themselves have no structural purpose. They were included to provide a frame for the arch panels and to give better visual balance to the bridge. The pylons were not part of the original design, and were only added to allay public concern about the structural integrity of the bridge.\nAlthough originally added to the bridge solely for their aesthetic value, all four pylons have now been put to use. The south-eastern pylon contains a museum and tourist centre, with a 360\u00b0 lookout at the top providing views across the Harbour and city. The south-western pylon is used by Transport for NSW to support its CCTV cameras overlooking the bridge and the roads around that area. The two pylons on the north shore include venting chimneys for fumes from the Sydney Harbour Tunnel, with the base of the southern pylon containing the Transport for NSW maintenance shed for the bridge, and the base of the northern pylon containing the traffic management shed for tow trucks and safety vehicles used on the bridge.\nIn 1942, the pylons were modified to include parapets and anti-aircraft guns designed to assist in both Australia's defence and general war effort.\nHistory.\nEarly proposals.\nThere had been plans to build a bridge as early as 1814, when convict and noted architect Francis Greenway reputedly proposed to Governor Lachlan Macquarie that a bridge be built from the northern to the southern shore of the harbour. In 1825, Greenway wrote a letter to the then \"The Australian\" newspaper stating that such a bridge would \"give an idea of strength and magnificence that would reflect credit and glory on the colony and the Mother Country\".\nNothing came of Greenway's suggestions, but the idea remained alive, and many further suggestions were made during the nineteenth century. In 1840, naval architect Robert Brindley proposed that a floating bridge be built. Engineer Peter Henderson produced one of the earliest known drawings of a bridge across the harbour around 1857. A suggestion for a truss bridge was made in 1879, and in 1880 a high-level bridge estimated at \u00a3850,000 was proposed.\nIn 1900, the Lyne government committed to building a new Central railway station and organised a worldwide competition for the design and construction of a harbour bridge, overseen by Minister for Public Works Edward William O'Sullivan. G.E.W. Cruttwell, a London based engineer, was awarded the first prize of \u00a31,000. Local engineer Norman Selfe submitted a design for a suspension bridge and won the second prize of \u00a3500. In 1902, when the outcome of the first competition became mired in controversy, Selfe won a second competition outright, with a design for a steel cantilever bridge. The selection board were unanimous, commenting that, \"The structural lines are correct and in true proportion, and... the outline is graceful\". However due to an economic downturn and a change of government at the 1904 NSW State election construction never began.\nA unique three-span bridge was proposed in 1922 by Ernest Stowe with connections at Balls Head, Millers Point, and Balmain with a memorial tower and hub on Goat Island.\nPlanning.\nIn 1914, John Bradfield was appointed Chief Engineer of Sydney Harbour Bridge and Metropolitan Railway Construction, and his work on the project over many years earned him the legacy as the father of the bridge. Bradfield's preference at the time was for a cantilever bridge without piers, and in 1916 the NSW Legislative Assembly passed a bill for such a construction, however it did not proceed as the Legislative Council rejected the legislation on the basis that the money would be better spent on the war effort.\nFollowing World War I, plans to build the bridge again built momentum. Bradfield persevered with the project, fleshing out the details of the specifications and financing for his cantilever bridge proposal, and in 1921 he travelled overseas to investigate tenders. His confidential secretary Kathleen M. Butler handled all the international correspondence during his absence, her title belying her role as project manager as well as a technical adviser. On return from his travels Bradfield decided that an arch design would also be suitable and he and officers of the NSW Department of Public Works prepared a general design for a single-arch bridge based upon New York City's Hell Gate Bridge. In 1922 the government of George Fuller passed the \"Sydney Harbour Act 1922\", specifying the construction of a high-level cantilever or arch bridge across the Harbour between Dawes Point and Milsons Point, along with construction of necessary approaches and electric railway lines, and worldwide tenders were invited for the project.\nAs a result of the tendering process, the government received twenty proposals from six companies; on 24 March 1924 the contract was awarded to Dorman Long &amp; Co of Middlesbrough, England well known as the contractors who later built the similar Tyne Bridge in Newcastle Upon Tyne (opened 4 years before Sydney Harbour Bridge), for an arch bridge at a quoted price of AU\u00a34,217,721 11s 10d. The arch design was cheaper than alternative cantilever and suspension bridge proposals, and also provided greater rigidity making it better suited for the heavy loads expected. In 1924, Kathleen Butler travelled to London to set up the project office within those of Dorman, Long &amp; Co., \"attending the most difficult and technical questions and technical questions in regard to the contract, and dealing with a mass of correspondence\".\nBradfield and his staff were ultimately to oversee the bridge design and building process as it was executed by Dorman Long and Co, whose Consulting Engineer, Sir Ralph Freeman of Sir Douglas Fox and Partners, and his associate Georges Imbault, carried out the detailed design and erection process of the bridge. Architects for the contractors were from the British firm John Burnet &amp; Partners of Glasgow, Scotland. Lawrence Ennis, of Dorman Long, served as Director of Construction and primary onsite supervisor throughout the entire build, alongside Edward Judge, Dorman Long's Chief Technical Engineer, who functioned as Consulting and Designing Engineer.\nThe building of the bridge coincided with the construction of a system of underground railways beneath Sydney's CBD, known today as the City Circle, and the bridge was designed with this in mind. The bridge was designed to carry six lanes of road traffic, flanked on each side by two railway tracks and a footpath. Both sets of rail tracks were linked into the underground Wynyard railway station on the south (city) side of the bridge by symmetrical ramps and tunnels. The eastern-side railway tracks were intended for use by a planned rail link to the Northern Beaches; in the interim they were used to carry trams from the North Shore into a terminal within Wynyard station, and when tram services were discontinued in 1958, they were converted into extra traffic lanes. The Bradfield Highway, which is the main roadway section of the bridge and its approaches, is named in honour of Bradfield's contribution to the bridge.\nConstruction.\nBradfield visited the site sporadically throughout the eight years it took Dorman Long to complete the bridge. Despite having originally championed a cantilever construction and the fact that his own arched general design was used in neither the tender process nor as input to the detailed design specification (and was anyway a rough copy of the Devil's Gate bridge produced by the NSW Works Department), Bradfield subsequently attempted to claim personal credit for Dorman Long's design. This led to a bitter argument, with Dorman Long maintaining that instructing other people to produce a copy of an existing design in a document not subsequently used to specify the final construction did not constitute personal design input on Bradfield's part. This friction ultimately led to a large contemporary brass plaque being bolted very tightly to the side of one of the granite columns of the bridge to makes things clear.\nThe official ceremony to mark the turning of the first sod occurred on 28 July 1923, on the spot at Milsons Point where two workshops to assist in building the bridge were to be constructed.\nAn estimated 469 buildings on the north shore, both private homes and commercial operations, were demolished to allow construction to proceed, with little or no compensation being paid. Work on the bridge itself commenced with the construction of approaches and approach spans, and by September 1926 concrete piers to support the approach spans were in place on each side of the harbour.\nAs construction of the approaches took place, work was also started on preparing the foundations required to support the enormous weight of the arch and loadings. Concrete and granite faced abutment towers were constructed, with the angled foundations built into their sides.\nOnce work had progressed sufficiently on the support structures, a giant creeper crane was erected on each side of the harbour. These cranes were fitted with a cradle, and then used to hoist men and materials into position to allow for erection of the steelwork. To stabilise works while building the arches, tunnels were excavated on each shore with steel cables passed through them and then fixed to the upper sections of each half-arch to stop them collapsing as they extended outwards.\nArch construction itself began on 26 October 1928. The southern end of the bridge was worked on ahead of the northern end, to detect any errors and to help with alignment. The cranes would \"creep\" along the arches as they were constructed, eventually meeting up in the middle. In less than two years, on 19 August 1930, the two halves of the arch touched for the first time. Workers riveted both top and bottom sections of the arch together, and the arch became self-supporting, allowing the support cables to be removed. On 20 August 1930 the joining of the arches was celebrated by flying the flags of Australia and the United Kingdom from the jibs of the creeper cranes.\nOnce the arch was completed, the creeper cranes were then worked back down the arches, allowing the roadway and other parts of the bridge to be constructed from the centre out. The vertical hangers were attached to the arch, and these were then joined with horizontal crossbeams. The deck for the roadway and railway were built on top of the crossbeams, with the deck itself being completed by June 1931, and the creeper cranes were dismantled. Rails for trains and trams were laid, and road was surfaced using concrete topped with asphalt. Power and telephone lines, and water, gas, and drainage pipes were also all added to the bridge in 1931.\nThe pylons were built atop the abutment towers, with construction advancing rapidly from July 1931. Carpenters built wooden scaffolding, with concreters and masons then setting the masonry and pouring the concrete behind it. Gangers built the steelwork in the towers, while day labourers manually cleaned the granite with wire brushes. The last stone of the north-west pylon was set in place on 15 January 1932, and the timber towers used to support the cranes were removed.\nOn 19 January 1932, the first test train, a steam locomotive, safely crossed the bridge. Load testing of the bridge took place in February 1932, with the four rail tracks being loaded with as many as 96 New South Wales Government Railways steam locomotives positioned end-to-end. The bridge underwent testing for three weeks, after which it was declared safe and ready to be opened. The first trial run of an electric train over the bridge was successfully completed on both lines 11 March 1932. On 19 March 1932, 632 people were the first fare-paying passengers to cross the bridge by rail, paying a premium of 10 s. for the privilege, but they were not the first members of the public to do so. That distinction fell to a pair of clergymen who inadvertently boarded the test train of the previous day, and were discovered too late to be ejected. The construction worksheds were demolished after the bridge was completed, and the land that they were on is now occupied by Luna Park.\nThe standards of industrial safety during construction were poor by today's standards. Sixteen workers died during construction, but surprisingly only two from falling off the bridge. Several more were injured from unsafe working practices undertaken whilst heating and inserting its rivets, and the deafness experienced by many of the workers in later years was blamed on the project. Henri Mallard between 1930 and 1932 produced hundreds of stills and film footage which reveal at close quarters the bravery of the workers in tough Depression-era conditions.\nInterviews were conducted between 1982-1989 with a variety of tradesmen who worked on the building of the bridge. Among the tradesmen interviewed were drillers, riveters, concrete packers, boilermakers, riggers, ironworkers, plasterers, stonemasons, an official photographer, sleepcutters, engineers and draughtsmen.\nThe total financial cost of the bridge was AU\u00a36.25 million, which was not paid off in full until 1988.\nOfficial opening ceremony.\nThe bridge was formally opened on Saturday, 19 March 1932. Among those who attended and gave speeches were the Governor of New South Wales, Philip Game, and the Minister for Public Works, Lawrence Ennis. The Premier of New South Wales, Jack Lang, was to open the bridge by cutting a ribbon at its southern end.\nHowever, just as Lang was about to cut the ribbon, a man in military uniform rode up on a horse, slashing the ribbon with his sword and opening the Sydney Harbour Bridge in the name of the people of New South Wales before the official ceremony began. He was promptly arrested. The ribbon was hurriedly retied and Lang performed the official opening ceremony and Game thereafter inaugurated the name of the bridge as Sydney Harbour Bridge and the associated roadway as the Bradfield Highway. After they did so, there was a 21-gun salute and a Royal Australian Air Force flypast. The intruder was identified as Francis de Groot. He was convicted of offensive behaviour and fined \u00a35 after a psychiatric test proved he was sane, but this verdict was reversed on appeal. De Groot then successfully sued the Commissioner of Police for wrongful arrest and was awarded an undisclosed out of court settlement. De Groot was a member of a right-wing paramilitary group called the New Guard, opposed to Lang's leftist policies and resentful of the fact that a member of the British royal family had not been asked to open the bridge. De Groot was not a member of the regular army but his uniform allowed him to blend in with the real cavalry. This incident was one of several involving Lang and the New Guard during that year.\nA similar ribbon-cutting ceremony on the bridge's northern side by North Sydney's mayor, Alderman Primrose, was carried out without incident. It was later discovered that Primrose was also a New Guard member but his role in and knowledge of the de Groot incident, if any, are unclear. The pair of golden scissors used in the ribbon cutting ceremonies on both sides of the bridge was also used to cut the ribbon at the dedication of the Bayonne Bridge, which had opened between Bayonne, New Jersey, and New York City the year before.\nDespite the bridge opening in the midst of the Great Depression, opening celebrations were organised by the Citizens of Sydney Organising Committee, an influential body of prominent men and politicians that formed in 1931 under the chairmanship of the lord mayor to oversee the festivities. The celebrations included an array of decorated floats, a procession of passenger ships sailing below the bridge, and a Venetian Carnival. A message from a primary school in Tottenham, away in rural New South Wales, arrived at the bridge on the day and was presented at the opening ceremony. It had been carried all the way from Tottenham to the bridge by relays of school children, with the final relay being run by two children from the nearby Fort Street Boys' and Girls' schools. \nAfter the official ceremonies, the public was allowed to walk across the bridge on the deck, something that would not be repeated until the 50th anniversary celebrations. Estimates suggest that between 300,000 and one million people took part in the opening festivities, a phenomenal number given that the entire population of Sydney at the time was estimated to be 1,256,000.\nThere had also been numerous preparatory arrangements. On 14 March 1932, three postage stamps were issued to commemorate the imminent opening of the bridge. Several songs were composed for the occasion. In the year of the opening, there was a steep rise in babies being named Archie and Bridget in honour of the bridge. One of three microphones used at the opening ceremony was signed by 10 local dignitaries who officiated at the event, Philip Game, John Lang, MA Davidson, Samuel Walder, D Clyne, H Primrose, Ben Howe, John Bradfield, Lawrence Ennis and Roland Kitson. It was supplied by AWA who organised the ceremony's broadcast and collected by Philip Geeves, the AWA announcer on the day. The radio is now in the collection of the Powerhouse Museum.\nThe bridge itself was regarded as a triumph over Depression times, earning the nickname \"the Iron Lung\", as it kept many Depression-era workers employed.\nOperations.\nIn 2010, the average daily traffic included 204 trains, 160,435 vehicles and 1650 bicycles.\nRoad.\nFrom the Sydney CBD side, motor vehicle access to the bridge is via Grosvenor Street, Clarence Street, Kent Street, the Cahill Expressway, or the Western Distributor. Drivers on the northern side will find themselves on the Warringah Freeway, though it is easy to turn off the freeway to drive westwards into North Sydney or eastwards to Neutral Bay and beyond upon arrival on the northern side.\nThe bridge originally only had four wider traffic lanes occupying the central space which now has six, as photos taken soon after the opening clearly show. In 1958 tram services across the bridge were withdrawn and the tracks replaced by two extra road lanes; these lanes are now the leftmost southbound lanes on the bridge and are separated from the other six road lanes by a median strip. Lanes 7 and 8 now connect the bridge to the elevated Cahill Expressway that carries traffic to the Eastern Distributor.\nIn 1988, work began to build a tunnel to complement the bridge. It was determined that the bridge could no longer support the increased traffic flow of the 1980s. The Sydney Harbour Tunnel was completed in August 1992 and carries only motor vehicles.\nThe Bradfield Highway is designated as a Travelling Stock Route which means that it is permissible to herd livestock across the bridge, but only between midnight and dawn, and after giving notice of intention to do so. In practice, the last time livestock crossed the bridge was in 1999 for the Gelbvieh Cattle Congress.\nTidal flow.\nThe bridge is equipped for tidal flow operation, permitting the direction of traffic flow on the bridge to be altered to better suit the morning and evening peak hour traffic patterns.\nThe bridge has eight lanes, numbered one to eight from west to east. Lanes three, four and five are reversible. One and two always flow north. Six, seven, and eight always flow south. The default is four each way. For the morning peak hour, the lane changes on the bridge also require changes to the Warringah Freeway, with its inner western reversible carriageway directing traffic to the bridge lane numbers three and four southbound. Until September 1982, during the evening peak the tidal flow was set as six northbound and two southbound lanes.\nThe bridge has a series of overhead gantries which indicate the direction of flow for each traffic lane. A green arrow pointing down to a traffic lane means the lane is open. A flashing red \"X\" indicates the lane is closing, but is not yet in use for traffic travelling in the other direction. A static red \"X\" means the lane is in use for oncoming traffic. This arrangement was introduced in January 1986, replacing a slow operation where lane markers were manually moved to mark the centre median.\nIt is possible to see odd arrangements of flow during night periods when maintenance occurs, which may involve completely closing some lanes. Normally this is done between midnight and dawn, because of the enormous traffic demands placed on the bridge outside these hours.\nWhen the Sydney Harbour Tunnel opened in August 1992, lane 7 became a bus lane.\nTolls.\nThe vehicular traffic lanes on the bridge are operated as a toll road. Since January 2009, there is a variable tolling system for all vehicles headed into the CBD (southbound). The toll paid is dependent on the time of day in which the vehicle passes through the toll plaza. The toll varies from a minimum value of $2.76 to a maximum value of $4.41. There is no toll for northbound traffic (though taxis travelling north may charge passengers the toll in anticipation of the toll the taxi must pay on the return journey). In 2017, the Bradfield Highway northern toll plaza infrastructure was removed and replaced with new overhead gantries to service all southbound traffic. Following on from this upgrade, in 2018 all southern toll plaza infrastructure was also removed. Only the Cahill Expressway toll plaza infrastructure remains. The toll was originally placed on travel across the bridge, in both directions, to recoup the cost of its construction. This was paid off in 1988, but the toll has been kept (indeed increased) to recoup the costs of the Sydney Harbour Tunnel.\nOriginally it cost a car or motorcycle six pence to cross, a horse and rider being three pence. Use of the bridge by bicycle riders (provided that they use the cycleway) and by pedestrians is free. Later governments capped the fee for motorcycles at one-quarter of the passenger-vehicle cost, but now it is again the same as the cost for a passenger vehicle, although quarterly flat-fee passes are available which are much cheaper for frequent users. Originally there were six toll booths at the southern end of the bridge, these were replaced by 16 booths in 1950. The toll was charged in both directions until 4 July 1970 when changed to only be applied to southbound traffic.\nAfter the decision to build the Sydney Harbour Tunnel was made in the early 1980s, the toll was increased (from 20 cents to $1, then to $1.50 in March 1989, and finally to $2 by the time the tunnel opened) to pay for its construction. The tunnel also had an initial toll of $2 southbound. After the increase to $1, a concrete barrier on the bridge separating the Bradfield Highway from the Cahill Expressway was increased in height, because of the large numbers of drivers crossing it illegally from lane 6 to 7, to avoid the toll.\nThe southbound toll was increased to $2.20 in July 2000 to account for the newly imposed goods and services tax (GST). The toll increased again to $3 in January 2002.\nIn July 2008, a new electronic tolling system called e-TAG was introduced. The Sydney Harbour Tunnel was converted to this new tolling system while the Sydney Harbour Bridge itself had several cash lanes. The electronic system as of 12 January 2009 has now replaced all booths with E-tag lanes. In January 2017 work commenced to remove the southern toll booths. In August 2020, the remaining toll booths at Milsons Point were removed. Tolls rose in October 2023 for the first time in 14 years.\nPedestrians.\nThe pedestrian-only footway is located on the east side of the bridge. Access from the northern side involves climbing an easily spotted flight of stairs, located on the east side of the bridge at Broughton Street, Kirribilli. Pedestrian access on the southern side is more complicated, but signposts in The Rocks area now direct pedestrians to the long and sheltered flight of stairs that leads to the bridge's southern end. These stairs are located near Gloucester Street and Cumberland Street.\nThe bridge can also be approached from the south by accessing Cahill Walk, which runs along the Cahill Expressway. Pedestrians can access this walkway from the east end of Circular Quay by a flight of stairs or a lift. Alternatively it can be accessed from the Botanic Gardens.\nCyclists.\nThe bike-only cycleway is located on the western side of the bridge. Access from the northern side involves carrying or pushing a bicycle up a staircase, consisting of 55 steps, located on the western side of the bridge at Burton Street, Milsons Point. A wide smooth concrete strip in the centre of the stairs permits cycles to be wheeled up and down from the bridge deck whilst the rider is dismounted. A campaign to eliminate the steps on this popular cycling route to the CBD has been running since at least 2008. On 7 December 2016 the NSW Roads Minister Duncan Gay confirmed that the northern stairway would be replaced with a A$20 million ramp alleviating the needs for cyclists to dismount. At the same time the NSW Government announced plans to upgrade the southern ramp at a projected cost of A$20 million. Both projects are expected to be completed by late 2020. Access to the cycleway on the southern side is via the northern end of the Kent Street cycleway and/or Upper Fort Street in The Rocks.\nRail.\nThe bridge lies between Milsons Point and Wynyard railway stations, located on the north and south shores respectively, with two tracks running along the western side of the bridge. These tracks are part of the North Shore railway line.\nIn 1958, tram services across the bridge were withdrawn and the tracks they had used were removed and replaced by two extra road lanes; these lanes are now the leftmost southbound lanes on the bridge and are still clearly distinguishable from the other six road lanes. The original ramp that took the trams into a terminus at the underground Wynyard railway station is still visible at the southern end of the main walkway under lanes 7 and 8, although around 1964, the former tram tunnels and station were converted for use as a carpark for the Menzies Hotel and as public parking. One of the tunnels was converted for use as a storage facility after reportedly being used by the NSW police as a pistol firing range.\nMaintenance.\nThe Sydney Harbour Bridge requires constant inspections and other maintenance work to keep it safe for the public, and to protect from corrosion. Among the trades employed on the bridge are painters, ironworkers, boilermakers, fitters, electricians, plasterers, carpenters, plumbers, and riggers.\nThe most noticeable maintenance work on the bridge involves painting. The steelwork of the bridge that needs to be painted is a combined , the equivalent of sixty football fields. Each coat on the bridge requires some of paint. A special fast-drying paint is used, so that any paint drops have dried before reaching the vehicles or bridge surface. One notable identity from previous bridge-painting crews is Australian comedian and actor Paul Hogan, who worked as a bridge rigger before rising to media fame in the 1970s.\nIn 2003 the Roads &amp; Traffic Authority began completely repainting the southern approach spans of the bridge. This involved removing the old lead-based paint, and repainting the of steel below the deck. Workers operated from self-contained platforms below the deck, with each platform having an air extraction system to filter airborne particles. An abrasive blasting was used, with the lead waste collected and safely removed from the site for disposal.\nBetween December 2006 and March 2010 the bridge was subject to works designed to ensure its longevity. The work included some strengthening.\nSince 2013, two grit-blasting robots specially developed with the University of Technology, Sydney have been employed to help with the paint stripping operation on the bridge. The robots, nicknamed Rosie and Sandy, are intended to reduce workers' potential exposure to dangerous lead paint and asbestos and the blasting equipment which has enough force to cut through clothes and skin.\nTourism.\nSouth-east pylon.\nEven during its construction, the bridge was such a prominent feature of Sydney that it would attract tourist interest. One of the ongoing tourist attractions of the bridge has been the south-east pylon, which is accessed via the pedestrian walkway across the bridge, and then a climb to the top of the pylon of about 200 steps.\nNot long after the bridge's opening, commencing in 1934, Archer Whitford first converted this pylon into a tourist destination. He installed a number of attractions, including a caf\u00e9, a camera obscura, an Aboriginal museum, a \"Mother's Nook\" where visitors could write letters, and a \"pashometer\". The main attraction was the viewing platform, where \"charming attendants\" assisted visitors to use the telescopes available, and a copper cladding (still present) over the granite guard rails identified the suburbs and landmarks of Sydney at the time.\nThe outbreak of World War II in 1939 saw tourist activities on the bridge cease, as the military took over the four pylons and modified them to include parapets and anti-aircraft guns.\nIn 1948, Yvonne Rentoul opened the \"All Australian Exhibition\" in the pylon. This contained dioramas, and displays about Australian perspectives on subjects such as farming, sport, transport, mining, and the armed forces. An orientation table was installed at the viewing platform, along with a wall guide and binoculars. The owner kept several white cats in a rooftop cattery, which also served as an attraction, and there was a souvenir shop and postal outlet. Rentoul's lease expired in 1971, and the pylon and its lookout remained closed to the public for over a decade.\nThe pylon was reopened in 1982, with a new exhibition celebrating the bridge's 50th anniversary. In 1987 a \"Bicentennial Exhibition\" was opened to mark the 200th anniversary of European settlement in Australia in 1988.\nThe pylon was closed from April to November 2000 for the Roads &amp; Traffic Authority and BridgeClimb to create a new exhibition called \"Proud Arch\". The exhibition focussed on Bradfield, and included a glass direction finder on the observation level, and various important heritage items.\nThe pylon again closed for four weeks in 2003 for the installation of an exhibit called \"Dangerous Works\", highlighting the dangerous conditions experienced by the original construction workers on the bridge, and two stained glass feature windows in memory of the workers.\nBridgeClimb.\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, there were occasional newspaper reports of climbers who had made illegal arch traversals of the bridge by night. In 1973 Philippe Petit walked across a wire between the two pylons at the southern end of the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Since 1998, BridgeClimb has made it possible for tourists to legally climb the southern half of the bridge. Tours run throughout the day, from dawn to night, and are only cancelled for electrical storms or high wind.\nGroups of climbers are provided with protective clothing appropriate to the prevailing weather conditions, and are given an orientation briefing before climbing. During the climb, attendees are secured to the bridge by a wire lifeline similar to a Klettersteig rock climbing. Each climb begins on the eastern side of the bridge and ascends to the top. At the summit, the group crosses to the western side of the arch for the descent. Each climb takes three-and-a-half-hours, including the preparations.\nIn December 2006, BridgeClimb launched an alternative to climbing the upper arches of the bridge. The Discovery Climb allows climbers to ascend the lower chord of the bridge and view its internal structure. From the apex of the lower chord, climbers ascend a staircase to a platform at the summit.\nCelebrations.\n50th Anniversary celebrations.\nIn 1982, the 50th anniversary of the opening of the bridge was celebrated. For the first time since its opening in 1932, the bridge was closed to most vehicles with the exception of vintage vehicles, and pedestrians were allowed full access for the day. The celebrations were attended by Edward Judge, who represented Dorman Long.\nBicentennial Australia Day celebrations.\nAustralia's bicentennial celebrations on 26 January 1988 attracted large crowds in the bridge's vicinity as merrymakers flocked to the foreshores to view the events on the harbour. The highlight was the biggest parade of sail ever held in Sydney, square-riggers from all over the world, surrounded by hundreds of smaller craft of every description, passing majestically under the Sydney Harbour Bridge. The day's festivities culminated in a fireworks display in which the bridge was the focal point of the finale, with fireworks streaming from the arch and roadway. This was to become the pattern for later firework displays.\nSydney New Year's Eve.\nThe Harbour Bridge has been an integral part of the Sydney New Year's Eve celebrations, generally being used in spectacular ways during the fireworks displays at 9pm and midnight. In recent times, the bridge has included a ropelight display on a framework in the centre of the eastern arch, which is used to complement the fireworks. The scaffolding and framework were clearly visible for some weeks before the event, revealing the outline of the design.\nDuring the millennium celebrations in 2000, the Sydney Harbour Bridge was lit up with the word \"Eternity\", as a tribute to the legacy of Arthur Stace a Sydney artist who for many years inscribed said word on pavements in chalk in copperplate writing despite the fact that he was illiterate.\nThe effects have been as follows:\nThe numbers for the New Year's Eve countdown also appear on the Bridge pylons.\nWalk for Reconciliation.\nIn May 2000, the bridge was closed to vehicular access for a day to allow a special reconciliation march\u2014the \"Walk for Reconciliation\" \u2013 to take place. This was part of a response to an Aboriginal Stolen Generations inquiry, which found widespread suffering had taken place amongst Australian Aboriginal children forcibly placed into the care of white parents in a little-publicised state government scheme. Between 200,000 and 300,000 people were estimated to have walked the bridge in a symbolic gesture of crossing a divide.\nSydney 2000 Olympics.\nDuring the Sydney 2000 Olympics in September and October 2000, the bridge was adorned with the Olympic Rings. It was included in the Olympic torch's route to the Olympic stadium. The men's and women's Olympic marathon events likewise included the bridge as part of their route to the Olympic stadium. A fireworks display at the end of the closing ceremony ended at the bridge. The east-facing side of the bridge has been used several times since as a framework from which to hang static fireworks, especially during the elaborate New Year's Eve displays.\nFormula One promotion.\nIn 2005, Mark Webber drove a Williams-BMW Formula One car across the bridge.\n75th anniversary.\nIn 2007, the 75th anniversary of its opening was commemorated with an exhibition at the Museum of Sydney, called \"Bridging Sydney\". An initiative of the Historic Houses Trust, the exhibition featured dramatic photographs and paintings with rare and previously unseen alternative bridge and tunnel proposals, plans and sketches.\nOn 18 March 2007, the 75th anniversary of the Sydney Harbour Bridge was celebrated. The occasion was marked with a ribbon-cutting ceremony by the governor, Marie Bashir and the Premier of New South Wales, Morris Iemma. The bridge was subsequently open to the public to walk southward from Milsons Point or North Sydney. Several major roads, mainly in the CBD, were closed for the day. An Aboriginal smoking ceremony was held at 7:00pm.\nApproximately 250,000 people (50,000 more than were registered) took part in the event. Bright green souvenir caps were distributed to walkers. A series of speakers placed at intervals along the bridge formed a sound installation. Each group of speakers broadcast sound and music from a particular era (e.g. King Edward VIII's abdication speech; Gough Whitlam's speech at Parliament House in 1975), the overall effect being that the soundscape would \"flow\" through history as walkers proceeded along the bridge. A light-show began after sunset and continued late into the night, the bridge being bathed in constantly changing, multi-coloured lighting, designed to highlight structural features of the bridge. In the evening the bright yellow caps were replaced by orange caps with a small, bright LED attached. The bridge was closed to walkers at about 8:30pm.\nBreakfast on the Bridge.\nOn 25 October 2009 turf was laid across the eight lanes of bitumen, and 6,000 people celebrated a picnic on the bridge accompanied by live music. The event was repeated in 2010. Although originally scheduled again in 2011, this event was moved to Bondi Beach due to traffic concerns about the prolonged closing of the bridge.\n80th anniversary.\nOn 19 March 2012, the 80th anniversary of the Sydney Harbour Bridge was celebrated with a picnic dedicated to the stories of people with personal connections to the bridge. In addition, Google dedicated its Google Doodle on the 19th to the event.\nThe proposal to upgrade the bridge tolling equipment was announced by the NSW Roads Minister Duncan Gay.\nWorldPride.\nIn closing WorldPride celebrations in Sydney, a march across the Harbour Bridge was held on 5 March 2023 with over 50,000 people in attendance.\nProtests.\nVarious protests have caused disruptions on the Sydney Harbour Bridge. In 2019, Greenpeace activists scaled the bridge and they were arrested soon after. In 2021, a number of truck and bus drivers clogged the bridge for a number of hours; they were protesting the COVID-19 lockdown.\nViolet Coco blocked one lane of traffic in 2022 as part of a climate change protest.\nMarch For Humanity.\nIn August 2025, a pro-Palestine protest called \"March For Humanity\" and organised by activist group Palestine Action Group took place, with the bridge closed down prior to the event. Its purpose was to express support of Palestinian people, raise awareness of the genocide in Gaza, and pressure the Australian government to sanction Israel. Separate estimates range from 90,000 to 300,000 in attendance.\nAttendees included WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, City of Sydney Lord Mayor Clover Moore, Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi, former NSW premier Bob Carr, former government minister Ed Husic, activist and former soccer player Craig Foster, boxer Anthony Mundine, journalist Antoinette Lattouf, journalist Antony Loewenstein, actor Meyne Wyatt, writer Randa Abdel-Fattah, journalist Mary Kostakidis, among many others.\nThe turnout was so large that NSW Police, in cooperation with Palestine Action Group, shutdown the protest at 15:00 claiming \"the march needs to stop due to public safety.\" After being halted at Milsons Point railway station protesters were then directed to overflow into Bradfield park with those remaining directed back towards the city.\nFlags.\nHistorically the flags of Australia and New South Wales had been flown above the bridge with the Aboriginal flag flown for nineteen days a year. In February 2022, Premier Dominic Perrottet announced that the Australian, New South Wales and the Aboriginal flags were to permanently fly with a third pole erected. In July 2022, it was announced that the Aboriginal flag would replace the New South Wales flag, which was given a prominent location within the Macquarie Street East redevelopment, near the Royal Mint and Hyde Park Barracks.\nQuotations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There the proud arch Colossus like bestrideYon glittering streams and bound the strafing tide.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I open this bridge in the name of His Majesty the King and all the decent citizens of NSW.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To get on in Australia, you must make two observations. Say, \"You have the most beautiful bridge in the world\" and \"They tell me you trounced England again in the cricket.\" The first statement will be a lie. Sydney Bridge [\"sic\"] is big, utilitarian and the symbol of Australia, like the Statue of Liberty or the Eiffel Tower. But it is very ugly. No Australian will admit this.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...in a gesture of anomalous exhilaration, at the worst time of the depression Sydney opened its Harbour Bridge, one of the talismanic structures of the earth, and by far the most striking thing ever built in Australia. At that moment, I think, contemporary Sydney began, perhaps definitive Sydney.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...you can see it from every corner of the city, creeping into frame from the oddest angles, like an uncle who wants to get into every snapshot. From a distance it has a kind of gallant restraint, majestic but not assertive, but up close it is all might. It soars above you, so high that you could pass a ten-storey building beneath it, and looks like the heaviest thing on earth. Everything that is in it \u2013 the stone blocks in its four towers, the latticework of girders, the metal plates, the six-million rivets (with heads like halved apples) \u2013 is the biggest of its type you have ever seen... This is a great bridge.\u2014\u200a\nHeritage listing.\nAt the time of construction and until recently, the bridge was the longest single span steel arch bridge in the world. The bridge, its pylons and its approaches are all important elements in townscape of areas both near and distant from it. The curved northern approach gives a grand sweeping entrance to the bridge with continually changing views of the bridge and harbour. The bridge has been an important factor in the pattern of growth of metropolitan Sydney, particularly in residential development in post World War II years. In the 1960s and 1970s the Central Business District had extended to the northern side of the bridge at North Sydney which has been due in part to the easy access provided by the bridge and also to the increasing traffic problems associated with the bridge.\nSydney Harbour Bridge was listed on the New South Wales State Heritage Register on 25 June 1999 having satisfied the following criteria.\nThe place is important in demonstrating the course, or pattern, of cultural or natural history in New South Wales.\nThe bridge is one of the most remarkable feats of bridge construction. At the time of construction and until recently it was the longest single span steel arch bridge in the world and is still \n\"The archaeological remains are demonstrative of an earlier phase of urban development within Milsons Point and the wider North Sydney precinct. The walls are physical evidence that a number of 19th century residences existed on the site which were resumed and demolished as part of the Sydney Harbour Bridge construction\".\nThe place is important in demonstrating aesthetic characteristics and/or a high degree of creative or technical achievement in New South Wales.\nThe bridge, its pylons and its approaches are all important elements in townscape of areas both near and distant from it. The curved northern approach gives a grand sweeping entrance to the bridge with continually changing views of the bridge and harbour.\nThe place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group in New South Wales for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.\nThe bridge has been an important factor in the pattern of growth of metropolitan Sydney, particularly in residential development in post World War II years. In the 1960s and 1970s the Central Business District had extended to the northern side of the bridge at North Sydney which has been due in part to the easy access provided by the bridge and also to the increasing traffic problems associated with the bridge.\nThe place has potential to yield information that will contribute to an understanding of the cultural or natural history of New South Wales.\n\"The archaeological remains have some potential to yield information about the previous residential and commercial occupation of Milsons Point prior to the construction of the Sydney Harbour Bridge transport link\".\nEngineering recognition.\nThe bridge was listed as a National Engineering Landmark by Engineers Australia in 1988 as part of its Engineering Heritage Recognition Program. The bridge was also recognized by a plaque that year from the American Society of Civil Engineers designating it an \"International Historic Civil Engineering Landmark\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution.\n This Wikipedia article contains material from https://, entry number 781 in the New South Wales State Heritage Register published by the State of New South Wales (Department of Planning and Environment) 2018 under https:// http://, accessed on 13 October 2018. \nExternal links.\n \nWebcams:\nImages:"}
{"id": "28268", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28268", "title": "Suttra", "text": ""}
{"id": "28269", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28269", "title": "Saving Private Ryan", "text": "1998 film by Steven Spielberg\nSaving Private Ryan is a 1998 American epic war film directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Robert Rodat. Set in 1944 in Normandy, France, during World War II, it follows a group of soldiers, led by Captain John Miller (Tom Hanks), on a mission to locate Private James Francis Ryan (Matt Damon) and bring him home safely after his three brothers have been killed in action. The cast also includes Edward Burns, Tom Sizemore and Jeremy Davies.\nInspired by the books of Stephen E. Ambrose and accounts of multiple soldiers in a single family, such as the Niland brothers, being killed in action, Rodat drafted the script, and Paramount Pictures hired him to finish writing it. The project came to the attention of Hanks and Spielberg, whose involvement, due to their previous successes, secured the project's development. Spielberg wanted to make \"Saving Private Ryan\" as authentic as possible and hired Frank Darabont and Scott Frank to do uncredited rewrites based on research and interviews with veterans. The main cast went through a week-long boot camp to help them understand the soldier's experience. Filming took place from June to September 1997, on a $65\u201370million budget, almost entirely on location in England and Ireland. The opening Omaha Beach battle was the most demanding scene, costing $12 million to film over a four-week period, and using 1,500 background actors.\nReleased on July 24, 1998, \"Saving Private Ryan\" became one of the year's most successful films, earning critical acclaim for its graphic portrayal of combat. WWII veterans described the combat scenes as the most realistic portrayal of their own experiences they had seen; some said they had been unable to watch it due to their traumatic memories. The film earned $481.8million, making it the second-highest-grossing film of 1998, and went on to win many accolades, including Golden Globe, Academy, BAFTA, and Saturn awards.\nConsidered one of the greatest war films ever made, \"Saving Private Ryan\"'s battle-scene filming techniques impacted many subsequent war, action, and superhero films, and numerous directors have cited \"Saving Private Ryan\" as an influence on them. The picture is credited with having helped to renew interest in WWII at the turn of the century, inspiring other films, television shows, and video games set during the war. In 2014, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nOn June 6, 1944, soldiers of the U.S. Army land at Omaha Beach during the Normandy invasion, suffering heavily from artillery and machine gun fire from the fortified German defenders. Initially dazed by the ferocity of the defence, 2nd Ranger Battalion Captain John H. Miller leads a surviving group in a successful infiltration behind German lines to secure victory.\nThe United States Department of War receives communication that three of four Ryan brothers have been killed in action; the last, James Francis Ryan of the 101st Airborne Division, is listed as missing. General George C. Marshall orders that Ryan be found and sent home, to spare his family the loss of all its sons. Miller is tasked with recovering Ryan and assembles a detachment of soldiers to accompany him: Mike Horvath, Richard Reiben, Adrian Caparzo, Stanley Mellish, Daniel Jackson, medic Irwin Wade, and interpreter Timothy Upham, who lacks combat experience.\nThe group tracks Ryan to the town of Neuville-au-Plain, where Caparzo is killed by a German sniper while trying to rescue a young girl. Mourning their friend, the men grow resentful at being forced to risk their lives for one man. They later find James Frederick Ryan, but realize he is the wrong man with a similar name. That evening, the men rest in a chapel, where Miller tells Horvath that his hands began uncontrollably shaking after he joined the war. The men travel to a rallying point where the 101st Airborne might be after landing off course, where they find scores of wounded and displaced soldiers. Wade admonishes Reiben, Mellish, and Jackson for callously searching through a pile of deceased soldiers' dog tags in front of passing troops, hoping to find Ryan's among them and conclude their mission. Remorseful for ignoring their behavior, Miller shouts for anyone who knows Ryan; one soldier tells him that Ryan was reassigned to defend a vital bridge in the town of Ramelle.\nOn the way, Miller decides to neutralize a German gun nest they discover, against the advice of his men, and although they are successful, Wade is killed. The men prepare to execute a surrendered German soldier in revenge, but Upham intervenes, arguing that they should follow the rules of war. Miller releases the soldier, nicknamed \"Steamboat Willie\", ordering that he surrender to the next Allied patrol. Discontented with the mission, Reiben threatens to desert, leading to a standoff between the men that Miller defuses by revealing his civilian background as a teacher and baseball coach, which he had always refused to disclose. Miller muses that people often guessed his career before he became a soldier, while his men could not, implying that war has changed him, and worries whether his wife will still recognize him after the war.\nIn Ramelle, Miller's detachment finds Ryan and informs him of their mission, but Ryan refuses to abandon his post or his fellow soldiers, believing he does not deserve to go home more than anyone else. Horvath convinces Miller that saving Ryan might be the only truly decent thing they can accomplish during the war. Miller takes command of Ryan's group as the only officer present and prepares the soldiers for a German assault. Jackson and Horvath are killed, and Upham stands paralyzed with fear as Mellish is stabbed to death. Steamboat Willie returns and shoots Miller before reinforcements arrive to defeat the Germans. Upham confronts Willie, who attempts to surrender again, and kills him. Upham and Reiben observe as the mortally wounded Miller tells Ryan to earn the sacrifices made to send him home.\nDecades later, an elderly Ryan and his family visit Miller's grave at the Normandy Cemetery. Ryan expresses that he remembers Miller's words every day, lived his life the best he could, and hopes he has earned their sacrifices.\nCast.\nThe cast also includes Glenn Wrage as Doyle, Corey Johnson as a radioman, John Sharian as Corporal Loeb, and Rolf Saxon as Lieutenant Briggs\u2014Allied soldiers at the Omaha beach landing. Demetri Goritsas and Dylan Bruno portray Parker and Private First Class Toynbe, respectively, who aid in the battle of Ramelle. Joerg Stadler appears as Steamboat Willie, a German prisoner. Amanda Boxer portrays Ryan's mother, while Harrison Young and Kathleen Byron portray the elderly James Ryan and his wife, Margaret. Technical advisor and Marine veteran Dale Dye appears as a War Department colonel.\nProduction.\nConcept.\nProducer Mark Gordon was a fan of writer Robert Rodat's previous work on films such as \"Tall Tale\" (1995) and \"Fly Away Home\" (1996). The pair met in early 1995 to discuss potential projects and ideas. Within a few weeks, Rodat conceived of \"Saving Private Ryan\". He was inspired by a gift from his wife, the historical book \"D-Day June 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II\" (1994), by Stephen E. Ambrose, recounting the events of the Normandy landings. Rodat visited a monument in Keene, New Hampshire dedicated to American soldiers killed in combat; he noticed the losses included brothers. He said, \"The idea of losing a son to war is painful beyond description... the idea of losing more than one son is inconceivable\". The Ryan family was based primarily on the four Niland brothers detailed in Ambrose's book, who were deployed during WWII; two were killed and a third presumed dead; the fourth was returned from the war.\nDevelopment.\nTo develop \"Saving Private Ryan\", Gordon founded the independent film studio Mutual Film Company, alongside producer Gary Levinsohn. Gordon brought Rodat's draft to Paramount Pictures executives; they responded positively and hired Rodat who wrote the script over the following 12 months. Michael Bay was hired as director, but left the project because he could not resolve how to approach the material. Carin Sage, a junior agent representing Tom Hanks at the Creative Artists Agency, gave the script to Hanks, who was immediately interested and met with Gordon and Levinsohn. Hanks shared the script with Steven Spielberg who agreed to direct because the pair had wanted to work together for some time. Rodat thought that Paramount would cancel the project after the studio purchased two other WWII-era scripts, \"Combat\" and \"With Wings as Eagles\", with popular actors Bruce Willis and Arnold Schwarzenegger attached, respectively. However, having secured the involvement of Hanks and Spielberg, two of the highest-paid and most successful actors and directors, Gordon suggested Paramount executives prioritize \"Saving Private Ryan\".\nDescribing what interested him about the project, Spielberg said, \"So what you're doing is sending eight people out, all of whom have parents, to rescue one boy and send him back to his mom when any or all of these kids, along the mission route, could be killed. That was the central tug that made me want to tell the story\". Spielberg had a lifelong interest in WWII, having made war films as a teenager because \"it was the seminal conversation inside my family. My parents talked about the Holocaust and they talked about combat and war. And I was born knowing this. My dad was a veteran... he had many veterans over to the house, and I became absolutely obsessed... based on my father's stories, recollections, and also based on all the WWII movies\". He described the project as a tribute to his father.\nWith Spielberg on board, DreamWorks Pictures, which he co-founded, became involved as a financier, with his company Amblin Entertainment as a production company. Spielberg's clout effectively removed Gordon and Levinsohn from the production, having no creative input, equity, or rights, but receiving a producer's credit and one-off payment. Levinsohn said, \"You just know going in what the score is... I guess it's unspoken that when you hire Steven Spielberg you're not going to be on the set making decisions\". DreamWorks hired Ian Bryce to replace them. In April 1997, Sumner Redstone, chairman of Paramount's parent company Viacom, had Spielberg flip a coin to determine the film's distribution rights. Spielberg won the toss, giving DreamWorks the favored North American distribution rights and Paramount the international rights. Earnings were held collectively and split evenly between the studios. In exchange, Paramount received the North American distribution rights to DreamWorks' \"Deep Impact\" (1998). To keep the budget low, Spielberg and Hanks took minimal upfront salaries in exchange for a guaranteed 17.5% of the gross profits, equivalent to 35 cents of every dollar earned.\nRewrite.\nSpielberg's initial concept for \"Saving Private Ryan\" was a \"Boys' Own\u2013\"style adventure film in which the search for Ryan was a public relations effort by the war department. However, after interviewing WWII veterans for research, he found this idea inappropriate. He decided to embed the story within a realistic portrayal of actual events while portraying the conflicted morality of sending men into life-threatening situations to save one man. He said, \"I cannot tell you how many veterans came up to me... and said: 'Please be honest about it. Please don't make another Hollywood movie about WWII. Please tell our stories...'\" The surviving Niland family was interviewed, and the story was further influenced by other substantial family war losses, including the five Sullivan brothers killed during WWII, and the Bixby brothers during the American Civil War; the resulting letter by Abraham Lincoln is quoted in the film.\nSpielberg described existing WWII films as \"sanitized\" and sentimentalized, focused on depicting honor and the glory of service in a manner that was \"very safe and wholly untrue\". He wanted to present the courage of the soldiers in the face of \"palpable terror, almost blind terror\": \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAmbrose served as a historical consultant. He disliked glorified depictions of the Normandy landings that ignored the reality of soldiers slowly dying in mud and water, wanting \"their mothers, they wanted morphine. It took a long time.\" Spielberg believed the legacy of the Vietnam War had made his generation less interested in glorifying combat in film. Even so, he was influenced by early war films such as \"Battleground\" (1949), \"The Steel Helmet\" (1951), and \"Hell Is for Heroes\" (1962).\nAlthough Rodat's script came close to the ideal WWII project he had hoped for, Spielberg said it had \"a few problems\". He hired Frank Darabont and Scott Frank to perform uncredited script rewrites. The scene begins as the second wave of soldiers arrives on Omaha beach (Darabont's suggestion), so they would be walking into \"Hell on Earth\" instead of empty beaches. Scott Frank performed rewrites based on transcriptions of Spielberg's recorded ideas and two folders of historical facts about the Normandy landings; these gave Frank ideas but he found it difficult to parse the reality of events into original ideas.\nThe Normandy cemetery scene was based on Spielberg's own experience visiting the area as a youth; he witnessed a family accompanying a man who fell to his knees and began to cry at a grave marker.\nCasting.\nSpielberg wanted older actors for his main cast, claiming that young soldiers would look older than their age under the stresses of war. Miller is the \"adult in the story,\" intended to project a calmness and feeling of safety that is undermined by the character's uncontrollable handshaking. Spielberg wanted Hanks to play Miller because he was the only actor he thought of who would not \"want to use his teeth to pull out a pin from a hand grenade\". Hanks formed Miller's character based on the history of the 2nd Ranger Battalion before Omaha Beach, saying he believed Miller was \"horribly afraid\" of getting more of his men killed. Mel Gibson and Harrison Ford were considered for the role. Miller's detachment is a diverse group, including a Jew and Italian, reminiscent of earlier WWII films; this was not a deliberate choice, although Spielberg believed he had subconsciously drawn on conventional WWII films. Burns described Reiben as a \"wise guy\" in the script, but the experience of filming the Omaha Beach landing inspired him to give the character a \"much harder edge\". Sizemore had been offered a role in \"The Thin Red Line\" (1998) but took Spielberg's offer of an alternative role as Horvath, Miller's friend and confidant. The actor had a history of drug addiction, and Spielberg mandated that he pass regular drug tests to keep his part, or the role would be recast and his scenes re-shot. Describing his character, Sizemore said, \"he was a quiet man; he was taciturn; he followed orders, and he loved the captain... if he had a tragic flaw, it was that he didn't know when he had had enough, when it was time to say, 'I can't do this anymore.'\"\nDiesel was cast after Spielberg saw his self-starring directorial efforts, \"Multi-Facial\" (1995) and \"Strays\" (1997). The actor was working as a telemarketer at the time, having struggled to secure acting jobs. Goldberg's role did not exist in the script until his casting. Spielberg wanted a relatively unknown actor to portray Private Ryan. Spielberg visited the set of \"Good Will Hunting\" (1997), and Robin Williams introduced him to Damon. Spielberg cast him shortly after, believing he possessed a \"great American everyboy look,\" unaware that \"Good Will Hunting\"'s success would significantly raise Damon's profile. Neil Patrick Harris was considered for the role, and Edward Norton turned it down for \"American History X\" (1998). Thomas Haden Church, Pete Postlethwaite, Tony Shalhoub, and Garth Brooks were considered for unspecified roles.\nAt Hanks's and Dye's suggestion, Spielberg had the principal cast take part in a six-day boot camp, wanting them to experience cold, wet, and exhaustive conditions, like those of WWII soldiers. Overseen by Dye and retired U.S. Marines, the actors remained in character while simulating attacks, performing runs with full backpacks, weapons training, military exercises, and push-ups after making mistakes, on three hours of sleep per night in cold and rainy conditions. The men wanted to quit, but Hanks convinced them otherwise, saying they would regret not following through and the experience would help them understand their characters and motivations. Diesel said, \"at that moment we got this huge respect for him in real life, we were all exhausted, we all wanted to leave and here was this guy who was a superstar, who doesn't have to be here, voting to stay\". Dye was present throughout filming to remind the actors of their training. Spielberg kept Damon out of the boot camp because he wanted the other actors to resent him and his character.\nPre-production.\nThe pre-production for \"Saving Private Ryan\" was truncated because Spielberg chose to film \"Amistad\" (1997) immediately after finishing work on ' (1997). Cinematographer Janusz Kami\u0144ski spent several weeks performing camera tests to define the film's visual aesthetic. The pair considered filming monochromatically as Spielberg had with his Holocaust film, \"Schindler's List\" (1993). However, they considered that this would seem \"pretentious,\" and were interested in emulating the colored WWII footage from their research. Kami\u0144ski let his interpretation of the narrative dictate how to light scenes and narrowed down visual styles by identifying which films he did not want \"Saving Private Ryan\" to emulate. He and Spielberg were visually influenced by WWII documentaries, such as ' (1944), \"The Battle of Midway\" (1942), \"Why We Fight\" (1942\u20131945), and the Nazi propaganda films of Leni Riefenstahl. They also looked at various books, paintings, and photographs of the Omaha Beach invasion taken by the war photographer Robert Capa. Kami\u0144ski wanted it to look like a major production \"shot on [16 mm film] by a bunch of combat cameramen\".\nA variety of camera techniques were used to emulate the experience of being on a battlefield: Kami\u0144ski removed the protective coating on some lenses, creating a \"flatter\", degraded image akin to WWII-era cameras, and mismatched lenses when using multiple cameras for an inconsistent result; alternating shutter angles and speeds; and desynchronizing the camera shutter which created a \"streaking\" effect. Kami\u0144ski considered this a risky option because if it failed there was no way to fix the image in post-production. A Clairmont Camera Image Shaker vibrated the camera to emulate the effects of a nearby explosion or rolling tank. Spielberg chose to film in because he believed it was more lifelike and closer to \"the way the human eye really sees,\" and found widescreen formats to be artificial.\nThree months were spent scouting for a location to portray the Normandy coast. The real location was too developed for their needs, and many other French beaches were restricted by military or wildlife use; Spielberg believed officials were difficult because they did not want him filming there. Beaches researched in England and Scotland lacked either the aesthetics or amenities required, such as housing for the crew, and the filmmakers needed a specific depth for the cast to leap from the landing crafts into the water. Associate producer, Kevin De La Noy's earlier work on \"Braveheart\" (1995) in Ireland had developed contacts with the Irish Army and knowledge of local beaches. One such location, the long Curracloe Beach, near Curracloe, County Wexford, offered the desired golden sands and sheer cliffs and nearby amenities. Spielberg selected a segment of the beach, known as Ballinesker. He said, \"I was a bit disappointed that the beach we used wasn't as broad as the real Omaha Beach... I tried to use certain wide-angle lenses to extend the length of the flats on the sandy beach before the soldiers reach the shingle. I used wider lenses for geography and tighter lenses for the compression of action.\" A segment adjacent to Blackwater, also in Wexford, was considered, but the local nuns could not make the land available in time. Service roads were built for vehicles to reach Ballinesker. Production designer Thomas E. Sanders led construction of the concrete battlements, bunkers, Czech hedgehogs, and barbed wire, much of which was made by local metalworkers. Over eleven weeks were spent preparing Ballinesker for filming. A storm destroyed some of the props just before filming, but they were rebuilt overnight. The main crew arrived on location on June 25, 1997.\nFilming in Ireland.\nPrincipal photography began on June 27, 1997. Filming completed up to 50 shots per day. Spielberg wanted the actors to get little rest, \"A war is fought fast, and I really wanted to keep all of the actors off-balance. I didn't want them to be able to read 75 pages of a novel... I wanted to work fast enough so that they always felt as if they were in combat... I had to keep them on the set, which meant shooting the film even faster than I normally do. War doesn't give you a break.\" \"Saving Private Ryan\" was shot almost entirely in continuity order, although some of the crew found this \"a mentally demoralizing experience\" because the cast started together and left as their characters died.\nThe Omaha Beach battle was filmed over three to four weeks, for $12million. The scene involved about 1,500 people including 400 crew, 1,000 volunteer reserve and Irish army soldiers, and dozens of extras and about 30 amputees and paraplegics fitted with prosthetic limbs to portray disfigured soldiers. Their numbers were supplemented with over one thousand detailed mannequins. The extras were divided into platoons with a designated leader, allowing Dye to control their action via four different radios with aid from three non-commissioned officers. Costume designer Joanna Johnston contracted an American company responsible for making boots for soldiers during WWII to create about 2,000 pairs, using the last batch of dye from that period. Soldiers in the ocean wore wet suits beneath their uniforms to minimize hypothermia. Armorer Simon Atherton was responsible for supplying authentic weapons.\nTwo Higgins Boats used in the landings were used in the scene; additional boats from the 1950s were brought from California, Donegal, and Southampton. Hanks recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoldiers vomiting from the boats was achieved using milk of magnesia. A crane shot moving from beneath the ocean surface to above the battlefield was achieved by placing the crane on a flatbed trailer and reversing it into the sea.\nThe Omaha Beach sequence was extensively choreographed by stunt coordinator Simon Crane, with squibs and explosives managed by Neil Corbould. The only serious accident resulted when an extra's foot was run over by a car. Thousands of gallons of fake blood were used, mainly to turn the ocean and shoreline red. Based on his interviews with veterans, Spielberg had dead fish strewn in the water and around the battlefield, as well as floating a Bible on the surface. Bullet impacts were emulated using air pipes concealed beneath the sand and ocean surface. Drums of diesel fuel were burned to create black smoke, while a series of pickup trucks carried systems to disperse white smoke.\nDuring filming, the weather was cold, rainy, and overcast; Kami\u0144ski said this matched the weather during the Normandy landings, enhancing the film's accuracy. Artificial light was used sparingly apart from on the boats to highlight the actors' eyes under their helmets. Spielberg had the camera stay close to the ground to appear as if it was the view of a soldier avoiding getting shot or a combat cameraman. He intended for the audience to feel like they were a part of the battle rather than watching. Most of \"Saving Private Ryan\" was filmed with handheld cameras. This was physically demanding on camera operator Mitch Dubin and Steadicam operator Chris Haarhoff due to both proximity to the ground and movement through exploding scenery. The camera was close enough that fake blood, water, and sand would stick to the camera lens, but the filmmakers believed this made the footage more authentic.\nKami\u0144ski considered the extensive setup of explosives, smoke, and choreography of over a thousand characters to be demanding as it could take half a day to reset if something went wrong, but the majority of scenes in the sequence were captured in less than four takes, using up to three cameras simultaneously. Spielberg said, \"I rarely walked away from a scene until I got what I wanted, and I'd say that I got what I wanted from those complex setups about 80 percent of the time.\" He reviewed each day's footage nightly in a local parish hall. The production crew remained after filming to restore the beach to its original state over the following month, per an ecological protection order.\nFilming in England and France.\nFilming relocated to the Hatfield Aerodrome in Hertfordshire, England, at the end of August, for the remaining scenes and the battle of Ramelle. French towns and rivers were scouted where a partial set could be built, but this was discarded over environmental concerns of filming contaminating the water. Instead, Sanders and his team built the fictional Ramelle on the grounds of the Aerodrome, based on five towns where fighting took place. Nearly three city blocks long, the set included fully built buildings, facades, and a custom built, long river. The river was lined because they \"had to control the height of the water very carefully\". Explosives were used to create bomb craters and damage around Ramelle.\nThough the battle involved fewer extras than the Omaha Beach scene, several weeks were spent developing the complex choreography based on a battle plan devised by Dye. Spielberg did not storyboard \"Saving Private Ryan\" because he wanted to position the camera spontaneously in reaction to what was taking place in each scene and he often relied on Dye and other WWII consultants for advice on staging the combat scenes. Dale also advised on technical aspects of weapons; where Spielberg wanted to use larger explosions typically found in Hollywood action films, Dye would generally advise him to \"go half that size, they were never that big\". The production was estimated to have spent about \u00a38million in the local area.\nSpielberg's spontaneous approach carried into other aspects; about halfway through filming, he decided to depict the remainder of the film from Upham's perspective, believing he represented the audience's inexperience of war. Goldberg's character was only going to be shot dead until Dye suggested a hand-to-hand combat sequence on the day of filming, leading Mellish to be stabbed through the heart. A separate scene of Ryan talking about his brothers was ad-libbed by Damon.\nThe German machine-gun nest and following ambush of a half-track vehicle were filmed on the grounds of Thame Park, Thame, in Oxfordshire; the chapel interior where Miller's men rest was filmed in the Thame Park chapel. The Iowa cornfields where Ryan's mother lives in a house built for filming was set near West Kennet, Wiltshire. The American war office was filmed in the Hatfield Aerodrome. Kami\u0144ski wanted scenes in America to be more colorful and a relief from the muted tones of the combat scenes, so he positioned very bright lighting outside the windows. Scenes featuring the elderly Ryan were filmed at the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial in Colleville-sur-Mer, France, adjacent to Omaha Beach.\nFilming concluded ahead of schedule on September 13, 1997, after 12 weeks, with the French church interior scenes. The estimated total budget was $65\u2013$70million.\nPost-production.\nKami\u0144ski chose to render his footage using Technicolor's proprietary ENR process (similar to a bleach bypass) which retained more silver in the film stock and produced deeper blacks. He used \"70 percent ENR\" for a desaturated image which added a blue hue. Concerned this change would make the fake blood appear inauthentic, the effects department mixed blue coloring into it, giving it a dark red appearance. Visual-effects studio Industrial Light &amp; Magic provided digital enhancements; many bullet wounds and blood splatter were computer-generated imagery.\nMichael Kahn edited the final 170-minute cut. Spielberg said that Kahn's style was intended to defy audience expectations and not make every scene or transition clear. Some scenes were cut because of their graphic imagery, such as Miller's unit encounter with burnt out tanks with charred bodies. Mellish's death was also trimmed, removing parts where the character screams in pain, after Spielberg's projectionist said \"It's too painful to watch.\"\nSpielberg said his movie had to be \"ugly\", but was worried the violent content could be seen as exploitative and earn it a restrictive NC-17 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America, restricting it to audiences over 17 years of age. He anticipated that the \"historical importance\" of the content would be taken into consideration; it received an R rating, meaning children could watch when accompanied by an adult.\nMusic.\nJohn Williams, Spielberg's longtime collaborator, produced, composed and conducted the score. Spielberg chose little music accompaniment, wanting the sounds of battle and death to be prominent. Using a spotting process, he and Williams watched a rough cut of the film to agree on which scenes would feature music. Williams deliberately avoided \"anything grandiose or operatic\". Williams recorded the 55-minute score over three days at Symphony Hall in Boston, with the Boston Symphony Orchestra and vocals by the Tanglewood Festival Chorus. The recording cost about $100,000 per hour. Spielberg chose the Orchestra: \"This is a movie about a company of soldiers, and it seemed appropriate to use an experienced company of musicians who are all virtuosos. Also we really wanted the sound of this room, Symphony Hall. On a soundstage you can get acoustically correct sound, but you don't hear the air. Here you get a rich, warm sound off the walls and ceiling, and you do hear the air; Symphony Hall is an instrument too.\"\nRelease.\nContext.\nThe 1998 summer theatrical season began in early May with \"Deep Impact\", a surprise box office hit that studios saw as a positive indicator for their upcoming 100 film releases. \"Godzilla\" and \"Armageddon\" were expected to be the biggest successes, while industry executives were hopeful for smaller budget films (costing less than $60million) like \"Small Soldiers\", \"The Negotiator\", \"The Parent Trap\", and \"There's Something About Mary\" to become sleeper hits. Fewer sequels and less escapist entertainment were scheduled for release, and more films were targeted toward older audiences. \"Saving Private Ryan\" was highly anticipated but analysis suggested the film faced commercial limitations because of its long runtime, restricting the number of times it could be screened daily, and its violent content. DreamWorks' marketing chief Terry Press said it was risky to release a serious drama in the summer, a time generally reserved for family and escapist entertainment, but this was offset by Spielberg and Hanks's popularity. A screening for DreamWorks and Paramount executives was highly praised, but Spielberg had low expectations, believing the film was too violent to attract broad audiences.\nBox office.\nThe film premiered on July 21, 1998. The event was a low-profile affair without a party or many celebrities; Press said of the premiere, \"it would have been inappropriate\". \"Saving Private Ryan\" was released in the United States and Canada on July 24, 1998. During its opening weekend, it earned $30.6million across 2,463 theaters\u2014an average of $12,414 per theater. This figure made it the number-one film of the weekend, ahead of \"The Mask of Zorro\" ($13.4million) in its second weekend, \"Lethal Weapon 4\" ($13.1million) in its third, and \"There's Something About Mary\" ($12.5million), also in its second. The audience was split evenly between women and men, and skewed towards those aged over 25. \"The New York Times\" described it as unusual for a near-three-hour-long drama to perform so well on its opening weekend, crediting positive reviews. DreamWorks believed the box-office figure would have been higher if not for a delay in film prints arriving in hundreds of theaters across California and Arizona until late in the afternoon.\nIn its second weekend, \"Saving Private Ryan\" remained the number-one film, with $23.6million, ahead of the debuting \"The Parent Trap\" ($11.1million) and \"There's Something About Mary\" ($10.9million) in its third. \"Saving Private Ryan\" retained the number-one position in its third weekend with ($17.4million), ahead of the debuts of \"Snake Eyes\" ($16.3million) and ' ($16.1million), and its fourth with $13.2million, ahead of the debuts of \"How Stella Got Her Groove Back\" ($11.3million) and \"The Avengers\" ($10.3million). In its fifth weekend, \"Saving Private Ryan\" fell to number2 with $10.1million, behind the debut of \"Blade\" ($17.1million). Without regaining the number1 position, it ranked among the top ten for 12 weeks. By the end of its theatrical run, \"Saving Private Ryan\" earned a total box-office gross of $216.5million, making it the highest-grossing film of the year, ahead of \"Armageddon\" ($201.6million) and \"There's Something About Mary\" ($176.5million). This also made it only the third R-rated film to earn more than $200million, after 1984's \"Beverly Hills Cop\" ($235million) and 1991's ' ($205million).\nOutside of the U.S. and Canada, \"Saving Private Ryan\" is estimated to have earned a further $265.3million. This gave the film a cumulative worldwide gross of $481.8million, making it the second-highest-grossing film of 1998, behind \"Armageddon\" ($553.7million).\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" was seen as the biggest success of the theatrical summer. \"The New York Times\" wrote that the success of a \"prestige film\" during a time of blockbuster entertainment with broad appeal was evidence that audiences were accepting of serious dramas alongside action films, such as \"Armageddon\" and \"Godzilla\", and \"gross-out comedy\" like \"There's Something About Mary\". The publication wrote that the popularity of \"Saving Private Ryan\" was, in part, because it depicted a \"nobler, cleaner era\" promoting values of heroism and \"patriotic duty\". The 1998 box office broke records with over $7billion earned. Despite expectations, the biggest successes had relatively modest budgets, such as \"Saving Private Ryan\", \"There's Something About Mary\", \"Rush Hour\", and \"The Waterboy\", while the anticipated blockbusters, such as \"Godzilla\" and \"Armageddon\", were so expensive to make that they were less profitable. Re-releases of \"Saving Private Ryan\" have raised the box office to $482.3million. Spielberg's and Hanks's pay agreement earned them an estimated $30\u2013$40 million each of the box office.\nReception.\nCritical response.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" received critical acclaim, and audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale. Critics generally agreed that \"Saving Private Ryan\" presented the grim and brutal reality of the \"Good War\" in a way previously unseen on film. Writing for the \"Los Angeles Times\", Kenneth Turan described the film as darker and more pessimistic than any of Spielberg's previous works, dispelling the mythos of WWII as staunchly good heroes fighting against evil forces, to depict the reality of combat where, \"American soldiers mock virtue and shoot surrendering Germans, where decent and altruistic actions tend to be fatal, where death is random, stupid and redeems hardly anything at all\". Some reviewers said this exploration of the limitations of morality in combat asked audiences to consider that the lives lost during the conflict were as valuable as those saved by their sacrifices. Writing for the \"Chicago Tribune\", Gene Siskel lauded the film's ability to discuss the \"brutality and madness\" of war while \"believably\" celebrating the sacrifices and courage of those fighting it. \"Salon.com\"'s Gary Kamiya concluded, \"it will forever change the way people imagine the most important event in 20th century history. That is no small achievement.\" In \"The New York Times\", Stephen Holden said \"it's a safe bet that \"Saving Private Ryan\", a powerful but flawed movie, will be revered as a classic decades hence.\"\nMany reviewers focused on the film's two major combat sequences, particularly the opening on Omaha Beach. Focus was on the \"horrifying,\" \"visceral,\" \"brutal,\" \"shocking,\" and \"fierce\" violence present in the opening battle, described by \"Entertainment Weekly\"'s Owen Gleiberman and \"Time\"'s Richard Schickel as one of the most revolutionary film sequences ever made. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" and Schickel compared it with the energy and dread of similar scenes in the Vietnam war film \"Platoon\" (1986), but with a grander scope depicting masses of men killing each other from afar, drawing the \"horror\" out of a lengthy, sustained sequence, without allowing the audience to become desensitized. Some reviewers believed that the scene was so impactful and thought-provoking that it overshadowed the rest of the film. Although there was some criticism toward the realistic violence and gore, Turan believed it was done purposely and dispassionately, conveying the chaos and despair experienced by the soldiers, and not done for the sake of entertainment. Spielberg rejected this criticism, affirming he wanted the audience to understand what real combat was like and what the soldiers experienced, not observe it from afar as spectators. Some reviewers believed the concluding battle in Ramelle was more violent than Omaha Beach, particularly the slow death of Mellish as he is stabbed through the chest. \"The New York Observer\"'s Andrew Sarris criticized the \"pornography of violence and cruelty\" depicted in severed limbs and rivers of blood.\nTuran and Jonathan Rosenbaum found that, outside of the combat, the script was effective but uninspired and derivative of war films by other directors, such as Oliver Stone, Stanley Kubrick, and Francis Ford Coppola. Others criticized \"manipulative\" oversentimentality, particularly in the modern day framing device featuring the elderly Ryan. Even so, Kamiya described it as \"enormously moving, it serves as a kind of redemption, a necessary if eternally fragile answer to the hell he witnessed\".\nHanks's performance was generally praised, with some reviewers calling it the best of his career to date. Many reviewers agreed that his everyman persona allowed him to portray Miller with a gentle weariness, empathy, and vulnerability beneath a surface of strength and decency, but also cynicism toward the war. Ebert and Schickel wrote that he offered a quiet reserve \"hinting at unspoken competencies\" that convince his men and the audience to follow along with him. Turan believed that Hanks's \"indelible\" performance represented how the audience would hope to be when confronted by the same situations. The other main cast also generally received positive reviews, particularly Davies, with Ebert saying that his transformation from inexperienced interpreter to soldier was the conclusion to \"Spielberg's unspoken philosophical argument\". Gleiberman and Turan also highlighted the performances of Pepper, Ribisi, and Sizemore, who Turan believed delivered his career's \"best, most controlled\" performance. Ebert praised the cast for not devolving into clich\u00e9 or \"zany\" archetypes and effectively portraying the bonds between them. However, Kamiya wrote that Damon's performance was \"jarring\", believing both his more cinematic aesthetic and speech about his brothers to be artificial. The review concluded that Ryan was not very compelling, which made it difficult to care about the mission to save him.\nAccolades.\nAt the 56th Golden Globe Awards in 1999, \"Saving Private Ryan\" won Best Drama and Best Director (Spielberg), and was nominated for Best Drama Actor (Hanks), Best Original Score (Williams), and Best Screenplay (Rodat). At the 71st Academy Awards, \"Saving Private Ryan\" won Best Director (Spielberg), Best Cinematography (Kami\u0144ski), Best Film Editing (Kahn), Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Gary Summers, Andy Nelson, Ronald Judkins), and Best Sound Effects Editing (Rydstrom and Richard Hymns) while it was nominated for Best Actor (Hanks), Best Original Screenplay (Rodat), Best Music (Williams), Best Production Design (Sanders and Lisa Dean Kavanaugh), and Best Makeup (Lois Burwell, Conor O'Sullivan, Daniel C. Striepeke). \"Saving Private Ryan\"'s unexpected loss of Best Picture to \"Shakespeare in Love\" is seen as one of the biggest upsets in the awards history and led DreamWorks executives to accuse its producers, Miramax, of \"overly aggressive campaigning\". A 2015 poll of academy voters suggested that, given another opportunity, they would have voted \"Saving Private Ryan\" as Best Picture.\nAt the 52nd British Academy Film Awards, \"Saving Private Ryan\" won Best Special Effects and Best Sound, and was nominated for Best Film, Best Direction (Spielberg), and Best Actor (Hanks). At the 25th Saturn Awards, it won Best Action, Adventure, or Thriller Film. The 3rd Golden Satellite Awards also earned the film Best Editing (Kahn), and a nomination for Best Supporting Actor (Sizemore), as well as Best Director (Spielberg) and Best Actor (Hanks) at the Empire Awards.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" also won awards for Outstanding Directorial Achievement (Directors Guild of America, Spielberg), Motion Picture Producer of the Year (PGA Awards, Spielberg, Bryce, Gordon, and Levinsohn), Best Casting (Casting Society of America, Denise Chamian), Best Instrumental Composition Written for a Motion Picture (Grammy Awards, Williams), Best Sound Editing for Dialogue (Motion Picture Sound Editors, Hymns, Rydstrom, Sandina Bailo-Lape, Ethan Van der Ryn, Teresa Eckton, Frank Eulner Karen Wilson, Larry Oatfield, and Bruce Lacey), and Sound Effects (Hymns, Rydstrom, Gwendolyn Yates Whittle, Larry Singer, Ewa Sztompke Oatfield, Sara Bolder, Denise Whiting, and Thomas Whiting) and Best of Show - Audiovisual (Key Art Awards). In 2014, the United States Library of Congress selected \"Saving Private Ryan\" to be preserved in the National Film Registry as \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPost-release.\nHistorical accuracy and veteran responses.\nSeveral publications highlighted the accuracy of the Omaha Beach assault, down to the sound of gunfire, although some errors were noted, such as bullets killing soldiers underwater, the absence of British coxswains steering the boats, and the battle's truncated duration. Historical curator John Delaney said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It's accurate for that unit on that bit of that beach on that day... but you can't say, 'That's what D-Day was like', because it wasn't. Omaha beach is about long. What's happening at one end of the beach isn't what's happening at the other end.\nDiscussing the core narrative, Ambrose said, \"It's a stretch that they would send eight soldiers, but it could have been hard to find him... the paratroopers were scattered everywhere.\"\nMany World War II veterans described the opening of \"Saving Private Ryan\" as depicting the most realistic representation of combat. Another veteran, interviewed by \"Time\", said \"I remember when I walked out into the lobby of the moviehouse, not a single person coming out of that showing said one word... everybody was stunned by it... It just brought back so many memories.\" There were various reports of some veterans being unable to finish watching \"Saving Private Ryan\" because of the memories it brought back. The United States Department of Veterans Affairs created a dedicated phoneline for viewers affected by the film, and more veterans visited counselors for post traumatic stress disorder.\nThe rest of the film is less historically accurate. Fictitious elements include the nonexistent town of Ramelle, the battle associated with it, certain military tactical errors (included for dramatic effect), much of the dialogue, and some of the methods used to locate Ryan. \"Total Film\" and some non U.S. veterans were critical of the lack of other Allied forces throughout the film. British broadcaster Channel 4 said that these critics had missed the point of the film, in that it was \"unashamedly an American story\".\nHome media.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" was released on VHS in May 1999. It became the most successful rental debut of its time, earning $9.6million in its first week and $44million by July 1999. A limited edition two-VHS version was released in November 1999, adding a making-of documentary, as well as a message from Spielberg about D-Day and the National D-Day Museum.\nA DVD was released alongside the limited edition VHS, with the same extras. A two-disc Special Collector's Edition DVD set was released in May 2004 to coincide with the 60th anniversary of D-Day. This edition included additional content, including behind-the-scenes content recorded during filming. Spielberg discussed his interest in WWII, the Niland brothers, the story and character development, the cast's boot camp experience, the involvement of the Irish army and locations, the recreation of Omaha Beach, the music, sound effects, and a farewell from Spielberg. This was released alongside a four-disc deluxe \"The World War II Collection\" DVD package that included a collectible book and two documentaries: \"Price for Peace\" (directed by James Moll) about the use of dogs in WWII, and \"Shooting War\" (directed by Richard Schickel) about combat photographers, with narration by Hanks.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" was released as a two-disc Blu-ray in May 2010, including all previously released special features apart from \"Price for Peace\". Paramount Home Entertainment issued a recall of the Blu-rays after discovering that some versions featured an audio synchronization issue. The defect was fixed in versions re-released later that month. For the film's 20th anniversary in 2018, a three-disc \"Commemorative 20th Anniversary\" Blu-ray set was released, including a 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray and all previously released features.\nOther media.\nA novelization, written by Max Allan Collins and Rodat, was released alongside the film. \"Saving Private Ryan: The Men, the Mission, the Movie : A Film by Steven Spielberg\" was also released in 1998. It features illustrations, color plates, extracts from the screenplay and Ambrose's works, as well as commentary by crew including Spielberg, Hanks, and Damon.\nThematic analysis.\nPatriotism.\nLeading into the early 21st century, there was renewed focus in America on glorifying the generation that had fought in WWII, depicted in films such as \"Saving Private Ryan\" and \"The Thin Red Line\", the miniseries \"Band of Brothers\" (2001), books such as \"The Greatest Generation\" (1998), and construction of a World War II Memorial in Washington, D.C. Many publications believed this resurgence of interest in the war to be a response to decades of American cynicism toward the nation's failure in the Vietnam War (1955\u20131975), and anticlimactic victories in the Cold and Gulf Wars that resulted in little diplomatic success or celebration.\nMany films about the Vietnam War depicted its American combatants as self-hating, \"deeply troubled, or even psychotic,\" offered little respect, and portrayed the conflict itself as one mired in dread, anxiety, and general negativity. Literature professor Marzena Soko\u0142owska-Pary\u017c said the worship of WWII as \"the last Good War\" and its veterans as \"the greatest generation\" represented a \"therapeutic [form of] patriotism\" designed to rehabilitate the modern image of combatants as the enduring legacy of WWII soldiers and the core American national identity while forgetting any lingering guilt over the Vietnam War. Film scholar Albert Auster described this reappraisal as a reversal of attitudes up to the early 1990s where historical wars, including WWII, were not beyond criticism and, particularly in response to the Vietnam War, literary critics aimed to undo the impression of WWII as the \"Good War\". \"Saving Private Ryan\" is American-centric, beginning and ending with an image of the nation's flag fluttering in the wind, a desaturated image suggesting a nostalgic image of \"the deep pride we once felt in our flag\". Stephen Holden described it as \"a wholehearted celebration of American pluck and virtue and honor\".\nHolden and Ebert disagreed with the view of some critics that \"Saving Private Ryan\"'s \"harrowing\" and realistic combat scenes were a statement against war. They wrote that it accepts war as a necessity and portrays its main characters not as symbols, but as real people trying to kill the enemy without getting themselves killed. The scenes of the elderly Ryan visiting Miller's grave with his family received some criticism. Author John Biguenet queried how such a \"savage and unsentimental film\" could conclude with a scene so sentimentalized. Spielberg said in making the film he was meant to \"wave the flag and be patriotic,\" but that the reality of his father's experiences made him want to also convey the harsh reality. The Omaha Beach landing establishes the distance between the commanders safe at home who order Ryan be rescued, and the soldiers endangered in doing so. It is a sentimental mission intended to spare one family the grief of losing all of its sons, but Miller refers to it as a public relations scheme designed to boost civilian morale. General Marshall quotes a letter by Abraham Lincoln to a similarly affected family, but where Lincoln's letter expresses sentiment and patriotic sacrifice to the mother, it is not sentimental nor does it claim that her grief is greater than any other mother who lost her child at war. Biguenet said Marshall, in comparison, confuses sentimentality for morality.\nDespite the patriotic American imagery, the characters of \"Saving Private Ryan\" do not discuss their home country or protecting democracy from fascism. The soldiers are only concerned with returning home to their loved ones. Miller's men openly state that they do not care about Ryan, but Miller says that he will go into metaphorical Hell to save him, if it means Miller can return to his wife. The soldiers actively fighting are not sentimental about their mission.\nTuran and Biguenet said \"Saving Private Ryan\" \"feels like an official act of atonement\" for modern generations failing to acknowledge the \"courage and sacrifice\" of WWII soldiers. When Miller tells Ryan to \"earn this,\" he is effectively speaking about the debt owed to veterans who made \"the ultimate sacrifice\" for their country. Biguenet called this a \"terrible, impossible order\", a moral burden that Ryan will carry until his own death because there is no way to compensate the high price paid by Miller's men. Spielberg suggested the answer was in the living paying homage to the fallen soldiers and the freedom for which they fought. History professor John Bodnar described the image of the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial as depicting a national unity with row after row of white grave markers, serving as a permanent reminder \"to other nations of the sacrifices made by the United States\".\nMorality and humanity.\nUnlike some older WWII films that portrayed the soldiers as infallible heroes, \"Saving Private Ryan\" presents battles fought by brave but frightened civilians, the majority of whom at Omaha Beach were not combat veterans. Ebert believed much of the audience, including himself, would identify with Upham, someone completely unprepared for the realities of war but who must fight regardless. Miller is the opposite: an experienced soldier who is scared and anxious because he knows exactly what to expect and is haunted by his responsibility for the lives of his men. Although 94 men have died under his command, Miller rationalizes that he can prioritize his mission over his men because each sacrifice was responsible for saving many more lives. However, his mission to rescue Ryan demands he risk the lives of several men to save just one. Turan said Miller's trembling hands were a sign that he is \"dangerously close to coming apart\". \"Far Out\" magazine wrote that the focus on Miller's ailment acknowledges the side effects of war such as post-traumatic stress disorder, something he suppresses to fulfil his duty.\nSpielberg said the mission to rescue Ryan cannot be morally or patriotically justified, risking eight lives to save one. This theme is reinforced when they encounter the sole survivor of a glider crash caused by heavy steel shielding added to protect a single general on board, resulting in 22 deaths. No character claims that the mission of Miller and his men is heroic, and the men express the grief their own mothers will feel should they be killed on this endeavor. The \"toughest\" soldier, Horvath, gives it meaning when he tells Miller that saving Ryan could be the one decent thing they can accomplish in \"this whole godawful, shitty mess\". Biguenet said that Spielberg is explicitly condemning their mission as an immoral act to force upon soldiers. Ebert considered the decision to deviate from the mission to attack the German gun nest on the way to Ramelle to be a deliberate rebellion against their orders. The action is not part of their mission and it is possible to avoid the situation entirely, but it grants the soldiers the opportunity to do what they came to Europe for: to fight a war. Hanks said the decision to stay with Ryan and defend Ramelle was the characters \"bringing meaning to a situation that until then had been absurd\".\nWhile film critic Andrew Sarris found the German characters to match evil archetypes found in other WWII films, concluding with Upham's lesson that Steamboat Willie should have been killed earlier, \"Saving Private Ryan\" does not portray the Allied soldiers as unimpeachable heroes. Following Omaha Beach, two Allied soldiers laugh as they execute two pleading German soldiers, but the soldiers are speaking Czech, indicating they are potentially from German-conquered Czechoslovakia, forcibly conscripted into the war effort. Biguenet wrote that the Germans are not portrayed as any worse than the Americans, as they are similarly affected by the horrors of war and casually execute downed American soldiers. In \"Saving Private Ryan\", allegiances do not matter, all men are equal, and rules only matter until they conflict with the mission objective.\nUpham's transformation from cowardly interpreter to Willie's executioner shows the transformative realities of combat. William J. Prior and Auster wrote that Upham represents respect for human life and moral decency when he interferes to prevent Steamboat Willie's execution, despite the fact that it would protect the mission. He offers the intellectual perspective of a civilian, but his lack of combat experience makes him unable to kill the prisoner, which results in the deaths of many of his allies. Miller's experience means he is conscious of the risk involved in releasing Willie, but he is simultaneously struggling to cling to his own humanity and decency, believing that every time he kills he is moving \"farther from home\". Although Willie is the enemy, he is also a human with his own right to exist, and summarily executing him would further distance Miller from the self he and his wife knew. His decision to spare Willie and reveal his civilian background, returns to him a semblance of his humanity.\nLegacy.\nCultural influence.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" was credited with renewing interest in World War II leading into the 21st century. NBC News wrote that in presenting audiences with its \"stomach-churning violence and soul-shaking intensity of that pivotal chapter in the war\", the film had reshaped the United States' \"cultural memory\". It is regarded as one of the most accurate and realistic war films ever made, particularly for the opening Omaha Beach battle. Film historian Steven Jay Rubin said, \"It was a game-changer... it was devastatingly dramatic, visceral, immersive. I didn't touch my popcorn because it felt sacrilegious to eat while I'm watching it.\" Even so, director and Vietnam War veteran Oliver Stone claimed that \"Saving Private Ryan\" depicted a \"worship\" of WWII as \"the good war\" that, alongside films such as \"Gladiator\" (2000) and \"Black Hawk Down\", made audiences more in favor of war: \"By the time of the Iraq War, we were ready to go back.\" American academic Paul Fussell similarly decried \"Saving Private Ryan\" for providing an \"honest, harrowing, 15-minute opening\" of Omaha Beach before descending into more broadly acceptable action-adventure fare. He said, \"Its genre was pure cowboys and Indians, with the virtuous cowboys of course victorious.\"\nThe film is considered to have had a lasting influence on filmmaking, particularly its opening battle scenes. \"Vanity Fair\" wrote, \"no films about combat made since would look the way they do without the de-saturated, handheld, blood-splatters-and-all horror of cinema that is this extended sequence... it's a terrifying scene, either honorable or exploitative in its all v\u00e9rit\u00e9, depending on whom you ask. Regardless of any moral assessment, it's easily one of the most aped and referenced scenes of the late 20th century.\" \"Saving Private Ryan\" was named by other directors as an influence, such as Quentin Tarantino (\"Inglourious Basterds\", 2009), Christopher Nolan (\"Dunkirk\", 2017), and Robert Altman. The \"Los Angeles Times\" wrote that \"Saving Private Ryan\"'s stylistic choices, such as placing the audience close to the on-screen action, can be seen in war and action media that followed. This includes films such as \"Gladiator\" (2000), \"Enemy at the Gates\", \"Pearl Harbor\" (both 2001), \"Flags of Our Fathers\" (2006), and \"Hacksaw Ridge\" (2016), the \"psychological anguish\" of \"American Sniper\" (2014), and modern superhero films. Cinematographer Oren Soffer cited the film's battle sequences as an influence on those in Gareth Edwards' science fiction film \"The Creator\" (2023), for which he served as co-cinematographer with Greig Fraser. This influence extends to television, with shows such as \"Game of Thrones\" (\"The Spoils of War\", 2017) and \"The Pacific\" (2010). \"Saving Private Ryan\" is also seen as an influence on video games. Spielberg and DreamWorks developed \"Medal of Honor\" (1999) to translate the realism and setting of \"Saving Private Ryan\". Its success launched a series of \"Medal of Honor\" games, which, in turn, contributed to the creation of the \"Call of Duty\" series.\nRetrospective reception.\n\"Saving Private Ryan\" is considered one of the greatest war films ever made. In a 2018 interview, Spielberg said, \"I didn't anticipate the success of the movie... in very early screenings, certain associates and other people in my life were saying that I made it too tough. I feared that almost nobody would see it because the word of mouth would spread quickly after the first 25 minutes.\"\nIn 2007, the American Film Institute (AFI) listed \"Saving Private Ryan\" as 71st-greatest American film. The AFI listed it among the most thrilling, inspiring, and epic American films. A 2014 poll of 2,120 entertainment industry professionals by \"The Hollywood Reporter\" ranked \"Saving Private Ryan\" as the 46th-best film. Publications such as \"Parade\" and \"Variety\" named it one of the greatest films of all time. \"Saving Private Ryan\" is included in the 2013 film reference book \"1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die\", and it is listed on Rotten Tomatoes' 300 essential movies. The film is generally considered to be among the best of Spielberg's works, and of Hanks's credits. In a 2025 retrospective by \"Vulture\", \"Saving Private Ryan\" was listed among the best movies to have not won the Best Picture Academy Award.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a approval rating across critics, with an average score of . The consensus reads; \"Anchored by another winning performance from Tom Hanks, Steven Spielberg's unflinchingly realistic war film virtually redefines the genre.\" The film has a score of 91 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 38 critics, indicating \"universal acclaim\". \"Saving Private Ryan\" has remained popular with audiences, with reader and viewer-ranked polling listing it as one of the greatest war films, among the greatest films of the 1990s, and the greatest films of all time.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28270", "revid": "50673752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28270", "title": "Shaggy dog story", "text": "Story with long setup and no payoff\nIn its original sense, a shaggy-dog story or yarn is an extremely long-winded anecdote characterized by extensive narration of typically irrelevant incidents and terminated by an anticlimax. In other words, it is a long story that is intended to be amusing and that has an intentionally silly or meaningless ending.\nShaggy-dog stories play upon the audience's preconceptions of joke-telling. The audience listens to the story with certain expectations, which are either simply not met or met in some entirely unexpected manner. A lengthy shaggy-dog story derives its humour from the fact that the joke-teller held the attention of the listeners for a long time (such jokes can take five minutes or more to tell) for no reason at all, as the long-awaited resolution is essentially meaningless, with the joke as a whole playing upon people's search for meaning. The nature of their delivery is reflected in the English idiom \"spin a yarn\", by way of analogy with the production of yarn.\nAs a comic device, the shaggy-dog story is related to unintentional long-windedness, and the two are sometimes both referred to in the same way. While a shaggy-dog story is a comic exaggeration of the real life experience, it is also deliberately constructed to play off an audience who are expecting a comedic payoff and uses that expectation to subvert expectations and create comedy in unexpected ways. In such kind of humorous story, the humor lies in the pointlessness or irrelevance of the plot or punch line.\nHumanities scholar Jane Marie Todd observed that the shaggy-dog story demonstrates the nature of desiring humor and how that process occurs.\nArchetypal story.\nThe eponymous shaggy dog story serves as the archetype of the genre. The story builds up a repeated emphasizing of the dog's exceptional shagginess. The climax of the story culminates in a character reacting to the animal by stating: \"That dog's not so shaggy.\" The expectations of the audience that have been built up by the presentation of the story, both in the details (that the dog is shaggy) and in the delivery of a punchline, are thus subverted. Ted Cohen gives the following example of this story:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A boy owned a dog that was uncommonly shaggy. Many people remarked upon its considerable shagginess. When the boy learned that there are contests for shaggy dogs, he entered his dog. The dog won first prize for shagginess in both the local and the regional competitions. The boy entered the dog in ever-larger contests, until finally he entered it in the world championship for shaggy dogs. When the judges had inspected all of the competing dogs, they remarked about the boy's dog: \"He's not that shaggy.\"\nHowever, authorities disagree as to whether this particular story is the archetype after which the category is named. Eric Partridge, for example, provides a very different story, as do William and Mary Morris in \"The Morris Dictionary of Word and Phrase Origins\".\nAccording to Partridge and the Morrises, the archetypical shaggy-dog story involves an advertisement placed in the \"Times\" announcing a search for a shaggy dog. In the Partridge story, an aristocratic family living in Park Lane is searching for a lost dog, and an American answers the advertisement with a shaggy dog that he has found and personally brought across the Atlantic, only to be received by the butler at the end of the story who takes one look at the dog and shuts the door in his face, saying, \"But not so shaggy as \"that\", sir!\" In the Morris story, the advertiser is organizing a competition to find the shaggiest dog in the world, and after a lengthy exposition of the search for such a dog, a winner is presented to the aristocratic instigator of the competition, who says, \"I don't think he's so shaggy.\"\nExamples in literature.\nIsaac Asimov and the story of the Shah Guido G..\nIn the collection of stories by Isaac Asimov titled \"Buy Jupiter and Other Stories\" is a story titled \"Shah Guido G.\" In his background notes, Asimov identifies the tale as a shaggy-dog story, and explains that the title is a play on \"shaggy dog\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "28271", "revid": "19248916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=28271", "title": "Sushi", "text": "Japanese dish of vinegared rice and seafood\n \n is a traditional Japanese dish made with , typically seasoned with sugar and salt, and combined with a variety of , such as seafood, vegetables, or meat; raw seafood is the most common, although some may be cooked. While sushi has numerous styles and presentations, the current defining component is the vinegared rice, also known as , or .\nThe modern form of sushi is believed to have been created by Hanaya Yohei, who invented \"nigiri-zushi\", the most commonly recognized type today, in which seafood is placed on hand-pressed, vinegared rice. This innovation occurred around 1824 in the Edo period (1603\u20131867). It was the fast food of the \"ch\u014dnin\" class in the Edo period.\nSushi is traditionally made with medium-grain white rice, although it can also be prepared with brown rice or short-grain rice. It is commonly prepared with seafood, such as squid, eel, yellowtail, salmon, tuna, or imitation crab meat (\"surimi\"). Certain types of sushi are vegetarian. It is often served with , wasabi, and soy sauce. Daikon radish or are popular garnishes for the dish.\nSushi is sometimes confused with sashimi, a dish that consists of thinly sliced raw fish or occasionally meat, without sushi rice.\nHistory.\n\"Narezushi\".\nA dish known as , \"matured fish\", stored in fermented rice for possibly months at a time, has been cited as one of the early influences for the Japanese practice of applying rice on raw fish. The fish was fermented with rice vinegar, salt, and rice, after which the rice was discarded. is also called , meaning \"fully fermented\", as opposed to , meaning \"partially fermented\", a type of sushi that appeared in the Muromachi period.\nFermented fish using rice, such as , originated in Southeast Asia, where it was made to preserve freshwater fish, possibly in the Mekong River basin, which is now Laos, Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam, and in the Irrawaddy River basin, which is now Myanmar. The first mention of a -like food is in a Chinese dictionary thought to be from the fourth century, in this instance referring to salted fish that had been placed in cooked or steamed rice, which caused it to undergo a fermentation process via lactic acid. Fermentation methods following similar logic in other Asian rice cultures include , , and of the Philippines; \"pekasam\" of Indonesia and Malaysia; \"padaek\" () of Laos; () of Thailand; \"sikhae\" () of Korea; and \"m\u1eafm\" of Vietnam.\nThe lacto-fermentation of the rice prevents the fish from spoiling. When wet-field rice cultivation was introduced during the Yayoi period, lakes and rivers would flood during the rainy season and fish would get caught in the rice paddy fields. Pickling was a way to preserve the excess fish and guarantee food for the following months, and became an important source of protein for Japanese consumers. The term \"sushi\" literally means \"sour-tasting\", as the overall dish has a sour and umami or savory taste. The term comes from an antiquated terminal-form conjugation, no longer used in other contexts, of the adjectival verb , resulting in the term . still exists as a regional specialty, notably as from Shiga Prefecture.\nIn the of 718, the characters for \"\u9ba8\" and \"\u9b93\" are written as a tribute to the Japanese imperial court, and although there are various theories as to what exactly this food was, it is possible that it referred to .\n\"Namanare\".\nUntil the early 19th century, sushi slowly changed with Japanese cuisine. The Japanese started eating three meals a day, rice was boiled instead of steamed, and of large importance was the development of rice vinegar.\nDuring the Muromachi period (1336\u20131573), the Japanese invented a style of sushi called or (), which means \"partially fermented\". The fermentation period of was shorter than that of the earlier , and the rice used for fermentation was also eaten with the fish. In other words, with the invention of , sushi changed from a preserved fish food to a food where fish and rice are eaten together. After the appearance of , sake and sake lees were used to shorten fermentation, and vinegar was used in the Edo period.\n\"Hayazushi\".\nDuring the Edo period (1603\u20131867), a third type of sushi, , was developed. differed from earlier sushi in that instead of lactic fermentation of rice, vinegar, a fermented food, was mixed with rice to give it a sour taste so that it could be eaten at the same time as the fish. Previously, sushi had evolved with a focus on shortening the fermentation period, but with the invention of , which is simply mixed with vinegar, the fermentation process was eliminated and sushi became a fast food. Many types of sushi known in the world today, such as , , , and , were invented during this period, and they are a type of . Each region utilizes local flavors to produce a variety of sushi that has been passed down for many generations. A 1689 cookbook describes , and a 1728 cookbook describes pouring vinegar over (square sushi made by filling a wooden frame with rice).\nToday's style of , consisting of an oblong mound of rice with a slice of fish draped over it, became popular in Edo (contemporary Tokyo) in the 1820s or 1830s. One common story of the origin of is of the chef Hanaya Yohei (1799\u20131858), who invented or perfected the technique in 1824 at his shop in Ry\u014dgoku. The of this period was somewhat different from modern . The sushi rice of this period was about three times the size of today's . The amount of vinegar used was half that of today's sushi, and the type of vinegar developed during this period, called , was made by fermenting sake lees. They also used slightly more salt than in modern times instead of sugar. Seafood served over rice was prepared in a variety of ways. This red vinegar was developed by Nakano Matazaemon (\u4e2d\u91ce \u53c8\u4f50\u885b\u9580), who is the founder of Mizkan, a company that still develops and sells vinegar and other seasonings today.\nThe dish was originally termed as it used freshly caught fish from the (Edo or Tokyo Bay); the term is still used today as a by-word for quality sushi, regardless of its ingredients' origins.\nConveyor belt sushi.\nIn 1958, Yoshiaki Shiraishi opened the first named \"Genroku Zushi\" in Higashi-Osaka. In conveyor belt sushi restaurants, conveyor belts installed along tables and counters in the restaurant transport plates of sushi to customers. Generally, the bill is based on the number of plates, with different colored plates representing the price of the sushi.\nWhen Genroku Sushi opened a restaurant at the Japan World Exposition, Osaka, 1970, it won an award at the expo, and conveyor belt sushi restaurants became known throughout Japan. In 1973, an automatic tea dispenser was developed, which is now used in conveyor belt sushi restaurants today. When the patent for conveyor belt sushi restaurants expired, a chain of conveyor belt sushi restaurants was established, spreading conveyor belt sushi throughout Japan and further popularizing and lowering the price of sushi. By 2021, the conveyor belt sushi market had grown to 700 billion yen and spread outside Japan.\nSushi in English.\nThe earliest written mention of \"sushi\" in English described in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" is in an 1893 book, \"A Japanese Interior\", where it mentions sushi as \"a roll of cold rice with fish, sea-weed, or some other flavoring\". There is an earlier mention of sushi in James Hepburn's Japanese\u2013English dictionary from 1873, and an 1879 article on Japanese cookery in the journal \"Notes and Queries\". Despite common misconception among English speakers, sushi does not mean \"raw seafood.\"\nTypes.\nThe common ingredient in all types of sushi is vinegared sushi rice. Fillings, toppings, condiments, and preparation vary widely.\nDue to consonant mutation, \"sushi\" is pronounced with instead of when a prefix is attached, as in .\n\"Chirashizushi\".\n serves the rice in a bowl and tops it with a variety of raw fish and vegetable garnishes. It is popular because it is filling, fast, and easy to make. It is eaten annually on in March and Children's Day in May.\n\n is a pouch of fried tofu typically filled with sushi rice alone. According to Shinto lore, is named after the god Inari. Foxes, messengers of Inari, are believed to have a fondness for fried tofu and in some regions an Inari-zushi roll has pointed corners that resemble fox ears, thus reinforcing the association. The shape of Inarizushi varies by region. Inarizushi usually has a rectangular shape in Kant\u014d region and a triangle shape in the Kansai region. \nRegional variations include pouches made from a thin omelette (, or , ), instead of fried tofu. It should not be confused with , a sushi roll filled with seasoned fried tofu.\nCone sushi is a variant of originating in Hawaii that may include green beans, carrots, gobo, or poke along with rice, wrapped in a triangular piece. It is often sold in (Japanese delis) and as a component of bento boxes.\n\"Makizushi\".\n, or is a cylindrical piece formed with the help of a mat known as a . is generally wrapped in nori (seaweed) but is occasionally wrapped in a thin omelette, soy paper, cucumber, or (perilla) leaves. is often cut into six or eight pieces, constituting a single roll order. Short-grain white rice is usually used, although short-grain brown rice, like olive oil on nori, is now becoming more widespread among the health-conscious. Rarely, sweet rice is mixed in rice.\nNowadays, the rice in can be many kinds of black rice, boiled rice, and cereals. Besides the common ingredients listed above, some varieties may include cheese, spicy cooked squid, , , lunch meat, sausage, bacon or spicy tuna. The nori may be brushed with sesame oil or sprinkled with sesame seeds. In a variation, sliced pieces of may be lightly fried with egg coating.\nBelow are some common types of , but many other kinds exist.\nModern.\n is a traditional form of fermented sushi. Skinned and gutted fish are stuffed with salt, placed in a wooden barrel, doused with salt again, then weighed down with a heavy (pickling stone). As days pass, water seeps out and is removed. After six months, this sushi can be eaten, remaining edible for another six months or more.\nThe most famous variety of are the ones offered as a specialty dish of Shiga Prefecture, particularly the made from fish of the crucian carp genus, the authentic version of which calls for the use of , a particular locally differentiated variety of wild goldfish endemic to Lake Biwa.\n\"Nigirizushi\".\n consists of an oblong mound of sushi rice that a chef typically presses between the palms of the hands to form an oval-shaped ball and a topping (the ) draped over the ball. It is usually served with a bit of wasabi; toppings are typically fish such as salmon, tuna, or other seafood. Certain toppings are typically bound to the rice with a thin strip of nori, most commonly octopus (), freshwater eel (), sea eel (), squid (), and sweet egg ().\n () is a special type of : an oval, hand-formed clump of sushi rice that has a strip of nori wrapped around its perimeter to form a vessel that is filled with some soft, loose or fine-chopped ingredient that requires the confinement of nori such as roe, , oysters, (sea urchin roe), sweetcorn with mayonnaise, scallops, and quail eggs. was invented at the Ginza Kyubey restaurant in 1941; its invention significantly expanded the repertoire of soft toppings used in sushi.\n is a style of sushi made by pressing rice and fish into a ball-shaped form by hand using a plastic wrap.\n\"Oshizushi\".\n, also known as , is a pressed sushi from the Kansai region, a favorite and specialty of Osaka. A block-shaped piece is formed using a wooden mold, called an . The chef lines the bottom of the with the toppings, covers them with sushi rice, and then presses the mold's lid to create a compact, rectilinear block. The block is removed from the mold and then cut into bite-sized pieces. Particularly famous is or . In , all the ingredients are either cooked or cured, and raw fish is never used. The name \"battera\" means \"small boat\" in Portuguese (bateira), as the sushi molds resembled small boats. \n\"Oshizushi\" wrapped in persimmon leaves, a specialty of Nara, is known as .\nSeared \"oshizushi\", or , is a popular variety invented in Vancouver, British Columbia in 2008. This involves using a butane torch to sear the sushi, which may contain ingredients such as mayonnaise, various sauces, jalape\u00f1os, and avocado in addition to typical sushi ingredients such as salmon and mackerel. The variety has since spread to other cities, such as Toronto.\nWestern-style sushi.\nThe increasing popularity of sushi worldwide has resulted in variations typically found in the Western world but rarely in Japan.\nOne widespread form of sushi created to suit the Western palate is the California roll, a which presently almost always uses imitation crab (the original recipe calls for real cooked crab), along with avocado and cucumber. A wide variety of popular rolls ( and ) have evolved since. \nThe identity of the creator of the California roll is disputed. Several chefs from Los Angeles have been cited as the dish's originators, as well as one chef from Vancouver, British Columbia.\nThe earliest mention in print of a \"California roll\" was in the \"Los Angeles Times\" and an Ocala, Florida newspaper on November 25, 1979. Less than a month later an Associated Press story credited a Los Angeles chef named Ken Seusa at the Kin Jo sushi restaurant near Hollywood as its inventor. The AP article cited Mrs. Fuji Wade, manager of the restaurant, as its source for the claim. \nOthers attribute the dish to Ichiro Mashita, another Los Angeles sushi chef from the former Little Tokyo restaurant \"Tokyo Kaikan\". According to this account, Mashita began substituting the \"toro\" (fatty tuna) with avocado in the off-season, and after further experimentation, developed the prototype, back in the 1960s.\nJapanese-born chef Hidekazu Tojo, a resident of Vancouver, British Columbia since 1971 is also credited, claiming he created the California roll at his restaurant in the late 1970s. Tojo insists he is the innovator of the \"inside-out\" sushi, and it got the name \"California roll\" because its contents of crab and avocado were abbreviated to C.A., which is the abbreviation for the state of California. Because of this coincidence, Tojo was set on the name California Roll. According to Tojo, he single-handedly created the California roll at his Vancouver, British Columbia restaurant, including all the modern ingredients of cucumber, cooked crab, and avocado. In 2016 the Japanese Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries named Tojo a goodwill ambassador for Japanese cuisine.\nThe common theme in origin stories is that surrounding the roll in rice made it more appealing to western consumers who had never eaten traditional sushi. This innovation led to the eventual creation of countless rolls across North America and the world.\nFor example, the \"Norway roll\" is another variant of filled with (omelette), imitation crab and cucumber, rolled with leaf and , topped with slices of Norwegian salmon, garnished with lemon and mayonnaise.\nAlthough most Western sushi creations are rare in Japan, a notable exception to this is the use of salmon. The Japanese have eaten salmon since prehistory; however, caught salmon in nature often contains parasites and must be cooked or cured for its lean meat to be edible. On the other side of the world, in the 1960s and 1970s, Norwegian entrepreneurs started experimenting with aquaculture farming. The big breakthrough was when they figured out how to raise salmon in net pens in the sea. Being farm-raised, the Atlantic salmon reportedly showed advantages over the Pacific salmon, such as no parasites, easy animal capture, and higher fat content. With government subsidies and improved techniques, they were so successful in raising fatty and parasite-free salmon they ended up with a surplus. Norway has a small population and limited market; therefore, they looked to other countries to export their salmon. The first Norwegian salmon was imported into Japan in 1980, accepted conventionally, for grilling, not for sushi. Salmon had already been consumed in North America as an ingredient in sushi as early as the 1970s. Salmon sushi did not become widely accepted in Japan until a successful marketing partnership in the late 1980s between Bj\u00f8rn E. Olsen, a Norwegian businessman tasked with helping the Norwegian salmon industry glut, and the Japanese food supplier Nichirei.\n\"Uramaki\".\n is a medium-sized cylindrical style of sushi with two or more fillings and was developed as a result of the creation of the California roll, as a method originally meant to hide the nori. differs from other because the rice is on the outside and the nori inside. The filling is surrounded by nori, then a layer of rice, and optionally an outer coating of some other ingredients such as roe or toasted sesame seeds. It can be made with different fillings, such as tuna, crab meat, avocado, mayonnaise, cucumber, or carrots.\nExamples of variations include the rainbow roll (an inside-out topped with thinly sliced and avocado) and the caterpillar roll (an inside-out topped with thinly sliced avocado). Also commonly found is the \"rock and roll\" (an inside-out roll with barbecued freshwater eel and avocado with toasted sesame seeds on the outside).\nIn Japan, is an uncommon type of ; because sushi is traditionally eaten by hand in Japan, the outer layer of rice can be quite difficult to handle with fingers.\nIn Brazil and other sushi pieces commonly include cream cheese in their recipe. Although unheard of in Japanese sushi, this is the most common sushi ingredient used in Brazil. also often contains a large amount of cream cheese and is extremely popular in restaurants.\nAmerican-style.\nMultiple-filling rolls inspired by are a more popular type of sushi within the United States and come in variations that take their names from their places of origin. Other rolls may include a variety of ingredients, including chopped scallops, spicy tuna, beef or chicken teriyaki roll, okra, and assorted vegetables such as cucumber and avocado, and the tempura roll, where shrimp tempura is inside the roll or the entire roll is battered and fried tempura-style. In the Southern United States, many sushi restaurants prepare rolls using crawfish. Sometimes, rolls are made with brown rice or black rice, known as forbidden rice, which appear in Japanese cuisine as well.\nPer Food and Drug Administration regulations, raw fish served in the United States must be frozen before serving to kill parasites.\nSince rolls are often made to order, it is not unusual for the customer to specify the exact ingredients desired (e.g., salmon roll, cucumber roll, avocado roll, tuna roll, shrimp or tuna tempura roll, etc.). Though the menu names of dishes often vary by restaurant, some examples include the following:\nAustralia.\nAustralian sushi is a thick hand roll made from half a standard sheet of nori. It is similar to thick rolls; however, it is often served uncut as an on-the-go snack. Typical fillings in Australian sushi include teriyaki chicken, salmon and avocado, tuna, and prawn. Australian California rolls are very different from American California rolls, with the nori wrapping the rice and fillings always on the outside, and no nor cream cheese. \nContrary to sushi in Japan and other countries being a high-end food, it is widely available in affordable takeaway joints in Australia. Sushi in Japanese restaurants has existed in Australia since the 1950s, but the first Australian-style sushi only appeared in 1995, in a stall called Sushi-Jin in the Target Centre food court at 246 Bourke Street, Melbourne. The owner, Toshihiro Shindo, started selling takeaway sushi rolls which he adapted to Australian tastes. The store closed in 2008. As of 2024, Japanese cuisine is the most popular cuisine in Australia with sushi as the third overall most popular food item, after hot dogs and pizza.\nAustralian sushi has grown in popularity in recent years, with its influence extending beyond Australia into the United Kingdom and United States, which has sparked an online controversy after the opening of Sushi Counter in West Village, New York City. People accused the owner of cultural appropriation and left negative reviews, prompting Google to remove all spam ratings from the restaurant location.\nCanada.\nMany of the styles seen in the United States are also seen in Canada and their own. Doshi (a portmanteau of \"donut\" and \"sushi\") is a donut-shaped rice ball on a deep-fried crab or imitation crab cake topped with sushi ingredients. Maki poutine is similar to in style except it is topped with cheese curds and gravy and contains duck confit, more cheese curds, and sweet potato tempura. Sushi cake is made of crab meat, avocado, shiitake mushroom, salmon, spicy tuna, and tobiko and served on sushi rice, then torched with spicy mayonnaise, barbecue sauce, and balsamic reduction, and dotted with caper and garlic chips. Sushi pizza is deep-fried rice or crab/imitation crab cake topped with mayonnaise and various sushi ingredients.\nMexico and the Western United States.\nSinaloan sushi originated in Sinaloa, Mexico and has been available in the Western United States since 2013.\nSimilar dishes in Asia.\nSouth Korea.\n, similar to , is an internationally popular convenience food of Korean origin. It consists of (the Korean version of nori) rolled around rice seasoned with sesame oil, instead of vinegar, and a variety of ingredients such as vegetables, like , and meat, like .\nIngredients.\nAll sushi has a base of specially prepared rice, complemented with other ingredients. Traditional Japanese sushi consists of rice flavored with vinegar sauce and various raw or cooked ingredients.\n\"Sushi-meshi\".\n (also known as , , or ) is a preparation of white, short-grained, Japanese rice mixed with a dressing consisting of rice vinegar, sugar, salt, and occasionally kombu and sake. It must be cooled to room temperature before being used for a sushi filling, or it will get too sticky while seasoned. Traditionally, it is mixed with a hangiri (a round, flat-bottom wooden tub or barrel) and a (a wooden paddle).\nSushi rice is prepared with short-grain Japanese rice, which has a consistency that differs from long-grain strains such as those from India, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Thailand, and Vietnam. The essential quality is its stickiness or glutinousness, although the type of rice used for sushi differs from glutinous rice. Freshly harvested rice () typically contains too much water and requires extra time to drain the rice cooker after washing. In some fusion cuisine restaurants, short-grain brown rice and wild rice are also used.\nThere are regional variations in sushi rice, and individual chefs have their methods. Most of the variations are in the rice vinegar dressing: the Kant\u014d region (or East Japan) version of the dressing commonly uses more salt; in Kansai region (or West Japan), the dressing has more sugar.\nNori.\nThe dark green seaweed wrappers used in are called . Nori is a type of red algae, typically in the family Bangiaceae, traditionally cultivated in the harbors of Japan. Many different foliose red algae species are cultivated to be used as sushi wrappers, however \"Pyropia tenera\" is the most commonly farmed. This species ranks among the top three most commonly cultivated seaweed species in China, Korea, and Japan. Originally, algae was scraped from dock pilings, rolled out into thin, edible sheets, and dried in the sun, similar to making rice paper. Today, the commercial product is farmed, processed, toasted, packaged, and sold in sheets.\nThe size of a nori sheet influences the size of . A full-size sheet produces , and a half produces and . To produce and some other , an appropriately sized piece of nori is cut from a whole sheet.\nNori by itself is an edible snack and is available with salt or flavored with teriyaki sauce. The flavored variety, however, tends to be of lesser quality and is not suitable for sushi.\nWhen making , a paper-thin omelet may replace a sheet of nori as the wrapping. The omelet is traditionally made on a rectangular omelet pan, known as a , and used to form the pouch for the rice and fillings.\n\"Gu\".\nThe ingredients used inside sushi are called and are, typically, varieties of fish. For culinary, sanitary, and aesthetic reasons, the minimum quality and freshness of fish to be eaten raw must be superior to that of fish that is to be cooked. Sushi chefs are trained to recognize important attributes, including smell, color, firmness, and freedom from parasites that may go undetected in a commercial inspection. Commonly used fish are tuna (), yellowtail (), snapper (), mackerel (), and salmon (). The most valued sushi ingredient is , the fatty cut of the fish. This comes in a variety of (often from the bluefin species of tuna) and , meaning \"middle toro\", implying that it is halfway into the fattiness between and the regular cut. style refers to nigiri sushi, where the fish is partially grilled (topside) and partially raw. Most nigiri sushi will have completely raw toppings, called .\nOther seafoods such as squid (), eel ( and ), pike conger (), octopus (), shrimp ( and ), clam (, and ), fish roe (, , and ), sea urchin (), crab (), and various kinds of shellfish (abalone, prawn, scallop) are the most popular seafoods in sushi. Oysters are less common, as the taste is thought to not go well with the rice. , or imitation crab stick, is commonly substituted for real crab, most notably in California rolls.\nPickled daikon radish () in , pickled vegetables (), fermented soybeans () in , avocado, cucumber in , asparagus, yam, pickled (), gourd (), burdock (), and sweet corn (sometimes mixed with mayonnaise) are plant products used in sushi.\nTofu, eggs (in the form of slightly sweet, layered omelette called ), and raw quail eggs (as a topping) are also common.\nCondiments.\nSushi is commonly eaten with condiments. Sushi may be dipped in (soy sauce), and is usually flavored with wasabi, a piquant paste made from the grated stem of the \"Wasabia japonica\" plant. Japanese-style mayonnaise is a common condiment in Japan on salmon, pork, and other sushi cuts.\nThe traditional grating tool for wasabi is a sharkskin grater or . An imitation wasabi (), made from horseradish, mustard powder, and green dye, is common. It is found at lower-end restaurants, in bento box sushi, and at most restaurants outside Japan. If manufactured in Japan, it may be labelled \"Japanese Horseradish\". The spicy compound in both true and imitation wasabi is allyl isothiocyanate, which has well-known anti-microbial properties. However, true wasabi may contain some other antimicrobials as well.\n (sweet, pickled ginger) is eaten in between sushi courses to both cleanse the palate and aid in digestion. In Japan, green tea () is invariably served together with sushi. Better sushi restaurants often use a distinctive premium tea known as . In sushi vocabulary, green tea is known as .\nSushi may be garnished with , grated , thinly sliced vegetables, carrots, radishes, and cucumbers that have been shaped to look like flowers, real flowers, or seaweed salad.\nWhen closely arranged on a tray, different pieces are often separated by green strips called or . These dividers prevent the flavors of neighboring pieces of sushi from mixing and help to achieve an attractive presentation. Originally, these were cut leaves from the and plants, respectively. Using actual leaves had the added benefit of releasing antimicrobial phytoncides when cut, thereby extending the limited shelf life of the sushi.\nSushi bento boxes are a staple of Japanese supermarkets and convenience stores. As these stores began rising in prominence in the 1960s, the labor-intensive cut leaves were increasingly replaced with green plastic to lower costs. This coincided with the increased prevalence of refrigeration, which extended sushi's shelf life without the need for cut leaves. Today plastic strips are commonly used in sushi bento boxes and, to a lesser degree, in sushi presentations found in sushi bars and restaurants. In store-sold or to-go packages of sushi, the plastic leaf strips are often used to prevent the rolls from coming into early or unwanted contact with the ginger and wasabi included with the dish.\nNutrition.\nThe main ingredients of traditional Japanese sushi\u2014raw fish and rice\u2014are naturally low in fat and high in protein, carbohydrates (from the rice), vitamins, and minerals, as are (pickled ginger) and (seaweed). Other vegetables wrapped in sushi may also provide additional nutrients.\nHealth risks.\nPotential chemical and biological hazards in sushi include environmental contaminants, pathogens, and toxins.\nLarge marine apex predators such as tuna (especially bluefin) can harbor high levels of methylmercury, one of many toxins of marine pollution. Frequent or significantly large consumption of methylmercury can lead to developmental defects when consumed by certain higher-risk groups, including women who are pregnant or may become pregnant, nursing mothers, and young children. A 2021 study in Catalonia, Spain reported that the estimated exposure to methylmercury in sushi consumption by adolescents exceeded the tolerable daily intake.\nA 2011 article reported approximately 18 million people infected with fish-borne flukes worldwide. Such an infection can be dangerous for expecting mothers due to the health risks that medical interventions or treatment measures may pose on the developing fetus. Parasitic infections can have a wide range of health impacts, including bowel obstruction, anemia, liver disease, and more. These illnesses' impact can pose health concerns for the expecting mother and baby.\nSashimi or other types of sushi containing raw fish present a risk of infection by three main types of parasites:\nFor these reasons, EU regulations forbid using raw fish that had not previously been frozen. It must be frozen at temperatures below in all product parts for no less than 24 hours. Fish for sushi may be flash frozen on fishing boats and by suppliers to temperatures as low as . Super-freezing destroys parasites, and also prevents oxidation of the blood in tuna flesh that causes discoloration at temperatures above .\nCalls for stricter analysis and regulation of seafood include improved product description. A 2021 DNA study in Italy found 30%\u201340% of fish species in sushi incorrectly described.\nSome forms of sushi, notably those containing the fugu pufferfish and some kinds of shellfish, can cause severe poisoning if not prepared properly. Fugu consumption, in particular, can be fatal. Fugu pufferfish have a lethal dose of tetrodotoxin in their internal organs and, by law in many countries, must be prepared by a licensed fugu-chef who has passed the prefectural examination in Japan. Licensing involves a written test, a fish-identification test, and a practical test that involves preparing the fugu and separating out the poisonous organs; only about 35 percent of applicants pass.\nSustainable sushi.\nSustainable sushi is made from fished or farmed sources that can be maintained or whose future production does not significantly jeopardize the ecosystems from which it is acquired.\nPresentation.\nTraditionally, sushi is served on minimalist Japanese-style plates\u2014often made of wood or lacquer\u2014and arranged to emphasize clean lines, open space, and a sense of tranquility, reflecting the aesthetic principles of Japanese cuisine.\nMany sushi restaurants offer fixed-price sets selected by the chef from the catch of the day. These are often graded as , , , and , with being the most expensive and the least expensive. Sushi restaurants often have private booth dining, where guests are asked to remove their shoes and leave them outside the room; however, most sushi bars offer diners a casual experience with an open dining room concept.\nSushi may also be served (sushi train) style, in which color-coded plates of sushi are placed on a conveyor belt from which diners pick as they please. After finishing, the bill is tallied by counting how many plates of each color have been taken. Newer restaurants use barcodes or RFID tags embedded in the dishes to manage the time elapsed since each item was prepared.\nThere is a practice called which entails serving sushi on the naked body of a woman.\nGlossary.\nSome specialized or slang terms are used in the sushi culture. Most of these terms are used only in sushi bars.\nEtiquette.\nUnlike sashimi, which is almost always eaten with chopsticks, is traditionally eaten with the fingers, even in formal settings. Although it is commonly served on a small platter with a side dish for dipping, sushi can also be served in a bento, a box with small compartments that hold the various dishes of the meal.\nSoy sauce is the usual condiment, and sushi is normally served with a small sauce dish or a compartment in the bento. Traditional etiquette suggests that the sushi is turned over so that only the topping is dipped to flavor it; the rice\u2014which has already been seasoned with rice wine vinegar, sugar, salt, mirin, and kombu\u2014would otherwise absorb too much soy sauce and would fall apart.\nTraditionally, the sushi chef will add an appropriate amount of wasabi to the sushi while preparing it, and the diner should not add more. However, today, wasabi is more a matter of personal taste, and even restaurants in Japan may serve wasabi on the side for customers to use at their discretion, even when there is wasabi already in the dish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
