{"id": "24566", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24566", "title": "Palaeography", "text": "Study of handwriting and manuscripts\nPalaeography (UK) or paleography (US) (ultimately from , , 'old', and , , 'to write') is the study and academic discipline of historical writing systems. It encompasses the historicity of manuscripts and texts, subsuming deciphering and dating of historical manuscripts, as well as the analysis of historic penmanship, handwriting scripts, signification, and printed media. \nIt is primarily concerned with the forms, processes, and relationships of writing and printing systems as evident in a text, document, or manuscript \u2014 analysis of the substantive textual content of documents is a secondary function. Included in the discipline is the practice of deciphering, reading, and dating manuscripts, and the cultural and technical context of writing systems, including the methods by which texts (such as manuscripts, books, codices, tracts, and monographs) were produced, and the history of scriptoria. Palaeography as a discipline is important for understanding, authenticating, and dating historical texts; however, in the absence of additional evidence, it is difficult to use palaeographic means alone to pinpoint exact dates of such texts.\nThe discipline is one of the auxiliary sciences of history, and is considered to have been founded by Jean Mabillon with his 1681 work \"\", the first textbook to address the subject. The term \"palaeography\" was coined by Bernard de Montfaucon with the publication of his work on Greek palaeography, the \"Palaeographia Graeca,\" in 1708.\nApplication.\nPalaeography is an essential skill for many historians, semioticians, and philologists, as it addresses a suite of interrelated lines of inquiry. First, since the style of an alphabet, grapheme, or sign system set within a register in each given dialect and language has evolved constantly, it is necessary to know how to decipher its individual substantive, occurrence make-up and constituency. For example, assessing its characters and typology as they existed in various places, times and locations. In addition, for hand-written texts, scribes often use many abbreviations and annotations so as to functionally aid speed, efficiency, and ease of writing and in some registers to importantly save invaluable space of the medium. Hence, the specialist-palaeographer, philologist and semiotician must know how to, in the broadest sense, interpret, comprehend and understand them. Knowledge of individual letterforms, typographic ligatures, signs, typology, fonts, graphemes, hieroglyphics, and signification forms in general, subsuming punctuation, syntagm and proxemics, abbreviations and annotations; enables the palaeographer to read, comprehend and then to understand the text and/or the relationship and hierarchy between texts in suite. The palaeographer, philologist and semiotician must first determine language, then dialect and then the register, function and purpose of the text. That is, one must by necessity become expert in the formation, historicity and evolution of these languages and signification communities, and material communication events. Secondly, the historical usages of various styles of handwriting, common writing customs, and scribal or notarial abbreviations, annotations conventions, annexures, addenda and specifics of printed typology, syntagm and proxemics must be assessed as a collective undertaking. Philological knowledge of the register, language, vocabulary, and grammar generally used at a given time, place and circumstance may assist palaeographers to identify a hierarchy of texts in a suite through discourse analysis, determining the provenance of texts, identifying forgeries, interpolations and recensions with precision; eliciting a professional authenticity in documentation, textual and manuscript evaluation with view to producing a critical edition if required and a critical assessment of a given discourse event as rendered and set in a materiality or medium.\nKnowledge of writing materials and discourse material production systems is foundational to the study of handwriting and printing events and to the identification of the periods in which a document or manuscript may have been produced. An important goal may be to assign the text a date and a place of origin, or determining which translations of a text are produced from which specific document or manuscript. This is why the palaeographer and attendant semiologists and philologists must take into account the style, substance and formation of the text, document and manuscript and the handwriting style and printed typology, grapheme typos and lexical and signification system(s) employed.\nDocument dating.\nPalaeography may be employed to provide information about the date at which a document was written. However, \"paleography is a last resort for dating\" and, \"for book hands, a period of 50 years is the least acceptable spread of time\" with it being suggested that \"the 'rule of thumb' should probably be to avoid dating a hand more precisely than a range of at least seventy or eighty years\". In a 2005 e-mail addendum to his 1996 \"The Paleographical Dating of P-46\" paper, Bruce W. Griffin stated \"Until more rigorous methodologies are developed, it is difficult to construct a 95% confidence interval for [New Testament] manuscripts without allowing a century for an assigned date.\" William Schniedewind went even further in the abstract to his 2005 paper \"Problems of Paleographic Dating of Inscriptions\" and stated: \"The so-called science of paleography often relies on circular reasoning because there is insufficient data to draw precise conclusion about dating. Scholars also tend to oversimplify diachronic development, assuming models of simplicity rather than complexity\".\nAramaic palaeography.\nThe Aramaic language was the international trade language of the Ancient Middle East, originating in what is modern-day Syria, between 1000 and 600\u00a0BC. It spread from the Mediterranean coast to the borders of India, becoming extremely popular and being adopted by many people, both with or without any previous writing system. The Aramaic script was written in a consonantal form with a direction from right to left. The Aramaic alphabet, a modified form of Phoenician, was the ancestor of the modern Arabic and Hebrew scripts, as well as the Brahmi script, the parent writing system of most modern abugidas in India, Southeast Asia, Tibet, and Mongolia. Initially, the Aramaic script did not differ from the Phoenician, but then the Aramaeans simplified some of the letters, thickened and rounded their lines: a specific feature of its letters is the distinction between \u27e8d\u27e9 and \u27e8r\u27e9. One innovation in Aramaic is the system to indicate certain vowels. Early Phoenician-derived scripts did not have letters for vowels, and so most texts recorded just consonants. Most likely as a consequence of phonetic changes in North Semitic languages, the Aramaeans reused certain letters in the alphabet to represent long vowels. The letter \"aleph\" was employed to write /\u0101/, \"he\" for /\u014d/, \"yod\" for /\u012b/, and \"vav\" for /\u016b/.\nAramaic writing and language supplanted Babylonian cuneiform and Akkadian language, even in their homeland in Mesopotamia. The wide diffusion of Aramaic letters led to its writing being used not only in monumental inscriptions, but also on papyrus and potsherds. Aramaic papyri have been found in large numbers in Egypt, especially at Elephantine\u2014among them are official and private documents of the Jewish military settlement in 5\u00a0BC. In the Aramaic papyri and potsherds, words are separated usually by a small gap, as in modern writing. At the turn of the 3rd to 2nd centuries BC, the heretofore uniform Aramaic letters developed new forms, as a result of dialectal and political fragmentation in several subgroups. The most important of these is the so-called square Hebrew block script, followed by Palmyrene, Nabataean, and the much later Syriac script.\nAramaic is usually divided into three main parts:\nThe term Middle Aramaic refers to the form of Aramaic which appears in pointed texts and is reached in the 3rd century AD with the loss of short unstressed vowels in open syllables, and continues until the triumph of Arabic.\nOld Aramaic appeared in the 11th century BC as the official language of the first Aramaean states. The oldest witnesses to it are inscriptions from northern Syria of the 10th to 8th centuries BC, especially extensive state treaties (c.\u2009750 BC) and royal inscriptions. The early Old Ancient should be classified as \"Ancient Aramaic\" and consists of two clearly distinguished and standardised written languages, the Early Ancient Aramaic and the Late Ancient Aramaic. Aramaic was influenced at first principally by Akkadian, then from the 5th century BC by Persian and from the 3rd century BC onwards by Greek, as well as by Hebrew, especially in Palestine. As Aramaic evolved into the imperial language of the Neo-Assyrian Empire, the script used to write it underwent a change into something more cursive. The best examples of this script come from documents written on papyrus from Egypt. About 500\u00a0BC, Darius\u00a0I (522\u2013486) made the Aramaic used by the imperial administration into the official language of the western half of the Achaemenid Empire. This so-called \"Imperial Aramaic\" (the oldest dated example, from Egypt, belonging to 495\u00a0BC) is based on an otherwise unknown written form of Ancient Aramaic from Babylonia. In orthography, Imperial Aramaic preserves historical forms\u2014alphabet, orthography, morphology, pronunciation, vocabulary, syntax and style are highly standardised. Only the formularies of the private documents and the Proverbs of Ahiqar have maintained an older tradition of sentence structure and style. Imperial Aramaic immediately replaced Ancient Aramaic as a written language and, with slight modifications, it remained the official, commercial and literary language of the Near East until gradually, beginning with the fall of the Achaemenids in 331 BC and ending in the 4th century AD, it was replaced by Greek, Persian, the eastern and western dialects of Aramaic and Arabic, though not without leaving its traces in the written form of most of these. In its original Achaemenid form, Imperial Aramaic is found in texts of the 5th to 3rd centuries BC. These come mostly from Egypt and especially from the Jewish military colony of Elephantine, which existed at least from 530 to 399\u00a0BC.\nGreek palaeography.\nA history of Greek handwriting must be incomplete owing to the fragmentary nature of evidence. If one rules out the inscriptions on stone or metal, which belong to the science of epigraphy, there is practically a dependence on papyri from Egypt for the period preceding the 4th or 5th century AD, the earliest of which take back our knowledge only to the end of the 4th century BC. This limitation is less serious than might appear, since the few manuscripts not of Egyptian origin which have survived from this period, like the parchments from Avroman or Dura-Europos, the Herculaneum papyri, and a few documents found in Egypt but written elsewhere, reveal a uniformity of style in the various portions of the Greek world; however, differences can be discerned, with it being probable that distinct local styles could be traced were there more material to analyze.\nFurther, during any given period several types of hand may exist together. There was a marked difference between the hand used for literary works (generally called \"uncials\" but, in the papyrus period, better styled \"book-hand\") and that of documents (\"cursive\") and within each of these classes several distinct styles were employed side by side; and the various types are not equally well represented in the surviving papyri.\nThe development of any hand is largely influenced by the materials used. To this general rule the Greek script is no exception. Whatever may have been the period at which the use of papyrus or leather as a writing material began in Greece (and papyrus was employed in the 5th century BC), it is highly probable that for some time after the introduction of the alphabet the characters were incised with a sharp tool on stones or metal far oftener than they were written with a pen. In cutting a hard surface, it is easier to form angles than curves; in writing the reverse is the case; hence the development of writing was from angular letters (\"capitals\") inherited from epigraphic style to rounded ones (\"uncials\"). But only certain letters were affected by this development, in particular \u27e8E\u27e9 (uncial \u27e8\u03b5\u27e9), \u27e8\u03a3\u27e9 (\u27e8c\u27e9), \u27e8\u03a9\u27e9 (\u27e8\u03c9\u27e9), and to a lesser extent \u27e8A\u27e9 (\u27e8\u03b1\u27e9).\nPtolemaic period.\nThe earliest Greek papyrus yet discovered is probably that containing the \"Persae\" of Timotheus, which dates from the second half of the 4th century BC and its script has a curiously archaic appearance. \u27e8E\u27e9, \u27e8\u03a3\u27e9, and \u27e8\u03a9\u27e9 have the capital form, and apart from these test letters the general effect is one of stiffness and angularity. More striking is the hand of the earliest dated papyrus, a contract of 311\u00a0BC. Written with more ease and elegance, it shows little trace of any development towards a truly cursive style; the letters are not linked, and though the uncial \u27e8c\u27e9 is used throughout, \u27e8E\u27e9 and \u27e8\u03a9\u27e9 have the capital forms. A similar impression is made by the few other papyri, chiefly literary, dating from about 300\u00a0BC; \u27e8E\u27e9 may be slightly rounded, \u27e8\u03a9\u27e9 approach the uncial form, and the angular \u27e8\u03a3\u27e9 occurs as a letter only in the Timotheus papyrus, though it survived longer as a numeral (= 200), but the hands hardly suggest that for at least a century and a half the art of writing on papyrus had been well established. Yet before the middle of the 3rd century BC, one finds both a practised book-hand and a developed and often remarkably handsome cursive.\nThese facts may be due to accident, the few early papyri happening to represent an archaic style which had survived along with a more advanced one; but it is likely that there was a rapid development at this period, due partly to the opening of Egypt, with its supplies of papyri, and still more to the establishment of the great Alexandrian Library, which systematically copied literary and scientific works, and to the multifarious activities of Hellenistic bureaucracy. From here onward, the two types of script were sufficiently distinct (though each influenced the other) to require separate treatment. Some literary papyri, like the roll containing Aristotle's \"Constitution of Athens\", were written in cursive hands, and, conversely, the book-hand was occasionally used for documents. Since the scribe did not date literary rolls, such papyri are useful in tracing the development of the book-hand.\nThe documents of the mid-3rd century BC show a great variety of cursive hands. There are none from chancelleries of the Hellenistic monarchs, but some letters, notably those of Apollonius, the finance minister of Ptolemy II, to this agent, Zeno, and those of the Palestinian sheikh, Toubias, are in a type of script which cannot be very unlike the Chancery hand of the time, and show the Ptolemaic cursive at its best. These hands have a noble spaciousness and strength, and though the individual letters are by no means uniform in size there is a real unity of style, the general impression being one of breadth and uprightness. \u27e8H\u27e9, with the cross-stroke high, \u27e8\u03a0\u27e9, \u27e8\u039c\u27e9, with the middle stroke reduced to a very shallow curve, sometimes approaching a horizontal line, \u27e8\u03a5\u27e9, and \u27e8\u03a4\u27e9, with its cross-bar extending much further to the left than to the right of the up-stroke, \u27e8\u0393\u27e9 and \u27e8\u039d\u27e9, whose last stroke is prolonged upwards above the line, often curving backwards, are all broad; \u27e8\u03b5\u27e9, \u27e8c\u27e9, \u27e8\u03b8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u03b2\u27e9, which sometimes takes the form of two almost perpendicular strokes joined only at the top, are usually small; \u27e8\u03c9\u27e9 is rather flat, its second loop reduced to a practically straight line. Partly by the broad flat tops of the larger letters, partly by the insertion of a stroke connecting those (like H, \u03a5) which are not naturally adapted to linking, the scribes produced the effect of a horizontal line along the top of the writing, from which the letters seem to hang. This feature is indeed a general characteristic of the more formal Ptolemaic script, but it is specially marked in the 3rd century BC.\nBesides these hand of Chancery type, there are numerous less elaborate examples of cursive, varying according to the writer's skill and degree of education, and many of them strikingly easy and handsome. In some cursiveness is carried very far, the linking of letters reaching the point of illegibility, and the characters sloping to the right. \u27e8A\u27e9 is reduced to a mere acute angle (\u27e8\u2220\u27e9), \u27e8T\u27e9 has the cross-stroke only on the left, \u27e8\u03c9\u27e9 becomes an almost straight line, \u27e8H\u27e9 acquires a shape somewhat like h, and the last stroke of \u27e8N\u27e9 is extended far upwards and at times flattened out until it is little more than a diagonal stroke to the right. The attempt to secure a horizontal line along the top is here abandoned. This style was not due to inexpertness, but to the desire for speed, being used especially in accounts and drafts, and was generally the work of practised writers. How well established the cursive hand had now become is shown in some wax tablets of this period, the writing on which, despite the difference of material, closely resemble the hands of papyri.\nDocuments of the late 3rd and early 2nd centuries BC show there is nothing analogous to the Apollonius letters, perhaps partly by the accident of survival. In the more formal types the letters stand rather stiffly upright, often without the linking strokes, and are more uniform in size; in the more cursive they are apt to be packed closely together. These features are more marked in the hands of the 2nd century. The less cursive often show am approximation to the book-hand, the letters growing rounder and less angular than in the 3rd century; in the more cursive linking was carried further, both by the insertion of coupling strokes and by the writing of several letters continuously without raising the pen, so that before the end of the century an almost current hand was evolved. A characteristic letter, which survived into the early Roman period, is \u27e8T\u27e9, with its cross-stroke made in two portions (variants:). In the 1st century, the hand tended, so far as can be inferred from surviving examples, to disintegrate; one can recognise the signs which portend a change of style, irregularity, want of direction, and the loss of the feeling for style. A fortunate accident has preserved two Greek parchments written in Parthia, one dated 88\u00a0BC, in a practically unligatured hand, the other, 22/21\u00a0BC, in a very cursive script of Ptolemaic type; and though each has non-Egyptian features the general character indicates a uniformity of style in the Hellenistic world.\nThe development of the Ptolemaic book-hand is difficult to trace, as there are few examples, mostly not datable on external grounds. Only for the 3rd century BC have we a secure basis. The hands of that period have an angular appearance; there is little uniformity in the size of individual letters, and though sometimes, notably in the Petrie papyrus containing the \"Phaedo\" of Plato, a style of considerable delicacy is attained, the book-hand in general shows less mastery than the contemporary cursive. In the 2nd century, the letters grew rounder and more uniform in size, but in the 1st century there is a certain disintegration perceptible, as in the cursive hand. Probably at no time did the Ptolemaic book-hand acquire such unity of stylistic effect as the cursive.\nRoman period.\nPapyri of the Roman period are far more numerous and show greater variety. The cursive of the 1st century has a rather broken appearance, part of one character being often made separately from the rest and linked to the next letter. A form characteristic of the 1st and 2nd century and surviving after that only as a fraction sign (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20448) is \u27e8\u03b7\u27e9 in the shape . By the end of the 1st century, there had been developed several excellent types of cursive, which, though differing considerably both in the forms of individual letters and in general appearance, bear a family likeness to one another. Qualities which are specially noticeable are roundness in the shape of letters, continuity of formation, the pen being carried on from character to character, and regularity, the letters not differing strikingly in size and projecting strokes above or below the line being avoided. Sometimes, especially in tax-receipts and in stereotyped formulae, cursiveness is carried to an extreme. In a letter of the prefect, dated in 209, we have a fine example of the Chancery hand, with tall and laterally compressed letters, \u27e8\u03bf\u27e9 very narrow and \u27e8\u03b1\u27e9 and \u27e8\u03c9\u27e9 often written high in the line. This style, from at least the latter part of the 2nd century, exercised considerable influence on the local hands, many of which show the same characteristics less pronounced; and its effects may be traced into the early part of the 4th century. Hands of the 3rd century uninfluenced by it show a falling off from the perfection of the 2nd century; stylistic uncertainty and a growing coarseness of execution mark a period of decline and transition.\nSeveral different types of book-hand were used in the Roman period. Particularly handsome is a round, upright hand seen, for example, in a British Museum papyrus containing \"Odyssey\" III. The cross-stroke of \u27e8\u03b5\u27e9 is high, \u27e8\u039c\u27e9 deeply curved and \u27e8\u0391\u27e9 has the form \u27e8\u03b1\u27e9. Uniformity of size is well attained, and a few strokes project, and these but slightly, above or below the line. Another type, well called by palaeographer Schubart the \"severe\" style, has a more angular appearance and not infrequently slopes to the right; though handsome, it has not the sumptuous appearance of the former. There are various classes of a less pretentious style, in which convenience rather than beauty was the first consideration and no pains were taken to avoid irregularities in the shape and alignment of the letters. Lastly may be mentioned a hand which is of great interest as being the ancestor of the type called (from its later occurrence in vellum codices of the Bible) the biblical hand. This, which can be traced back at least the late 2nd century, has a square, rather heavy appearance; the letters, of uniform size, stand upright, and thick and thin strokes are well distinguished. In the 3rd century the book-hand, like the cursive, appears to have deteriorated in regularity and stylistic accomplishment.\nIn the charred rolls found at Herculaneum are specimens of Greek literary hands from outside Egypt dating to c.\u20091 AD. A comparison with the Egyptian papyri reveals great similarity in style and shows that conclusions drawn from the henads of Egypt may, with caution, be applied to the development of writing in the Greek world generally.\nByzantine period.\nThe cursive hand of the 4th century shows some uncertainty of character. Side by side with the style founded on the Chancery hand, regular in formation and with tall and narrow letters, which characterised the period of Diocletian, and lasted well into the century, we find many other types mostly marked by a certain looseness and irregularity. A general progress towards a florid and sprawling hand is easily recognisable, but a consistent and deliberate style was hardly evolved before the 5th century, from which unfortunately few dated documents have survived. Byzantine cursive tends to an exuberant hand, in which the long strokes are excessively extended and individual letters often much enlarged. But not a few hands of the 5th and 6th centuries are truly handsome and show considerable technical accomplishment. Both an upright and a sloping type occur and there are many less ornamental hands, but there gradually emerged towards the 7th century two general types, one (especially used in letters and contracts) a current hand, sloping to the right, with long strokes in such characters at \u27e8\u03c4\u27e9, \u27e8\u03c1\u27e9, \u27e8\u03be\u27e9, \u27e8\u03b7\u27e9 (which has the h shape), \u27e8\u03b9\u27e9, and \u27e8\u03ba\u27e9, and with much linking of letters, and another (frequent in accounts), which shows, at least in essence, most of the forms of the later minuscule. (cf. below.) This is often upright, though a slope to the right is quite common, and sometimes, especially in one or two documents of the early Arabic period, it has an almost calligraphic effect.\nIn the Byzantine period, the book-hand, which in earlier times had more than once approximated to the contemporary cursive, diverged widely from it.\nVellum and paper manuscripts.\nThe change from papyrus to vellum involved no such modification in the forms of letters as followed that from metal to papyrus. The justification for considering the two materials separately is that after the general adoption of vellum, the Egyptian evidence is first supplemented and later superseded by that of manuscripts from elsewhere, and that during this period the hand most used was one not previously employed for literary purposes.\nUncial hand.\nThe prevailing type of book-hand during what in papyrology is called the Byzantine period, that is, roughly from AD\u00a0300 to 650, is known as the biblical hand. It went back to at least the end of the 2nd century and had had originally no special connection with Christian literature. In both vellum and paper manuscripts from 4th-century Egypt are other forms of script, particularly a sloping, rather inelegant hand derived from the literary hand of the 3rd century, which persisted until at least the 5th century. The three great early codices of the Bible are all written in uncials of the biblical type. In the \"Vaticanus\", placed during the 4th century, the characteristics of the hand are least strongly marked; the letters have the forms characteristic of the type but without the heavy appearance of later manuscripts, and the general impression is one of greater roundness. In the \"Sinaiticus\", which is not much later, the letters are larger and more heavily made; in the 5th-century \"Alexandrinus\", a later development is seen with emphatic distinction of thick and thin strokes. By the 6th century, alike in vellum and in papyrus manuscripts, the heaviness had become very marked, though the hand still retained, in its best examples, a handsome appearance; but after this it steadily deteriorated, becoming ever more mechanical and artificial. The thick strokes grew heavier; the cross strokes of \u27e8T\u27e9 and \u27e8\u0398\u27e9 and the base of \u27e8\u0394\u27e9 were furnished with drooping spurs. The hand, which is often singularly ugly, passed through various modifications, now sloping, now upright, though it is not certain that these variations were really successive rather than concurrent. A different type of uncials, derived from the Chancery hand and seen in two papyrus examples of the Festal letters despatched annually by the Patriarch of Alexandria, was occasionally used, the best known example being the \"Codex Marchalianus\" (6th or 7th century). A combination of this hand with the other type is also known.\nMinuscule hand.\nThe uncial hand lingered on, mainly for liturgical manuscripts, where a large and easily legible script was serviceable, as late as the 12th century, but in ordinary use it had long been superseded by a new type of hand, the minuscule, which originated in the 8th century, as an adaptation to literary purposes of the second of the types of Byzantine cursive mentioned above. A first attempt at a calligraphic use of this hand, seen in one or two manuscripts of the 8th or early 9th century, in which it slopes to the right and has a narrow, angular appearance, did not find favour, but by the end of the 9th century a more ornamental type, from which modern Greek script descended, was already established. It has been suggested that it was evolved in the Monastery of Stoudios at Constantinople. In its earliest examples it is upright and exact but lacks flexibility; accents are small, breathings square in formation, and in general only such ligatures are used as involve no change in the shape of letters. The single forms have a general resemblance (with considerable differences in detail) both to the minuscule cursive of late papyri, and to those used in modern Greek type; uncial forms were avoided.\nIn the course of the 10th century the hand, without losing its beauty and exactness, gained in freedom. Its finest period was from the 9th to the 12th century, after which it rapidly declined. The development was marked by a tendency\nBut from the first there were several styles, varying from the formal, regular hands characteristic of service books to the informal style, marked by numerous abbreviations, used in manuscripts intended only for a scholar's private use. The more formal hands were exceedingly conservative, and there are few classes of script more difficult to date than the Greek minuscule of this class. In the 10th, 11th and 12th centuries a sloping hand, less dignified than the upright, formal type, but often very handsome, was especially used for manuscripts of the classics.\nHands of the 11th century are marked in general (though there are exceptions) by a certain grace and delicacy, exact but easy; those of the 12th by a broad, bold sweep and an increasing freedom, which readily admits uncial forms, ligatures and enlarged letters but has not lost the sense of style and decorative effect. In the 13th and still more in the 14th centuries there was a steady decline; the less formal hands lost their beauty and exactness, becoming ever more disorderly and chaotic in their effect, while formal style imitated the precision of an earlier period without attaining its freedom and naturalness, and often appears singularly lifeless. In the 15th century, especially in the West, where Greek scribes were in request to produce manuscripts of the classical authors, there was a revival, and several manuscripts of this period, though markedly inferior to those of the 11th and 12th centuries, are by no means without beauty.\nAccents, punctuation, and division of words.\nIn the book-hand of early papyri, neither accents nor breathings were employed. Their use was established by the beginning of the Roman period, but was sporadic in papyri, where they were used as an aid to understanding, and therefore more frequently in poetry than prose, and in lyrical oftener than in other verse. In the cursive of papyri they are practically unknown, as are marks of punctuation. Punctuation was effected in early papyri, literary and documentary, by spaces, reinforced in the book-hand by the paragraphos, a horizontal stroke under the beginning of the line. The coronis, a more elaborate form of this, marked the beginning of lyrics or the principal sections of a longer work. Punctuation marks, the comma, the high, low and middle points, were established in the book-hand by the Roman period; in early Ptolemaic papyri, a double point (\u27e8:\u27e9) is found.\nIn vellum and paper manuscripts, punctuation marks and accents were regularly used from at least the 8th century, though with some differences from modern practice. At no period down to the invention of printing did Greek scribes consistently separate words. The book-hand of papyri aimed at an unbroken succession of letters, except for distinction of sections; in cursive hands, especially where abbreviations were numerous, some tendency to separate words may be recognised, but in reality it was phrases or groups of letters rather than words which were divided. In the later minuscule word-division is much commoner but never became systematic, accents and breathings serving of themselves to indicate the proper division.\nIndia.\nThe view that the art of writing in India developed gradually, as in other areas of the world, by going through the stages of pictographic, ideographic and transitional phases of the phonetic script, which in turn developed into syllabic and alphabetic scripts was challenged by Falk and others in the early 1990s. In the new paradigm, Indian alphabetic writing, called Brahmi, was discontinuous with earlier, undeciphered, glyphs, and was invented specifically by King Ashoka for application in his royal edicts . In the subcontinent, Kharosthi (clearly derived from the Aramaic alphabet) was used at the same time in the northwest, next to Brahmi (at least influenced by Aramaic) elsewhere. In addition, the Greek alphabet were also added to the Indian context after its penetration in the early centuries AD, with the Arabic alphabet following in the 13th century. After a lapse of a few centuries the Kharo\u1e63\u1e6dhi script became obsolete; the Greek script in India went through a similar fate and disappeared. But the Brahmi and Arabic scripts endured for a much longer period. Moreover, there was a change and development in the Brahmi script which may be traced in time and space through the Maurya, Ku\u1e63a\u1e47a, Gupta and early medieval periods. The present-day N\u0101gar\u012b script is derived from Brahmi. The Brahmi is also the ancestral script of most other Indian scripts, in northern and southern South Asia. Legends and inscriptions in Brahmi are engraved upon leather, wood, terracotta, ivory, stone, copper, bronze, silver and gold. Arabic got an important place, particularly in the royalty, during the medieval period and it provides rich material for history writing. The decipherment and subsequent development of Indus glyphs is also a matter for continuing research and discussion.\nMost of the available inscriptions and manuscripts written in the above scripts\u2014in languages like Prakrit, Pali, Sanskrit, Apabhra\u1e43\u015ba, Tamil and Persian\u2014have been read and exploited for history writing, but numerous inscriptions preserved in different museums still remain undeciphered for lack of competent palaeographic Indologists, as there is a gradual decline in the subcontinent of such disciplines as palaeography, epigraphy and numismatics. The discipline of ancient Indian scripts and the languages they are written needs new scholars who, by adopting traditional palaeographic methods and modern technology, may decipher, study and transcribe the various types of epigraphs and legends still extant today.\nThe language of the earliest written records, that is, the Edicts of Ashoka, is Prakrit. Besides Prakrit, the Ashokan edicts are also written in Greek and Aramaic. Moreover, all the edicts of Ashoka engraved in the Kharoshthi and Brahmi scripts are in the Prakrit language: thus, originally the language employed in the inscriptions was Prakrit, with Sanskrit adopted at a later stage. Past the period of the Maurya Empire, the use of Prakrit continued in inscriptions for a few more centuries. In north India, Prakrit was replaced by Sanskrit by the end of the 3rd century, while this change took place about a century later in south India. Some of the inscriptions though written in Prakrit, were influenced by Sanskrit and vice versa. The epigraphs of the Kushana kings are found in a mixture of Prakrit and Sanskrit, while the Mathura inscriptions of the time of Sodasa, belonging to the first quarter of the 1st century, contain verses in classical Sanskrit. From the 4th century onwards, the Gupta Empire came to power and supported the Sanskrit language and literature.\nIn western India and also in some regions of Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, Prakrit was used till the 4th century, mostly in the Buddhist writings though in a few contemporary records of the Ikshvakus of Nagarjunakonda, Sanskrit was applied. The inscription of Yajna Sri Satakarni (2nd century) from Amaravati is considered to be the earliest so far. The earlier writings (4th century) of Salankayanas of the Telugu region are in Prakrit, while their later records (belonging to the 5th century) are written in Sanskrit. In the Kannada speaking area, inscriptions belonging to later Satavahanas and Chutus were written in Prakrit. From the 4th century onwards, with the rise of the Guptas, Sanskrit became the predominant language of India and continued to be employed in texts and inscriptions of all parts of India along with the regional languages in the subsequent centuries. The copper-plate charters of the Pallavas, the Cholas and the Pandyas documents are written in both Sanskrit and Tamil. Kannada is used in texts dating from about the 5th century and the Halmidi inscription is considered to be the earliest epigraph written in the Kannada language. Inscriptions in Telugu began to appear from the 6th or 7th century. Malayalam made its beginning in writings from the 15th century onwards.\nNorth India.\nIn north India, the Brahmi script was used over a vast area; however, Ashokan inscriptions are also found using Kharoshthi, Aramaic and Greek scripts. With the advent of the Saka-Kshatrapas and the Kushanas as political powers in north India, the writing system underwent a definite change due to the use of new writing tools and techniques. Further development of the Brahmi script and perceivable changes in its evolutionary trend can be discerned during the Gupta period: in fact, the Gupta script is considered to be the successor of the Kushana script in north India.\nFrom the 6th to about the 10th century, the inscriptions in north India were written in a script variously named, e.g., Siddhamatrika and Kutila (\"Ra\u00f1jan\u0101 script\"). From the 8th century, Siddhamatrika developed into the \u015a\u0101rad\u0101 script in Kashmir and Punjab, into Proto-Bengali or Gaudi in Bengal and Orissa, and into Nagari in other parts of north India. Nagari script was used widely in northern India from the 10th century onwards. The use of Nandinagari, a variant of Nagari script, is mostly confined to the Karnataka region.\nIn central India, mostly in Madhya Pradesh, the inscriptions of the Vakatakas, and the kings of Sarabhapura and Kosala were written in what are known as \"box-headed\" and \"nail-headed\" characters. It may be noted that the early Kadambas of Karnataka also employed \"nail-headed\" characters in some of their inscriptions. During the 3rd\u20134th century, the script used in the inscriptions of Ikshvakus of Nagarjunakonda developed a unique style of letter-forms with elongated verticals and artistic flourishes, which did not continue after their rule.\nSouth India.\nThe earliest attested form of writing in South India is represented by inscriptions found in caves, associated with the Chalukya and Chera dynasties. These are written in variants of what is known as the Cave character, and their script differs from the Northern version in being more angular. Most of the modern scripts of South India have evolved from this script, with the exception of Vatteluttu, the exact origins of which are unknown, and Nandinagari, which is a variant of Devanagari that developed due to later Northern influence. In south India from the 7th century of the common era onwards, a number of inscriptions belonging to the dynasties of Pallava, Chola and Pandya are found. These records are written in three different scripts known as Tamil, Vattezhuttu and Grantha scripts, the last variety being used to write Sanskrit inscriptions. In the Kerala region, the Vattezhuttu script developed into a still more cursive script called Kolezhuthu during the 14th and 15th centuries. At the same time, the modern Malayalam script developed out of the Grantha script. The early form of the Telugu-Kannada script is found in the inscriptions of the early Kadambas of Banavasi and the early Chalukyas of Badami in the west, and Salankayana and the early Eastern Chalukyas in the east who ruled the Kannada and Telugu speaking areas respectively, during the 4th to 7th centuries.\nLatin.\nAttention should be drawn at the outset to certain fundamental definitions and principles of the science. The original characters of an alphabet are modified by the material and the implements used. When stone and chisel are discarded for papyrus and reed-pen, the hand encounters less resistance and moves more rapidly. This leads to changes in the size and position of the letters, and then to the joining of letters, and, consequently, to altered shapes. We are thus confronted at an early date with quite distinct types. The majuscule style of writing, based on two parallel lines, ADPL, is opposed to the minuscule, based on a system of four lines, with letters of unequal height, adpl. Another classification, according to the care taken in forming the letters, distinguishes between the set book-hand and the cursive script. The difference in this case is determined by the subject matter of the text; the writing used for books (') is in all periods quite distinct from that used for letters and documents (', \"\"). While the set book-hand, in majuscule or minuscule, shows a tendency to stabilise the forms of the letters, the cursive, often carelessly written, is continually changing in the course of years and according to the preferences of the writers.\nThis being granted, a summary survey of the morphological history of the Latin alphabet shows the zenith of its modifications at once, for its history is divided into two very unequal periods, the first dominated by majuscule and the second by minuscule writing.\nOverview.\nJean Mabillon, a French Benedictine monk, scholar and antiquary, whose work \"\" was published in 1681, is widely regarded as the founder of the twin disciplines of palaeography and diplomatics. However, the actual term \"palaeography\" was coined (in Latin) by Bernard de Montfaucon, a Benedictine monk, in the title of his \"Palaeographia Graeca\" (1708), which remained a standard work in the specific field of Greek palaeography for more than a century. With their establishment of palaeography, Mabillon and his fellow Benedictines were responding to the Jesuit Daniel Papebroch, who doubted the authenticity of some of the documents which the Benedictines offered as credentials for the authorisation of their monasteries. In the 19th century such scholars as Wilhelm Wattenbach, Leopold Delisle and Ludwig Traube contributed greatly to making palaeography independent from diplomatic. In the 20th century, the \"New French School\" of palaeographers, especially Jean Mallon, gave a new direction to the study of scripts by stressing the importance of ductus (the shape and order of the strokes used to compose letters) in studying the historical development of scripts.\nMajuscule writing.\nCapital writing.\nThe Latin alphabet first appears in the epigraphic type of majuscule writing, known as capitals. These characters form the main stem from which developed all the branches of Latin writing. On the oldest monuments (the \"inscriptiones bello Hannibalico antiquiores\" of the \"Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum = CIL\"), it is far from showing the orderly regularity of the later period. Side by side with upright and square characters are angular and sloping forms, sometimes very distorted, which seem to indicate the existence of an early cursive writing from which they would have been borrowed. Certain literary texts clearly allude to such a hand. Later, the characters of the cursive type were progressively eliminated from formal inscriptions, and capital writing reached its perfection in the Augustan Age.\nEpigraphists divide the numerous inscriptions of this period into two quite distinct classes: \"tituli\", or formal inscriptions engraved on stone in elegant and regular capitals, and \"acta\", or legal texts, documents, etc., generally engraved on bronze in cramped and careless capitals. Palaeography inherits both these types. Reproduced by scribes on papyrus or parchment, the elegant characters of the inscriptions become the square capitals of the manuscripts, and the \"actuaria\", as the writing of the \"acta\" is called, becomes the rustic capital.\nOf the many books written in square capitals, the \"\u00e9ditions de luxe\" of ancient times, only a few fragments have survived, the most famous being pages from manuscripts of Virgil. The finest examples of rustic capitals, the use of which is attested by papyri of the 1st century, are to be found in manuscripts of Virgil and Terence. Neither of these forms of capital writing offers any difficulty in reading, except that no space is left between the words. Their dates are still uncertain, in spite of attempts to determine them by minute observation.\nThe rustic capitals, more practical than the square forms, soon came into general use. This was the standard form of writing, so far as books are concerned, until the 5th century, when it was replaced by a new type, the uncial, which is discussed below.\nEarly cursive writing.\nWhile the set book-hand, in square or rustic capitals, was used for the copying of books, the writing of everyday life, letters and documents of all kinds, was in a cursive form, the oldest examples of which are provided by the graffiti on walls at Pompeii (\"CIL\", iv), a series of waxen tablets, also discovered at Pompeii (\"CIL\", iv, supplement), a similar series found at Verespatak in Transylvania (\"CIL\", iii) and a number of papyri. From a study of a number of documents which exhibit transitional forms, it appears that this cursive was originally simplified capital writing. The evolution was so rapid, however, that at quite an early date the \"scriptura epistolaris\" of the Roman world can no longer be described as capitals. By the 1st century, this kind of writing began to develop the principal characteristics of two new types: the uncial and the minuscule cursive. With the coming into use of writing surfaces which were smooth, or offered little resistance, the unhampered haste of the writer altered the shape, size and position of the letters. In the earliest specimens of writing on wax, plaster or papyrus, there appears a tendency to represent several straight strokes by a single curve. The cursive writing thus foreshadows the specifically uncial forms. The same specimens show great inequality in the height of the letters; the main strokes are prolonged upwards (= \u27e8b\u27e9; = \u27e8d\u27e9) or downwards (= \u27e8q\u27e9; = 's). In this direction, the cursive tends to become a minuscule hand.\nUncial writing.\nAlthough the characteristic forms of the uncial type appear to have their origin in the early cursive, the two hands are nevertheless quite distinct. The uncial is a \"libraria\", closely related to the capital writing, from which it differs only in the rounding off of the angles of certain letters, principally . It represents a compromise between the beauty and legibility of the capitals and the rapidity of the cursive, and is clearly an artificial product. It was certainly in existence by the latter part of the 4th century, for a number of manuscripts of that date are written in perfect uncial hands (\"Exempla\", pl. XX). It presently supplanted the capitals and appears in numerous manuscripts which have survived from the 5th, 6th and 7th centuries, when it was at its height. By this time it had become an imitative hand, in which there was generally no room for spontaneous development. It remained noticeably uniform over a long period. It is difficult therefore to date the manuscripts by palaeographical criteria alone. The most that can be done is to classify them by centuries, on the strength of tenuous data. The earliest uncial writing is easily distinguished by its simple and monumental character from the later hands, which become progressively stiff and affected.\nMinuscule cursive writing.\nEarly minuscule cursive.\nIn the ancient cursive writing, from the 1st century onward, there are symptoms of transformation in the form of certain letters, the shape and proportions of which correspond more closely to the definition of minuscule writing than to that of majuscule. Rare and irregular at first, they gradually become more numerous and more constant and by degrees supplant the majuscule forms, so that in the history of the Roman cursive there is no precise boundary between the majuscule and minuscule periods.\nThe oldest example of minuscule cursive writing that has been discovered is a letter on papyrus, found in Egypt, dating from the 4th century. This marks a highly important date in the history of Latin writing, for with only one known exception, not yet adequately explained\u2014two fragments of imperial rescripts of the 5th century\u2014the minuscule cursive was consequently the only \"scriptura epistolaris\" of the Roman world. The ensuing succession of documents show a continuous improvement in this form of writing, characterised by the boldness of the strokes and by the elimination of the last lingering majuscule forms. The Ravenna deeds of the 5th and 6th centuries exhibit this hand at its perfection.\nAt this period, the minuscule cursive made its appearance as a \"book hand\", first as marginal notes, and later for the complete books themselves. The only difference between the book-hand and that used for documents is that the principal strokes are shorter and the characters thicker. This form of the hand is usually called \"semi-cursive\".\nNational hands.\nThe fall of the Empire and the establishment of the barbarians within its former boundaries did not interrupt the use of the Roman minuscule cursive hand, which was adopted by the newcomers. But for gaps of over a century in the chronological series of documents which have been preserved, it would be possible to follow the evolution of the Roman cursive into the so-called \"national hands\", forms of minuscule writing which flourished after the barbarian invasions in Italy, France, Spain, England and Ireland, and which are still known as Lombardic, Merovingian, Visigothic, Anglo-Saxon and Irish. These names came into use at a time when the various national hands were believed to have been invented by the peoples who used them, but their connotation is merely geographical. Nevertheless, in spite of a close resemblance which betrays their common origin, these hands are specifically different, perhaps because the Roman cursive was developed by each nation in accordance with its artistic tradition.\nIn Italy, after the close of the Roman and Byzantine periods, the writing is known as Lombardic, a generic term which comprises several local varieties. These may be classified under four principal types: two for the \"scriptura epistolaris\", the old Italian cursive and the papal chancery hand, or \"littera romana\", and two for the \"libraria\", the old Italian book-hand and Lombardic in the narrow sense, sometimes known as \"Beneventana\" because it flourished in the principality of Benevento.\nThe oldest preserved documents written in the old Italian cursive show all the essential characteristics of the Roman cursive of the 6th century. In northern Italy, this hand began in the 9th century to be influenced by a minuscule book-hand which developed, as will be seen later, in the time of Charlemagne; under this influence it gradually disappeared, and ceased to exist in the course of the 12th century. In southern Italy, it persisted far on into the later Middle Ages. The papal chancery hand, a variety of Lombardic peculiar to the vicinity of Rome and principally used in papal documents, is distinguished by the formation of the letters \"a, e, q, t\". It is formal in appearance at first, but is gradually simplified, under the influence of the Carolingian minuscule, which finally prevailed in the bulls of Honorius II (1124\u20131130). The notaries public in Rome continued to use the papal chancery hand until the beginning of the 13th century. The old Italian book-hand is simply a semi-cursive of the type already described as in use in the 6th century. The principal examples are derived from \"scriptoria\" in northern Italy, where it was displaced by the Carolingian minuscule during the 9th century. In southern Italy, this hand persisted, developing into a calligraphic form of writing, and in the 10th century took on a very artistic angular appearance. The \"Exultet\" rolls provide the finest examples. In the 9th century, it was introduced in Dalmatia by the Benedictine monks and developed there, as in Apulia, on the basis of the archetype, culminating in a rounded \"Beneventana\" known as the \"Bari type\".\nThe offshoot of the Roman cursive which developed in Gaul under the first dynasty of kings is called Merovingian writing. It is represented by thirty-eight royal diplomas, a number of private charters and the authenticating documents of relics.\nThough less than a century intervenes between the Ravenna cursive and the oldest extant Merovingian document (AD 625), there is a great difference in appearance between the two writings. The facile flow of the former is replaced by a cramped style, in which the natural slope to the right gives way to an upright hand, and the letters, instead of being fully outlined, are compressed to such an extent that they modify the shape of other letters. Copyists of books used a cursive similar to that found in documents, except that the strokes are thicker, the forms more regular, and the heads and tails shorter. The Merovingian cursive as used in books underwent simplification in some localities, undoubtedly through the influence of the minuscule book-hand of the period. The two principal centres of this reform were Luxeuil and Corbie.\nIn Spain, after the Visigothic conquest, the Roman cursive gradually developed special characteristics. Some documents attributed to the 7th century display a transitional hand with straggling and rather uncouth forms. The distinctive features of Visigothic writing, the most noticeable of which is certainly the q-shaped \u27e8g\u27e9, did not appear until later, in the book-hand. The book-hand became set at an early date. In the 8th century it appears as a sort of semi-cursive; the earliest example of certain date is ms lxxxix in the Capitular Library in Verona. From the 9th century the calligraphic forms become broader and more rounded until the 11th century, when they become slender and angular. The Visigothic minuscule appears in a cursive form in documents about the middle of the 9th century, and in the course of time grows more intricate and consequently less legible. It soon came into competition with the Carolingian minuscule, which supplanted it as a result of the presence in Spain of French elements such as Cluniac monks and warriors engaged in the campaign against the Moors.\nThe Irish and Anglo-Saxon hands, which were not directly derived from the Roman minuscule cursive, will be discussed in a separate sub-section below.\nSet minuscule writing.\nOne by one, the national minuscule cursive hands were replaced by a set minuscule hand which has already been mentioned and its origins may now be traced from the beginning.\nHalf-uncial writing.\nThe early cursive was the medium in which the minuscule forms were gradually evolved from the corresponding majuscule forms. Minuscule writing was therefore cursive in its inception. As the minuscule letters made their appearance in the cursive writing of documents, they were adopted and given calligraphic form by the copyists of literary texts, so that the set minuscule alphabet was constituted gradually, letter by letter, following the development of the minuscule cursive. Just as some documents written in the early cursive show a mixture of majuscule and minuscule forms, so certain literary papyri of the 3rd century, and inscriptions on stone of the 4th century yield examples of a mixed set hand, with minuscule forms side by side with capital and uncial letters. The number of minuscule forms increases steadily in texts written in the mixed hand, and especially in marginal notes, until by the end of the 5th century the majuscule forms have almost entirely disappeared in some manuscripts. This quasi-minuscule writing, known as the \"half-uncial\" thus derives from a long line of mixed hands which, in a synoptic chart of Latin scripts, would appear close to the oldest \"librariae\", and between them and the \"epistolaris\" (cursive), from which its characteristic forms were successively derived. It had a considerable influence on the continental \"scriptura libraria\" of the 7th and 8th centuries.\nIrish and Anglo-Saxon writing.\nThe half-uncial hand was introduced in Ireland along with Latin culture in the 5th century by priests and laymen from Gaul, fleeing before the barbarian invasions. It was adopted there to the exclusion of the cursive, and soon took on a distinct character. There are two well established classes of Irish writing as early as the 7th century: a large round half-uncial hand, in which certain majuscule forms frequently appear, and a pointed hand, which becomes more cursive and more genuinely minuscule. The latter developed out of the former. One of the distinguishing marks of manuscripts of Irish origin is to be found in the initial letters, which are ornamented by interlacing, animal forms, or a frame of red dots. The most certain evidence, however, is provided by the system of abbreviations and by the combined square and cuneiform appearance of the minuscule at the height of its development. The two types of Irish writing were introduced in the north of Great Britain by the monks, and were soon adopted by the Anglo-Saxons, being so exactly copied that it is sometimes difficult to determine the origin of an example. Gradually, however, the Anglo-Saxon writing developed a distinct style, and even local types, which were superseded after the Norman conquest by the Carolingian minuscule. Through St Columbanus and his followers, Irish writing spread to the continent, and manuscripts were written in the Irish hand in the monasteries of Bobbio Abbey and St Gall during the 7th and 8th centuries.\nPre-Caroline.\nJames J. John points out that the disappearance of imperial authority around the end of the 5th century in most of the Latin-speaking half of the Roman Empire does not entail the disappearance of the Latin scripts, but rather introduced conditions that would allow the various provinces of the West gradually to drift apart in their writing habits, a process that began around the 7th century.\nPope Gregory I (Gregory the Great, d. 604) was influential in the spread of Christianity to Britain and also sent Queens Theodelinde and Brunhilda, as well as Spanish bishops, copies of manuscripts. Furthermore, he sent the Roman monk Augustine of Canterbury to Britain on a missionary journey, on which Augustine may have brought manuscripts. Although Italy's dominance as a centre of manuscript production began to decline, especially after the Gothic War (535\u2013554) and the invasions by the Lombards, its manuscripts\u2014and more important, the scripts in which they were written\u2014were distributed across Europe.\nFrom the 6th through the 8th centuries, a number of so-called 'national hands' were developed throughout the Latin-speaking areas of the former Roman Empire. By the late 6th century Irish scribes had begun transforming Roman scripts into Insular minuscule and majuscule scripts. A series of transformations, for book purposes, of the cursive documentary script that had grown out of the later Roman cursive would get under way in France by the mid-7th century. In Spain half-uncial and cursive would both be transformed into a new script, the Visigothic minuscule, no later than the early 8th century.\nCarolingian minuscule.\nBeginning in the 8th century, as Charlemagne began to consolidate power over a large area of western Europe, scribes developed a minuscule script (Caroline minuscule) that effectively became the standard script for manuscripts from the 9th to the 11th centuries. The origin of this hand is much disputed. This is due to the confusion which prevailed before the Carolingian period in the \"libraria\" in France, Italy and Germany as a result of the competition between the cursive and the set hands. In addition to the calligraphic uncial and half-uncial writings, which were imitative forms, little used and consequently without much vitality, and the minuscule cursive, which was the most natural hand, there were innumerable varieties of mixed writing derived from the influence of these hands on each other. In some, the uncial or half-uncial forms were preserved with little or no modification, but the influence of the cursive is shown by the freedom of the strokes; these are known as rustic, semi-cursive or cursive uncial or half-uncial hands. Conversely, the cursive was sometimes affected, in varying degrees, by the set \"librariae\"; the cursive of the \"epistolaris\" became a semi-cursive when adopted as a \"libraria\". Nor is this all. Apart from these reciprocal influences affecting the movement of the hand across the page, there were morphological influences at work, letters being borrowed from one alphabet for another. This led to compromises of all sorts and of infinite variety between the uncial and half-uncial and the cursive. It will readily be understood that the origin of the Carolingian minuscule, which must be sought in this tangle of pre-Carolingian hands, involves disagreement. The new writing is admittedly much more closely related to the \"epistolaris\" than the primitive minuscule; this is shown by certain forms, such as the open \"\u27e8a\u27e9\" (), which recall the cursive, by the joining of certain letters, and by the clubbing of the tall letters b d h l, which resulted from a cursive \"ductus\". Most palaeographers agree in assigning the new hand the place shown in the :\nControversy turns on the question whether the Carolingian minuscule is the primitive minuscule as modified by the influence of the cursive or a cursive based on the primitive minuscule. Its place of origin is also uncertain: Rome, the Palatine school, Tours, Reims, Metz, Saint-Denis and Corbie have been suggested, but no agreement has been reached. In any case, the appearance of the new hand is a turning point in the history of culture. So far as Latin writing is concerned, it marks the dawn of modern times.\nGothic minuscule.\nIn the 12th century, Carolingian minuscule underwent a change in its appearance and adopted bold and broken Gothic letter-forms. This style remained predominant, with some regional variants, until the 15th century, when the Renaissance humanistic scripts revived a version of Carolingian minuscule. It then spread from the Italian Renaissance all over Europe.\nRise of modern writing.\nThese humanistic scripts are the base for the antiqua and the handwriting forms in western and southern Europe. In Germany and Austria, the \"Kurrentschrift\" was rooted in the cursive handwriting of the later Middle Ages. With the name of the calligrapher Ludwig S\u00fctterlin, this handwriting counterpart to the blackletter typefaces was abolished by Hitler in 1941. After World War II, it was taught as an alternative script in some areas until the 1970s; it is no longer taught. Secretary hand is an informal business hand of the Renaissance.\nDevelopments.\nThere are undeniable points of contact between architecture and palaeography, and in both it is possible to distinguish a Romanesque and a Gothic period . The creative effort which began in the post-Carolingian period culminated at the beginning of the 12th century in a calligraphy and an architecture which, though still somewhat awkward, showed unmistakable signs of power and experience, and at the end of that century and in the first half of the 13th both arts reached their climax and made their boldest flights.\nThe topography of later medieval writing is still being studied; national varieties can, of course, be identified but the problem of distinguishing features becomes complicated as a result of the development of international relations, and the migration of clerks from one end of Europe to the other. During the later centuries of the Middle Ages the Gothic minuscule continued to improve within the restricted circle of \"de luxe\" editions and ceremonial documents. In common use, it degenerated into a cursive which became more and more intricate, full of superfluous strokes and complicated by abbreviations.\nIn the first quarter of the 15th century an innovation took place which exercised a decisive influence on the evolution of writing in Europe. The Italian humanists were struck by the eminent legibility of the manuscripts, written in the improved Carolingian minuscule of the 10th and 11th centuries, in which they discovered the works of ancient authors, and carefully imitated the old writing. In Petrarch's compact book hand, the wider leading and reduced compression and round curves are early manifestations of the reaction against the crabbed Gothic secretarial minuscule we know today as \"blackletter\".\nPetrarch was one of the few medieval authors to have written at any length on the handwriting of his time; in his essay on the subject, \"La scrittura\" he criticized the current scholastic hand, with its laboured strokes (\"artificiosis litterarum tractibus\") and exuberant (\"luxurians\") letter-forms amusing the eye from a distance, but fatiguing on closer exposure, as if written for other purpose than to be read. For Petrarch the gothic hand violated three principles: writing, he said, should be simple (\"castigata\"), clear (\"clara\") and orthographically correct. Boccaccio was a great admirer of Petrarch; from Boccaccio's immediate circle this post-Petrarchan \"semi-gothic\" revised hand spread to \"literati\" in Florence, Lombardy and the Veneto.\nA more thorough reform of handwriting than the Petrarchan compromise was in the offing. The generator of the new style (\"illustration\") was Poggio Bracciolini, a tireless pursuer of ancient manuscripts, who developed the new humanist script in the first decade of the 15th century. The Florentine bookseller Vespasiano da Bisticci recalled later in the century that Poggio had been a very fine calligrapher of \"lettera antica\" and had transcribed texts to support himself\u2014presumably, as Martin Davies points out\u2014 before he went to Rome in 1403 to begin his career in the papal curia. Berthold Ullman identifies the watershed moment in the development of the new humanistic hand as the youthful Poggio's transcription of Cicero's \"Epistles to Atticus\".\nBy the time the Medici library was catalogued in 1418, almost half the manuscripts were noted as in the \"lettera antica\". The new script was embraced and developed by the Florentine humanists and educators Niccol\u00f2 de' Niccoli and Coluccio Salutati. The papal chancery adopted the new fashion for some purposes, and thus contributed to its diffusion throughout Christendom. The printers played a still more significant part in establishing this form of writing by using it, from the year 1465, as the basis for their types.\nThe humanistic minuscule soon gave rise to a sloping cursive hand, known as the Italian, which was also taken up by printers in search of novelty and thus became the italic type. In consequence, the Italian hand became widely used, and in the 16th century began to compete with the Gothic cursive. In the 17th century, writing masters were divided between the two schools, and there was in addition a whole series of compromises. The Gothic characters gradually disappeared, except a few that survived in Germany. The Italian became universally used, brought to perfection in more recent times by English calligraphers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nWestern palaeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIndian palaeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDigital palaeography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24567", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24567", "title": "Pollutant", "text": "Substance or energy damaging to the environment\nA pollutant or novel entity is a substance or energy introduced into the environment that has undesired effect, or adversely affects the usefulness of a resource. These can be both naturally forming (i.e. minerals or extracted compounds like oil) or anthropogenic in origin (i.e. manufactured materials or byproducts). Pollutants result in environmental pollution or become of public health concern when they reach a concentration high enough to have significant negative impacts. \nA pollutant may cause long- or short-term damage by changing the growth rate of plant or animal species, or by interfering with resources used by humans, human health or wellbeing, or property values. Some pollutants are biodegradable and therefore will not persist in the environment in a long term. However, the degradation products of some pollutants are themselves pollutants such as DDE and DDD produced from the degradation of DDT.\nPollution has widespread negative impact on the environment. When analyzed from a planetary boundaries perspective, human society has released novel entities that well exceed safe levels.\nDifferent types of pollutants in the environment.\nPollutants can be categorized in a variety of different ways. For example, it is sometimes useful to distinguish between \"stock pollutants\" and \"fund pollutants\". Another way is to group them together according to more specific properties, such as organic, particulate, pharmaceutical, et cetera. The environment has some capacity to absorb many discharges without measurable harm, and this is called \u201cassimilative capacity (or absorptive capacity); a pollutant actually causes pollution when the assimilative capacity is exceeded.\nStock pollutants.\nPollutants, towards which the environment has low absorptive capacity are called \"stock pollutants\". Examples include persistent organic pollutants like PCBs, non-biodegradable plastics and heavy metals. Stock pollutants accumulate in the environment over time. The damage they cause increases as more pollutant is emitted, and persists as the pollutant accumulates. Stock pollutants can create a burden for the future generations, bypassing on the damage that persists well after the benefits received from incurring that damage, have been forgotten. Scientists have officially deemed that the planetary boundaries safe chemical pollutant levels (novel entities) have been surpassed.\nFund pollutants.\nIn contrast to stock pollutants, for which the environment has low absorptive capacity, fund pollutants are those for which the environment has a moderate absorptive capacity. Fund pollutants do not cause damage to the environment unless the emission rate exceeds the receiving environment's absorptive capacity (e.g. carbon dioxide, which is absorbed by plants and oceans). Fund pollutants are not destroyed, but rather converted into less harmful substances, or diluted/dispersed to non-harmful concentrations.\nSpecific groups of pollutants.\nMany pollutants are within the following notable groups:\nLight pollutant.\nLight pollution is the impact that anthropogenic light has on the visibility of the night sky. It also encompasses ecological light pollution which describes the effect of artificial light on individual organisms and on the structure of ecosystems as a whole. \nZones of influence.\nPollutants can also be defined by their zones of influence, both horizontally and vertically.\nHorizontal zone.\nThe horizontal zone refers to the area that is damaged by a pollutant. Local pollutants cause damage near the emission source. Regional pollutants cause damage further from the emission source.\nVertical zone.\nThe vertical zone refers to whether the damage is ground-level or atmospheric. Surface pollutants cause damage by accumulating near the Earth's surface. Global pollutants cause damage by concentrating on the [atmosphere].\nRegulation.\nInternational.\nPollutants can cross international borders and therefore international regulations are needed for their control. The Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, which entered into force in 2004, is an international legally binding agreement for the control of persistent organic pollutants. Pollutant Release and Transfer Registers (PRTR) are systems to collect and disseminate information on environmental releases and transfers of toxic chemicals from industrial and other facilities.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Pollutant Emission Register is a type of PRTR providing access to information on the annual emissions of industrial facilities in the Member States of the European Union, as well as Norway.\nUnited States.\nClean Air Act standards. Under the Clean Air Act, the National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) are developed by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for six common air pollutants, also called \"criteria pollutants\": particulates; smog and ground-level ozone; carbon monoxide; sulfur oxides; nitrogen oxides; and lead. The National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants are additional emission standards that are set by EPA for toxic air pollutants.\nClean Water Act standards. Under the Clean Water Act, EPA promulgated national standards for municipal sewage treatment plants, also called \"publicly owned treatment works,\" in the \"Secondary Treatment Regulation.\" National standards for industrial dischargers are called \"Effluent guidelines\" (for existing sources) and New Source Performance Standards, and currently cover over 50 industrial categories. In addition, the Act requires states to publish water quality standards for individual water bodies to provide additional protection where the national standards are insufficient.\nRCRA standards. The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) regulates the management, transport and disposal of municipal solid waste, hazardous waste and underground storage tanks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24569", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24569", "title": "Ph.D", "text": ""}
{"id": "24573", "revid": "11555324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24573", "title": "Pepsi", "text": "Soft drink by PepsiCo\nPepsi is a carbonated soft drink with a cola flavor, manufactured by PepsiCo which serves as its flagship product. In 2023, Pepsi was the second most valuable soft drink brand worldwide behind Coca-Cola; the two share a long-standing rivalry in what has been called the \"cola wars\".\nPepsi, originally created in 1893 by Caleb Bradham and named \"Brad's Drink,\" was first sold in his drugstore in New Bern, North Carolina. Renamed Pepsi-Cola in 1898 due to its supposed digestive benefits, its name was shortened to Pepsi in 1961. The beverage's formula initially included sugar and vanilla but not pepsin, despite speculation on the origin of its name. Early on, Pepsi struggled with financial stability, going bankrupt in 1923 but was subsequently purchased and revived by Charles Guth, who reformulated the syrup. Pepsi gained popularity with the introduction of a 12-ounce bottle during the Great Depression and clever marketing strategies like the \"Nickel, Nickel\" jingle, doubling sales by emphasizing its value.\nThe mid-20th century saw Pepsi targeting the African American market, a then-untapped demographic, with positive portrayals and endorsements from prominent figures, boosting its market share. Pepsi's rivalry with Coca-Cola, highlighted by the \"cola wars\", led to significant cultural and market competition, including the \"Pepsi Challenge\" taste tests and the introduction of New Coke in response. Pepsi's expansion into international markets has seen varied success, with notable ventures into the Soviet Union via a landmark barter deal and enduring popularity in certain regions over Coca-Cola.\nDespite occasional controversies, such as an aborted Madonna advertisement and the \"Pepsi Number Fever\" fiasco in the Philippines, Pepsi has remained a prominent global brand, partly thanks to innovative marketing campaigns and sponsorships in sports and entertainment. PepsiCo have since launched new drinks under the Pepsi brand, such as Diet Pepsi and Pepsi Max, that make up the brand portfolio today on top of the original Pepsi cola.\nHistory.\nPepsi was first invented in 1893 as \"Brad's Drink\" by Caleb Bradham, who sold the drink at his drugstore in New Bern, North Carolina.\nIt was renamed Pepsi-Cola in 1898, \"Pepsi\" because it was advertised to relieve dyspepsia (indigestion) and with \"Cola\" referring to the cola flavor. Some have also suggested that \"Pepsi\" may have been a reference to the drink aiding digestion like the digestive enzyme pepsin, but pepsin itself was never used as an ingredient to Pepsi-Cola.\nThe original recipe also included sugar and vanilla. Bradham sought to create a fountain drink that was appealing and would aid in digestion and boost energy.\nIn 1903, Bradham moved the bottling of Pepsi from his drugstore to a rented warehouse. That year, Bradham sold 7,968 gallons of syrup. The next year, Pepsi was sold in six-ounce bottles, and sales increased to 19,848 gallons. In 1909, automobile race pioneer Barney Oldfield was the first celebrity to endorse Pepsi, describing it as \"A bully drink...refreshing, invigorating, a fine bracer before a race.\" The advertising theme \"Delicious and Healthful\" was then used over the next two decades.\nIn 1923, the Pepsi-Cola Company entered bankruptcy\u2014in large part due to financial losses incurred by speculating on the wildly fluctuating sugar prices as a result of World War I. Assets were sold and Roy C. Megargel bought the Pepsi trademark. Megargel was unsuccessful in efforts to find funding to revive the brand and soon Pepsi-Cola's assets were purchased by Charles Guth, the president of Loft, Inc. Loft was a candy manufacturer with retail stores that contained soda fountains. He sought to replace Coca-Cola at his stores' fountains after The Coca-Cola Company refused to give him additional discounts on syrup. Guth then had Loft's chemists reformulate the Pepsi-Cola syrup formula.\nOn three occasions between 1922 and 1933, the Coca-Cola Company was offered the opportunity to purchase the Pepsi-Cola Company, which it declined on each occasion.\nGrowth in popularity.\nDuring the Great Depression, Pepsi gained popularity following the introduction in 1934 of a 12-ounce (355 mL) bottle. Prior to that, Pepsi and Coca-Cola sold their drinks in 6.5-ounce (192 mL) servings for about $0.05 a bottle. With a radio advertising campaign featuring the popular jingle \"Nickel, Nickel\" \u2013 first recorded by the Tune Twisters in 1940 \u2013 Pepsi encouraged price-conscious consumers to double the volume their nickels could purchase. The jingle is arranged in a way that loops, creating a never-ending tune:\"Pepsi-Cola hits the spot / Twelve full ounces, that's a lot / Twice as much for a nickel, too / Pepsi-Cola is the drink for you.\"Coming at a time of economic crisis, the campaign succeeded in boosting Pepsi's status. From 1936 to 1938, Pepsi-Cola's profits doubled.\nPepsi's success under Charles Guth came while the Loft Candy business was faltering. Since he had initially used Loft's finances and facilities to establish the new Pepsi success, the near-bankrupt Loft Company sued Guth for possession of the Pepsi-Cola company. A long legal battle, \"Guth v. Loft\", then ensued, with the case reaching the Delaware Supreme Court and ultimately ending in a loss for Guth.\nSecond half of the 20th century.\nPepsi-Cola began a continuous rise in popularity and sales growth starting in the 1950s under the leadership of Alfred Steele and later Donald M. Kendall. With Pepsi having been seen as a \"poor man's Coca-Cola\" that was \"popular in the kitchen but it rarely arrived in the parlor\", Steele gravitated production from economy to quality. The sugar content in Pepsi-Cola syrup was also lowered slightly to desweeten the taste. Combined with company and production changes, Pepsi sales had boomed by 1956 and gradually narrowed the gap to its large competitor.\nBy the mid 1950s, amid a time when cola products were booming all over the world. the drink was being bottled in over 700 plans across seventy countries around the world. These helped make Pepsi-Cola a popular product in many markets, including in the Middle East following the opening of a plant in Cairo, and the \"Beirut Daily Star\" referred to the \"Pepsi-Cola culture\" when distribution began in Lebanon in 1952. Notably, in 1974 Pepsi became the very first American consumer product to be produced, marketed and sold in the Soviet Union.\nIn 1958, the \"swirl\" design bottle began to be used for distributing Pepsi. In 1963, the drink began to be distributed in America in larger 16-ounce (473 mL) bottles, and 12-ounce cans were introduced as well. Diet Pepsi, a second Pepsi product and the first extending the brand, was launched in 1964.\nBeginning in the mid 1960s, aggressive and effective marketing of the product (see Pepsi Generation and Pepsi Challenge), mostly aimed at the younger generation, drastically increased the drink's popularity to become a formidable competitor to long-time market leader Coca-Cola. Pepsi machines were also installed in the White House cafeteria when Richard Nixon, who already had a close relationship with Pepsi, assumed the American presidency in 1969. Although total Pepsi sales never overtook that of Coca-Cola, the latter's lead in the American market had been narrowed to 1\u00bd-to-1 as of 1980 (from 5-to-1 in 1950), and Pepsi was outselling its rival in the \"take-home\" market, which includes supermarkets.\nIn November 1984, PepsiCo announced that it would, at least in the US, exclusively use high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) to sweeten its canned, bottled and fountain Pepsi-Cola, replacing corn sugar. The Coca-Cola Company also did the same around the same time. \nIngredients.\nPepsi may have small formula differences depending on where it is produced and the target market. In the United States, Pepsi cola is made with carbonated water, high fructose corn syrup, caramel color, sugar, phosphoric acid, caffeine, citric acid, and natural flavors. A 12 fl oz (355 mL) can of Pepsi has 41\u00a0grams of carbohydrates (all from sugars), 30\u00a0mg of sodium, 0\u00a0grams of fat, 0\u00a0grams of protein, 38\u00a0mg of caffeine, and 150 calories. The Canadian equivalent can has mostly the same except 42 grams of carbohydrates (of which 41 g is sugar) and 35 mg of sodium. \nPepsi has 10 more calories and two more grams of sugar and carbohydrates than Coca-Cola. Caffeine-Free Pepsi contains the same ingredients but without the caffeine.\nIn many countries since the 2020s, a new Pepsi formulation has been distributed in bottles and cans with the reduction of sugar content and the addition of artificial sweeteners Acesulfame K and Sucralose. It replaced the original formulation in many regions including Argentina and across Europe since at least 2021, with sugar being reduced by over one third from approximately 10.7 g to 7.0 g (per 100 mL) in some countries, while in Western Europe sugar was cut by more than half, to 4.6 g per 100 mL. The new formulation also came into effect in Australia in 2025 (with sugar reduced by one-third) The change was done as part of PepsiCo's pro-health commitment across all its brands, as well as the increasing sugar taxes and regulations all around the world.\nVariants and portfolio.\nToday the Pepsi portfolio consists of three main major brands: the regular Pepsi (since 1893), Diet Pepsi/Pepsi Light (since 1964) and Pepsi Max (since 1993, intertwines with Pepsi Zero Sugar). The latter are low-calorie products. In addition, Caffeine-Free Pepsi has been produced since 1982, and a retro-themed drink made of cane sugar is sold exclusively in North America, called Pepsi Throwback.\nIn addition, since the 1970s Pepsi have distributed a large variety of flavors blended with the cola, such as Pepsi Wild Cherry (cherry flavored) and Pepsi Twist (lemon flavored), and has also experimented with special limited editions and country-exclusive Pepsi colas throughout the years.\nFictional drinks.\nA vitamin-enriched Pepsi variation called \"Pepsi Perfect\" in a special bottle was shown in the 1989 movie \"Back to the Future Part II\" in scenes set in the future year 2015. This was in 2015 released as a limited-edition drink. Only 6,500 bottles were available for $20.15, they have since been sold for hundreds of dollars on eBay.\nMarketing.\nFrom the 1930s through the late 1950s, \"Pepsi-Cola Hits The Spot\" was the most commonly used slogan in the days of old-time radio, classic motion pictures and early days of television. Its jingle (conceived in the days when Pepsi cost only five cents) was used in many different forms with different lyrics. With the rise of radio, Pepsi-Cola utilized the services of a young, up-and-coming actress named Polly Bergen to promote products, oftentimes, lending her singing talents to the classic \"...Hits The Spot\" jingle.\nFilm actress Joan Crawford, after marrying Pepsi-Cola president Alfred N. Steele became a spokesperson for Pepsi, appearing in commercials, television specials, and televised beauty pageants on behalf of the company. Crawford also had images of the soft drink placed prominently in several of her later films. When Steele died in 1959, Crawford was appointed to the Board of Directors of Pepsi-Cola, a position she held until 1973, although she was not a board member of the larger PepsiCo, created in 1965.\nPepsi has been featured in several films, including \"Back to the Future Part II\" (1989), \"Home Alone\" (1990), \"Wayne's World\" (1992), \"Fight Club\" (1999), \"World War Z\" (2013), and in films directed by Spike Lee.\nPepsi marketing has also been marred in controversy. In 1989, Pepsi commissioned a $5 million marketing campaign to coincide with the release of Madonna's song \"Like a Prayer\", but was cancelled following strong backlash regarding the religious themes in the song's music video. In 1992, the Pepsi Number Fever marketing campaign in the Philippines accidentally distributed 800,000 winning bottle caps for a 1 million peso grand prize, leading to riots and the deaths of five people.\nIn 1996, PepsiCo launched the highly successful Pepsi Stuff marketing strategy. \"Project Blue\" was launched in several international markets outside the United States in April. The launch included extravagant publicity stunts, such as a Concorde airplane painted in blue colors (which was owned by Air France) and a banner on the Mir space station. The Project Blue design was first tested in the United States in June 1997, and was released that December in preparation for Pepsi's 100th anniversary. It was at this point, the logo began to be referred to as the Pepsi Globe.\nFrom 1986 to 1991, the wordmark in the Pepsi logo was typeset in Handel Gothic. This logo was also used for Pepsi Throwback until 2014. In October 2008, Pepsi announced that it would redesign its logo and re-brand many of its products by early 2009. In 2009, Pepsi, Diet Pepsi, and Pepsi Max began using all lower-case fonts for name brands. The brand's blue and red globe trademark became a series of \"smiles,\" with the central white band initially arcing at different angles depending on the product. In March 2023, Pepsi unveiled a new logo expected to launch in North America in late-2023, and internationally in 2024 (including 2025 in Colombia). The logo is a modernization of the \"vintage\" Pepsi logo; accompanying branding elements will also shift from blue to black as their primary color.\nNiche marketing.\nWalter Mack was named the new president of Pepsi-Cola and guided the company through the 1940s. Mack, who supported progressive causes, noticed that the company's strategy of using advertising for a general audience either ignored African Americans or used ethnic stereotypes in portraying Blacks. Up until the 1940s, the full revenue potential of what was called \"the Negro market\" was largely ignored by white-owned manufacturers in the U.S. \nMack realized that Black people were an untapped niche market and that Pepsi stood to gain market share by targeting its advertising directly towards them. To this end, he hired Hennan Smith, an advertising executive \"from the Negro newspaper field\" to lead an all-black sales team, which had to be cut due to the onset of World War II.\nIn 1947, Walter Mack resumed his efforts, hiring Edward F. Boyd to lead a twelve-man team. They came up with advertising portraying black Americans in a positive light, such as one with a smiling mother holding a six pack of Pepsi while her son (a young Ron Brown, who grew up to be Secretary of Commerce) reaches up for one. Another ad campaign, titled \"Leaders in Their Fields\", profiled twenty prominent African Americans such as Nobel Peace Prize winner Ralph Bunche and photographer Gordon Parks.\nBoyd also led a sales team composed entirely of blacks around the country to promote Pepsi. Racial segregation and Jim Crow laws were still in place throughout much of the U.S.; Boyd's team faced a great deal of discrimination as a result, from insults by Pepsi co-workers to threats by the Ku Klux Klan. On the other hand, it was able to use its anti-racism stance as a selling point, attacking Coke's reluctance to hire blacks and support by the chairman of The Coca-Cola Company for segregationist governor of Georgia Herman Talmadge. As a result, Pepsi's market share as compared to Coca-Cola's shot up dramatically in the 1950s with African American soft-drink consumers three times more likely to purchase Pepsi over Coke. After the sales team visited Chicago, Pepsi's share in the city overtook that of Coke for the first time.\nJournalist Stephanie Capparell interviewed six men who were on the team in the late 1940s. The team members had a grueling schedule, working seven days a week, morning and night, for weeks on end. They visited bottlers, churches, ladies groups, schools, college campuses, YMCAs, community centers, insurance conventions, teacher and doctor conferences, and various civic organizations. They got famous jazzmen such as Duke Ellington and Lionel Hampton to promote Pepsi from the stage. No group was too small or too large to target for a promotion.\nPepsi advertisements avoided the stereotypical images common in the major media that depicted Aunt Jemimas and Uncle Bens, whose role was to draw a smile from white customers. Instead, it portrayed black customers as self-confident middle-class citizens who showed very good taste in their soft drinks. They were economical too, as Pepsi bottles were twice the size.\nThis focus on the market for black people caused some consternation within the company and among its affiliates. It did not want to seem focused on black customers for fear white customers would be pushed away. In a national meeting, Mack tried to assuage the 500 bottlers in attendance by pandering to them, saying \"We don't want it to become known as a nigger drink.\" After Mack left the company in 1950, support for the black sales team faded and it was cut.\nBoyd was replaced in 1952 by Harvey C. Russell Jr., who was notable for his marketing campaigns towards black youth in New Orleans. These campaigns, held at locales attended largely by black children, would encourage children to collect Pepsi bottle caps, which they could then exchange for rewards. One example is Pepsi's 1954 \"Pepsi Day at the Beach\" event, where New Orleans children could ride rides at an amusement park in exchange for Pepsi bottle caps. By the end of the event, 125,000 bottle caps been collected. According to \"The Pepsi Cola World\", the New Orleans campaign was a success; once people's supply of bottle caps ran out, the only way they could get more was to buy more Pepsi.\nRivalry with Coca-Cola.\nAccording to Consumer Reports, in the 1970s, the rivalry continued to heat up the market. Pepsi conducted blind taste tests in stores, in what was called the \"Pepsi Challenge\". These tests suggested that more consumers preferred the taste of Pepsi to Coca-Cola. The sales of Pepsi started to climb, and Pepsi kicked off the \"Challenge\" across the nation. This became known as the \"cola wars\".\nIn 1985, The Coca-Cola Company, amid much publicity, changed its formula. The theory has been advanced that New Coke, as the reformulated drink came to be known, was invented specifically in response to the Pepsi Challenge. However, a consumer backlash led to Coca-Cola quickly reintroducing the original formula as \"Coca-Cola Classic\".\nIn 1989, Billy Joel mentioned the rivalry between the two companies in the song \"We Didn't Start the Fire\". The line \"Rock &amp; Roller Cola Wars\" refers to Pepsi and Coke's usage of various musicians in advertising campaigns. Coke used Paula Abdul, while Pepsi used Michael Jackson. Both companies then competed to get other musicians to advertise its beverages.\nAccording to \"Beverage Digest\"'s 2008 report on carbonated soft drinks, PepsiCo's U.S. market share is 30.8 percent, while The Coca-Cola Company's is 42.7 percent (this includes all their respective brands). Coca-Cola outsells Pepsi in most parts of the U.S., notable exceptions being central Appalachia, Montana, North Dakota, and Utah. In the city of Buffalo, New York, Pepsi outsells Coca-Cola by a two-to-one margin. As of 2024, Pepsi had fallen behind Coca-Cola and Dr Pepper as the third most popular soft drink in the United States, losing its second place spot to the aforementioned Dr Pepper, a position it had held since 1985.\nWhile total American Pepsi sales figures never overtook that of Coca-Cola (with the special exception of 1985 when Coca-Cola sales were fractured between New Coke and Coca-Cola Classic), in corporate terms, the PepsiCo company had overtaken the Coca-Cola Company in total corporate sales in 1979, partly driven by PepsiCo's wide range of non-beverage products (after its merger with Frito-Lay in 1965).\nAround the world.\nOverall, Coca-Cola continues to outsell Pepsi in almost all areas of the world. However, exceptions include: Oman, India, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Egypt, Peru, Myanmar the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, and the Canadian provinces of Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick.. Pepsi is isn't sold in Russia, Cuba and North Korea. Pepsi had long been the drink of French-Canadians, and it continues to hold its dominance by relying on local Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois celebrities (especially Claude Meunier, of \"La Petite Vie\" fame) to sell its product. PepsiCo introduced the Quebec slogan \"here, it's Pepsi\" () in response to Coca-Cola ads proclaiming \"Around the world, it's Coke\" ().\nIn India, by most accounts, Coca-Cola was India's leading soft drink until 1977, when it left India because of the new foreign exchange laws which mandated majority shareholding in companies to be held by Indian shareholders; Coca-Cola was unwilling to dilute its stake in its Indian unit as required by the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, which would have forced them to share their formula with an entity in which it did not have majority shareholding. In 1988, PepsiCo entered the Indian market by creating a joint venture with the government of Punjab-owned Punjab Agro Industrial Corporation and Voltas India Limited. This joint venture marketed and sold Lehar Pepsi until 1991, when the use of foreign brands was allowed; PepsiCo promptly bought out its partners and ended the joint venture in 1994. In 1993, Coca-Cola returned to the Indian market in pursuance of India's liberalization policy. As of 2012, Pepsi is the third most popular carbonated drink in India, with a 15% market share, behind Sprite and Thums Up. In comparison, Coca-Cola is the fourth most popular carbonated drink, occupying a mere 8.8% of the Indian market share.\nIn Russia, Pepsi initially had a larger market share than Coke, but it was undercut once the Cold War ended. In 1972, PepsiCo struck a barter agreement with the government of the Soviet Union, in which PepsiCo was granted exportation and Western marketing rights to Stolichnaya vodka in exchange for importation and Soviet marketing of Pepsi. This exchange led to Pepsi being the first foreign product sanctioned for sale in the Soviet Union. Reminiscent of the way that Coca-Cola became a cultural icon and its global spread spawned words like \"cocacolonization\", Pepsi and its relation to the Soviet system turned it into an icon. In the early 1990s, the term \"Pepsi-stroika\" began appearing as a pun on \"perestroika\", the reform policy of the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev. Critics viewed the policy as an attempt to usher in Western products in deals there with the old elites; Pepsi, as one of the first American products in the Soviet Union, became a symbol of that relationship and the Soviet policy, reflected in Russian author Victor Pelevin's book \"Generation P\". In 1992, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Coca-Cola was introduced to the Russian market and rapidly captured a significant market share due to public perceptions of Coca-Cola as representative of the new post-Soviet system (as opposed to Pepsi being exemplary of the old Soviet era), a market growth that might otherwise have required years to achieve. By July 2005, Coca-Cola enjoyed a market share of 19.4 percent, followed by Pepsi with 13 percent.\nPepsi was introduced in Romania in 1966, during the early liberalization policies of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu, opening a factory at Constan\u021ba in 1967. This was done as a barter agreement similar to the one in the USSR, with Romanian wine serving as their bartered drink sold in the West. Pepsi quickly became popular in Romania, especially among young people, but due to the austerity measures imposed in the 1980s, it became scarce and difficult to find. After the fall of Soviet communism in 1991, PepsiCo entered the new Romanian market economy, and still maintains a bigger popularity than Coca-Cola, which was introduced in Romania in 1992, despite heavy competition during the 1990s (sometime between 2000 and 2005, Pepsi overtook Coca-Cola in sales in Romania).\nIn 1984, Venezuela was cited as the only country where Pepsi cola sales were higher than Coca-Cola.\nPepsi did not sell soft drinks in Israel until 1991. Many Israelis and some American Jewish organizations attributed Pepsi's previous reluctance to expand operations in Israel to fears of an Arab boycott. Pepsi, which has a large and lucrative business in the Arab world, denied the claims, stating that economic, rather than political, reasons kept it out of Israel.\nPepsi entered the market in Vietnam in 1994 after the end of an American trade embargo against the country. Both Pepsi and Coca-Cola immediately launched following the end of the embargo, starting a 'cola war' in Vietnam.\nPepsiman.\nPepsiman is an official Pepsi mascot from Pepsi's Japanese corporate branch, which debuted in March 1996. Pepsiman took on three different outfits, each one representing the current style of the Pepsi can in distribution. Twelve commercials were created featuring the character. His role in the advertisements is to appear with Pepsi to thirsty people or people craving soda. \nPepsiman happens to appear at just the right time with the product. After delivering the beverage, sometimes Pepsiman would encounter a difficult and action-oriented situation which would result in injury. Pepsiman is mostly silent, and he has no face except for a hole that opens up whenever he delivers a Pepsi. Another more minor mascot, Pepsiwoman, also featured in a few of her own commercials for Pepsi Twist; her appearance is basically a female Pepsiman wearing a lemon-shaped balaclava.\nIn 1996, Sega-AM2 released the Sega Saturn version of its arcade fighting game \"Fighting Vipers\". In this game, Pepsiman was included as a special character, with his specialty listed as being the ability to \"quench one's thirst.\" He does not appear in any other version or sequel. \nIn 1999, KID developed a video game for the PlayStation entitled \"Pepsiman\". As the titular character, the player runs \"on rails\" (forced motion on a scrolling linear path), skateboards, rolls, and stumbles through various areas, avoiding dangers and collecting cans of Pepsi, all while trying to reach a thirsty person as in the commercials. Despite largely being considered a financial failure, Pepsiman has developed a cult following due to its over the top and nonsensical premise.\nSports sponsorships.\nPepsi has official sponsorship deals with the National Football League, National Hockey League, and National Basketball Association. In 2007, and from 2013 to 2022, Pepsi sponsored the NFL's Super Bowl Halftime Shows. It was the sponsor of Major League Soccer until December 2015 and Major League Baseball until April 2017, both leagues signing deals with Coca-Cola. From 1999 to 2020, Pepsi also had the naming rights to the Pepsi Center, an indoor sports and entertainment facility in Denver, Colorado, until the venue's new naming rights were announced on October 22, 2020. \nIn 1997, after his sponsorship with Coca-Cola ended, retired NASCAR Cup Series driver Jeff Gordon signed a long-term contract with Pepsi, and he drove with the Pepsi logos on his car with various paint schemes for about 2 races each year, usually a darker paint scheme during nighttime races. Pepsi has remained as one of his sponsors ever since. Pepsi has also sponsored the NFL Rookie of the Year award since 2002.\nPepsi has the first global sponsorship deals with the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Women's Champions League starting in the 2015\u201316 season along with the sister brand, Pepsi Max and became the global sponsor of the competition.\nPepsi also has sponsorship deals in international cricket teams. The Pakistani national cricket team is one of the teams that the brand sponsors. The team wears the Pepsi logo on the front of their test and ODI test match clothing.\nThe Buffalo Bisons, an American Hockey League team, was sponsored by Pepsi-Cola in its later years; the team adopted the beverage's red, white, and blue color scheme along with a modification of the Pepsi logo (with the word \"Buffalo\" in place of the Pepsi-Cola wordmark). The Bisons ceased operations in 1970, making way for the Buffalo Sabres of the NHL.\nPepsi also has been a sponsor of the Carolina Hurricanes of the National Hockey League since the team moved to North Carolina in 1997.\nIn 2017, Pepsi was the jersey sponsor of the Papua New Guinea national basketball team.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "24576", "revid": "1174762", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24576", "title": "Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach", "text": "German legal scholar\nPaul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach (14 November 1775\u00a0\u2013 29 May 1833) was a German legal scholar. His major achievement was a reform of the Bavarian penal code which led to the abolition of torture and became a model for several other countries. He is also well known for his research on Kaspar Hauser, who died the same year as Feuerbach.\nBiography.\nHe was born in Hainichen, near Jena. He received his early education at Frankfurt on Main, where his family had moved soon after his birth. At the age of sixteen, however, he ran away from home, and, going to Jena, was helped by relations there to study at the university. In spite of poor health and the most desperate poverty, he made rapid progress. He attended the lectures of Karl Leonhard Reinhold and Gottlieb Hufeland, and soon published some literary essays of more than ordinary merit.\nIn 1795, he took the degree of doctor of philosophy, and in the same year, though possessing little money, he married. It was this step which led him to success and fame, by forcing him to turn from his favourite studies of philosophy and history to that of law, which was repugnant to him, but which offered a prospect of more rapid advancement.\nAt 23, he came into prominence by a vigorous criticism of Thomas Hobbes' theory on civil power. Soon afterwards, in lectures on criminal jurisprudence he set forth his famous theory, that in administering justice judges should be strictly limited in their decisions by the penal code. This new doctrine gave rise to a party called Rigorists, who supported his theory.\nVon Feuerbach was the originator of the famous maxim \"nullum crimen, nulla poena sine praevia lege poenali\": \"There is no crime and hence there shall not be punishment if at the time no penal law existed\".\nIn 1801, Feuerbach was appointed extraordinary professor of law without salary, at the University of Jena, and in the following year accepted a chair at Kiel, where he remained two years.\nHis chief work was the framing of a penal code for Bavaria. In 1804, he had moved from the University of Kiel to the University of Landshut, but, on being commanded by King Maximilian Joseph to draft a penal code for Bavaria (\"Strafgesetzbuch f\u00fcr das K\u00f6nigreich Bayern\"), in 1805 he moved to Munich where he was given a high appointment in the Ministry of Justice and was ennobled in 1808. The practical reform of penal legislation in Bavaria was begun under his influence in 1806 by the abolition of torture.\nOut of his practical experience in the Ministry of Justice, with evaluating death penalties by Bavarian courts for royal pardon, he published the most notable cases 1808/11 in \"Merkw\u00fcrdige Criminalf\u00e4lle\" and 1828/29 a much enlarged collection \"Aktenm\u00e4\u00dfige Darstellung merkw\u00fcrdiger Verbrechen\" (Notable crimes presented according to the court records). With this legal handbook of criminal cases in the tradition of the famous \"Causes C\u00e9l\u00e8bres\" of the French lawyer Gayot de Pitaval (1673\u20131743), Feuerbach intended to establish a modern criminal psychology (\"Seelenkunde\") for crime investigation, criminal judges,\u00a0etc.\nIn the course of time, his work has been misinterpreted merely as a literary collection of fictional sensational crimes, and many of his court cases have been edited and published as trivial popular crime stories. However, Gerold Schmidt has found that Feuerbach recorded true historical events at true localities and persons with their real names and that, therefore, his work is a rich historical source for Bavarian local and social history, mentality, biography, etc.\nIn his \"Betrachtungen \u00fcber das Geschworenengericht\" of 1811, Feuerbach declared against trial by jury, maintaining that the verdict of a jury was not adequate legal proof of a crime. Much controversy was aroused on the subject, and the author's view was subsequently to some extent modified.\nThe result of his labours on the Bavarian penal code was promulgated in 1813. The influence of this code, the embodiment of Feuerbach's enlightened views, was immense. It was at once made the basis for new codes in W\u00fcrttemberg and Saxe-Weimar; it was adopted in its entirety in the Grand Duchy of Oldenburg; and it was translated into Swedish by order of the king. Several of the Swiss cantons reformed their codes in conformity with it.\nFeuerbach had also undertaken to prepare a civil code for Bavaria, to be founded on the Code Napol\u00e9on. This was afterwards set aside, and the Codex Maximilianus adopted as a basis. The project did not become law.\nDuring the war of liberation (1813\u20131814), Feuerbach showed himself an ardent patriot, and published several political brochures. In 1814, Feuerbach was appointed second president of the court of appeal at Bamberg, and three years later he became first president of the court of appeal at Ansbach. In 1821 he was deputed by the government to visit France, Belgium, and the Rhine provinces for the purpose of investigating their juridical institutions. As the fruit of this visit, he published his treatises \"Betrachtungen \u00fcber \u00d6ffentlichkeit und M\u00fcndigkeit der Gerechtigkeitspflege\" (1821) and \"\u00dcber die Gerichtsverfassung und das gerichtliche Verfahren Frankreichs\" (1825). In these he pleaded unconditionally for publicity in all legal proceedings.\nIn his later years, he took a deep interest in the fate of the strange foundling Kaspar Hauser, who had excited much attention in Europe. He was the first to publish a critical summary of the ascertained facts, under the title \"Kaspar Hauser, ein Beispiel eines Verbrechens am Seelenleben\" (1832).\nFeuerbach died on 29 May 1833 in Frankfurt. There is some controversy over the cause and circumstances of his death, which remain largely unclear; his family, as well as he himself, shortly before his death, believed that he had been poisoned due to his protection of and research work on Kaspar Hauser, who himself died later the same year under suspicious circumstances.\nFamily.\nFeuerbach had five sons and three daughters: Joseph Anselm Feuerbach (1798\u20131851), Karl Wilhelm Feuerbach (1800\u20131834), Eduard August Feuerbach (1803-1843), Ludwig Andreas Feuerbach (1804\u20131872), Heinrich Friedrich Feuerbach (1806\u20131880), Rebecca Magdalena (1808\u20131891), Leonore Feuerbach (1809-1885), and Elise Feuerbach (1813\u20131883).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24578", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24578", "title": "Pub", "text": "Establishment that serves alcoholic drinks\nA pub (short for public house) is, in several countries, a drinking establishment licensed to serve alcoholic drinks for consumption on the premises. The term first appeared in England in the late 17th century to differentiate private houses from those open to the public as alehouses, taverns, and inns. Today, there is no strict definition, but the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) states a pub has four characteristics:\nThe history of pubs can be traced to taverns in Roman Britain, and through Anglo-Saxon alehouses, but it was not until the early 19th century that pubs, as they are today, first began to appear. The model also became popular in countries and regions of British influence, where pubs are often still considered to be an important aspect of their culture. In many places, especially in villages, pubs are the focal point of local communities. In his 17th-century diary, Samuel Pepys described the pub as \"the heart of England\"; pubs have been established in other countries in modern times.\nAlthough the drinks traditionally served include draught beer and cider, most also sell wine, spirits, tea, coffee, and soft drinks; many pubs offer meals and snacks, and those considered to be gastro-pubs serve food in a manner akin to a restaurant, and many pubs also host live music or karaoke.\nA licence is required to operate a pub; the licensee is known as the landlord or landlady, or the publican. Often colloquially referred to as their \"local\" by regular customers, pubs are typically chosen for their proximity to home or work, good food, social atmosphere, the presence of friends and acquaintances, and the availability of pub games such as darts or pool. Pubs often screen sporting events, such as rugby, cricket and football; the pub quiz was established in the UK in the 1970s.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nAle was a native British drink before the arrival of the Roman Empire in the first century, but it was with the construction of the Roman road network that the first pubs, called \"tabernae\" (the origin of modern English \"tavern\"), began to appear.\nAfter the departure of Roman authority in the fifth century and the fall of the Romano-British kingdoms, the Anglo-Saxons established alehouses that may have grown out of domestic dwellings, first attested in the 10th century. These alehouses quickly evolved into meeting houses for folk to socially congregate, gossip and arrange mutual help within their communities. The Wantage law code of \u00c6thelred the Unready prescribes fines for breaching the peace at meetings held in alehouses.\nA traveller in the early Middle Ages could obtain overnight accommodation in monasteries, but later a demand for hostelries grew with the popularity of pilgrimages and travel. The Hostellers of London were granted guild status in 1446, and in 1514 the guild became the Worshipful Company of Innholders. A survey in 1577 of drinking establishment in England and Wales for taxation purposes recorded 14,202 alehouses, 1,631 inns, and 329 taverns, representing one pub for every 187 people.\nInns.\nInns are buildings where travellers can seek lodging and, usually, food and drink. They are typically located in the country or along a highway. In Europe, they possibly first sprang up when the Romans built a system of roads two millennia ago. Some inns in Europe are several centuries old. In addition to providing for the needs of travellers, inns traditionally acted as community gathering places.\nIn Europe, it is the provision of accommodation, if anything, that now distinguishes inns from taverns, alehouses and pubs. The latter tend to provide alcohol (and, in the UK, soft drinks and often food), but less commonly accommodation. Inns tend to be older and grander establishments: historically they provided not only food and lodging, but also stabling and fodder for travellers' horses, and on some roads fresh horses for the mail coach.\nFamous London inns include the George, Southwark and the Tabard. There is, however, no longer a formal distinction between an inn and other kinds of establishment. Many pubs use \"Inn\" in their name, either because they are long established former coaching inns, or to summon up a particular kind of image, or in many cases simply as a pun on the word \"in\".\nThe original services of an inn are now also available at other establishments. Hotels, lodges, and motels focus more on lodging customers than on other services but usually provide meals. Pubs are primarily alcohol-serving establishments. Restaurants and taverns serve food and drink. In North America, the lodging aspect of the word \"inn\" lives on in hotel brand names like Holiday Inn, and in some state laws that refer to lodging operators as innkeepers.\nThe Inns of Court and Inns of Chancery in London started as ordinary inns where barristers met to do business, but became institutions of the legal profession in England and Wales.\nAdvent of the modern pub.\nPubs as we know them today first appeared in the 19th century. Before this time alehouses were largely indistinguishable from private houses and the poor standard of rural roads meant that, away from the larger towns, the only beer available was often brewed by the publican. With the arrival of the Industrial Revolution, many areas of the United Kingdom were transformed by a surge in industrial activity and rapid population growth. There was huge demand for beer and for venues where the public could meet but there was also intense competition for customers.\nGin houses and palaces became increasingly popular, while the Beerhouse Act 1830 caused a proliferation of beerhouses. By the mid-19th century, pubs were widely purpose-built and could incorporate architectural features that distinguished them from private houses to make them stand out from the competition. Many public houses were redeveloped at this time, borrowing features from other building types and gradually developing the characteristics that make pubs instantly recognisable today. In particular, contrary to the intentions of the Beerhouse Act, many drew inspiration from the gin houses and palaces.\nBar counters had been an early adoption but ornate mirrors, etched glass, polished brass fittings and lavishly tiled surfaces were all features that had first made their appearance in gin houses. Innovations such as the introduction of hand pumps (or beer engines) allowed more people to be served, faster, while technological advances in the brewing industry and improved transportation links made it possible for breweries to deliver beer far from where it was brewed.\nTied house system.\nThe latter half of the 19th century saw increased competition within the brewing industry and, in an attempt to secure markets for their own products, breweries began rapidly buying local pubs and directly employing publicans to run them. Although some tied houses had existed in larger British towns since the 17th century, this represented a fundamental shift in the way that many pubs were operated and the period is now widely regarded as the birth of the tied house system.\nDecreasing numbers of free houses and difficulties in obtaining new licences meant a continual expansion of their tied estates was the only feasible way for breweries to generate new trade. By the end of the century more than 90 per cent of public houses in England were owned by breweries, and the only practical way brewers could now grow their tied estates was to turn on each other. Buy-outs and amalgamations became commonplace, and by the end of the 1980s there were only six large brewers left in the UK, collectively known as the Big Six; Allied, Bass, Courage, Grand Metropolitan, Scottish &amp; Newcastle and Whitbread.\nIn an attempt to increase the number of free houses, by forcing the big breweries to sell their tied houses, the government introduced the Beer Orders in 1989. The result, however, was that the Big Six melted away into other sectors; selling their brewing assets and spinning off their tied houses, largely into the hands of branded pub chains, called pubcos. As these were not brewers, they were not governed by the Beer Orders and tens of thousands of pubs remain tied, much in the same way that they had been previously. In reality, government interference did very little to improve Britain's tied house system and all its large breweries are now in the hands of foreign or multi-national companies.\nDecline in Britain.\nThe number of pubs in the UK has declined year on year at least since 1982. Various reasons are put forward for this, such as the failure of some establishments to keep up with customer requirements. Others claim the smoking ban of 2007, intense competition from gastro-pubs, the availability of cheap alcohol in supermarkets or the general economic climate are either to blame, or are factors in the decline. Changes in demographics may be an additional factor. In 2015 the rate of pub closures came under the scrutiny of Parliament in the UK, with a promise of legislation to improve relations between owners and tenants. The Lost Pubs Project listed over 45,000 closed English pubs in June 2025, with photographs of over 33,000. In the fifteen years to 2017 a quarter of London's pubs had closed. The closures have been ascribed to factors such as changing tastes and a rise in the cost of beer due to tax increases. Some London boroughs where there has been an increase in British Muslim population\u2014Islam forbids alcohol to its adherents\u2014have seen a high amount of closures.\nThe industry suffered a major decline from 2020, due to reduced trade during the COVID-19 pandemic, followed by the wave of inflation that increased prices. By June 2022, pub numbers in England and Wales had fallen to a record low of 39,970, a loss of 7,000 in 10 years. Pubs also found it difficult to hire enough staff, with 142,000 jobs unfilled in the accommodation and food services sector by 2023. Figures published in 2023 showed that the rate of pub loss, equivalent to two closures a day, was increasing and that 39,404 pubs in England and Wales remained open at the end of June.\nLicensing laws.\nThere was regulation of public drinking spaces in England from at least the 15th century. In 1496, under, Henry VII, an act was passed, \"against vagabonds and beggers\" (11 Hen. VII c2), that included a clause empowering two justices of the peace, \"to rejecte and put awey comen ale-selling in tounes and places where they shall think convenyent, and to take suertie of the keepers of ale-houses in their gode behavyng by the discrecion of the seid justices, and in the same to be avysed and aggreed at the tyme of their sessions.\"\nThe Beerhouse Act of 1830 is widely considered to be a milestone in the history of public houses. Gin was popularised in England in the late 17th century, largely because it provided an alternative to French brandy at a time of political and religious conflict between Britain and France. Because of its cheapness, gin became popular with the poor, eventually leading to a period of drunkenness and lawlessness, known as the Gin Craze.\nIn the early 19th century, encouraged by a reduction of duties, gin consumption again began to rise and gin houses and gin palaces (an evolution of gin shops) began to spread from London to most towns and cities in Britain. Alarmed at the prospect of a return to the Gin Craze, the government attempted to counter the threat, and encourage the consumption of a more wholesome beverage, by introducing the Beerhouse Act of 1830. The Act introduced a new lower, and largely deregulated, tier of premises called \"the beerhouse\".\nUnder the act any householder, upon payment of two guineas (roughly equal in value to \u00a3 today), was permitted to brew and sell beer or cider in their own home. Beerhouses were not allowed to open on Sundays, or sell spirits and fortified wines; any beerhouse discovered to be breaking these rules was closed down and the owner heavily fined.\nWithin eight years 46,000 new beerhouses opened and, because operating costs were so low, huge profits were often made. The combination of increasing competition and high profits eventually led to what has been described as a golden age of pub building when many landlords extended or redeveloped their properties, adopting many features modern pubs still have.\nAuthorities attempted to check the growth from 1869 by introducing magisterial control and new licensing laws. These aimed to make it harder to obtain a licence, and control drunkenness, prostitution, and other undesirable conduct on licensed premises.\nIn the United Kingdom, restrictions were tightened considerably following the advent of the First World War. The Defence of the Realm Act, along with introducing rationing and censorship of the press, restricted pubs' opening hours to 12 noon\u20132:30\u00a0pm and 6:30\u00a0pm\u20139:30\u00a0pm. Opening for the full licensed hours was compulsory, and closing time was equally firmly enforced by the police. There was also a special case established under the State Management Scheme where the brewery and licensed premises were bought and run by the state, most notably in Carlisle.\nLock-in.\nA \"lock-in\" is when a pub owner allows patrons to continue drinking in the pub after the legal closing time, on the theory that once the doors are locked, it becomes a private party rather than a pub. Patrons may put money behind the bar before official closing time, and redeem their drinks during the lock-in so no drinks are technically sold after closing time. The origin of the British lock-in was a reaction to 1915 changes in the licensing laws in England and Wales, which curtailed opening hours to stop factory workers from turning up drunk and harming the war effort. From then until the start of the 21st century, UK licensing laws changed very little, retaining these comparatively early closing times. The tradition of the lock-in therefore remained. Since the implementation of the Licensing Act 2003, premises in England and Wales may apply to extend their opening hours beyond 11\u00a0pm, allowing round-the-clock drinking and removing much of the need for lock-ins. Since the smoking ban, some establishments operated a lock-in during which the remaining patrons could smoke without repercussions but, unlike drinking lock-ins, allowing smoking in a pub was still a prosecutable offence.\nSmoking bans.\nConcerns about the effects of cigarette smoke inhalation first surfaced in the 1950s and ultimately led many countries to ban or restrict smoking in specific settings, such as pubs and restaurants. Early in 2004, Ireland became the first country in the world to ban smoking in all enclosed public areas. Scotland was the first UK nation to introduce a ban on indoor smoking in March 2006, followed by the rest of the UK in 2007. Australia introduced a similar ban in 2006 and now has some of the world's toughest anti-smoking laws, with some territories having also banned smoking in outside public areas. Some publicans raised concerns, prior to the implementation of restrictions, that a smoking ban would have a negative impact on sales. The impact of the ban was mixed, with some pubs suffering declining sales, and others seeing an increase, particularly in food sales.\nArchitecture.\nSaloon or lounge.\nBy the end of the 18th century, a new room in the pub was established: the saloon. Beer establishments had always provided entertainment of some sort\u2014singing, gaming or sport. Balls Pond Road in Islington was named after an establishment run by a Mr. Ball that had a duck pond at the rear, where drinkers could, for a fee, go out and take a potshot at the ducks. More common, however, was a card room or a billiards room. The saloon was a room where, for an admission fee or a higher price of drinks, singing, dancing, drama, or comedy was performed and drinks would be served at the table. From this came the popular music hall form of entertainment\u2014a show consisting of a variety of acts.\nA most famous London saloon was the Grecian Saloon in the Eagle, City Road, referenced by name in the 18th-century nursery rhyme: \"Up and down the City Road / In and out the Eagle / That's the way the money goes / Pop goes the weasel.\" This meant that the customer had spent all his money at the Eagle, and needed to pawn his \"weasel\" to get some more. The meaning of the \"weasel\" is unclear but the two most likely definitions are: a flat iron used for finishing clothing; or rhyming slang for a coat (\"weasel and stoat\").\nA few pubs have stage performances such as serious drama, stand-up comedy, musical bands, cabaret or striptease; however, juke boxes, karaoke and other forms of pre-recorded music have otherwise replaced the musical tradition of a piano or guitar and singing.\nPublic bar.\nThe public bar, or tap room, was where the working class were expected to congregate and drink. It had unfurnished floorboards, sometimes covered with sawdust to absorb the spitting and spillages (known as \"spit and sawdust\"), bare bench seats and stools. Drinks were generally lower-quality beers and liquors. Public bars were seen as exclusive areas for only men; strictly enforced social etiquettes barred women from entering public bars (some pubs did not lift this rule until the 1980s). In the Manchester area, the public bar was known as the \"vault\", other rooms being the lounge and snug as usual elsewhere. The vault was a men-only bar, meant for working men in their dirty working clothes.\nThis style was in marked contrast to the adjacent saloon or lounge bar which, by the early 20th century, was where male or accompanied female middle-class drinkers would drink. It had carpeted floors, upholstered seats, and a wider selection of better quality drinks that cost a penny or two more than those served in the public bar.\nBy the mid-20th century, the standard of the public bar had generally improved. Many were built between the world wars as part of the \"improved\" pub movement and as \"roadhouse\" inns\u2014with large car parks to attract passing trade. Pub patrons only had to choose between economy and exclusivity (or youth and age: a jukebox or dartboard). By the 1970s, divisions between saloons and public bars were being phased out, usually by the removal of the dividing wall or partition. While the names of saloon and public bar may still be seen on the doors of pubs, the prices (and often the standard of furnishings and decoration) are the same throughout the premises. Most present day pubs now comprise one large room, although with the advent of gastropubs, some establishments have returned to maintaining distinct rooms or areas.\nSnug.\nThe \"snug\" was a small private room or area, typically with access to the bar and a frosted glass window above head height. Customers in the snug paid a higher price for beer and nobody could look in and see the drinkers. Not only did wealthy visitors use these rooms, but also patrons who preferred not to be seen in the public bar. Ladies often enjoyed a private drink in the snug in a time when many frowned on women visiting a pub. The local police officer might nip in for a quiet pint, the parish priest for his evening whisky, or lovers for a rendezvous. The Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) has surveyed the 50,000 pubs in Britain and it believes that there are very few pubs that still have classic snugs. These are on a historic interiors list in order that they can be preserved.\nCounter.\nThe pub took the concept of the bar counter to serve the beer from gin palaces in the 18th century. Until that time beer establishments used to bring the beer out to the table or benches, as remains the practice in (for example) beer gardens and some other drinking establishments in Germany. A bar might be provided for the manager or publican to do paperwork while keeping an eye on his or her customers, and the term \"bar\" applied to the publican's office where one was built, but beer would be tapped directly from a cask or barrel on a table, or kept in a separate taproom and brought out in jugs.\nWhen purpose built Victorian pubs were built after the Beerhouse Act 1830, the main room was the public room with a large serving bar copied from the gin houses, the idea being to serve the maximum number of people in the shortest possible time. The other, more private, rooms had no serving bar\u2014they had the beer brought to them from the public bar. A number of pubs in the Midlands or the North still retain this set up, though now customers fetch the drinks themselves from the taproom or public bar. One of these is the Vine, known locally as the Bull and Bladder, in Brierley Hill near Birmingham, another the Cock at Broom, Bedfordshire a series of small rooms served drinks and food by waiting staff. By the early 1970s there was a tendency to change to one large drinking room as breweries were eager to invest in interior design and theming.\nIsambard Kingdom Brunel, the British engineer and railway builder, introduced the idea of a circular bar into the Swindon station pub in order that customers were served quickly and did not delay his trains. These island bars became popular as they also allowed staff to serve customers in several different rooms surrounding the bar.\nBeer engine.\nA \"beer engine\" is a device for pumping beer, originally manually operated and typically used to dispense beer from a cask or container in a pub's basement or cellar.\nThe first beer pump known in England is believed to have been invented by John Lofting, a Dutch-born, London-based inventor, manufacturer, and merchant, in the late 1680s or early 1690s. The London Gazette of 17 March 1691 published a patent in favour of John Lofting for a fire engine, but remarked upon and recommended another invention of his, for a beer pump:\n\"Whereas their Majesties [i.e., William III of England and Mary II of England] have been Graciously Pleased to grant Letters patent to John Lofting of London Merchant for a New Invented Engine for Extinguishing Fires which said Engine have found every great encouragement. The said Patentee hath also projected a Very Useful Engine for starting of beer and other liquors which will deliver from 20 to 30 barrels an hour which are completely fixed with Brass Joints and Screws at Reasonable Rates. Any Person that hath occasion for the said Engines may apply themselves to the Patentee at his house near St Thomas Apostle London or to Mr. Nicholas Wall at the Workshoppe near Saddlers Wells at Islington or to Mr. William Tillcar, Turner, his agent at his house in Woodtree next door to the Sun Tavern London.\"\nA further engine was invented in the late 18th century by the locksmith and hydraulic engineer Joseph Bramah (1748\u20131814).\nStrictly the term refers to the pump itself, which is normally manually operated, though electrically powered and gas powered pumps are occasionally used. When manually powered, the term \"handpump\" is often used to refer to both the pump and the associated handle.\nCompanies.\nIn the 18th century, after the development of the large London porter breweries, a trend grew for pubs to become \"tied houses\" that only sold beer from a single brewery. (A pub not 'tied' in this way was called a free house.) The usual arrangement for a tied house was that the brewery owned the pub but rented it out to a private individual (landlord) who ran it as a separate business (even though contracted to buy the beer from the brewery). Another common arrangement was (and is) for the landlord to own the premises (whether freehold or leasehold) independently of the brewer, but then to take a mortgage loan from a brewery, either to finance the purchase of the pub initially, or to refurbish it, and be required as a term of the loan to observe the solus tie.\nIn the late 20th century, breweries increasingly ran their pubs directly, using managers rather than tenants. Most such breweries, such as the regional brewery Shepherd Neame in Kent and Young's and Fuller's in London, control hundreds of pubs in a particular region of the UK, while a few, such as Greene King, are spread nationally. The landlord of a tied pub may be an employee of the brewery\u2014in which case, they are a manager of a managed house\u2014or a self-employed tenant under a lease agreement with a brewery that obligates (trade tie) them to purchase only that brewery's beer. The beer selection is mainly limited to beers brewed by that particular company. The Beer Orders, passed in 1989, were aimed at getting tied houses to offer at least one alternative beer, known as a guest beer, from another brewery. This law has now been repealed but while in force it dramatically altered the industry. Some pubs still offer a regularly changing selection of guest beers.\nOrganisations such as Wetherspoons, Punch Taverns and O'Neill's were formed in the UK in the wake of the Beer Orders. A PubCo is a company involved in the retailing but not the manufacture of beverages, while a Pub chain may be run either by a PubCo or by a brewery. In 2016, a number of the largest PubCo's were regulated, and tied tenants in England and Wales got new statutory rights to go free of tie or to have disputes heard by the Pubs Code Adjudicator.\nPubs within a chain usually have items in common\u2014such as fittings, promotions, ambience, and food and drink menu. A pub chain positions itself in the marketplace for a target clientele. One company may run several pub chains aimed at different segments of the market. Pubs for use in a chain are bought and sold in large units, often from regional breweries that then close down. Newly acquired pubs are often renamed by the new owners, and many people resent the loss of traditional names, especially if their favourite regional beer disappears at the same time.\nIn 2009 about half of Britain's pubs were owned by large pub companies.\nBrewery tap.\nA brewery tap, also called a brewpub or taproom, is the nearest outlet for a brewery's beers. It is usually a room or bar in the brewery itself, although the name may be applied to a nearby pub.\nTypes.\nA pub has no strict definition, but CAMRA states that a pub has four characteristics:\nTogether these characteristics differentiate pubs from restaurants and hotel bars, although some pubs also serve as restaurants or hotels.\nGastropub.\nA gastropub is a hybrid pub and restaurant, notable for serving good quality beer, wine and food. The name is a portmanteau of \"gastronomy\" and \"public house\", and was coined in 1991 when David Eyre and Mike Belben took over the Eagle pub in Clerkenwell, London. The concept of a restaurant in a pub reinvigorated both pub culture and British dining, though it has also attracted criticism for potentially removing the character of traditional pubs.\nIn 2011, \"The Good Food Guide\" suggested that the term has become irrelevant such is its commonality these days.\nCountry pub.\nA \"country pub\" is simply a rural drinking establishment, though the term has acquired a romantic image typically of thatched roofs and whitewashed stone walls. As with urban pubs, the country pub can function as a social and recreational centre, providing opportunities for people to meet, exchange news, and cooperate on local charitable events. However, that culture of functioning as a social centre for a village and rural community started to diminish in the latter part of the 20th century, as many country pubs either closed down, or were converted to restaurants or gastropubs. Those country pubs located on main routes may once have been coaching inns, providing accommodation or refreshment for travellers before the advent of motorised transport.\nRoadhouse.\nThe term roadhouse was originally applied to a coaching inn, but with the advent of popular travel by motor car in the 1920s and 1930s in the United Kingdom, a new type of roadhouse emerged, often located on the newly constructed arterial roads and bypasses. They were large establishments offering meals and refreshment and accommodation to motorists and parties travelling by charabanc. The largest roadhouses boasted facilities such as tennis courts and swimming pools. Their popularity ended with the outbreak of the Second World War when recreational road travel became impossible, and the advent of post-war drunk driving legislation prevented their full recovery. Many of these establishments are now operated as pub restaurants or fast food outlets.\nTheme pub.\nA theme pub is a pub that aligns itself to a specific culture, style or activity; often with the intention of attracting a niche clientele. Many are decorated and furnished accordingly, with the theme sometimes dictating the style of food or drink on offer too. Examples of theme pubs include sports bars, rock pubs, biker bars, Goth pubs, strip clubs, karaoke bars and Irish pubs.\nMicropubs.\nIn Britain, a micropub is a very small, modern, one-room pub founded on principles set up by Martyn Hillier, the creator of the first micropub, the Butchers Arms in Herne, Kent, in 2005. Micropubs are \"based upon good ale and lively banter\", commonly with a strong focus on local cask ale. It became easier to start a small pub after the passing of the 2003 Licensing Act, which became effective in 2005.\nOther.\nA \"nolo\" or \"no lo\" pub serves only non-alcoholic and low-alcoholic beverages. A temperance bar serves no alcohol at all.\nPub signs.\nIn 1393, King Richard II of England compelled landlords to erect signs outside their premises. The legislation stated \"Whosoever shall brew ale in the town with intention of selling it must hang out a sign, otherwise he shall forfeit his ale.\" This law was to make alehouses easily visible to passing inspectors, borough ale tasters, who would decide the quality of the ale they provided. William Shakespeare's father, John Shakespeare, was one such inspector.\nAnother important factor was that during the Middle Ages a large proportion of the population were illiterate and so pictures on a sign were more useful than words as a means of identifying a public house. For this reason there was often no reason to write the establishment's name on the sign and inns opened without a formal written name, the name being derived later from the illustration on the pub's sign.\nThe earliest signs were often not painted but consisted, for example, of paraphernalia connected with the brewing process such as bunches of hops or brewing implements, which were suspended above the door of the pub. In some cases local nicknames, farming terms and puns were used. Local events were often commemorated in pub signs. Simple natural or religious symbols such as suns, stars and crosses were incorporated into pub signs, sometimes adapted to incorporate elements of the heraldry (e.g., the coat of arms) of the local lords who owned the lands upon which the pub stood. Some pubs have Latin inscriptions.\nOther subjects that lent themselves to visual depiction included the name of battles (e.g. Trafalgar), explorers, local notables, discoveries, sporting heroes and members of the royal family. Some pub signs are in the form of a pictorial pun or rebus. For example, a pub in Crowborough, East Sussex called \"The Crow and Gate\" had for some years an image of a crow with gates as wings. A \"British Path\u00e9 News \"film of 1956 shows artist Michael Farrar-Bell at work producing inn signs.\nMost British pubs still have decorated signs hanging over their doors, and these retain their original function of enabling the identification of the pub. Today's pub signs almost always bear the name of the pub, both in words and in pictorial representation. The more remote country pubs often have stand-alone signs directing potential customers to their door.\nNames.\nPub names are used to identify and differentiate each pub. Modern names are sometimes a marketing ploy or attempt to create \"brand awareness\", frequently using a comic theme thought to be memorable, \"Slug and Lettuce\" for a pub chain being an example. Interesting origins are not confined to old or traditional names, however. Names and their origins can be broken up into a relatively small number of categories.\nAs many pubs are centuries old, many of their early customers were unable to read, and pictorial signs could be readily recognised when lettering and words could not be read.\nPubs often have traditional names. A common name is the \"Marquis of Granby\". These pubs were named after John Manners, Marquess of Granby, who was the son of John Manners, 3rd Duke of Rutland and a general in the 18th-century British Army. He showed a great concern for the welfare of his men, and on their retirement, provided funds for many of them to establish taverns, which were subsequently named after him. All pubs granted their licence in 1780 were called the Royal George, after King George III, and the twentieth anniversary of his coronation.\nSome names for pubs that seem absurd or whimsical have come from corruptions of old slogans or phrases, such as the Bag o'Nails (Bacchanals), the Goat and Compasses (God Encompasseth Us), the Cat and the Fiddle (\"Chaton Fid\u00e8le\": Faithful Kitten) and the Bull and Bush, which purportedly celebrates the victory of Henry VIII at \"Boulogne Bouche\" or Boulogne-sur-Mer Harbour.\nEntertainment.\nTraditional games are played in pubs, ranging from the well-known darts, skittles, dominoes, cards and bar billiards, to the more obscure Aunt Sally, nine men's morris quoits, and ringing the bull. In the UK betting is legally limited to certain games such as cribbage or dominoes, played for small stakes. In recent decades the game of pool (both the British and American versions) has increased in popularity as well as other table based games such as snooker (rarely) or table football.\nIncreasingly, more modern games such as video games and slot machines are provided. Pubs hold special events, from tournaments of the aforementioned games to karaoke nights to pub quizzes. Some play pop music and hip-hop (dance bar), or show football and rugby union on big screen televisions (sports bar). Shove ha'penny and Bat and trap were also popular in pubs south of London.\nSome pubs in the UK also have football teams composed of regular customers. Many of these teams are in leagues that play matches on Sundays, hence the term \"Sunday League Football\". Bowling is found in association with pubs in some parts of the country and the local team plays matches against teams invited from elsewhere on the pub's bowling green.\nPubs may be venues for pub songs and live music. During the 1970s pubs provided an outlet for a number of bands, such as Kilburn and the High Roads, Dr. Feelgood and the Kursaal Flyers, who formed a musical genre called pub rock that was a precursor to punk music.\nFood.\nSome pubs have a long tradition of serving food, dating back to their historic usage as inns and hotels where travellers would stay.\nMany pubs were drinking establishments, and little emphasis was placed on the serving of food, other than sandwiches and \"bar snacks\", such as pork scratchings, pickled eggs, salted crisps and peanuts. These all helped to increase beer sales. In South East England (especially London) it was common until recent times for vendors of cockles, whelks, mussels, and other shellfish to sell them during the evening and at closing time. Many mobile shellfish stalls would set up near pubs, a practice that continues in London's East End. Otherwise, pickled cockles and mussels may be offered by the pub in jars or packets.\nStarting in the 1950s, some British pubs would offer \"a pie and a pint\", with hot individual steak and ale pies made easily on the premises by the proprietor's wife during the lunchtime opening hours. The ploughman's lunch became popular in the late 1960s, as did the convenient \"chicken in a basket\", a portion of roast chicken with chips, served on a napkin in a wicker basket.\nLunch at an Australian pub is called a \"counter lunch\", while the term \"counter meal\" is used for either lunch or dinner. Common dishes served at counter lunches and counter meals are steak and chips, chicken parmigiana and chips, a mixed grill (an assortment of grilled meats), and roast lamb or beef with roast vegetables.\nFamily chain pubs that serve food in the evening gained popularity in the 1970s, and included Berni Inn and Beefeater.\nQuality dropped but variety increased with the introduction of microwave ovens and frozen food. \"Pub grub\" expanded to include British food items such as steak and ale pie, shepherd's pie, fish and chips, bangers and mash, Sunday roast, ploughman's lunch, chicken tikka masala, and pasties. In addition, dishes such as burgers, chicken wings, lasagne and chilli con carne are often served. Some pubs offer elaborate hot and cold snacks free to customers at Sunday lunchtimes, to prevent them getting hungry and leaving for their lunch at home.\nSince the 1990s, food has become a more important part of a pub's trade, and today most pubs serve lunches and dinners at the table in addition to (or instead of) snacks consumed at the bar. They may have a separate dining room. Some pubs serve meals to a higher standard, to match good restaurant standards; these are sometimes termed gastropubs.\nListed.\nCAMRA maintains a \"National Inventory\" of historical notability and of architecturally and decoratively notable pubs. The National Trust owns thirty-six public houses of historic interest including the George Inn, Southwark, London and the Crown Liquor Saloon, Belfast, Northern Ireland.\nRecords.\nHighest and remotest.\nThe highest pub in the United Kingdom is the Tan Hill Inn, North Yorkshire, at above sea level. The remotest pub on the British mainland is the Old Forge in the village of Inverie, Lochaber, Scotland. There is no road access and it may only be reached by an walk over mountains, or a sea crossing.\nSmallest.\nContenders for the smallest public house in the UK include:\nThe list includes a small number of parlour pubs, one of which is the Sun Inn in Leintwardine, Herefordshire.\nThe smallest public house in Wales is claimed by Y Goron Fach (the Little Crown) in Denbigh, with a single bar of .\nLargest.\nThe largest pub in the UK is the Royal Victoria Pavilion, in Ramsgate, Kent. The venue was previously a casino and before that a theatre.\nOldest.\nA number of pubs claim to be the oldest surviving establishment in the United Kingdom, although in several cases original buildings have been demolished and replaced on the same site. Others are ancient buildings that were used for purposes other than as a pub previously in their history. Some notable claims include:\nLongest and shortest name.\nThe town of Stalybridge in Greater Manchester is thought to have the pubs with both the longest and shortest names in the United Kingdom \u2013 The Old Thirteenth Cheshire Astley Volunteer Rifleman Corps Inn and the Q Inn, both operating as of 2019[ [update]] (the Rifleman reopening in new premises, moving from Astley Street to premises two doors away from the Q Inn in Market Street in 2019, after being closed for three years). The original Rifleman building retains a pub sign, and a blue plaque from 1995 recording the recognition of the name in the Guinness Book of Records.\nCultural associations.\nInns and taverns feature throughout English literature and poetry, from the Tabard Inn in Chaucer's \"Canterbury Tales\" onwards.\nThe highwayman Dick Turpin used the Swan Inn at Woughton-on-the-Green in Buckinghamshire as his base. Jamaica Inn near Bolventor in Cornwall gave its name to a 1936 novel by Daphne du Maurier and a 1939 film directed by Alfred Hitchcock. In the 1920s John Fothergill (1876\u20131957) was the innkeeper of the Spread Eagle in Thame, Berkshire, and published his autobiography: \"An Innkeeper's Diary\" (London: Chatto &amp; Windus, 1931). During his idiosyncratic occupancy many famous people came to stay, such as H. G. Wells. United States president George W. Bush fulfilled his lifetime ambition of visiting a 'genuine British pub' during his November 2003 state visit to the UK when he had lunch and a pint of non-alcoholic lager (Bush being a teetotaler) with British Prime Minister Tony Blair at the Dun Cow pub in Sedgefield, County Durham, in Blair's home constituency. There were approximately 53,500 public houses in 2009 in the United Kingdom. This number has been declining every year, so that nearly half of the smaller villages no longer have a local pub.\nLondon.\nMany of London's pubs are known to have been used by famous people, but in some cases, such as the association between Samuel Johnson and Ye Olde Cheshire Cheese, this is speculative, based on little more than the fact that the person is known to have lived nearby. However, Charles Dickens is known to have visited the Cheshire Cheese, the Prospect of Whitby, Ye Olde Cock Tavern and many others. Samuel Pepys is also associated with the Prospect of Whitby and the Cock Tavern.\nThe Fitzroy Tavern is a pub situated at 16 Charlotte Street in the Fitzrovia district, to which it gives its name. It became famous (or according to others, infamous) during a period spanning the 1920s to the mid-1950s as a meeting place for many of London's artists, intellectuals and bohemians such as Dylan Thomas, Augustus John, and George Orwell. Several establishments in Soho, London, have associations with well-known, post-war literary and artistic figures, including the Pillars of Hercules, the Colony Room and the Coach and Horses. The Canonbury Tavern, Canonbury, was the prototype for Orwell's ideal English pub, \"The Moon Under Water\".\nThe Red Lion in Whitehall is close to the Palace of Westminster and is consequently used by political journalists and Members of Parliament (MPs). The pub is equipped with a Division bell that summons MPs back to the chamber when they are required to take part in a vote. The Punch Bowl, Mayfair was at one time jointly owned by Madonna and Guy Ritchie. The Coleherne public house in Earls Court was a well-known gay pub from the 1950s. It attracted many well-known patrons, such as Freddie Mercury, Kenny Everett and Rudolph Nureyev. It was used by the serial-killer Colin Ireland to pick up victims.\nJack Straw's Castle was a pub named after Jack Straw, one of the three leaders of Peasants' Revolt, the pub was active since the 14th century until its destruction by the Blitz during the Second World War.\nIn 1966 the Blind Beggar in Whitechapel became infamous as the scene of a murder committed by gangster Ronnie Kray. The Ten Bells is associated with several of the victims of Jack the Ripper. In 1955, Ruth Ellis, the last woman executed in the United Kingdom, shot David Blakely as he emerged from the Magdala in South Hill Park, Hampstead, It is said that Vladimir Lenin and a young Joseph Stalin met in the Crown and Anchor pub (now known as the Crown Tavern) on Clerkenwell Green when the latter was visiting London in 1903.\nThe Angel, Islington was formerly a coaching inn, the first on the Great North Road, the main route northwards out of London, where Thomas Paine is believed to have written much of \"Rights of Man\" (1791). It was mentioned by Charles Dickens, became a Lyons Corner House, and is now a Co-operative Bank.\nOxford and Cambridge.\nThe Eagle and Child and the Lamb and Flag, Oxford, were regular meeting places of the Inklings, a writers' group that included J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis. The Eagle in Cambridge is where Francis Crick interrupted patrons' lunchtime on 28 February 1953 to announce that he and James Watson had \"discovered the secret of life\" after they had come up with their proposal for the structure of DNA. The anecdote is related in Watson's book \"The Double Helix\". and commemorated with a blue plaque on the outside wall.\nOutside Great Britain.\nAlthough \"British\" pubs found outside of Britain and its former colonies are often themed bars owing little to the original British pub, a number of \"true\" pubs may be found around the world.\nIn Scandinavia, especially Denmark, a number of pubs that eschew \"theming\" have opened. They instead focus on providing carefully conditioned beer, often independent of any particular brewery or chain, in an environment not unfamiliar to a British pub-goer. Some import British cask ale, rather than beer in kegs, to provide the full British real ale experience to their customers. This newly established Danish interest in British cask beer and the British pub tradition is reflected by the fact that some 56 British cask beers were available at the 2008 European Beer Festival in Copenhagen, which was attended by more than 20,000 people.\nIn Ireland, pubs are known for their atmosphere or \"craic\". In Irish, a pub is referred to as \"teach t\u00e1bhairne\" (\"tavernhouse\") or \"teach \u00f3il\" (\"drinkinghouse\"). Live music, either sessions of traditional Irish music or varieties of modern popular music, is frequently featured in the pubs of Ireland. Pubs in Northern Ireland are largely identical to their counterparts in the Republic of Ireland except for the lack of spirit grocers. A side effect of the Troubles was that the lack of a tourist industry meant that a higher proportion of traditional bars have survived the wholesale refitting of Irish pub interiors in the \"English style\" in the 1950s and 1960s. New Zealand sports a number of Irish pubs.\nPubs have a long history in Canada, with some still operating after 200 years, like the Olde Angel Inn in Niagara-on-the-Lake. An \"English-looking\" pub trend started in the 1990s, built into existing storefronts, often run by corporate pub firms. Most universities in Canada have campus pubs that are central to student life\u2014serving food and drink as well as hosting social events. Often these pubs are run by the student's union and at some universities, a budget is reserved for course pub nights. The gastropub concept has caught on, as traditional British influences are to be found in many Canadian dishes. Aside from pubs, the term \"bar\" can refer to themed drinking establishments, sports bars, or cocktail bars, or to the physical counter in a pub. Tavern was previously a popular term, though it has become somewhat antiquated.\nIn South Africa pubs and taverns have had a particularly long and notable presence in the city of Cape Town. Prior to the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, Cape Town was a major trading port between Europe and Asia and hosted a very large number of drinking establishments earning the city the moniker \"Tavern of the Seas\". The oldest currently operating pub in South Africa, and one of the last drinking establishments left from the \"Tavern of the Seas\" era, is the Perseverance Tavern opened in 1808.\nIn fiction.\nPubs are a common setting for fictional works, including novels, stories, films, video games, and other works. In many cases, authors and other creators develop imaginary pubs for their works, some of which have become notable fictional places. Notable fictional pubs include The Admiral Benbow Inn in the \"Treasure Island\" pirate story, the Garrison in the 1920s crime TV drama \"Peaky Blinders\", the Golden Perch, the Prancing Pony, and the Green Dragon in the high fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\", the Leaky Cauldron and the Hog's Head in the \"Harry Potter\" fantasy series, Moe's Tavern, a working-class venue in \"The Simpsons\", the Nag's Head in \"Only Fools and Horses\", and the Oak and Crosier in the video game \".\"\nThe major soap operas on British television each feature a fictional pub, and these pubs have become household names in Britain. The Rovers Return is the pub in \"Coronation Street\", the British soap broadcast on ITV. The Queen Vic (short for the Queen Victoria) is the pub in \"EastEnders\", the major soap on BBC One and the Woolpack in ITV's \"Emmerdale\". The sets of each of the three major television soap operas have been visited by some of the members of the royal family, including Queen Elizabeth II. The centrepiece of each visit was a trip into the Rovers, the Queen Vic, or the Woolpack to be offered a drink.\nThe Bull in the BBC Radio 4 soap opera \"The Archers\" is an important meeting point.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24579", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24579", "title": "Pelvic inflammatory disease", "text": "Infection of uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries or the inner surface of pelvis\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nPelvic inflammatory disease (PID), also known as pelvic inflammatory disorder, is an infection of the upper part of the female reproductive system, mainly the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries, and inside of the pelvis. Often, there may be no symptoms. Signs and symptoms, when present, may include lower abdominal pain, vaginal discharge, fever, burning with urination, pain with sex, bleeding after sex, or irregular menstruation. Untreated PID can result in long-term complications including infertility, ectopic pregnancy, chronic pelvic pain, and cancer.\nThe disease is caused by bacteria that spread from the vagina and cervix. It has been reported that infections by \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" or \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" are present in 75 to 90 percent of cases. However, in the UK it is reported by the NHS that infections by \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" and \"Chlamydia trachomatis\" are responsible for only a quarter of PID cases. Often, multiple different bacteria are involved. \nWithout treatment, about 10 percent of those with a chlamydial infection and 40 percent of those with a gonorrhea infection will develop PID. Risk factors are generally similar to those of sexually transmitted infections and include a high number of sexual partners and drug use. Vaginal douching may also increase the risk. The diagnosis is typically based on the presenting signs and symptoms. It is recommended that the disease be considered in all women of childbearing age who have lower abdominal pain. A definitive diagnosis of PID is made by finding pus involving the fallopian tubes during surgery. Ultrasound may also be useful in diagnosis.\nEfforts to prevent the disease include not having sex or having few sexual partners and using condoms. Screening women at risk for chlamydial infection followed by treatment decreases the risk of PID. If the diagnosis is suspected, treatment is typically advised. Treating a woman's sexual partners should also occur. In those with mild or moderate symptoms, a single injection of the antibiotic ceftriaxone along with two weeks of doxycycline and possibly metronidazole by mouth is recommended. For those who do not improve after three days or who have severe disease, intravenous antibiotics should be used.\nGlobally, about 106 million cases of chlamydia and 106 million cases of gonorrhea occurred in 2008. The number of cases of PID, however, is not clear. It is estimated to affect about 1.5 percent of young women yearly. In the United States, PID is estimated to affect about one million people each year. A type of intrauterine device (IUD) known as the Dalkon shield led to increased rates of PID in the 1970s. Current IUDs are not associated with this problem after the first month.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSymptoms in PID range from none to severe. If there are symptoms, fever, cervical motion tenderness, lower abdominal pain, new or different discharge, painful intercourse, uterine tenderness, adnexal tenderness, or irregular menstruation may be noted.\nOther complications include endometritis, salpingitis, tubo-ovarian abscess, pelvic peritonitis, periappendicitis, and perihepatitis.\nComplications.\nPID can cause scarring inside the reproductive system, which can later cause serious complications, including chronic pelvic pain, infertility, ectopic pregnancy (the leading cause of pregnancy-related deaths in adult females), and other complications of pregnancy. Occasionally, the infection can spread to the peritoneum causing inflammation and the formation of scar tissue on the external surface of the liver (Fitz-Hugh\u2013Curtis syndrome).\nCause.\n\"Chlamydia trachomatis\" and \"Neisseria gonorrhoeae\" are common causes of PID. However, \nPID can also be caused by other untreated infections, like bacterial vaginosis.\nData suggest that PID is often polymicrobial. Isolated anaerobes and facultative microorganisms have been obtained from the upper genital tract. \"N. gonorrhoeae\" has been isolated from fallopian tubes, facultative and anaerobic organisms were recovered from endometrial tissues.\nThe anatomical structure of the internal organs and tissues of the female reproductive tract provides a pathway for pathogens to ascend from the vagina to the pelvic cavity through the infundibulum. The disturbance of the naturally occurring vaginal microbiota associated with bacterial vaginosis increases the risk of PID.\n\"N. gonorrhoea\" and \"C. trachomati\"s are the most common organisms. The least common were infections caused exclusively by anaerobes and facultative organisms. Anaerobes and facultative bacteria were also isolated from 50 percent of the patients from whom \"Chlamydia\" and \"Neisseria\" were recovered; thus, anaerobes and facultative bacteria were present in the upper genital tract of nearly two-thirds of the PID patients. PCR and serological tests have associated extremely fastidious organism with endometritis, PID, and tubal factor infertility. Microorganisms associated with PID are listed below.\nCases of PID have developed in people who have stated they have never had sex.\nBacteria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiagnosis.\nUpon a pelvic examination, cervical motion, uterine, or adnexal tenderness will be experienced. Mucopurulent cervicitis and or urethritis may be observed. In severe cases, more testing may be required, such as laparoscopy, intra-abdominal bacteria sampling and culturing, or tissue biopsy.\nLaparoscopy can visualize \"violin-string\" adhesions, characteristic of Fitz-Hugh\u2013Curtis perihepatitis and other abscesses that may be present.\nOther imaging methods, such as ultrasonography, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can aid in diagnosis. Blood tests can also help identify the presence of infection: the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), the C-reactive protein (CRP) level, and chlamydial and gonococcal DNA probes.\nNucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), direct fluorescein tests (DFA), and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) are highly sensitive tests that can identify specific pathogens present. Serology testing for antibodies is not as useful since the presence of the microorganisms in healthy people can confound interpreting the antibody titer levels, although antibody levels can indicate whether an infection is recent or long-term.\nDefinitive criteria include histopathologic evidence of endometritis, thickened, filled fallopian tubes, or laparoscopic findings. Gram stain/smear becomes definitive in the identification of rare, atypical and possibly more serious organisms. Two-thirds of patients with laparoscopic evidence of previous PID were not aware they had PID, but even asymptomatic PID can cause serious harm.\nLaparoscopic identification is helpful in diagnosing tubal disease; a 65 percent to 90 percent positive predictive value exists in patients with presumed PID.\nUpon gynecologic ultrasound, a potential finding is \"tubo-ovarian complex\", which is edematous and dilated pelvic structures as evidenced by vague margins, but without abscess formation.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nSeveral other causes may produce similar symptoms, including appendicitis, ectopic pregnancy, hemorrhagic or ruptured ovarian cysts, ovarian torsion, endometriosis and gastroenteritis, peritonitis, and bacterial vaginosis, among others.\nPelvic inflammatory disease is more likely to recur when there is a prior history of the infection, recent sexual contact, recent onset of menses, or an IUD (intrauterine device) in place, or if the partner has a sexually transmitted infection.\nAcute pelvic inflammatory disease is highly unlikely when recent intercourse has not taken place or an IUD is not being used. A sensitive serum pregnancy test is typically obtained to rule out ectopic pregnancy. Culdocentesis will differentiate hemoperitoneum (ruptured ectopic pregnancy or hemorrhagic cyst) from pelvic sepsis (salpingitis, ruptured pelvic abscess, or ruptured appendix).\nPelvic and vaginal ultrasounds are helpful in the diagnosis of PID. In the early stages of infection, the ultrasound may appear normal. As the disease progresses, nonspecific findings can include free pelvic fluid, endometrial thickening, uterine cavity distension by fluid or gas. In some instances, the borders of the uterus and ovaries appear indistinct. Enlarged ovaries accompanied by increased numbers of small cysts correlate with PID.\nLaparoscopy is infrequently used to diagnose pelvic inflammatory disease since it is not readily available. Moreover, it might not detect subtle inflammation of the fallopian tubes, and it fails to detect endometritis. Nevertheless, laparoscopy is conducted if the diagnosis is not certain or if the person has not responded to antibiotic therapy after 48 hours.\nNo single test has adequate sensitivity and specificity to diagnose pelvic inflammatory disease. A large multisite U.S. study found that cervical motion tenderness as a minimum clinical criterion increases the sensitivity of the CDC diagnostic criteria from 83 percent to 95 percent. However, even the modified 2002 CDC criteria do not identify women with subclinical disease.\nPrevention.\nRegular testing for sexually transmitted infections is encouraged for prevention. The risk of contracting pelvic inflammatory disease can be reduced by the following:\nTreatment.\nTreatment is often started without confirmation of infection because of the serious complications that may result from delayed treatment. Treatment depends on the infectious agent and generally involves the use of antibiotic therapy although there is no clear evidence of which antibiotic regimen is more effective and safe in the management of PID. If there is no improvement within two to three days, the patient is typically advised to seek further medical attention. Hospitalization sometimes becomes necessary if there are other complications. Treating sexual partners for possible STIs can help in treatment and prevention. There should be no wait for STI results to start treatment. Treatment should not be avoided for longer than 2-3 days due to the risk of infertility.\nFor women with PID of mild to moderate severity, parenteral and oral therapies appear to be effective. It does not matter to their short- or long-term outcome whether antibiotics are administered to them as inpatients or outpatients. Typical regimens include cefoxitin or cefotetan plus doxycycline, and clindamycin plus gentamicin. An alternative parenteral regimen is ampicillin/sulbactam plus doxycycline. Erythromycin-based medications can also be used. A single study suggests superiority of azithromycin over doxycycline. Another alternative is to use a parenteral regimen with ceftriaxone or cefoxitin plus doxycycline. Clinical experience guides decisions regarding transition from parenteral to oral therapy, which usually can be initiated within 24\u201348 hours of clinical improvement.\nPrognosis.\nEarly diagnosis and immediate treatment are vital in reducing the chances of later complications from PID. Delaying treatment for even a few days could greatly increase the chances of further complications. Even when the PID infection is cured, the effects of the infection may be permanent or long-lasting. This makes early identification essential.\nA limitation of this is that diagnostic tests are not included in routine check-ups, and cannot be done using signs and symptoms alone; the required diagnostic tests are more invasive than that. Treatment resulting in cure is very important in the prevention of damage to the reproductive system. Around 20 percent of women with PID develop infertility. Even women who do not experience intense symptoms or are asymptomatic can become infertile. This can be caused by the formation of scar tissue due to one or more episodes of PID, and can lead to tubal blockage. Both of these increase the risk of the inability to get pregnant, and 1% results in an ectopic pregnancy. Chronic pelvic/abdominal pain develops post PID 40% of the time. Certain occurrences such as a post pelvic operation, the period of time immediately after childbirth (postpartum), miscarriage or abortion increase the risk of acquiring another infection leading to PID.\nEpidemiology.\nGlobally, about 106 million cases of chlamydia and 106 million cases of gonorrhea occurred in 2008. The number of cases of PID; however, is not clear.This is largely due to diagnostic tests being invasive and not included in routine check-ups, despite PID being the most common reason for individuals to admit themselves under gynecological care. It is estimated to affect about 1.5 percent of young women yearly. In the United States, PID is estimated to affect about one million people yearly. Rates are highest among teenagers and first-time mothers. PID causes over 100,000 women to become infertile in the US each year.\nPrevalence.\nRecords show that...\nDespite the indications of a general decrease in PID rates, there is an observed rise in the prevalence of gonorrhea and chlamydia. With that, in order to decrease the prevalence of PID, one should test for gonorrhea and chlamydia.\nTwo nationally representative probability surveys referenced are the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) and the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) surveyed women aged 18 to 44 from 2013 to 2014.\nThe results:\nPopulation at risk.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24580", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24580", "title": "Pregnant", "text": ""}
{"id": "24581", "revid": "49959329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24581", "title": "PID", "text": "PID or Pid may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24583", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24583", "title": "Technology in Star Trek", "text": " \nThe fictional technology in \"Star Trek\" has borrowed many ideas from the scientific world. Episodes often contain technologies named after or inspired by real-world scientific concepts, such as tachyon beams, baryon sweeps, quantum slipstream drives, and photon torpedoes. Some of the technologies created for the \"Star Trek\" universe were done so out of financial necessity. For instance, the transporter was created because the limited budget of \"\" (\"TOS\") in the 1960s did not allow expensive shots of spaceships landing on planets.\n\"Discovery Channel Magazine\" stated that cloaking devices, faster-than-light travel, and dematerialized transport were only dreams at the time \"TOS\" was made, but physicist Michio Kaku believes all these things are possible. William Shatner, who portrayed James T. Kirk in \"TOS\", believes this as well, and went on to co-write the book \"I'm Working on That\", in which he investigates how \"Star Trek\" technology is becoming feasible.\nSubspace.\nIn the \"Star Trek\" fictional universe, subspace is a feature of space-time that facilitates faster-than-light transit, in the form of interstellar travel or the transmission of information. Faster-than-light warp drive travel via subspace obeys different laws of physics. The name \"subspace\" has also been adopted and used in other fictional settings, such as the \"Stargate\" franchise, \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" series, the \"Bobiverse\" series, and \"\". Narratively, it plays a similar role to the hyperspace that appears in \"Star Wars\" and other works of science fiction.\nIn most \"Star Trek\" series, subspace communications are a means to establish nearly instantaneous contact with people who are light years away. The physics of \"Star Trek\" describes infinite speed (expressed as \"warp factor 10\") as an impossibility; as such, even subspace communications which travel at speeds over Warp 9.9 may take hours or weeks to reach certain destinations. One exception to this impossibility was in the \" episode \" where Lt. Paris breaks the Warp 10 barrier. In the \"Star Trek\" universe subspace signals do not degrade with the square of the distance as do other methods of communication utilizing conventional bands of the electromagnetic spectrum (i.e. radio waves), so signals sent from a great distance can be expected to reach their destination at a predictable time and with little relative degradation (barring any random subspace interference or spatial anomalies).\nIn the \"Star Trek\" franchise, subspace communications have a limit of just over 20 light years before they must be boosted, although this limitation has been ignored in several storylines.\nWarp drive.\n\"Warp drive\" is one of the fundamental features of the \"Star Trek\" franchise; in the first pilot episode of \"\", \"The Cage\", it is referred to as a \"hyperdrive\", with Captain Pike stating the speed to reach planet TalosIV as \"time warp, factor 7\". When beginning to explain travel times to the illusion survivors (before being interrupted by the sight of Vina), crew member Jose Tyler stated that \"the time barrier's been broken\", allowing a group of interstellar travelers to return to Earth far sooner than would have otherwise been possible. Later in the pilot, when Spock is faced with the only action of escaping, he announces to the crew they have no choice but to leave, stating \"Our time warp factor...\" before the ship's systems start failing. In the second pilot for \"The Original Series\", \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\", \"time\" was dropped from the speed setting with Kirk ordering speeds in the simple \"ahead warp factor one\" that became familiar from then on.\nWorking principle.\nThe basic functional principle of the warp drive in \"Star Trek\" is the same for all spaceships. It was originally conceived of by a strong energy source, usually called a\" warp core \"or sometimes \"intermix chamber\", generates a high-energy plasma. This plasma is transported to \"warp field generators\" via lines that are reminiscent of pipes. These generators are effectively coils in \"warp nacelles\" protruding from the spaceship. The warp nacelles generate a subspace field, the \"warp field\" or a \"warp bubble\", which distort space-time and propels the bubble and spaceship in the bubble forward. That is similar to the Alcubierre drive, but with some exceptions as the maintenance of sub-light velocity and inertia. This means that a spaceship does not come to a complete standstill after the warp flight, but that superluminal and subluminal speeds flow directly into one another. It is also possible to ram another object at warp speed that is outside the warp bubble. This necessitates the existence of fictional deflector shields that protect the spacecraft from damage from collisions with interstellar dust particles and asteroids. The \"\" episode \"By Inferno's Light\" indicates that flying at warp speed inside a planetary system is not recommended.\nThe warp core can be designed in various forms. Humans and most of the other fictional races use a moderated reaction of antideuterium and deuterium with \"Dilithium\". The Romulans, however, use artificial micro-black holes called \"quantum singularities\".\nFictional history.\nThe episode \"Metamorphosis\", from \"The Original Series\", establishes a backstory for the invention of warp drive on Earth, in which Zefram Cochrane discovered the \"space warp\". Cochrane is repeatedly referred to afterwards, but the exact details of the first warp trials were not shown until the second ' movie, '. The movie depicts Cochrane as having first operated a warp drive on Earth in 2063. This successful first trial led directly to first contact with the Vulcans.\nIt was also established that many other civilizations had warp drive before humans; \"First Contact\" co-writer Ronald D. Moore suggested Cochrane's drive was in some way superior to forms which existed beforehand, and was gradually adopted by the galaxy at large.\nThe following table shows the gradual evolution of the warp drive and the warp speeds of humanity and later the United Federation of Planets. For better comparison, the warp factors of the TNG scale, based on the values given in the book \"Star Trek Encyclopedia\", have been converted to cubic warp factors from TOS.\nWarp speeds.\nOriginal warp scale (\"The Original Series\", \"The Animated Series\", \"Enterprise\", and \"Discovery\").\nThe warp drive velocity in \"Star Trek\" is generally expressed in \"warp factor\" units, which\u2014according to \"Star Trek Star Fleet Technical Manual\"\u2014corresponds to the magnitude of the warp field. Achieving warp factor1 is equal to breaking the light barrier, while the actual velocity corresponding to higher factors is determined using an ambiguous formula. \nAccording to the \"Star Trek\" episode writer's guide for \"The Original Series\", warp factors are converted to multiples of the speed of light by multiplication with the cubic function of the warp factor itself. Accordingly, \"warp 1\" is equivalent to the speed of light, \"warp 2\" is eight times the speed of light, \"warp 3\" is 27 times the speed of light, etc. Several episodes of \"The Original Series\" placed the \"Enterprise\" in peril by having it travel at high warp factors. However, the velocity (in present dimensional units) of any given warp factor is rarely the subject of explicit expression, and travel times for specific interstellar distances are not consistent through the various series. In the \"\" it was written that the real warp speed depends on external factors such as particle density or electromagnetic fields and only roughly corresponds with the calculated speed of current warp factor. The reference work \"Star Trek Maps\" established the theory of subspace (or warp) highways. In certain regions, a spaceship can fly at a multiple of the speed that corresponds to the current warp factor.\nIn \"The Original Series\", warp factor6 was established as the common speed of the USS \"Enterprise\" NCC-1701. In some cases, the starship traveled at warp7 or above, but with risk of damaging the ship or the engines. Warp8 in \"The Original Series\" was the \"never exceed\" speed for the hulls and engines of \"Constitution-\"class starships. Warp6 was the maximum \"safe\" cruising speed for that vessel class.\nLater on, a prequel series titled \"\" describes the warp engine technology as a \"Gravimetric Field Displacement Manifold\" (Commander Tucker's tour, \"\") and describes the device as being powered by a matter/anti-matter reaction which powers the two separate nacelles (one on each side of the ship) to create a displacement field. \"Enterprise\", set in 2151 and onward, follows the voyages of the first human ship capable of traveling at warp factor 5.2, which under the old warp table formula (the cube of the warp factor times the speed of light), is about 140 times the speed of light (i.e., 5.2 cubed). In the series pilot episode \"\", Capt. Archer equates warp 4.5 to \"Neptune and back [from Earth] in six minutes\" (which would correspond to a distance of 547 light-minutes or 66 au, consistent with Neptune's being a minimum of 29 au distant from Earth).\nModified warp scale (\"The Next Generation\", \"Deep Space Nine\", \"Voyager\", and \"Picard\").\nFor ' and the subsequent series, \"Star Trek\" artist Michael Okuda drew up a new warp scale and devised a formula based on the original one but with an important difference: In the half-open interval from 9to 10, the exponent\"w\" increases toward infinity. Thus, in the Okuda scale, warp velocities approach warp 10 asymptotically. According to the ' there is no exact formula for this interval because the quoted velocities are based on a hand-drawn curve; what can be said is that at velocities greater than warp 9, the form of the warp function changes because of an increase in the exponent of the warp factor\"w\". Due to the resultant increase in the derivative, even minor changes in the warp factor eventually correspond to a greater than exponential change in velocity. Warp factor 10 was set as an unattainable maximum of a theoretical infinite speed, at which an object would occupy all points in the universe simultaneously (according to the new scale, reaching or exceeding warp 10 required an infinite amount of energy). This is described in \"Star Trek Technical Manuals\" as \"Eugene's limit\", in homage to creator/producer Gene Roddenberry.\nAs stated in the collection \"Star Trek Fact Files\", no ship, including highly developed ships like the Borg cube, may exceed warp factor 9.99 with their normal warp drive. To achieve higher speeds, the use of transwarp technology is required.\nWarp velocities.\nIn the book \"Star Trek Encyclopedia\" and the compilation \"Star Trek Fact Files\", some warp velocities are given directly. For comparison, the following table shows these values and also the calculated speeds of the original warp scale, the calculated speeds of a simplified Okuda scale and some reference values for warp speeds from onscreen sources.\nTranswarp.\nTranswarp generally refers to speeds and technologies that are beyond conventional warp drives. The warp drive has a natural physical or economical limit beyond which higher speeds are no longer possible. The reference work \"Star Trek Fact Files\" indicates this limit at warp factor 9.99. This is the highest conventional warp speed mentioned for a spaceship (Borg cube). Also in the episode \"Threshold\" (\"Star Trek Voyager\") the warp factor 9.99 is suggested as the limit. This is the last warp factor mentioned before the leap takes place in the transwarp state.\nIn the book \"\" the authors describe the idea of transwarp: Finally, we had to provide some loophole for various powerful aliens like Q, who have a knack for tossing the ship million of light years in the time of a commercial break. .. This lets Q and his friends have fun in the 9.9999+ range, but also lets our ship travel slowly enough to keep the galaxy a big place, and meets the other criteria.\nThe transwarp concept itself is not tied to any particular technology or speed limit. Variants of transwarp are:\nMedical technology.\nTechnology plays an important part of the advanced medicine shown in \"Star Trek\". It is often based on selective current or even outdated concepts projected into the future. Examples are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24584", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24584", "title": "Physics and Star Trek/Miscellaneous where they got it wrong", "text": ""}
{"id": "24586", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24586", "title": "Impulse drive", "text": ""}
{"id": "24587", "revid": "32798152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24587", "title": "PKD", "text": "PKD may stand for:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24588", "revid": "11360876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24588", "title": "Princeton (disambiguation)", "text": "Princeton University is an Ivy League university in Princeton, New Jersey, United States. \nPrinceton may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24589", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24589", "title": "Punk subculture", "text": "Anti-establishment subculture\nThe punk subculture includes a diverse and widely known array of music, ideologies, fashion, and other forms of expression, visual art, dance, literature, and film. Largely characterised by anti-establishment views, the promotion of individual freedom, and the DIY ethics, the culture originated from punk rock.\nThe punk ethos is primarily made up of beliefs such as non-conformity, anti-capitalism, anti-authoritarianism, anti-corporatism, a do-it-yourself ethic, anti-consumerist, anti-corporate greed, direct action, and not \"selling out\".\nThere is a wide range of punk fashion, including T-shirts, leather jackets, Dr. Martens boots, hairstyles such as brightly coloured hair and spiked mohawks, cosmetics, tattoos, jewellery, and body modification. Women in the hardcore scene typically wore clothing categorised as masculine. This included black, ripped jeans and tops.\nPunk aesthetics determine the type of art punks enjoy, which typically has underground, minimalist, iconoclastic, and satirical sensibilities. Punk has generated a considerable amount of poetry and prose, and has its own underground press in the form of zines. Many punk-themed films have been made.\nHistory.\nThe punk subculture emerged in the mid-1970s; in New York in 1974 and in the United Kingdom in 1976. Some suggest the name \"punk\" was borrowed from prison slang. Early punk had an abundance of antecedents and influences, and Jon Savage describes the subculture as a \"bricolage\" of almost every previous youth culture in the Western world since World War II, \"stuck together with safety pins\".\nIn the late 1970s, the subculture began to diversify, which led to the proliferation of factions such as new wave, post-punk, 2 Tone, hardcore punk, no wave, street punk, and Oi!. Hardcore punk, street punk, and Oi! sought to do away with the frivolities introduced in the later years of the original punk movement. The punk subculture influenced other underground music scenes such as alternative rock, indie music, crossover thrash, and the extreme subgenres of heavy metal (mainly thrash metal, death metal, speed metal, and the NWOBHM).\nMusic.\nThe punk subculture is centered on a loud, aggressive genre of rock music called punk rock, usually played by bands consisting of a vocalist, one or two electric guitarists, an electric bassist, and a drummer. In some bands, the musicians contribute backup vocals, which typically consist of shouted slogans, choruses, or football-style chants.\nWhile most punk rock uses distorted guitars and noisy drumming sounds derived from 1960s garage rock and 1970s pub rock, some punk bands incorporate elements from other subgenres, such as surf rock, rockabilly, or reggae. Most punk rock songs are short, have simple and somewhat basic arrangements using relatively few chords, and typically have lyrics that express punk ideologies and values, although some punk lyrics are about lighter topics such as partying or romantic relationships.\nDifferent punk subcultures often distinguish themselves by having a unique style of punk rock, although not every style of punk rock has its own associated subculture.\nThe earliest form of music to be called \"punk rock\" was 1960s garage rock, and the term was applied to the genre retroactively by influential rock critics in the early 1970s. In the late 1960s, music now referred to as protopunk originated as a garage rock revival in the northeastern United States. The first distinct music scene to claim the \"punk\" label appeared in New York City between 1974 and 1976. Around the same time or soon afterward, a punk scene developed in London. Los Angeles subsequently became home to the third major punk scene. These three cities formed the backbone of the burgeoning movement, but there were also other punk scenes in cities such as Brisbane, Melbourne, and Sydney in Australia, Toronto, Vancouver, and Montreal in Canada, and Boston, Detroit, Cleveland, and San Francisco in the United States.\nIn the 1980s, punk went through an internal conflict over which the direction the music would go, the authenticity of the genre, and the commercial compromise from the bands. Scholars often described this period as an \"identity crisis\" where bands debated over what issues were truly essential to punk and how the music was meant to be played. Bands such as H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, 7 Seconds (band), Government Issue, and Dag Nasty played with a slower tempo and melody, drawing inspiration from jazz, classic rock, and more. Some fans viewed this change as necessary for the development of the genre while others said it was punk band changing for major record labels. This experimentation is what produced the subgenres of punk such as pop-punk, alternative rock, and Grunge. \nThe New York City punk rock scene arose from a subcultural underground promoted by artists, reporters, musicians, and a wide variety of non-mainstream enthusiasts. The Velvet Underground's harsh and experimental yet often melodic sound in the mid to late-1960s, much of it relating to transgressive media work by visual artist Andy Warhol, is credited for influencing 1970s bands such as the New York Dolls, the Stooges, and the Ramones.\nIdeologies.\nThe punk subculture advocates a do-it-yourself (DIY) ethic yet critics suggest that the DIY image often placed on punk is partly a delayed interpretation and not a completely accurate association. During the subculture's infancy members were almost all from a lower economic class, and had become tired of the affluence that was associated with popular rock music at the time. Punks would publish their own music or sign with small independent labels, in hopes to combat what they saw as a money-hungry music industry. The punk subculture advocates a DIY ethic, yet British punk rarely used the term \"DIY\". Punk bands were also known for spreading an anti-establishment culture, going against major corporations using unethical business practices, yet some scholars believe this wasn't entirely true. Punk bands, after becoming successful, would sign to major record labels and coast the rest of their career.Another critic going against their countercultural movement is that punk bands advertised their music, opting to use BBC radio 1 instead of local radio stations. The DIY ethic is still popular with punks. Even though punk is widely associated with DIY ideologies, British punk rarely used the term \"DIY\" and relied on mainstream advertising and factories to press their records. Punk is often credited with creating the DIY movement but some critics suggest we labeled this after the fact and is not an entirely true claim. \nPunk political ideologies are mostly concerned with individual freedom and anti-establishment views. Common punk viewpoints include anti-capitalism, individual liberty, anti-authoritarianism, a DIY ethic, non-conformity, anti-corporatism, anti-government, direct action, and not \"selling out\".\nSome groups and individuals that try to self-identify as being a part of the punk subculture hold pro-Nazi or Fascist views, however, these Nazi/Fascist groups are rejected by almost all of the punk subculture. The belief that such views are opposed to the original ethos of the punk subculture, and its history, has led to internal conflicts and an active push against such views being considered part of punk subculture at all. Two examples of this are an incident during the 2016 American Music Awards, where the band Green Day chanted anti-racist and anti-fascist messages, and an incident at a show by the Dropkick Murphys, when bassist and singer Ken Casey tackled an individual for giving a Nazi-style salute and later stated that Nazis are not welcome at a Dropkick Murphys show. Band member Tim Brennan later reaffirmed this sentiment. The song \"Nazi Punks Fuck Off\" by hardcore punk band Dead Kennedys is a standout example.\nEarly British punks expressed nihilistic and anarchist views with the slogan \"No Future\", which came from the Sex Pistols song \"God Save the Queen\". In the United States, punks had a different approach to nihilism which was less anarchistic than the British punks. Punk nihilism was expressed in the use of \"harder, more self-destructive, consciousness-obliterating substances like heroin, or methamphetamine\".\nFashion.\nEarly punk fashion adapted everyday objects for aesthetic effect: ripped clothing was held together by safety pins or wrapped with tape; ordinary clothing was customised by embellishing it with marker or adorning it with paint; a black bin liner became a dress, shirt or skirt; safety pins and razor blades were used as jewellery. Also popular have been leather, rubber, and PVC clothing that is often associated with transgressive sexuality, like BDSM and S&amp;M. A designer associated with early UK punk fashion was Vivienne Westwood, who made clothes for Malcolm McLaren's boutique in the King's Road, which became famous as \"SEX\".\nMany punks wear tight \"drainpipe\" jeans, plaid/tartan trousers, kilts or skirts, T-shirts, leather jackets (often decorated with painted band logos, pins and buttons, and metal studs, chains or spikes), and footwear such as high-cut Chuck Taylors, trainers, skate shoes, brothel creepers, Dr. Martens boots, and army boots. Early punks occasionally wore clothes displaying a swastika for shock value; Vivienne Westwood's \"DESTROY\" shirt featured an upside-down crucified Jesus and a swastika, notably worn by members of the Sex Pistols. Most contemporary punks are staunchly anti-racist and are more likely to wear a crossed-out swastika symbol than a pro-Nazi symbol. Some punks cut their hair into mohawks or other dramatic shapes, style it to stand in spikes, and colour it with vibrant, unnatural hues.\nSome punks are \"anti-fashion\", arguing that punk should be defined by music or ideology. Punk clothing choices challenge the way in which individuals in a nation dress, and the ideals of a traditionalist nation. This is most common in the post-1980s US hardcore punk scene, where members of the subculture often dressed in plain T-shirts and jeans, rather than the more elaborate outfits and spiked, dyed hair of their British counterparts. Many groups adopt a look based on street clothes and working-class outfits. Hardcore punk fans adopted a \"dressed-down\" style of T-shirts, jeans, combat boots or trainers, and crewcuts. Women in the hardcore scene typically wore army trousers, band T-shirts, and hooded jumpers.\nThe style of the 1980s hardcore scene contrasted with the more provocative fashion styles of late 1970s punk rockers (elaborate hairdos, torn clothes, patches, safety pins, studs, spikes, etc.). Circle Jerks frontman Keith Morris described early hardcore fashion as \"the...punk scene was basically based on English fashion. But we had nothing to do with that. Black Flag and the Circle Jerks were so far from that. We looked like the kid who worked at the gas station or submarine shop.\" Henry Rollins echoes Morris' point, stating that for him getting dressed up meant putting on a black shirt and some dark pants; Rollins viewed an interest in fashion as being a distraction. Jimmy Gestapo from Murphy's Law describes his own transition from dressing in a punk style (spiked hair and a bondage belt) to adopting a hardcore style (i.e. boots and a shaved head) as being based on a need for more functional clothing. A punk scholar states that \"hardcore kids do not look like punks\", since hardcore scene members wore basic clothing and short haircuts, in contrast to the \"embellished leather jackets and pants\" worn in the punk scene.\nIn contrast to Morris' and Rollins' views, another punk scholar claims that the standard hardcore punk clothing and styles included torn jeans, leather jackets, spiked armbands and dog collars, mohawk hairstyles, and DIY ornamentation of clothes with studs, painted band names, political statements, and patches. Yet another punk scholar describes the look that was common in the San Francisco hardcore scene as consisting of biker-style leather jackets, chains, studded wristbands, pierced noses and multiple piercings, painted or tattooed statements (e.g. an anarchy symbol), and hairstyles ranging from military-style haircuts dyed black or blonde to mohawks and shaved heads.\nThe Metropolitan Museum of Art in 2013 hosted a comprehensive exhibit, \"PUNK: Chaos to Couture\", that examined the techniques of hardware, distress, and re-purposing in punk fashion.\nGender and gender expression.\nIn the United Kingdom, the advent of punk in the late 1970s with its \"anyone can do it\" ethos led to women making significant contributions. In contrast to the rock music and heavy metal scenes of the 1970s, which were dominated by men, the anarchic, counter-cultural mindset of the punk scene in mid- and late 1970s encouraged women to participate. \"That was the beauty of the punk thing,\" Chrissie Hynde later said. \"[Sexual] discrimination didn't exist in that scene.\" This participation played a role in the historical development of punk music, especially in the US and UK at that time, and continues to influence and enable future generations.\nRock historian Helen Reddington states that the popular image of young punk women musicians as focused on the fashion aspects of the scene (fishnet stockings, spiky blond hair, etc.) was stereotypical. She states that many, if not most women punks were more interested in the ideology and socio-political implications, rather than the fashion. Music historian Caroline Coon contends that before punk, women in rock music were virtually invisible; in contrast, in punk, she argues \"[i]t would be possible to write the whole history of punk music without mentioning any male bands at all \u2013 and I think a lot of [people] would find that very surprising.\" Johnny Rotten wrote that 'During the Pistols era, women were out there playing with the men, taking us on in equal terms ... It wasn't combative, but compatible.' Women were involved in bands such as The Runaways, The Slits, The Raincoats, Mo-dettes, Dolly Mixture, and The Innocents.\nOthers take issue with the notion of equal recognition, such as guitarist Viv Albertine, who stated that \"the A&amp;R men, the bouncers, the sound mixers, no one took us seriously. So, no, we got no respect anywhere we went. People just didn't want us around.\" The anti-establishment stance of punk opened the space for women who were treated like outsiders in a male-dominated industry. Sonic Youth's Kim Gordon states, \"I think women are natural anarchists, because you're always operating in a male framework.\"\nBody and appearance.\nFor some punks, the body was a symbol of opposition, a political statement expressing disgust of all that was \"normal\" and socially accepted. The idea was to make others outside of the subculture question their own views, which made gender presentation and gender identity a popular factor to be played with. In some ways, punk helped to tear apart the normalised view of gender as a dichotomy. There was a notable amount of cross-dressing in the punk scene; it was not unusual to see men wearing ripped-up skirts, fishnet tights, and excessive makeup, or to see women with shaved heads wearing oversized plaid shirts and jean jackets and heavy combat boots. Punk created a new cultural space for androgyny and all kinds of gender expression.\nIn trying to reject societal norms, punk embraced one societal norm by deciding that strength and anger was best expressed through masculinity, defining masculine as the \"default\", where gender did not exist or had no meaning. However, the main reasoning behind this argument equates femininity with popular conceptions of beauty. Everything that was normally supposed to be hidden was brought to the front, both literally and figuratively. This could mean anything from wearing bras and underwear on top of clothing to wearing nothing but a bra and underwear. Although that act can seem sexualised, to punks it was just a way of self-expression. Punk seemed to allow people to sexualise themselves and still be taken seriously.\nThe nature of punk allowed many to create a non-gender-conforming style. Punks could be free to use femininity or masculinity to make what they were doing even more shocking to their audience. It became popular for some punks to accentuate societal norms. At one concert, Donita Sparks, lead singer of the band L7, pulled out her tampon and threw it into the audience.\nRiot grrrl.\nRiot grrrl is an underground feminist hardcore punk movement that originated in the early 1990s in Washington, D.C., and the Pacific Northwest, especially Olympia, Washington. It is often associated with third-wave feminism, which is sometimes seen as its starting point. It has also been described as a musical genre that came out of indie rock, with the punk scene serving as an inspiration for a musical movement in which women could express themselves in the same way men had been doing for the past several years.\nQueercore.\nQueercore is a punk movement that focuses on LGBT issues. Queercore is an anti-establishment subculture based around a rejection of heteronormativity. This rejection extends beyond mainstream society and resists homophobia in the larger punk scene. Queercore is an offshoot of the hardcore punk scene and draws its name from a combination of the words \"queer\" and \"hardcore.\" As in the larger punk scene, DIY is an integral component of the queercore subculture. Many zines that came out of the riot grrrl movement explored issues of queer identity, contributing to the queercore subculture. The queercore and riot grrrl subcultures are often considered to be connected. These two punk scenes are intertwined, with many bands being both queercore and riot grrrl.\nVisual art.\nPunk aesthetics determine the type of art punks enjoy, usually with underground, minimalistic, iconoclastic, and satirical sensibilities. Punk artwork graces album covers, flyers for concerts, and punk zines. Usually straightforward with clear messages, punk art is often concerned with political issues such as social injustice and economic disparity. The use of images of suffering to shock and create feelings of empathy in the viewer is common. Alternatively, punk artwork may contain images of selfishness, stupidity, or apathy to provoke contempt in the viewer.\nMuch of the earlier artwork was black and white, because it was distributed in zines and reproduced by photocopying at work, school, or at copy shops. Punk art also uses the mass production aesthetic of Andy Warhol's Factory studio. Punk played a hand in the revival of stencil art, spearheaded by Crass. The Situationists also influenced the look of punk art, particularly that of the Sex Pistols created by Jamie Reid. Punk art often uses collage, exemplified by the art of Jamie Reid, Crass, The Clash, Dead Kennedys, and Winston Smith. John Holmstrom was a punk cartoonist who created work for the Ramones and \"Punk\".\nDance.\nTwo dance styles associated with punk are pogo dancing and moshing. The pogo is a dance in which the dancers jump up and down, while either remaining on the spot or moving around; the dance takes its name from its resemblance to the use of a pogo stick, especially in a common version of the dance, where an individual keeps their torso stiff, their arms rigid, and their legs close together. Pogo dancing is closely associated with punk rock and is a precursor to moshing. Moshing or slamdancing is a style of dance where participants push or slam into each other, typically during a live music show. It is usually associated with \"aggressive\" music genres, such as hardcore punk and thrash metal. Stage diving and crowd surfing were originally associated with protopunk bands such as The Stooges, and have appeared at punk, metal, and rock concerts. Ska punk promoted an updated version of skanking. Hardcore dancing is a later development influenced by all of the above-mentioned styles. Psychobillies prefer to \"wreck\", a form of slam dancing that involves people punching each other in the chest and arms as they move around the circle pit.\nLiterature.\nPunk has generated a considerable amount of poetry and prose. Punk has its own underground press in the form of punk zines, which feature news, gossip, cultural criticism, and interviews. Some zines take the form of perzines. Important punk zines include \"Maximum RocknRoll\", \"Punk Planet\", \"No Cure\", \"Cometbus\", \"Flipside\", and \"Search &amp; Destroy\". Several novels, biographies, autobiographies, and comic books have been written about punk. \"Love and Rockets\" is a comic with a plot involving the Los Angeles punk scene.\nJust as zines played an important role in spreading information in the punk era (e.g. British fanzines like Mark Perry's \"Sniffin Glue\" and Shane MacGowan's \"Bondage\"), zines also played an important role in the hardcore scene. In the pre-Internet era, zines enabled readers to learn about bands, shows, clubs, and record labels. Zines typically included reviews of shows and records, interviews with bands, letters to the editor, and advertisements for records and labels. Zines were DIY products, \"proudly amateur, usually handmade, and always independent\", and during the \"'90s, zines were the primary way to stay up on punk and hardcore.\" They were the \"blogs, comment sections, and social networks of their day.\"\nIn the American Midwest, the zine \"Touch and Go\" described the regional hardcore scene from 1979 to 1983. \"We Got Power\" described the LA scene from 1981 to 1984, and included show reviews of and interviews with such bands as Vancouver's D.O.A., the Misfits, Black Flag, Suicidal Tendencies, and the Circle Jerks. \"My Rules\" was a photo zine that included photos of hardcore shows from across the US. \"In Effect\", which began in 1988, described the New York City scene.\nPunk poets include: Richard Hell, Jim Carroll, Patti Smith, John Cooper Clarke, Seething Wells, Raegan Butcher, and Attila the Stockbroker. The Medway Poets performance group included punk musician Billy Childish and had an influence on Tracey Emin. Jim Carroll's autobiographical works are among the first known examples of punk literature. The punk subculture has inspired the cyberpunk and steampunk literature genres, and has even contributed (through Iggy Pop) to classical scholarship.\nFilm.\nMany punk-themed films have been made. The No Wave Cinema and Remodernist film movements owe much to punk aesthetics. Several famous punk bands have participated in movies, such as the Ramones in \"Rock 'n' Roll High School\", the Sex Pistols in \"The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle\", and Social Distortion in \"Another State of Mind\". Derek Jarman and Don Letts are notable punk filmmakers. Penelope Spheeris' first instalment of the documentary trilogy \"The Decline of Western Civilization\" (1981) focuses on the early Los Angeles punk scene through interviews and early concert footage from bands including Black Flag, Circle Jerks, Germs, and Fear. The Decline of Western Civilization III\" explores the gutter punk lifestyle in the 1990s. \"Loren Cass\" is another example of the punk subculture represented in film.\nThe Japanese cyberpunk movement has roots in the J-rock subculture that arose in the 1970s. The filmmaker Sogo Ishii introduced this subculture to Japanese cinema with his punk films \"Panic High School\" (1978) and \"Crazy Thunder Road\" (1980), which portrayed the rebellion and anarchy associated with punk, and went on to become highly influential in underground film circles. \"Crazy Thunder Road\" in particular was an influential biker film, with a punk biker gang aesthetic that paved the way for Katsuhiro Otomo's manga and anime franchise \"Akira\" (1982 debut). Ishii's next film was the frenetic \"Shuffle\" (1981), an unofficial short film adaptation of a manga comic strip by Otomo.\nThe documentary film \"Afro-Punk\" covers the black experience in the punk DIY scene.\nPerspectives on drugs and alcohol.\nInhalable solvents.\nThe \"cheap high\" of glue sniffing was adopted by punks, encouraged by the disgusted and shocked reactions they received from society. Model aeroplane glue and contact cement were among the numerous solvents and inhalants used by punks to achieve euphoria and intoxication. Glue was typically inhaled by placing a quantity in a plastic bag and \"huffing\" (inhaling) the vapour. Liquid solvents were typically inhaled by soaking a rag with the solvent and inhaling the vapour. While users inhale solvents for the intoxicating effects, the practice can be harmful or fatal.\nThe practice is referenced by the Ramones in their 1976 song, \"Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue\".\nStraight edge.\nStraight edge is a philosophy of hardcore punk culture, adherents of which refrain from using alcohol, tobacco, and other recreational drugs, in reaction to the excesses of punk subculture. For some, this extends to refraining from engaging in promiscuous sex, following a vegetarian or vegan diet, and not drinking coffee or taking prescribed medicine. The term \"straight edge\" was adopted from the 1981 song \"Straight Edge\" by the hardcore punk band Minor Threat.\nStraight edge emerged amid the early-1980s hardcore punk scene. Since then, a wide variety of beliefs and ideas have been associated with the movement, including vegetarianism and animal rights. Ross Haenfler writes that as of the late 1990s, approximately three out of four straight edge participants were vegetarian or vegan. While the commonly expressed aspects of the straight edge subculture have been abstinence from alcohol, nicotine, and illegal drugs, there have been considerable variations on how far to take the interpretations of \"abstaining from intoxicants\" or \"living drug-free\". Disagreements often arise as to the primary reasons for living straight edge. Straight edge politics are primarily left-wing and revolutionary but there have been conservative offshoots.\nIn 1999, William Tsitsos wrote that straight edge had gone through three eras since its founding in the early 1980s. Bent edge began as a counter-movement to straight edge by members of the Washington, D.C. hardcore scene who were frustrated by the rigidity and intolerance in the scene. During the youth crew era, which started in the mid-1980s, the influence of music on the straight edge scene was at an all-time high. By the early 1990s, militant straight edge was a well-known part of the wider punk scene. In the early to mid-1990s, straight edge spread from the United States to Northern Europe, Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and South America. By the beginning of the 2000s, militant straight edge punks had largely left the broader straight edge culture and movement.\nLifestyle and community.\nPunks come from all culture and economic classes. Compared to some subcultures, punk ideology is much closer to gender equality. Although the punk subculture is mostly anti-racist, it is overwhelmingly white. However, members of other groups (such as African Americans, other black people, Latinos, and Asians) have contributed to the development of the subculture. Substance abuse has sometimes been a part of the punk scene, with the notable exception of the straight edge movement. Violence has also sometimes appeared in the punk subculture, but has been opposed by some subsets of the subculture, such as the pacifist strain anarcho-punk.\nPunks often form a local scene, which can have as few as half a dozen members in a small town, or as many as thousands of in a major city. A local scene usually has a small group of dedicated punks surrounded by a more casual periphery. A typical punk scene is made up of punk and hardcore bands, fans who attend concerts, protests, and other events, zine publishers, reviewers, and other writers, visual artists illustrating zines, and creating posters and album covers, show promoters, and people who work at music venues or independent record labels. Punk communities also include older fans who have expanded punk into a lifestyle during adulthood. Research on older punk fans shows that involvement often persists into adulthood through small-venue shows, festivals, and local social scenes, acting almost as overseers of the genre. While the older fans stand to the side while younger fans mosh, they interact by sharing knowledge about punk and continuing the culture into adulthood. Although the visual indications of punk become less important to older fans, punk turns into an ideology that shapes their world view. \nSquatting plays a role in many punk communities, providing shelter and other forms of support. Squats in abandoned or condemned housing, and communal \"punk houses\" often provide bands a place to stay while they are touring. Punk houses are often centered on certain political or personal ideologies. It is not uncommon for a punk house to be anarchist, strictly straight-edge, or vegan. Punk houses serve as backdrops for local scenes; punk houses often provide overnight shelter to touring punk rock bands, and sometimes serve as a venue for shows. Bands or record labels sometimes form in a particular punk house. Many punk houses have associated punk zines that sometimes share the name of the house. There are some punk communes, such as Essex's Dial House.\nThe Internet has been playing an increasingly large role in punk, specifically in the form of virtual communities and file sharing programs for trading music files.\nAuthenticity.\nIn the punk and hardcore subcultures, members of the scene are often evaluated in terms of the authenticity of their commitment to the values or philosophies of the scene, which may range from political beliefs to lifestyle practices. In the punk subculture, the epithet \"poseur\" (or \"poser\") is used to describe \"a person who habitually pretends to be something [they are] not.\" The term is used to refer to a person who adopts the dress, speech, and/or mannerisms of a particular subculture, yet who is deemed to not share or understand the values or philosophy of the subculture.\nNever one to shy away from criticising the music industry and even punk culture, in Chickenshit Conformist Dead Kennedys opined that \"Punk's not dead It just deserves to die When it becomes another stale cartoon...Ideas don't matter, it's who you know.\", saying punk was in danger of becoming a \"meaningless fad\" because people had stopped caring about what they saw as the core values of punk (\"Change and caring are what's real\"). In particular, metal bands, which were seen as an offshoot, they saw as not only as a sell-out, but as morally repugnant to the core values of punk saying labels were making money by signing \"the most racist queerbashing bands they can find.\"\nWhile this perceived inauthenticity is viewed with scorn and contempt by members of the subculture, the definition of the term and to whom it should be applied is subjective. An article in \"Drowned in Sound\" argues that 1980s-era \"hardcore is the true spirit of punk\", because \"after all the poseurs and fashionistas fucked off to the next trend of skinny pink ties with New Romantic haircuts, singing wimpy lyrics\", the punk scene consisted only of people \"completely dedicated to the DIY ethics\".\nProto-punk bands such as the Who, the Stooges, the Velvet Underground, Pink Fairies, the Deviants, and Edgar Broughton Band came out of garage-rock during the late 1960s. Usually, white working-class boys are credited for pioneering the genre, however, there were many women (Patti Smith, Siouxsie Sioux) and people of colour (the Specials member) who contributed to the original punk sound and aesthetic. Because the original subculture meant to challenge to the mainstream, and punk movement became major it was brought to the mainstream. If punk is commercialised, it is far from street culture. This is the paradox of punk; as a subculture, it must always be evolving to stay out of the mainstream.\n\"Punk Girls\" written by Liz Ham is a photo-book featuring 100 portraits of Australian women in the punk subculture, and it was published in 2017 by Manuscript Daily. Discrimination against punk subculture is explored with her photographs in the book; these \"girls\" who are not mainstream, but \"beautiful and talented\".\nInteractions with other subcultures.\nSome of the first hip hop MCs called themselves punk rockers, and some punk fashions have found their way into hip hop dress and vice versa. Malcolm McLaren played roles in introducing both punk and hip hop to the United Kingdom. Hip hop later influenced some punk and hardcore bands, such as the Beastie Boys, Hed PE, Blaggers I.T.A., Biohazard, E.Town Concrete, The Transplants, and Refused. Other rappers and hip-hop acts were influenced by the subcultures of crust punk and hardcore such as City Morgue.\nThe skinhead subculture of the United Kingdom in the late 1960s \u2013 which had almost disappeared in the early 1970s \u2013 was revived in the late 1970s, partly because of the influence of punk rock, especially the Oi! punk subgenre. Conversely, ska and reggae, popular among traditionalist skinheads, has influenced several punk musicians. Punks and skinheads have had both antagonistic and friendly relationships, depending on the social circumstances, time period, and geographic location.\nThe punk and heavy metal subcultures have shared some similarities since punk's inception. The early 1970s protopunk scene had an influence on the development of heavy metal. Alice Cooper was a forerunner of the fashion and music of both the punk and metal subcultures. Mot\u00f6rhead, since their first album release in 1977, have enjoyed continued popularity in the punk scene, and their now-deceased frontman Lemmy was a fan of punk rock. Genres such as metalcore, grindcore, crossover thrash, riot grrl, and emo were greatly influenced by punk rock and heavy metal. Hardcore emerged as a response to the supposed commercialisation of early punk music. Most hardcore music was produced independently to reject the mainstream music industry. The emergence of hardcore resulted in the fused creation of many genres, such as metalcore, grindcore, and crossover thrash. Emo was inspired by punk, but added more emotional and lyrical themes. It is not considered to be as musically heavy as its punk predecessor. The new wave of British heavy metal influenced the UK 82-style of bands like Discharge, and hardcore was a primary influence on thrash metal bands such as Metallica and Slayer. The early 1990s grunge subculture was a fusion of punk anti-fashion ideals and metal-influenced guitar sounds. However, hardcore punk and grunge developed in part as reactions against the heavy metal music that was popular during the 1980s.\nIn punk's heyday, punks faced harassment and attacks from the general public and from members of other subcultures. In the 1980s in the UK, punks were sometimes involved in brawls with Teddy Boys, greasers, bikers, mods, and members of other subcultures. There was also considerable enmity between Positive punks (known today as goths) and the glamorously dressed New Romantics.\nIn the late 1970s, punks were known to have had confrontations with hippies due to the contrasting ideologies and backlash of the hippie culture. Nevertheless, Penny Rimbaud of the English anarcho-punk band Crass said that Crass was formed in memory of his friend, the hippie Wally Hope. Rimbaud also said that Crass were heavily involved with the hippie movement throughout the 1960s and 1970s, with Dial House being established in 1967. Many punks were often critical of Crass for their involvement in the hippie movement. Like Crass, Jello Biafra was influenced by the hippie movement and cited the yippies as a key influence on his political activism and thinking, though he did write songs critical of hippies.\nThe industrial and rivethead subcultures have had several ties to punk, in terms of music, fashion, and attitude.\nPower pop music (as defined by groups such as Badfinger, Cheap Trick, The Knack, and The Romantics) emerged in mostly the same time frame and geographical area as punk rock, and they shared a great deal musically in terms of playing short songs loud and fast while trying to emphasise catchy feelings. More melodic and pop-influenced punk music has also often been wrapped alongside power pop bands under the general \"new wave music\" label. A good example of a genre-straddling \"power pop punk\" band is the popular Northern Ireland group Protex. However, stylistically and lyrically, power pop bands have tended to have a very \"not-punk\" top 40 commercial pop music influence and a flashier, heavily teen-pop sense of fashion, especially modern power pop groups such as Stereo Skyline and All Time Low.\nPersecution.\nEast Germany.\nThe punk scene began to emerge in communist East Germany in the late 1970s. It shared many similarities with that of the West and was considered by the ruling authorities to be a spread of an international youth sub-culture which had its roots in the US and Western Europe. Indeed, this was an assessment many East German punks shared themselves. According to one, Mario Schulz, \"The start was that I liked the music. I did not quite understand the English texts, but this ostentatious experience as an outsider, this capacity to shock, that pleased me. I was already \u2013 someone else would probably express it differently- an awkward sod.\"\nBy the authorities, punk was seen as representing a way of life which was contrary in nature to existing social conventions and values. Punks were, however, not the only youth sub-culture to be considered 'negative decadent' and a threat to the stability of communist society: heavy metallers, skinheads, and goths were also targeted. While it is hard to ascertain an exact figure, the punk scene in East Germany in the early 1980s was still relatively small. For example, 'In 1981, the Stasi (secret police) identified 1,000 punks and a broader group of 10,000 sympathisers.' Punks, whether considered as individuals or as groups, were persecuted by both the regular police and the Stasi. More overt methods of persecution by the regular police \u2013 such as enforced haircutting, arrest, and physical beatings \u2013 were combined unofficially with the more insidious and far-reaching decomposition methods (trans. Zersetzung) of the Stasi: these involved various forms of infiltration, false flag type acts, framing, psychological harassment methods designed to cause mental health problems, and incarceration on the basis of mental health legislation or on the basis of crimes ostensibly committed.\nAs the methods of the Stasi were difficult to detect and even harder to prove, it allowed them to circumvent international condemnation in regard to the persecution of their own citizens. Aside from being designed to harm people, the methods were also designed to discredit and isolate individuals and break up the various bands and groupings. They relied heavily on the hiring of collaborators who were of a similar disposition to those who were being targeted. According to Stasi officers, this was a task which was harder to achieve with punks due to their 'feeling of belonging together.' Nonetheless, the Stasi did have notable success in the repression and decomposition of the punk scene. Former member of the band \"Namenlos\", Jana Schlosser, stated in 1984 when she came out of jail, that \"The Stasi had pretty well managed to smash punk.\"\nGlobal perspectives.\nThe punk subculture has spread to many countries around the world. The fluidity of musical expression in particular makes it an ideal medium for this cross-cultural interpretation.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, punk culture is primarily a phenomenon among the upper-middle class, many of whom were first exposed to punk music through travel to England, but rapidly shifted to the lower-class youth. Because of low fees at public universities in Mexico, a significant majority of Mexican punks are university students. It is estimated approximately 5,000 young people are active punks in Mexico City, hosting two or three underground shows a week. These young people often form chavos banda \u2014 youth gangs \u2014 that organise subculture activity by creating formal meeting spaces and rituals and practices.\nOral nicknames are a distinguishing feature of Mexican punk, where the tradition of oral culture has influenced the development of nicknames for almost all Mexican punks. Patches are widely used as an inexpensive way to alter clothing and express identity. Though English-language bands like the Dead Kennedys are well known in Mexico, punks there prefer Spanish-language music or covers translated into Spanish. The slam dance style common in the California punk scene of the early 1980s is thoroughly adopted as part of the movement and continues to be the most popular dancing style among punks.\nPerformance and ideology practices often reflect the socioeconomic circumstances of Mexican punks. Live shows, called \"tocadas\", are generally held in public spaces like basketball courts or community centers instead of places of business like venues, bars, and restaurants, as is more common in the United States and Europe. They usually take place in the afternoon and end early to accommodate the two or three hours it takes many punks to return home by public transit. Mexican punk groups rarely release vinyl or CD recordings, usually cassettes are the preferred format.\nThough Mexican punk itself does not have an explicit political agenda, Mexican punks have been active in the Zapatista, Anarcho-punk, and anti-globalisation movements.\nSouth Africa.\nPunk arrived slowly in South Africa during the 1970s when waves of British tradesmen welcomed by the then-apartheid government brought cultural influences like the popular British music magazine \"NME\", sold in South Africa six weeks after publication.\nSouth African punk developed separately in Johannesburg, Durban, and Cape Town and relied on live performances in townships and streets as the multi-racial composition of bands and fan bases challenged the legal and social conventions of the apartheid regime.\nPolitical participation is foundational to punk subculture in South Africa. During the apartheid regime, punk was second only to rock music in its importance to multi-racial interactions in South Africa. Because of this, any involvement in the punk scene was in itself a political statement. Police harassment was common and the government often censored explicitly political lyrics. Johannesburg-based band National Wake was routinely censored and even banned for songs like \"International News\", which challenged the South African government's refusal to acknowledge the racial and political conflict in the country. National Wake guitarist Ivan Kadey attributes the punk scene's ability to persevere despite the legal challenges of multi-racial mixing to punk subculture's DIY ethic and anti-establishment attitude.\nIn post-apartheid South Africa, punk attracted a greater number of white middle-class males than the more diverse makeup of the subculture during the apartheid era. Thabo Mbeki's African Renaissance movement has complicated the position of white South Africans in contemporary society. Punk provides young white men the opportunity to explore and express their minority identity. Cape Town band Hog Hoggidy Hog sings of the strange status of white Africans:\n\"It's my home it's where I'll stay and where I belong,\"\n\"I didn't choose to be here I was born I might seem out of place\"\n\"but everything I hold dear is under the African sun.\"\nPost-apartheid punk subculture continues to be active in South African politics, organising a 2000 festival called Punks Against Racism at Thrashers Statepark in Pretoria. Rather than the sense of despondency and fatalism that characterised 1970s British punk subculture, the politically engaged South African scene is more positive about the future of South Africa.\nPeru.\nIn Peru punk traces its roots to the band Los Saicos, a Lima group that played the unique blend of garage and break dance music that would later be labelled punk as early as the 1960s. The early activity of Los Saicos has led many to claim that punk originated in Lima instead of the UK, as is typically assumed. Though their claim to be the first punk band in the world can be disputed, Los Saicos were undoubtedly the first in Latin America and released their first single in 1965. The group played to full houses and made frequent television appearances throughout the 1960s. Throughout the 1970s, the band was completely forgotten. Years later, a plaque that declares \"here the global punk-rock movement was born\" was placed at the corner of Miguel Iglesias and Julio C. Tello Streets in Lima.\nBy the 1980s the punk scene in Peru was highly active. Peruvian punks call themselves \"subtes\" and appropriate the subversive implications of the English term \"underground\" through the Spanish term \"subterraneo\" (literally, subterranean). In the 1980s and 1990s subtes made almost exclusive use of cassette recording as a means of circulating music without participating in formal intellectual property and musical production industries. The current scene relies on digital distribution and assumes similar anti-establishment practices. Like many punk subcultures, subtes explicitly oppose the Peruvian state and advocate instead an anarchic resistance that challenges the political and mainstream cultural establishment.\nCuba.\nA punk subculture originated in Cuba in the 1980s, referred to as Los Frikis. As Cuban radio stations rarely played rock music, Frikis often listened to music by picking up radio frequencies from stations in nearby Florida. While many Frikas in the early-1990s entered AIDS clinics by knowingly injecting HIV-positive blood into them, others began congregating at \"El patio de Mar\u00eda\", a community centre in Havana that was one of the few venues in the city that allowed rock bands to play. Some Frikis also participate in squatting as an act of political defiance.\nIn its beginning, the subculture was seen as a threat to the collectivism of Cuban society, leading to Frikis becoming victims of discrimination and police brutality. According to the New Times Broward-Palm Beach some Frikis were \"rejected by family and often jailed or fined by the government\", the 1980s Friki woman Yoandra Cardoso, however, has that argued that much of the response was verbal harassment from law enforcement. Dionisio Arce, lead vocalist of Cuban heavy metal band Zeus spent six years in prison due to his part in the Frikis. Some schools would forcibly shave the heads of young Frikis as a form of punishment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24590", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24590", "title": "Pubic louse", "text": ""}
{"id": "24591", "revid": "51005813", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24591", "title": "Polyamory", "text": "Intimacy with multiple partners\nPolyamory (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'many' and la\u00a0'love') is the practice of, or the desire for, romantic or sexual relationships with more than one partner at the same time, with the informed consent of all partners involved. Some people who identify as polyamorous believe in consensual non-monogamy with a conscious management of jealousy and reject the view that sexual and relational exclusivity (monogamy) are prerequisite for deep, committed, long-term, loving relationships. Others prefer to restrict their sexual activity to only members of the group, a closed polyamorous relationship that is usually referred to as polyfidelity.\n\"Polyamory\" has come to be an umbrella term for various forms of non-monogamous, multi-partner relationships, or non-exclusive sexual or romantic relationships. Its usage reflects the choices and philosophies of the individuals involved, but with recurring themes or values, such as love, intimacy, honesty, integrity, equality, communication, and commitment. It can often be distinguished from some other forms of ethical non-monogamy in that the relationships involved are loving intimate relationships, as opposed to purely sexual relationships.\nThe term \"polyamory\" was coined in 1990 and officially defined by 1999. It is not typically considered part of the LGBTQ umbrella. Courts and cities in Canada and the U.S. are increasingly recognizing polyamorous families, granting legal parentage to multiple adults and extending protections to multi-partner relationships. While still uncommon, about 4% of people practice polyamory, and up to 17% are open to it. While mainstream Christianity and Judaism generally reject polyamory, some religious groups, including the Oneida Community, certain rabbis and Jewish communities, LaVeyan Satanists, and Unitarian Universalists, have accepted or supported polyamorous relationships. In clinical settings, therapists are encouraged to recognize diverse relationship structures such as polyamory, address biases toward monogamy, and utilize specialized resources to support polyamorous clients.\nFrom the 1970s onward, polyamory has been depicted in various media, including Isaac Asimov\u2019s works, DC Comics\u2019 Starfire, The Wheel of Time series, Futurama, and numerous 21st-century television shows and novels. Polyamory-related observances include Metamour Day on February 28, Polyamory Pride Day during Pride Month, International Solo Polyamory Day on September 24, and Polyamory Day on November 23, with polyamory groups often participating in pride parades. Worldwide nonprofits like Loving More and others advocate for polyamory rights, acceptance, and education. Critics argue that polyamory is not inherently radical, often reflects privilege, and may have negative social impacts. Notable individuals publicly identifying as polyamorous include authors Dossie Easton, Janet Hardy, and Laurell K. Hamilton; filmmaker Terisa Greenan; activist Brenda Howard; and musician Willow Smith.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe word \"polyamorous\" first appeared in an article by Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart, \"A Bouquet of Lovers\", published in May 1990 in \"Green Egg Magazine\", as \"poly-amorous\". In May 1992, Jennifer L. Wesp created the Usenet newsgroup \"alt.polyamory\", and the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) cites the proposal to create that group as the first verified appearance of the word. In 1999, Zell-Ravenheart was asked by the editor of the OED to provide a definition of the term, and she provided it for the UK version as \"the practice, state or ability of having more than one sexual loving relationship at the same time, with the full knowledge and consent of all partners involved.\" The words \"polyamory\", \"polyamorous\", and \"polyamorist\" were added to the OED in 2006.\nSome reference works define \"polyamory\" as a relational form (whether interpersonal or romantic or sexual) that involves multiple people with the consent of all the people involved, like Oxford Living Dictionaries, \"Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary\" and Thesaurus, and Dictionary.com. Some criticized the Merriam-Webster definition of polyamory, which defines the term as \"the state or practice of having more than one open romantic relationship at a time,\" as missing a \"vital component\": consent.\nThe word \"polyamory\" combines the Greek word for \"many\" (\"poly\") and the Latin word for \"love\" (\"amor\"). Polyamory is not generally included in the LGBT umbrella because it is not a sexuality or a gender identity.\nAs a practice.\nConsensual non-monogamy, which polyamory falls under, can take many different forms, depending on the needs and preferences of the individual(s) involved in any specific relationship(s). As of 2019, over one-fifth of single Americans have, at some point in their lives, engaged in some sort of consensual non-monogamy.\nSeparate from polyamory as a philosophical basis for relationships are the practical ways in which people who live polyamorously arrange their lives and handle specific issues compared to those of a more conventional monogamous arrangement. People of different sexual orientations are a part of the community and form networks of relationships with the consent and agreement of their partners. Many things differentiate polyamory from other types of non-monogamous relationships. It is common for swinging and open couples to maintain emotional monogamy while engaging in extra-dyadic sexual relations.\nThe friend or partner boundary in monogamous relationships and other forms of non-monogamy is typically fairly clear. Unlike other forms of non-monogamy, though, \"polyamory is notable for privileging emotional intimacy with others.\" Benefits of a polyamorous relationship might include: the ability of individuals to discuss issues with multiple partners, potentially mediating and thus stabilizing a relationship, and reducing polarization of viewpoints, and emotional support and structure from other committed adults within the familial unit. Other benefits include a wider range of adult experience, skills, resources, and perspective and support for companionate marriages, which can be satisfying even if no longer sexually vital since romantic needs are met elsewhere. This acts to preserve existing relationships.\nThe Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender and Reproduction estimated that there were half a million \"openly polyamorous families\" in the United States in July 2009. Additionally, 15\u201328% of heterosexual couples and about half of gay and bisexual people have a \"non-traditional\" arrangement of some kind as reported in \"The Guardian\" in August 2013. Polyamorous communities have been said to be outwardly feminist as women were central to the creation of such communities and gender equality is a central tenet. For those who are polyamorous, social distancing, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, created ripples in existing relationships, leading some to split apart and others to struggle to maintain their connections with one another.\nFidelity and loyalty.\nA large percentage of polyamorists define \"fidelity\" not as sexual exclusivity, but as faithfulness to the promises and agreements made about a relationship. As a relational practice, polyamory sustains a vast variety of open relationship or multi-partner constellations, which can differ in definition and grades of intensity, closeness and commitment. Specifically, \npolyamory can take the forms of a triad of three people in an intimate relationship, a poly family of more than three people, one person as the pivot point of a relationship (a \"vee\"), a couple in a two-person relationship which portrays other relationships on their own, and various other intimate networks of individuals. There are also those who are swingers and engage in polyamory or engage in poly-dating. A poly family is sometimes called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;kitchen table polyamory, a style of polyamory in which all members of a particular polycule are comfortable and connected enough with each other that it is not uncommon for them to literally gather around the kitchen table, as they may spend holidays, birthdays, or other important times together as a large group. This style emphasizes family-style connections, and not all members are necessarily sexually or romantically involved with every other person in the group. \nOther styles of polyamory include parallel polyamory, where members of individual relationships prefer not to meet or know details of their partners' other relationships, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;solo polyamory defines non-monogamous individuals who do not want a primary partner and may resist the \"relationship escalator\" (an idea that relationships must follow a progression, or \"escalator\" from dating, to being exclusive, to becoming engaged, getting married, and having children). For some, polyamory functions as an umbrella term for the multiple approaches of 'responsible non-monogamy'. A secret sexual relationship that violates those accords would be seen as a breach of fidelity. Polyamorists generally base definitions of \"commitment\" on considerations other than sexual exclusivity, e.g., \"trust and honesty\" or \"growing old together\". In an article in \"Men's Health\", Zachary Zane states that commitment in a polyamorous relationship means that \"you will be there for that person\", supporting them, taking care of them, and loving them.\nCommunication and negotiation.\nBecause there is no \"standard model\" for polyamorous relationships, and reliance upon common expectations may not be realistic, polyamorists advocate explicitly negotiating with all involved to establish the terms of their relationships and often emphasize that this should be an ongoing process of honest communication and respect. Polyamorists typically take a pragmatic approach to their relationships; many accept that sometimes they and their partners will make mistakes and fail to live up to these ideals and that communication is important for repairing any breaches. They also argue that polyamory is a response to challenges of relationships of a monogamous nature.\nTrust, honesty, dignity, and respect.\nPolyamory has been defined as loving more than one person at once, with respect, trust, and honesty for all partners involved. Ideally, a partner's partners are accepted as part of that person's life rather than merely tolerated, and usually a relationship that requires deception or a \"don't-ask-don't-tell\" policy is seen as a less than ideal model.\n\"Out\" additionally described polyamory as \"not a sexuality\" but as actually \"having multiple intimate relationships\".\nNon-possessiveness.\nSome polyamorists view excessive restrictions on other deep relationships as less than desirable, as such restrictions can be used to replace trust with a framework of ownership and control. It is usually preferred or encouraged that a polyamorist strive to view their partners' other significant others, often referred to as metamours or OSOs, in terms of the gain to their partners' lives rather than a threat to their own (compersion). Therefore, jealousy and possessiveness are generally viewed not so much as something to avoid or structure the relationships around but as responses that should be explored, understood, and resolved within each individual, with compersion as a goal. This is related to one of the types of polyamory, which is non-hierarchical, where \"no one relationship is prioritized above the rest\" and the fact that polyamorists insist on working through problems in their relationships \"through open communication, patience, and honesty.\"\nCompersion.\nCompersion is a term coined by members of the polyamorous community to describe an empathetic state of happiness and joy experienced when another individual experiences happiness and joy. In the context of polyamorous relationships, it describes positive feelings experienced by an individual when their intimate partner is enjoying another relationship. It has been variously described as \"the opposite or flip side of jealousy\", analogous to the \"joy parents feel when their children get married\", and a \"positive emotional reaction to a lover's other relationship\". The term is traced to the Kerista Commune in San Francisco.\nDifficulties.\nMorin (1999) and Fleckenstein (2014) noted that certain conditions are favorable to good experiences with polyamory but that these differ from the general population. Heavy public promotion of polyamory can have the unintended effect of attracting people to it for whom it is not well-suited. Unequal power dynamics, such as financial dependence, can also inappropriately influence a person to agree to a polyamorous relationship against their true desires. Even in more equal power-dynamic relationships, the reluctant partner may feel coerced into a proposed non-monogamous arrangement due to the implication that if they refuse, the proposer will pursue other partners anyway, will break off the relationship, or that the one refusing will be accused of intolerance and not being open-minded.\nPolyamorous relationships present practical pitfalls. One common complaint from participants is time management, as more partners mean one must divide one's time and attention between them, leaving less for each. Related is that the complexity of the arrangement can lead to so much effort being spent on the relationship that personal, individual needs can be overlooked. The strong emphasis on communication can unintentionally marginalize partners who are less articulate. Finally, negotiating the sometimes complex rules and boundaries of these relationships can be emotionally taxing, as can reconciling situations where one partner goes outside those boundaries.\nThe scientific studies of psychological well-being and relationship satisfaction for participants in polyamory have been limited due to mostly being a \"hidden population.\" While some results could be interpreted as positive, these findings often suffer from bias and methodological issues. A significant number of studies rely on small samples, often recruited from referrals, snowball-sampling, and websites devoted to polyamory. Individuals recruited in this manner tend to be relatively homogeneous regarding values, beliefs, and demographics, which limits the generalizability of the findings. These samples also tend to be self-selecting toward individuals with positive experiences. In contrast, those who found polyamory to be distressing or hurtful might be more reluctant to participate in the research. Most of the studies rely entirely on self-report measures. Generally, self-reports of the degree of well-being and relationship satisfaction over time are flawed and are often based on belief rather than actual experience. Self-report measures are also at risk of self-enhancement bias, as subjects may feel pressure to give positive responses about their well-being and relationship satisfaction in the face of stereotype threat.\nLegal issues.\nParenting.\nCanada.\nIn June 2018, a court in Newfoundland and Labrador recognized three unmarried adults as legal parents of a child who was born within the polyamorous family they had formed; this was believed to be a first for Canadian law. The three adults included the child's mother and two men; the child's biological father was unknown.\nIn April 2021, a British Columbia Supreme Court justice declared a woman was the third legal parent in a polyamorous \"triad\".\nIn April 2025, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled that the province must recognize families with more than two parents. The court gave the provincial government one year to amend the Civil Code, and listed court rulings in five provinces and territories as precedent.\nUnited States.\nIn 1998, a Tennessee court granted guardianship of a child to her grandmother and step-grandfather, after the child's mother April Divilbiss and partners outed themselves as polyamorous on MTV. After contesting the decision for two years, Divilbiss eventually agreed to relinquish her daughter, acknowledging that she was unable to adequately care for her child and that this, rather than her polyamory, had been the grandparents' real motivation in seeking custody.\nIn 2013, California passed SB 274 (Family Code \u00a77612(c)), legalizing state courts' recognition of more than two parents if the court finds that recognizing only two parents would be detrimental to the child. In 2017, three men became the first family in the state of California to have names of three fathers on their child's birth certificate under the law.\nIn November 2020, the issue of polyamory came to the Supreme Court of Vermont in the form of a dispute between two men and a woman in a polyamorous relationship.\nDomestic partnerships.\nIn 2016, writer Rebecca Ruth Gould called for non-monogamy, including polyamory, to receive \"the legal recognition it deserves\", saying that polyamory remains a \"negative identity\".\nIn June 2020, the city council of Somerville, Massachusetts, voted to recognize polyamorous domestic partnerships in the city, becoming the first American city to do so. This measure was passed so that those in a polyamorous relationship would have access to their partners' health insurance amid the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn March 2021, the Cambridge, Massachusetts City Council approved an ordinance amending the city's laws, stipulating that \"a domestic partnership needn't only include two partners.\" The measure was supported by the Polyamory Legal Advocacy Coalition, also known as PLAC, composed of the Chosen Family Law Center, Harvard Law School LGBTQ+ Advocacy Clinic, and some members on the American Psychological Association's Committee on Consensual Non-Monogamy. This ordinance was originally proposed in July 2020. In April 2021, the adjacent town of Arlington, Massachusetts, approved domestic partnerships of more than two people through a motion at Town Meeting. Any motion approved at Arlington's Town Meeting is subject to review and approval from the state Attorney General's office; by early January 2022 that office (the office of Maura Healey) approved it.\nAnti-discrimination law.\nPeople in polyamorous relationships sometimes receive punishment at work when they are open about their relationships.\nIn 2010, Ann Tweedy, a legal scholar, argued that polyamory could be considered a sexual orientation under existing United States law. This argument was opposed by Christian Keese, who wrote in 2016 that advocating a \"sexual orientation model of polyamory is likely to reduce the complexity and transformative potential of poly intimacies,\" while also limiting the reach and scope of possible litigation, obstructing the ability of poly activists to form alliances with other groups, and increasing the possibility that poly activists will have to settle for legal solutions which are \"exclusive and reproductive of a culture of privilege\".\nIn March 2023, the city of Somerville, Massachusetts passed an ordinance prohibiting discrimination against polyamorous people in employment and policing.\nIn April 2024, Oakland City Council passed legislation banning discrimination based on family and relationship structure in businesses, civil services, and housing.\nIn May 2024, Berkeley, California passed a law banning discrimination on the basis of relationship and family structure in businesses, city services, and housing.\nMarriage implications.\nMost western countries do not recognize polygamous marriages, and consider bigamy a crime. Several countries also prohibit people from living a polygamous lifestyle. This is the case in some states of the United States where the criminalization of a polygamous lifestyle originated as anti-Mormon laws, although they are rarely enforced. Having multiple non-marital partners, even if married to one, is legal in most U.S. jurisdictions; at most it constitutes grounds for divorce if the spouse is non-consenting, or feels that the interest in a further partner has destabilized the marriage. In some jurisdictions, like North Carolina, a spouse can sue a third party for causing \"loss of affection\" in or \"criminal conversation\" (adultery) with their spouse, while more than twenty states in the US have laws against adultery, although they are infrequently enforced; the Supreme Court's ruling in \"Lawrence v. Texas\" did not explicitly hold such laws to be unconstitutional but its reasoning may imply that conclusion.\nPolyamory, however, is on a continuum of family-bonds that includes group marriage and it does not refer to bigamy as long as no claim to being married in formal legal terms is made. \"The Social History of the American Family: An Encyclopedia\" (2014, edited by Marilyn J. Coleman and Lawrence H. Ganong) stated that under existing U.S. federal law, a polyamorous relationship is legal in all 50 states while polygamy is not. On November 23, 2011, the Supreme Court of British Columbia ruled that the anti-polygamy law of Canada does not affect unformalized polyamorous households; this is why Polyamory Day is celebrated every year on November 23. Even so, those in polyamorous relationships often face legal challenges when it comes to custody, morality clauses, adultery and bigamy laws, housing, and where they live.\nIn 2012, legal scholar Deborah Anapol called for the revision of existing U.S. laws against bigamy to permit married persons to enter into additional marriages, provided that they have first given legal notice to their existing marital partner or partners, with a \"dyadic networks\" model. In 2015, another legal scholar, Ronald C. Den Otter, wrote in the \"Emory Law Journal\" (in the article \"Three May Not Be a Crowd: The Case for a Constitutional Right to Plural Marriage\") that in the United States the constitutional rights of due process and equal protection fully support marriage rights for polyamorous families.\nDuring a PinkNews question-and-answer session in May 2015, Redfern Jon Barrett questioned Natalie Bennett, leader of the Green Party of England and Wales, about her party's stance toward polyamorous marriage rights. Bennett responded by saying that her party is \"open\" to discussion on the idea of civil partnership or marriages between three people. Bennett's announcement aroused media controversy on the topic and led to major international news outlets covering her answer. A follow-up article written by Barrett was published by PinkNews on May 4, 2015, further exploring the topic. \nIn most countries, it is legal for three or more people to form and share a sexual relationship (subject sometimes to laws against homosexuality or adultery if two of the three are married). With only minor exceptions no developed countries permit \"marriage\" among more than two people, nor do the majority of countries give legal protection (e.g., of rights relating to children) to non-married partners. Individuals involved in polyamorous relationships are generally considered by the law to be no different from people who live together, or \"date\", under other circumstances. In 2017, John Alejandro Rodriguez, Victor Hugo Prada, and Manuel Jose Bermudez became Colombia's first polyamorous family to have a legally recognized relationship, though not a marriage, as by Colombian law, marriage is between two people, so they instead called it a \"special patrimonial union\". Some have called for domestic partnership laws to be expanded to include polyamorous couples and have said that marriage-like entitlements should apply to such couples.\nPrevalence.\nResearch into the prevalence of polyamory has been limited. A comprehensive government study of sexual attitudes, behaviors, and relationships in Finland in 1992 (age 18\u201375, around 50% female and male) found that around 200 out of 2250 (8.9%) respondents \"agreed or strongly agreed\" with the statement \"I could maintain several sexual relationships at the same time\" and 8.2% indicated a relationship type \"that best suits\" at the present stage of life would involve multiple partners. By contrast, when asked about other relationships simultaneously as a steady relationship, around 17% stated they had had other partners while in a steady relationship (50% no, 17% yes, 33% refused to answer).\nThe article \"What Psychology Professionals Should Know About Polyamory\" (by Geri Weitzman), based on a paper presented at the 8th Annual Diversity Conference in March 1999 in Albany, New York, states that while openly polyamorous relationships are relatively rare, there are \"indications that private polyamorous arrangements within relationships are actually quite common.\" They also note, citing 1983 study of 3,574 married couples in their sample that \"15\u201328% had an understanding that allows nonmonogamy under some circumstances,\" with percentages are higher among \"cohabitating couples (28%), lesbian couples (29%) and gay male couples (65%).\" According to Jessica Fern, a psychologist and the author of \"Polysecure: Attachment, Trauma and Consensual Nonmonogamy\", as of September 2020, about 4% of Americans, nearly 16 million people, are \"practising a non-monogamous style of relationship\". A study by Amy C. Moors, Amanda N. Gesselman and Justin R. Garcia published on 23 March 2021 and using a sample of 3,438 individuals has shown that 10.7% of the sample were engaged in a polyamorous relationship at some point in their life, and 16.8% reported a desire to try or be in one. The study also revealed a correlation between educational background and polyamory, showing that lesser-educated male individuals were more likely to engage in or have been involved in polyamorous relationships. These findings indicate that the number of Americans who have engaged in polyamorous relationships is significantly higher than previously thought.\nAcceptance by religions.\nThe Oneida Community in the 1800s in New York (a Christian religious commune) believed strongly in a system of free love known as a complex marriage, where any member was free to have sex with any other who consented. In 1993, the archives of the community were made available to scholars for the first time. Contained within the archives was the journal of Tirzah Miller, Noyes' niece, who wrote extensively about her romantic and sexual relations with other members of Oneida.\nSome Christians are polyamorous, although mainstream Christianity does not accept polyamory. In 2017, the Council on Biblical Manhood and Womanhood, an evangelical Christian organization, released a manifesto on human sexuality known as the \"Nashville Statement\". The statement was signed by 150 evangelical leaders and included 14 points of belief. Among other things, it states, \"We deny that God has designed marriage to be a homosexual, polygamous, or polyamorous relationship.\"\nSome Jews are polyamorous, although mainstream Judaism does not accept polyamory. Nikki DeBlosi is an openly polyamorous rabbi; she was ordained by the Hebrew Union College \u2013 Jewish Institute of Religion. Also, in 2000, Rabbi Jacob Levin came out as polyamorous to his synagogue's board in California without losing his job as rabbi. As well, in his book \"A Guide to Jewish Practice: Volume 1 \u2013 Everyday Living\" (2011), Rabbi David Teutsch wrote, \"It is not obvious that monogamy is automatically a morally higher form of relationship than polygamy,\" and that if practiced with honesty, flexibility, egalitarian rules, and trust, practitioners may \"live enriched lives as a result\". In 2013, Sharon Kleinbaum, the senior rabbi at Congregation Beit Simchat Torah in New York, said that polyamory is a choice that does not preclude a Jewishly observant and socially conscious life. Some polyamorous Jews point to biblical patriarchs having multiple wives and concubines as evidence that polyamorous relationships can be sacred in Judaism. An email list is dedicated to polyamorous Jews; it is called \"AhavaRaba\", which roughly translates to \"big love\" in Hebrew, and which echoes God's \"great\" or \"abounding\" love mentioned in the Ahava rabbah prayer.\nLaVeyan Satanism is critical of Abrahamic sexual mores, considering them narrow, restrictive, and hypocritical. Satanists are pluralists, accepting polyamorists, bisexuals, lesbians, gays, BDSM, transgender people, and asexuals. Sex is viewed as an indulgence, but one that should only be freely entered into with consent. The Eleven Satanic Rules of the Earth only give two instructions regarding sex: \"Do not make sexual advances unless you are given the mating signal\" and \"Do not harm little children\", though the latter is much broader and encompasses physical and other abuse. This has been a consistent part of CoS policy since its inception in 1966. Magister Peter H. Gillmore wrote in an essay supporting same-sex marriage that some people try to suggest that their attitude on sexuality is \"anything goes\" even though they have a principle of \"responsibility to the responsible\".\nUnitarian Universalists for Polyamory Awareness, founded in 2001, has engaged in ongoing education and advocacy for greater understanding and acceptance of polyamory within the Unitarian Universalist Association. At the 2014 General Assembly, two UUPA members moved to include the category of \"family and relationship structures\" in the UUA's nondiscrimination rule, along with other amendments; the GA delegates ratified the package of proposed amendments.\nAcceptance by non-religious organizations.\nIn 2018, the Association of Humanistic Rabbis issued \"A Statement on Sexual Ethics for the 21st Century\", which states in part, \"We commit to the freedom and empowerment of all adults to full consensual sexual expression, be it monogamous or polyamorous.\"\nIn a clinical setting.\nIn 2002, a paper titled \"Working with polyamorous clients in the clinical setting\" (by Joy Davidson) addressed various areas of inquiry. This included the importance of talking about alternatives to monogamy, how therapists can work with those who are exploring polyamory, basic understandings of polyamory, and key issues that therapists need to watch for in the course of working with polyamorous clients. It concluded that \"Sweeping changes are occurring in the sexual and relational landscape\" (including \"dissatisfaction with limitations of serial monogamy, i.e. exchanging one partner for another in the hope of a better outcome\"); that clinicians need to start by \"recognizing the array of possibilities that 'polyamory' encompasses\" and \"examine our culturally-based assumption that 'only monogamy is acceptable'\" and how this bias impacts on the practice of therapy; the need for self-education about polyamory, basic understandings about the \"rewards of the poly lifestyle\" and the common social and relationship challenges faced by those involved, and the \"shadow side\" of polyamory, the potential existing for coercion, strong emotions in opposition, and jealousy. The paper also states that the configurations a therapist would be \"most likely to see in practice\" are individuals involved in primary-plus arrangements, monogamous couples wishing to explore non-monogamy for the first time, and \"poly singles\".\nIn 2002, the rights of polyamorous people were added to the mission of the National Coalition for Sexual Freedom, an American sex-positive advocacy and educational organization; a manual for psychotherapists who deal with polyamorous clients was published by them in September 2009, called \"What Psychotherapists Should Know About Polyamory\" (written by Geri Weitzman and others).\nThe National Coalition for Sexual Freedom manages the Kink And Poly Aware Professionals Directory, which consists of an Internet directory of psychotherapeutic, medical, and other professionals who have volunteered to be contacted by people who are involved in polyamory (and/or BDSM, etc.).\nThe Polyamory-Friendly Professionals Directory is a directory on the Internet \"of professionals who are sensitive to the unique needs of polyamorous clientele\"; it includes psychologists, therapists, medical professionals, and other professionals.\nMedia representation.\n1970s to 2000s.\n\"The Gods Themselves\" is a 1972 novel by Isaac Asimov, a third of which is devoted to describing an alien race in an alien dimension where romantic relationships are usually composed of \"three\" individuals and where conception, and orgasm, is only possible during sexual intercourse between all three partners at the same time (i.e., a threesome).\nStarfire, also known as Princess Koriand'r, is a fictional superhero appearing in books published by DC Comics, who debuted in a preview story inserted within \"DC Comics Presents\" #26 (October 1980) and was created by Marv Wolfman and George P\u00e9rez; she was shown to be a polyamorous character. Starfire was raised on the world of Tamaran where it was acceptable to have an open marriage. Some critics argue that after arriving on Earth, she remained sex-positive and free-thinking, remaining open to polygamous relationships, open sex, and pansexual \"free-love\" with anyone, often leading to conflict with Earth's more reserved culture and customs. For Starfire, polyamory was a personal and cultural preference.\nIn 1989, the anime series \"Ranma \u00bd\" included a polyamorous character, Tatewaki, who is in love with both Akane and the \"Pigtail Girl\" (Ranma's female form) and proposes to date both, but they do not return his feelings.\nRobert Jordan's fantasy book series \"The Wheel of Time\", which began its run in 1990, is notable for its inclusion of various polyamorous relationships throughout the narrative. This includes the protagonist Rand al\u2019Thor, who enters a romantic relationship with three women, Min, Aviendha and Elayne. The Aiel culture in the series also practice polyamory commonly. Jordan himself acknowledged that he had been in a non-monogamous relationship as a younger man, which inspired the relationships seen in his works. The books also hinted at a relationship between Alanna and her (male) warders Ihvon and Maksim, but it was not explored in detail until the 2021 television adaptation.\nIn 2002, the \"Futurama\" episode \"A Taste of Freedom\" showed Old Man Waterfall, who is Zoidberg's defense attorney until killed by a giant crab warship, having seven wives and one husband. While Waterfall's case for Zoidberg is unsuccessful, the Supreme Court holds polygamy as legal, though this leads to jeers from spectators. The made-for-TV \"Futurama\" film, \"\" (published 2008), featured two polyamorous characters: Colleen O'Hallahan and Yivo. Colleen had five boyfriends, Fry, Chu, Ndulu, Schlomo and Bolt Rolands, while Yivo is a planet-sized alien with no determinable gender, dating, then marrying all people of the universe at once. Fry and Colleen eventually break up. Afterwards, Yivo remains in a relationship with Colleen.\nThe 21st century brought various new forms of representation of polyamory. In 2007, Daniel Help Justice's book \"Dreyd\" featured Tarsa, a priestess, warrior, and bisexual woman, as part of a polyamorous love triad. In 2009, Graham Nicholls founded www.polyamory.org.uk, the United Kingdom's first website about polyamory and the Mom of Pina in Maria Pallotta-Chiarolli's novel, \"Love You Two\" was shown to be polyamorous and bisexual, leading Pina on a journey to explore the \"complex spectrum of sex and love\" in humanity itself. In 2010, the series \"Lost Girl\" began. It included Bo Dennis, a bisexual succubus which must sustain herself by feeding from the life force of male and female Fae and humans, via oral intake or the energy created through sex. In the first two seasons she was involved romantically with Dyson (a heterosexual shapeshifter) and Lauren (a lesbian human). Later on, Bo tried to have a monogamous relationship with Lauren, with Bo and Lauren remaining in love with each other through ups and downs, and later accepting each other as a couple by the end of the series.\nIncreased representation in the 2010s.\nPolyamorous characters appeared in various media in the 2010s. In the 2010 television show \"Caprica\", several main characters are portrayed as being in a polyfidelitous-style marriage consisting of multiple men and women, with each member being equal socially and legally. From 2012 to 2013, the American reality television series on the American pay television network Showtime, ', was broadcast. It followed polyamorous families as they navigated the challenges presented by polyamory. Around the same time, the webcomic \"Kimchi Cuddles\" began, which portrayed polyamorous people like other characters, \"only with more partners to steal their blankets.\" The following years featured a polyamorous captain in Jacqueline Koyanagi's novel, \"Ascension\", and three characters (Reese, David, and Amber) in a relationship in Malinda Lo's novel, \"Inheritance\". In 2011, ' began, with Countess Elizabeth Johnson, played by Lady Gaga, beginning a relationship with famed film actor Rudolph Valentino and his wife, Natacha Rambova, as seen in episode seven. The following year, the YouTube show \"The Gay and Wondrous Life of Caleb Gallo\" would show a couple working through their decision to convert from monogamy to polyamory, like Brian Jordan Alvarez, who considers himself polyamorous.\nFrom 2015 to 2017, in the webcomic \"Always Human\" by Ari North, the parents of Sunati (Nisa and Prav) were shown to be in a polyamorous relationship with a man named Vish, who Nisa calls \"our boyfriend\". In another webcomic, \"Unknown Lands\", which began in 2015, Vard is shown to be polyamorous, along with most of the cast having a queer sexual identity. The webcomic itself has environmental, feminist, and LGBTQ+ themes. A few years later, the 2017 film \"Professor Marston and the Wonder Women\" focuses on the real-life polyamorous relationship between the professor, psychologist William Moulton Marston (the creator of Wonder Woman), his wife and research partner Elizabeth Holloway Marston, and their student, Olive Byrne, as they share a \"workplace, a bed, a home and eventually a family.\" Furthermore, fiction writer Cassandra Clare stated that Mark Blackthorn in \"The Dark Artifices\" book series would \"definitely be open to a polyamorous relationship\", but would not cheat or lie, while noting that another such relationship between other characters would not be possible. Eventually, he ends up in a polyamorous triangle, with a girlfriend and a boyfriend who are dating each other. Additionally, writer K. Ancrum confirmed that polyamorous characters were in two of her books (\"The Wicker King\" and \"The Weight of the Stars\"), but did not name any specific characters. At the same time, Em, best friend of the protagonist in two books by Leigh Matthews (\"Don't Bang the Barista\" and \"Go Deep\") is a bisexual woman dating a man in the first book, but by the second book she has \"happily settled into a poly triad\", wondering how she will get married.\nOn May 29, 2017, in the last season of \"Steven Universe\", Fluorite, a member of the Off Colors, a fusion of six different gems into one being, with fusion as the physical manifestation of a relationship, was introduced. This character reappeared in various episodes in the show's fifth season (\"Lars Head\", \"Lars of the Stars\", \"Your Mother and Mine\"), the season 5 finale, \"Change Your Mind\", along with one in \"Steven Universe Future\" (\"Little Graduation\") and in \"\", with the latter two as non-speaking appearances. The series creator, Rebecca Sugar, confirmed that Fluorite is a representation of a polyamorous relationship at the show's Comic Con panel in San Diego. Sugar said at the panel, and at another conference, that she was inspired after talking with children at an LGBTQ+ center in Long Beach, California, who wanted a polyamorous character in the show. \"Steven Universe\" was not alone in this regard. The fourth season of \"BoJack Horseman\", a mature animated series, featured a character named Hollyhock, the sister of the protagonist, who has eight adoptive fathers in a polyamorous gay relationship. The same year, \"Unicornland\" premiered, with eight-episode web series focusing on Annie's exploration into polyamory after her divorce.\n2018\u2013present.\nPolyamory was the subject of the 2018 Louis Theroux documentary \"Love Without Limits\", where Theroux travels to Portland, Oregon, to meet a number of people engaged in polyamorous relationships. Also in 2018, \"195 Lewis\", a web series about a black lesbian couple dealing with their relationship being newly polyamorous, received the Breakthrough Series \u2013 Short Form award from the Gotham Awards. The series premiered in 2017 and ran for five episodes. The same year, the comic \"Open Earth\" premiered. The comic is set in the future and monogamous relationships are seen as outdated to all the young people on board the space station, all of whom are polyamorous. Author Sarah Mirk said that she wanted to write a story where \"open relationships can be really positive and wonderful\" and said that it is realistic to believe that people would \"explore multiple relationships\".\n\"Trigonometry\" is an eight-part BBC TV drama series which started on March 15, 2020, and is about an existing couple being joined by a third person and forming a polyamorous relationship. The BBC said that \"Trigonometry\" is \"A love story about three people who are made for each other.\" In July 2021, Australian soap opera \"Neighbours\" explored polyamory with three of its main characters. Actress Jacinta Stapleton was proud to be involved in the story arc, stating: \"I think we should always try to reflect real intimate relationships in our society. Polyamory certainly is a part of that. The more we represent the beautifully diverse nature and uniqueness of humans, the more people will feel accepted and seen.\"\nPolyamory-related observances.\nMetamour Day is celebrated every year on February 28. It celebrates the relationships people have with their metamours (partners' other significant others, often referred to as metamours or OSOs.)\nPolyamory Pride Day is celebrated every year on a day in Pride Month.\nPolyamory groups sometimes participate in pride parades.\nInternational Solo Polyamory Day is celebrated every year on September 24.\nPolyamory Day is celebrated every year on November 23; that day was chosen because on November 23, 2011, the Supreme Court of British Columbia ruled that the anti-polygamy law of Canada does not affect unformalized polyamorous households.\nPolyamory rights organizations.\nThe Canadian Polyamory Advocacy Association (CPAA) was founded in 2009. It \"advocates on behalf of Canadians who practice polyamory. It [also] promotes legal, social, government, and institutional acceptance and support of polyamory, and advances the interests of the Canadian polyamorous community generally.\"\nLoving More was an American non-profit organization formed to support and advocate on behalf of polyamorous people. Founded in 1985, Loving More claimed to be the oldest and longest-running polyamory organization; Loving More became inactive in March 2024.\nThe Organization for Polyamory and Ethical Non-monogamy (OPEN) was founded in the United States in 2022 as \"a nonprofit organization dedicated to normalizing and empowering non-monogamous individuals and communities.\"\nThe Polyamory Action Lobby (PAL) was founded in 2013 in Australia to fight cultural misconceptions about polyamorous people and to fight for their legal rights.\nThe Polyamory Legal Advocacy Coalition (PLAC), based in the United States, \"seeks to advance the civil and human rights of polyamorous individuals, communities, and families through legislative advocacy, public policy, and public education.\"\nThe UK Polyamory Association (UKPA) was founded by Giulia Smith. Its mission statement is, \u201cThe UK Polyamory Association exists to support the needs of polyamorous people and communities across the UK. We aim to increase public awareness and acceptance of polyamory, and challenge stigma through advocacy, positive representation, and education.\u201d\nUnitarian Universalists for Polyamory Awareness (UUPA) was founded in 2001. It \"has as its mission to serve the Unitarian Universalist Association and the community of polyamorous people within and outside the UUA by providing support, promoting education, and encouraging spiritual wholeness regarding polyamory.\"\nOpposition.\nYasmin Nair, a co-founder of Against Equality, has criticized polyamory. She has stated that polyamorists are not inherently radical, and said that the discourse around polyamory is unengaging and not liberating, only fetishizing a \"peculiar form of monogamy...and long-term relationships\". In a 2013 article in \"The Guardian\", Julie Bindel described polyamory a \"co-opting and rebranding of polygamy\". She argued that contemporary proponents of polyamory often overlooked gender dynamics and characterized it as a choice predominantly made by \"overwhelmingly white, affluent, university-educated, and privileged folk\". The conservative \"National Review\" claimed that \"widespread acceptance of polyamory could make society worse off\" with supposed false notions of honesty. Conor Friedersdorf, writing in \"The Atlantic\" in 2015, expressed his opposition to polyamorous civil marriages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPolyamory-related media\nPolyamory-related media coverage\nResearch and articles\nGuides"}
{"id": "24592", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24592", "title": "Pope Theodore II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 897\nPope Theodore II (; 840 \u2013 December 897) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States for twenty days in December 897. His short reign occurred during a period of partisan strife in the Catholic Church, which was entangled with a period of violence and disorder in central Italy. His main act as pope was to annul the recent Cadaver Synod, therefore reinstating the acts and ordinations of Pope Formosus, which had themselves been annulled by Pope Stephen VI. He also had the body of Formosus recovered from the river Tiber and reburied with honour. He died in office in late December 897.\nBackground.\nLittle is known of Theodore's background; he is recorded as being born a Roman, and the son of Photios. His brother Theodosius (or Theosius) was also a bishop. Theodore was ordained as a priest by Pope Stephen V.\nIn January 897, Pope Stephen VI held what is known as the Cadaver Synod. Because his predecessor, Formosus, sided with Arnulf of Carinthia rather than Stephen's ally, Lambert of Spoleto, in their struggle for the imperial dignity, Stephen had the corpse of Formosus exhumed and tried for \"perjury, violating the canons prohibiting the translation of bishops, and coveting the papacy\". The dead pope was found guilty, his body thrown in the Tiber, and all his acts and ordinations were annulled. Supporters of Formosus rebelled and deposed Stephen VI. His successor, Romanus, is generally assumed to have been pro-Formosus, but he too was soon deposed.\nPapacy.\nTheodore II was elected to succeed the deposed Romanus as pope. The exact dates of Theodore II's pontificate are unknown, but modern sources generally agree that he was pope for twenty days during December 897. Flodoard, a tenth-century French chronicler, only credited Theodore with a twelve-day reign, while in his history of the popes, Alexis-Fran\u00e7ois Artaud de Montor listed Theodore's reign as being twenty days, from 12 February to 3 March 898.\nLike Romanus, Theodore was a supporter of Formosus. Some historians believe that Romanus had been deposed because he had not acted to restore Formosus' honour quickly enough, though others suggest that he was removed by supporters of Stephen VI. In either case, Theodore immediately threw himself into the task of undoing the Cadaver Synod. He called his own synod, which annulled the rulings set out by Stephen VI. In so doing, he restored the acts and ordinations of Formosus, including the restoration of a large number of clergy and bishops to their offices. Theodore also ordered Formosus' body to be recovered from the harbour of Portus, where it had been secretly buried, and restored to the original grave at Old St. Peter's Basilica. Like Romanus before him, Theodore bestowed a privilege upon the See of Grado, and had a coin minted, bearing the name of Lambert on the obverse, and \"Scs. Petrus\" and \"Thedr.\" on the reverse.\nFlodoard cast Theodore in a positive light, describing him as \"beloved of the clergy, a friend of peace, temperate, chaste, affable and a great lover of the poor.\" He died in office, though the cause of his death is unknown. Because of this, some writers, such as Wendy Reardon, suggest the possibility of foul play. Horace Kinder Mann offers a different suggestion in his papal history, noting that it is possible that popes who were \"infirm or even older than [...] their predecessors\" might have been elected intentionally. Theodore was buried at St. Peter's Basilica, but his tomb was destroyed during the demolition of the old basilica in the seventeenth century.\nAftermath.\nAfter Theodore's death, both John IX and Sergius III claimed to have been elected pope; the latter was excommunicated and driven from the city, though he did later become pope in 904. John IX held synods reaffirming that of Theodore II, and he further banned the trial of people after their death. In turn, Sergius III later annulled the synods of Theodore II and John IX, and reinstated the validity of the Cadaver Synod.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24593", "revid": "50152312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24593", "title": "Pope Formosus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 891 to 896\nPope Formosus (c.\u2009816\u00a0\u2013 896) was the pope and ruler of the Papal States from 6 October 891 until his death on 4 April 896. His reign as Pope was troubled, marked by interventions in power struggles over the Patriarchate of Constantinople, the Kingdom of West Francia, and the Holy Roman Empire. Because he sided with Arnulf of Carinthia against Lambert of Spoleto, Formosus's remains were exhumed and put on trial in the Cadaver Synod. Several of his immediate successors were primarily preoccupied by the controversial legacy of his pontificate.\nEarly career.\nFormosus was Born around 816 within the papal states of Italy in the area surrounding Rome. Formosus's career became notable within the church when he was appointed as cardinal bishop of the suburbicarian diocese of\nPortus in 864. Shortly thereafter, Pope Nicholas I sent Formosus as a legate to Bulgaria in 866 where he served as a papal envoy and participated in the ordinations of Slavic followers of Cyril and Methodius of Rome. In 867, Boris I requested that Formosus be named archbishop of Bulgaria due to his connection with the bishop. The church did not allow Formosus to change sees as Formosus already held the position of Archbishop of Portus. The transfer of sees went against church canon as the church viewed Archbishops similarly to the way they viewed marriage. Bishops could not change sees unless it served the best interests of the church, and Formosus's transfer was seen as transmigration, or the transfer of episcopal sees in the pursuit of personal ambition. He also undertook diplomatic missions to France in 869 and 872.\nUpon the death of Holy Roman Emperor Louis II of Italy in 875, the nobles elected his uncle Charles the Bald as the new emperor. Formosus conveyed Pope John VIII's invitation for Charles to come to Rome to be crowned. Charles took the crown at Pavia and received the imperial insignia in Rome on 29 December. The supporters of Louis' other uncle, Louis the German, and of Louis's widow, Engelberga, opposed the coronation. Fearing political retribution, many of them left Rome surreptitiously. Formosus fled to Tours. On 19 April, John VIII called a synod which ordered Formosus and other papal officials to return to Rome. When Formosus did not comply, he was removed from the ranks of the clergy and excommunicated on the grounds that he had deserted his diocese without papal permission, and had aspired to the position of archbishop of Bulgaria. Additional charges included the accusations that he had opposed the emperor; \"conspired with certain iniquitous men and women for the destruction of the Papal See\"; and had \"despoiled the cloisters\" in Rome. The condemnation of Formosus and others was announced in July 876. In 878 the sentence of excommunication was withdrawn after he promised never to return to Rome or exercise his priestly functions.\nAs early as 872 he was a candidate for the papacy; Johann Peter Kirsch suggests that the Pope may have viewed him as a potential rival. In 883, John VIII's successor, Pope Marinus I, restored Formosus to his suburbicarian diocese of Portus. Following the reigns of Marinus, Pope Adrian III (884\u2013885), and Pope Stephen V (885\u2013891), Formosus was unanimously elected Pope on 6 October 891.\nPolitical Conflicts.\nShortly after his election, Formosus was asked to intervene in the Patriarchate of Constantinople, where Photius I had been ejected and Stephen I, the son of Emperor Basil I, had taken the office. Popes had taken on more secular authority in Rome during the ninth century due to a decline of Roman urban administration. Formosus refused to reinstate those who had been ordained by Photius, as his predecessor, Stephen V, had nullified all of Photius's ordinations. However, the Eastern bishops determined to recognize Photius's ordinations nonetheless. Formosus simultaneously involved himself in the dispute between Odo of Paris and Charles the Simple for the French throne. Siding with Charles, Formosus zealously exhorted Odo to cede the throne to Charles, to no avail.\nKing Arnulf v. Guy III of Spoleto.\nFormosus later involved himself in another conflict, in which Arnulf of Carinthia, the King of Germany, was marching through Tuscany on his way to Rome, and was met with the forces of Guy III of Spoleto, now the Roman Emperor, at the gates of Ivrea. Arnulf took the city after a siege, which began a feud between the two powerful figures. Formosus had trouble building a relationship with Guy, which caused him to become deeply distrustful of Guy and begin to look for support against him. This act went against those of the previous popes, when the papacy's rule was dependent on their relationship with, and the image of, the emperor. To bolster his position, Guy forced Formosus to crown his son Lambert as co-emperor in April 892. Stephen V and Formosus became the first two popes to crown a non-Carolingian man Emperor of Rome in almost a century, presenting the title to Guy III, the marquis of Spoleto, and later to his son, Lambert. The following year, however, Formosus persuaded Arnulf of Carinthia to advance to Rome and liberate Italy from Guy's control, as the faction of \u201cSpoletans\u201d aligned themselves with Agiltrude, Guy\u2019s wife. In 894, Arnulf's army occupied all the country north of the Po River. Guy died in December, leaving his son Lambert in the care of his mother, Agiltrude, who was an opponent of the Carolingians. In autumn 895, Arnulf undertook his second Italian campaign, progressing to Rome by February and seizing the city from Agiltrude by force on 21 February. The following day, Formosus crowned Arnulf as emperor in St. Peter's Basilica. Formosus successfully protected his positioning in the papacy by orchestrating Arnulf's invasion. The new emperor moved against Spoleto but was struck with paralysis on the way and was unable to continue the campaign. \nSaracens.\nDuring his papacy, Formosus also had to contend with the Saracens, who were attacking Lazio. While Muslims encroached upon Christian territory, Formosus took a staunch anti-diplomatic approach as pope, supporting violent military campaigns to eliminate the foreign threat and reinstate the Papacy\u2019s influence over the area. Emperor Guy led these campaigns until his death in 894, and other rulers took up the cause after him. On 4 April 896, Formosus died. He was succeeded by Boniface VI, whose papacy lasted 15 days. The death of Formosus resulted in Boniface VI being elected in an uncanonical manner.\nLegacy.\nStephen VI, the successor of Boniface VI, influenced by Lambert and Agiltrude, sat in judgment of Formosus. In 897, nine months after Fomosus's death, in what is known as the Cadaver Synod, where the pope\u2019s body was exhumed and forced to stand trial. The Synod was an attempt for the church to distance itself from the memory of Formosus, and was an example of violence being used to destroy the symbolism behind the former pope. The corpse was disinterred, clad in papal vestments, and seated on a throne to face all the charges from John VIII. The verdict stated that the deceased pope had been unworthy of the pontificate, and the was applied to Formosus. All of Formosus's measures and acts were annulled, and the orders conferred by him were declared invalid. The papal vestments were torn from his body, the three fingers from his right hand he had used in blessings were cut off, and the corpse was thrown into the Tiber, later to be retrieved by fisherman.\nFollowing the death of Stephen VI, Formosus's body was reinterred in St Peter's Basilica. Further trials of this nature against deceased persons were banned, but Sergius III (904\u2013911) reapproved the decisions against Formosus. Sergius demanded the re-ordination of the bishops consecrated by Formosus, who in turn had conferred orders on many other clerics, causing great confusion. Later, the validity of Formosus's pontificate was re-reinstated. The decision of Sergius with respect to Formosus has subsequently been universally disregarded by the Catholic Church, since Formosus's condemnation had little to do with piety and more to do with politics.\nLiudprand of Cremona's Account.\nFew primary sources document the life of Formosus or the events of his posthumous Cadaver Synod, as it presented such a blight on the reputation of the Holy See. The most well-known account comes from Liudprand of Cremona (c. 920-972), a historian, diplomat, and later Bishop of Cremona. His book, \"Antapodosis\" (\"Retribution\") offers a secondhand account of the events, written roughly 60 years after the synod took place. Composed for the records of Bishop Recemundus of Elvira, Liudprand included Formosus as part of a wider analysis on late-Carolingian era Italy. \nLiudprand wrote \"Antapodosis\" during a period of exile from the court of King Berengar II of Italy. As Berengar held very loose familial connection to the Carolingian dynasty, his legitimacy relied on a perception of longstanding social stability. Liudprand sought to ruin this perception and discredit his rival. His work connected the desecration of Formosus\u2019 body to a corrupt and chaotic church protected by Berengar\u2019s predecessors. As a result, historians recognize that the coverage of the Cadaver Synod in \"Antapodosis\" likely contains added details that exaggerate the savagery of the event.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24594", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24594", "title": "Proteolysis", "text": "Breakdown of proteins into smaller polypeptides or amino acids\nProteolysis is the breakdown of proteins into smaller polypeptides or amino acids. Protein degradation is a major regulatory mechanism of gene expression and contributes substantially to shaping mammalian proteomes. Uncatalysed, the hydrolysis of peptide bonds is extremely slow, taking hundreds of years. Proteolysis is typically catalysed by cellular enzymes called proteases, but may also occur by intra-molecular digestion.\nProteolysis in organisms serves many purposes; for example, digestive enzymes break down proteins in food to provide amino acids for the organism, while proteolytic processing of a polypeptide chain after its synthesis may be necessary for the production of an active protein. It is also important in the regulation of some physiological and cellular processes including apoptosis, as well as preventing the accumulation of unwanted or misfolded proteins in cells. Consequently, abnormality in the regulation of proteolysis can cause diseases.\nProteolysis can also be used as an analytical tool for studying proteins in the laboratory, and it may also be used in industry, for example in food processing and stain removal.\nBiological functions.\nPost-translational proteolytic processing.\nLimited proteolysis of a polypeptide during or after translation in protein synthesis often occurs for many proteins. This may involve removal of the N-terminal methionine, signal peptide, and/or the conversion of an inactive or non-functional protein to an active one. The precursor to the final functional form of protein is termed proprotein, and these proproteins may be first synthesized as preproprotein. For example, albumin is first synthesized as preproalbumin and contains an uncleaved signal peptide. This forms the proalbumin after the signal peptide is cleaved, and a further processing to remove the N-terminal 6-residue propeptide yields the mature form of the protein.\nRemoval of N-terminal methionine.\nThe initiating methionine (and, in bacteria, fMet) may be removed during translation of the nascent protein. For \"E. coli\", fMet is efficiently removed if the second residue is small and uncharged, but not if the second residue is bulky and charged. In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the exposed N-terminal residue may determine the half-life of the protein according to the N-end rule.\nRemoval of the signal sequence.\nProteins that are to be targeted to a particular organelle or for secretion have an N-terminal signal peptide that directs the protein to its final destination. This signal peptide is removed by proteolysis after their transport through a membrane.\nCleavage of polyproteins.\nSome proteins and most eukaryotic polypeptide hormones are synthesized as a large precursor polypeptide known as a polyprotein that requires proteolytic cleavage into individual smaller polypeptide chains. The polyprotein pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) contains many polypeptide hormones. The cleavage pattern of POMC, however, may vary between different tissues, yielding different sets of polypeptide hormones from the same polyprotein.\nMany viruses also produce their proteins initially as a single polypeptide chain that were translated from a polycistronic mRNA. This polypeptide is subsequently cleaved into individual polypeptide chains. Common names for the polyprotein include \"gag\" (group-specific antigen) in retroviruses and \"ORF1ab\" in Nidovirales. The latter name refers to the fact that a slippery sequence in the mRNA that codes for the polypeptide causes ribosomal frameshifting, leading to two different lengths of peptidic chains (\"a\" and \"ab\") at an approximately fixed ratio.\nCleavage of precursor proteins.\nMany proteins and hormones are synthesized in the form of their precursors - zymogens, proenzymes, and prehormones. These proteins are cleaved to form their final active structures. Insulin, for example, is synthesized as preproinsulin, which yields proinsulin after the signal peptide has been cleaved. The proinsulin is then cleaved at two positions to yield two polypeptide chains linked by two disulfide bonds. Removal of two C-terminal residues from the B-chain then yields the mature insulin. Protein folding occurs in the single-chain proinsulin form which facilitates formation of the ultimate inter-peptide disulfide bonds, and the ultimate intra-peptide disulfide bond, found in the native structure of insulin. \nProteases in particular are synthesized in the inactive form so that they may be safely stored in cells, and ready for release in sufficient quantity when required. This is to ensure that the protease is activated only in the correct location or context, as inappropriate activation of these proteases can be very destructive for an organism. Proteolysis of the zymogen yields an active protein; for example, when trypsinogen is cleaved to form trypsin, a slight rearrangement of the protein structure that completes the active site of the protease occurs, thereby activating the protein.\nProteolysis can, therefore, be a method of regulating biological processes by turning inactive proteins into active ones. A good example is the blood clotting cascade whereby an initial event triggers a cascade of sequential proteolytic activation of many specific proteases, resulting in blood coagulation. The complement system of the immune response also involves a complex sequential proteolytic activation and interaction that result in an attack on invading pathogens.\nProtein degradation.\nProtein degradation may take place intracellularly or extracellularly. In digestion of food, digestive enzymes may be released into the environment for extracellular digestion whereby proteolytic cleavage breaks proteins into smaller peptides and amino acids so that they may be absorbed and used. In animals the food may be processed extracellularly in specialized organs or guts, but in many bacteria the food may be internalized via phagocytosis. Microbial degradation of protein in the environment can be regulated by nutrient availability. For example, limitation for major elements in proteins (carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur) induces proteolytic activity in the fungus \"Neurospora crassa\" as well as in of soil organism communities.\nProteins in cells are broken into amino acids. This intracellular degradation of protein serves multiple functions: It removes damaged and abnormal proteins and prevents their accumulation. It also serves to regulate cellular processes by removing enzymes and regulatory proteins that are no longer needed. The amino acids may then be reused for protein synthesis.\nLysosome and proteasome.\nThe intracellular degradation of protein may be achieved in two ways\u2014proteolysis in lysosome, or a ubiquitin-dependent process that targets unwanted proteins to proteasome. The autophagy-lysosomal pathway is normally a non-selective process, but it may become selective upon starvation whereby proteins with peptide sequence KFERQ or similar are selectively broken down. The lysosome contains a large number of proteases such as cathepsins.\nThe ubiquitin-mediated process is selective. Proteins marked for degradation are covalently linked to ubiquitin. Many molecules of ubiquitin may be linked in tandem to a protein destined for degradation. The polyubiquinated protein is targeted to an ATP-dependent protease complex, the proteasome. The ubiquitin is released and reused, while the targeted protein is degraded.\nRate of intracellular protein degradation.\nDifferent proteins are degraded at different rates. Abnormal proteins are quickly degraded, whereas the rate of degradation of normal proteins may vary widely depending on their functions. Enzymes at important metabolic control points may be degraded much faster than those enzymes whose activity is largely constant under all physiological conditions. One of the most rapidly degraded proteins is ornithine decarboxylase, which has a half-life of 11 minutes. In contrast, other proteins like actin and myosin have a half-life of a month or more, while, in essence, haemoglobin lasts for the entire life-time of an erythrocyte.\nThe N-end rule may partially determine the half-life of a protein, and proteins with segments rich in proline, glutamic acid, serine, and threonine (the so-called PEST proteins) have short half-life. Other factors suspected to affect degradation rate include the rate deamination of glutamine and asparagine and oxidation of cystein, histidine, and methionine, the absence of stabilizing ligands, the presence of attached carbohydrate or phosphate groups, the presence of free \u03b1-amino group, the negative charge of protein, and the flexibility and stability of the protein. Proteins with larger degrees of intrinsic disorder also tend to have short cellular half-life, with disordered segments having been proposed to facilitate efficient initiation of degradation by the proteasome. \nThe rate of proteolysis may also depend on the physiological state of the organism, such as its hormonal state as well as nutritional status. In time of starvation, the rate of protein degradation increases.\nDigestion.\nIn human digestion, proteins in food are broken down into smaller peptide chains by digestive enzymes such as pepsin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase, and into amino acids by various enzymes such as carboxypeptidase, aminopeptidase, and dipeptidase. It is necessary to break down proteins into small peptides (tripeptides and dipeptides) and amino acids so they can be absorbed by the intestines, and the absorbed tripeptides and dipeptides are also further broken into amino acids intracellularly before they enter the bloodstream. Different enzymes have different specificity for their substrate; trypsin, for example, cleaves the peptide bond after a positively charged residue (arginine and lysine); chymotrypsin cleaves the bond after an aromatic residue (phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan); elastase cleaves the bond after a small non-polar residue such as alanine or glycine.\nIn order to prevent inappropriate or premature activation of the digestive enzymes (they may, for example, trigger pancreatic self-digestion causing pancreatitis), these enzymes are secreted as inactive zymogen. The precursor of pepsin, pepsinogen, is secreted by the stomach, and is activated only in the acidic environment found in stomach. The pancreas secretes the precursors of a number of proteases such as trypsin and chymotrypsin. The zymogen of trypsin is trypsinogen, which is activated by a very specific protease, enterokinase, secreted by the mucosa of the duodenum. The trypsin, once activated, can also cleave other trypsinogens as well as the precursors of other proteases such as chymotrypsin and carboxypeptidase to activate them.\nIn bacteria, a similar strategy of employing an inactive zymogen or prezymogen is used. Subtilisin, which is produced by \"Bacillus subtilis\", is produced as preprosubtilisin, and is released only if the signal peptide is cleaved and autocatalytic proteolytic activation has occurred.\nCellular regulation.\nProteolysis is also involved in the regulation of many cellular processes by activating or deactivating enzymes, transcription factors, and receptors, for example in the biosynthesis of cholesterol, or the mediation of thrombin signalling through protease-activated receptors.\nSome enzymes at important metabolic control points such as ornithine decarboxylase is regulated entirely by its rate of synthesis and its rate of degradation. Other rapidly degraded proteins include the protein products of proto-oncogenes, which play central roles in the regulation of cell growth.\nCell cycle regulation.\nCyclins are a group of proteins that activate kinases involved in cell division. The degradation of cyclins is the key step that governs the exit from mitosis and progress into the next cell cycle. Cyclins accumulate in the course the cell cycle, then abruptly disappear just before the anaphase of mitosis. The cyclins are removed via a ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway.\nApoptosis.\nCaspases are an important group of proteases involved in apoptosis or programmed cell death. The precursors of caspase, procaspase, may be activated by proteolysis through its association with a protein complex that forms apoptosome, or by granzyme B, or via the death receptor pathways.\nAutoproteolysis.\nAutoproteolysis takes place in some proteins, whereby the peptide bond is cleaved in a self-catalyzed intramolecular reaction. Unlike zymogens, these autoproteolytic proteins participate in a \"single turnover\" reaction and do not catalyze further reactions post-cleavage. Examples include cleavage of the Asp-Pro bond in a subset of von Willebrand factor type D (VWD) domains and \"Neisseria meningitidis\" FrpC self-processing domain, cleavage of the Asn-Pro bond in \"Salmonella\" FlhB protein, \"Yersinia\" YscU protein, as well as cleavage of the Gly-Ser bond in a subset of sea urchin sperm protein, enterokinase, and agrin (SEA) domains. In some cases, the autoproteolytic cleavage is promoted by conformational strain of the peptide bond.\nProteolysis and diseases.\nAbnormal proteolytic activity is associated with many diseases. In pancreatitis, leakage of proteases and their premature activation in the pancreas results in the self-digestion of the pancreas. People with diabetes mellitus may have increased lysosomal activity and the degradation of some proteins can increase significantly. Chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis may involve the release of lysosomal enzymes into extracellular space that break down surrounding tissues. Abnormal proteolysis may result in age-related neurological diseases such as Alzheimer's due to the generation and ineffective removal of peptides that aggregate in cells.\nProteases may be regulated by antiproteases or protease inhibitors, and imbalance between proteases and antiproteases can result in diseases, for example, in the destruction of lung tissues in emphysema brought on by smoking tobacco. Smoking is thought to increase the neutrophils and macrophages in the lung which release excessive amount of proteolytic enzymes such as elastase, such that they can no longer be inhibited by serpins such as \u03b11-antitrypsin, thereby resulting in the breaking down of connective tissues in the lung. Other proteases and their inhibitors may also be involved in this disease, for example matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs).\nOther diseases linked to aberrant proteolysis include muscular dystrophy, degenerative skin disorders, respiratory and gastrointestinal diseases, and malignancy.\nNon-enzymatic processes.\nProtein backbones are very stable in water at neutral pH and room temperature, although the rate of hydrolysis of different peptide bonds can vary. The half-life of a peptide bond under normal conditions can range from 7 years to 350 years, even higher for peptides protected by modified terminus or within the protein interior. The rate of hydrolysis however can be significantly increased by extremes of pH and heat. Spontaneous cleavage of proteins may also involve catalysis by zinc on serine and threonine.\nStrong mineral acids can readily hydrolyse the peptide bonds in a protein (acid hydrolysis). The standard way to hydrolyze a protein or peptide into its constituent amino acids for analysis is to heat it to 105\u00a0\u00b0C for around 24 hours in 6M hydrochloric acid. However, some proteins are resistant to acid hydrolysis. One well-known example is ribonuclease A, which can be purified by treating crude extracts with hot sulfuric acid so that other proteins become degraded while ribonuclease A is left intact.\nCertain chemicals cause proteolysis only after specific residues, and these can be used to selectively break down a protein into smaller polypeptides for laboratory analysis. For example, cyanogen bromide cleaves the peptide bond after a methionine. Similar methods may be used to specifically cleave tryptophanyl, aspartyl, cysteinyl, and asparaginyl peptide bonds. Acids such as trifluoroacetic acid and formic acid may be used for cleavage.\nLike other biomolecules, proteins can also be broken down by high heat alone. At 250\u00a0\u00b0C, the peptide bond may be easily hydrolyzed, with its half-life dropping to about a minute. Protein may also be broken down without hydrolysis through pyrolysis; small heterocyclic compounds may start to form upon degradation. Above 500\u00a0\u00b0C, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons may also form, which is of interest in the study of generation of carcinogens in tobacco smoke and cooking at high heat.\nLaboratory applications.\nProteolysis is also used in research and diagnostic applications: \nProtease enzymes.\nProteases may be classified according to the catalytic group involved in its active site.\nVenoms.\nCertain types of venom, such as those produced by venomous snakes, can also cause proteolysis. These venoms are, in fact, complex digestive fluids that begin their work outside of the body. Proteolytic venoms cause a wide range of toxic effects, including effects that are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24595", "revid": "1317249486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24595", "title": "Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease", "text": "Medical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAutosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the most common, life-threatening inherited human disorders and the most common hereditary kidney disease. It is associated with large interfamilial and intrafamilial variability, which can be explained to a large extent by its genetic heterogeneity and modifier genes. It is also the most common of the inherited cystic kidney diseases \u2014 a group of disorders with related but distinct pathogenesis, characterized by the development of renal cysts and various extrarenal manifestations, which in case of ADPKD include cysts in other organs, such as the liver, seminal vesicles, pancreas, and arachnoid membrane, as well as other abnormalities, such as intracranial aneurysms and dolichoectasias, aortic root dilatation and aneurysms, mitral valve prolapse, and abdominal wall hernias. Over 50% of patients with ADPKD eventually develop end stage kidney disease and require dialysis or kidney transplantation. ADPKD is estimated to affect at least one in every 1000 individuals worldwide, making this disease the most common inherited kidney disorder with a diagnosed prevalence of 1:2000 and incidence of 1:3000-1:8000 in a global scale.\nSigns and symptoms.\nADPKD can result in a wide variety of clinical symptoms. Symptoms may be caused directly by a cyst growing or bursting, or indirectly due to problems with other physiological functions. Most symptoms occur around 40 years of age, but some clinical symptoms can occur decades prior to the development of over kidney disease, with some symptoms presenting as early as childhood.\nPrimary Symptoms Include:\nAmong the most common symptoms associated with it is early-onset hypertension. Early-onset hypertension is present in 50%-70% of individuals with ADPKD. Hypertension can even develop before the decline in kidney function markers like GFR (glomerular filtration rate).\nThe presence of ADPKD is associated with several extra-renal symptoms, including the development of cysts in organs outside of the kidney. Polycystic liver disease is often found in adults with ADPKD and can be present in greater than 90% of individuals with ADPKD over 35 years old. Polycystic liver disease develops more often in females with ADPKD than males, with risk factors including and exposure to non-endogenous sources of estrogen and multiple gestations. Individuals with polycystic liver disease due to ADPKD can also experience gastrointestinal symptoms related to the presence of cysts in the liver, such as early discomfort, fullness, and gastroesophageal reflux. In rare cases, portal hypertension with secondary ascites and pleural effusion can also occur.\nIndividuals with ADPKD are also at increased risk for developing intracranial aneurysms. The risk of intracranial aneurysms is estimated to be four times higher in people with ADPKD when compared to the general population, and as a result, screening with magnetic resonance angiography is recommended for high-risk populations.\nAdditionally, symptoms such as abdominal fullness, excessive urination, and recurring urinary tract infections (occurring more frequently in women than in men), kidney stones, and bladder infection are also associated with ADPKD.\nADPKD can also result in a wide array of symptoms beyond the kidneys, resulting in the following symptoms:\nAmong the clinical presentation are:\nSigns and symptoms of ADPKD often develop between 30 and 40 years of age.\nGenetics.\nADPKD is genetically heterogeneous with two genes identified: \"PKD1\" (chromosome region 16p13.3; around 85% cases) and\" PKD2\" (4q21; around 15% cases). Several genetic mechanisms probably contribute to the phenotypic expression of the disease. Although evidence exists for a two-hit mechanism (germline and somatic inactivation of two PKD alleles) explaining the focal development of renal and hepatic cysts, haploinsufficiency is more likely to account for the vascular manifestations of the disease. Additionally, new mouse models homozygous for \"PKD1\" hypomorphic alleles 22 and 23 and the demonstration of increased renal epithelial cell proliferation in PKD2 +/\u2212 mice suggest that mechanisms other than the two-hit hypothesis also contribute to the cystic phenotype.\nLarge interfamilial and intrafamilial variability occurs in ADPKD. Most individuals with \"PKD1\" mutations have kidney failure by age 70 years, whereas more than 50% of individuals with\" PKD2\" mutations have adequate renal function at that age (mean age of onset of end-stage renal disease: 54\u00b73 years with \"PKD1\"; 74\u00b70 years with \"PKD2\").\nThe significant intrafamilial variability observed in the severity of renal and extrarenal manifestations points to genetic and environmental modifying factors that may influence the outcome of ADPKD, and results of an analysis of the variability in renal function between monozygotic twins and siblings support the role of genetic modifiers in this disease. It is estimated that 43\u201378% of the variance in age to ESRD could be due to heritable modifying factors, with parents as likely as children to show more severe disease in studies of parent-child pairs.\nPathophysiology.\nIn many patients with ADPKD, kidney dysfunction is not clinically apparent until 30 or 40 years of age. However, an increasing body of evidence suggests the formation of renal cysts starts \"in utero\". Cysts initially form as small dilations in renal tubules, which then expand to form fluid-filled cavities of different sizes. Factors suggested to lead to cystogenesis include a germline mutation in one of the polycystin gene alleles, a somatic second hit that leads to the loss of the normal allele, and a third hit, which can be a renal insult that triggers cell proliferation, and an injury response. Due to numerous similarities between the pathophysiology of ADPKD and the pathophysiology of the renal response to injury, ADPKD has been described as a state of aberrant and persistent activation of renal injury response pathways. In the progression of the disease, continued dilation of the tubules through increased cell proliferation, fluid secretion, and separation from the parental tubule lead to the formation of cysts.\nADPKD, together with many other diseases that present with renal cysts, can be classified into a family of diseases known as ciliopathies. Epithelial cells of the renal tubules, including all the segments of the nephron and the collecting ducts (with the exception of intercalated cells) show the presence of a single primary apical cilium. Polycystin-1, the protein encoded by the PKD1 gene, is present on these cilia and is thought to sense the flow with its large extracellular domains, activating the calcium channels associated with polycystin-2, the product of gene PKD2, as a result of the genetic setting of ADPKD as explained in the genetics sub-section above.\nEpithelial cell proliferation and fluid secretion lead to cystogenesis, which are two hallmark features of ADPKD. During the early stages of cystogenesis, cysts are attached to their parental renal tubules and a derivative of the glomerular filtrate enters the cysts. Once these cysts expand to approximately 2\u2009mm in diameter, the cyst closes off from its parental tubule and after that fluid can only enter the cysts through transepithelial secretion, which in turn is suggested to increase due to secondary effects from an increased intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP (cAMP).\nClinically, the insidious increase in the number and size of renal cysts translates as a progressive increment in kidney volume. Studies led by Mayo Clinic professionals established that the total kidney volume (TKV) in a large cohort of ADPKD patients was 1060 \u00b1 642ml with a mean increase of 204ml over three years, or 5.27% per year in the natural course of the disease, among other important, novel findings that were extensively studied for the first time.\nDiagnosis.\nUsually, the diagnosis of ADPKD is initially performed by renal imaging using ultrasound, CT scan, or MRI. However, molecular diagnostics can be necessary in the following situations: 1- when a definite diagnosis is required in young individuals, such as a potential living related donor in an affected family with equivocal imaging data; 2- in patients with a negative family history of ADPKD, because of potential phenotypic overlap with several other kidney cystic diseases; 3- in families affected by early-onset polycystic kidney disease, since in this cases hypomorphic alleles and/or oligogenic inheritance can be involved; and 4- in patients requesting genetic counseling, especially in couples wishing a pre-implantation genetic diagnosis.\nThe findings of large echogenic kidneys without distinct macroscopic cysts in an infant/child at 50% risk for ADPKD are diagnostic. In the absence of a family history of ADPKD, the presence of bilateral renal enlargement and cysts, with or without the presence of hepatic cysts, and the absence of other manifestations suggestive of a different renal cystic disease provides presumptively, but not definitively, evidence for the diagnosis. In some cases, intracranial aneurysms can be an associated sign of ADPKD, and screening can be recommended for patients with a family history of intracranial aneurysms.\nMolecular genetic testing by linkage analysis or direct mutation screening is clinically available; however, genetic heterogeneity is a significant complication to molecular genetic testing. Sometimes, a relatively large number of affected family members need to be tested in order to establish which one of the two possible genes is responsible within each family. The large size and complexity of \"PKD1 \"and \"PKD2\" genes, as well as marked allelic heterogeneity, present obstacles to molecular testing by direct DNA analysis. The sensitivity of testing is nearly 100% for all patients with ADPKD who are age 30 years or older and for younger patients with \"PKD1\" mutations; these criteria are only 67% sensitive for patients with \"PKD2\" mutations who are younger than age 30.\nTreatment.\nCurrently, the only pharmacological treatment available for ADPKD consists of reducing the rate of gain of total kidney volume (TKV) with vasopressin receptor 2 (V2) antagonists (i.e., tolvaptan). Tolvaptan treatment does not halt or reverse disease progression, and patients still progress towards renal failure. Palliative treatment modalities involve symptomatic medications (nonopioid and opioid analgesics) for abdominal/retroperitoneal pain. Options for analgesic-resistant pain include simple or complex surgical procedures (i.e., renal cyst aspiration, cyst decortication, renal denervation, and nephrectomy), which can result in complications inherent to surgery. Recent research suggests that ketogenic dietary interventions beneficially affect the progression and symptoms in individuals with ADPKD. Mild weight loss favorably affects pain indicating the benefit of dietary and lifestyle changes.\nAquaretic medication.\nIn 2014, Japan was the first country in the world to approve a pharmacological treatment for ADPKD followed by Canada and Europe, which approved the drug tolvaptan for ADPKD patients at the beginning of 2015. The USA FDA approved the use of tolvaptan in the treatment of ADPKD in 2018. Tolvaptan, an aquaretic drug, is a vasopressin receptor 2 (V2) antagonist. Pre-clinical studies had suggested that the molecule cAMP could be involved in the enlargement of ADPKD cysts, and studies on rodents confirmed the role of vasopressin in increasing the levels of cAMP in the kidney, which laid the basis for the conduction of clinical studies. Because data from the Consortium for Radiologic Imaging Studies of Polycystic Kidney Disease (CRISP) led by Mayo Clinic showed that total kidney volume (TKV) predicted the risk of developing chronic kidney disease in patients with ADPKD, the TEMPO 3:4 trial, which enrolled patients from 129 sites worldwide from 2007 to 2009, evaluated TKV as a primary end-point to test the efficacy of tolvaptan in ADPKD patients. That study showed a significant decrease in the ratio of TKV increase and deterring of renal function decline in ADPKD patients after treatment with tolvaptan; however, because laboratory test results regarding liver function appeared elevated in a percentage of patients enrolled in that study, the approval of the drug was either delayed by regulatory agencies or, as in case of the US, altogether denied.\nDietary and lifestyle interventions.\nResearch using ADPKD mouse models showed that mild food restriction strongly improved disease progression. The mechanism was shown to involve the metabolic state of ketosis, and beneficial effects could be produced by time-restricted feeding, acute fasting, a ketogenic diet, or by supplementation with the ketone beta-hydroxybutyrate in mouse, rat and cat models of ADPKD. A ketogenic diet regimen not only halted further disease progression but led to partial reversal of renal cystic disease in a rat model. The metabolic state of ketosis may be beneficial in ADPKD because renal cyst cells in ADPKD have a metabolic defect similar to the Warburg effect in cancer that makes them highly dependent on glucose, and unable to metabolize fatty acids and ketones. Consistent with this, serum glucose levels positively correlate with faster disease progression in ADPKD patients. Also, individuals with ADPKD and type 2 diabetes have significantly larger total kidney volume (TKV) than those with ADPKD alone, and overweight or obesity associate with faster progression in early-stage ADPKD. A retrospective case series study showed that ADPKD disease symptoms - including pain, hypertension and renal function - improved among 131 patients who implemented ketogenic diets for an average duration of 6 months.\nDietary intake of sodium is associated with worse renal function decline in ADPKD, and limiting sodium intake is generally recommended to patients. Dietary protein intake was not found to correlate with ADPKD progression.\nIncreased water intake is thought to be beneficial in ADPKD and is generally recommended. The underlying beneficial mechanism of increased water intake may be related to effects on the vasopressin V2 receptor or may be due to the suppression of harmful micro-crystal formation in renal tubules by dilution of solutes such as calcium oxalate, calcium phosphate, and uric acid.\nDietary intake of oxalate or inorganic phosphate has been shown to accelerate PKD disease progression in several rodent models. Low levels, or urinary citrate \u2013 a natural antagonist of the formation of harmful crystals in kidney tubules \u2013 have been shown to associate with worse disease progression in ADPKD patients.\nAnalgesic medication.\nChronic pain in patients with ADPKD is often refractory to conservative, noninvasive treatments, but nonopioid analgesics and conservative interventions can be first used before opioid analgesics are considered; if pain continues, then surgical interventions can target renal or hepatic cysts to directly address the cause of pain, with surgical options including renal cyst decortication, renal denervation, and nephrectomy.\nRenal cyst aspiration.\nAspiration with ethanol sclerotherapy can be performed for the treatment of symptomatic simple renal cysts, but can be impractical in advanced patients with multiple cysts. The procedure itself consists in the percutaneous insertion of a needle into the identified cyst, under ultrasound guidance, with subsequent draining the contained liquid; the sclerotherapy is used to avoid liquid reaccumulation that can occur in the cyst, which can result in symptom recurrence.\nLaparoscopic cyst decortication.\nLaparoscopic cyst decortication (also referred to as marsupialization) consists of the removal of one or more kidney cysts through laparoscopic surgery, during which cysts are punctured, and the outer wall of the larger cysts is excised with care not to incise the renal parenchyma. This procedure can be useful for pain relief in patients with ADPKD, and is usually indicated after earlier cyst aspiration has confirmed that the cyst to be decorticated is responsible for pain.\nNonrandomised controlled trials conducted in the '90s showed that patients with symptomatic simple renal cysts who had recurrence of symptoms after initial response to simple aspiration could be safely submitted to cyst decortication, with a mean pain-free life between 17 and 24 months after surgery. Laparoscopic decortication presents a 5% recurrence rate of renal cysts compared to an 82% recurrence rate obtained with sclerotherapy.\nNeurolysis.\nA novel treatment of specifically the chronic pain experienced by many with ADPKD is Celiac plexus neurolysis. This involves the chemical ablation of the celiac plexus, to cause a temporary degeneration of targeted nerve fibers. When the nerve fibers degenerate, it causes an interruption in the transmission of nerve signals. This treatment, when successful, provides significant pain relief for a period ranging from a few days to over a year. The procedure may be repeated when the affected nerves have healed and the pain returns.\nNephrectomy.\nMany ADPKD patients experience symptomatic sequelae in consequence of the disease, such as cyst hemorrhage, flank pain, recurrent infections, nephrolithiasis, and symptoms of mass effect (i.e., early satiety, nausea and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort), from their enlarged kidneys. In such cases, nephrectomy can be required due to intractable symptoms or when in the course of preparing for kidney transplantation, the native kidneys are found to impinge upon the true pelvis and preclude the placement of a donor allograft. Additionally, native nephrectomy may be undertaken in the presence of suspected malignancy, as renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is two to three times more likely in the ADPKD population in end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) than in the ESKD patients without ADPKD. Although the indications for nephrectomy in ADPKD may be related to kidney size, the decision to proceed with native nephrectomy is often undertaken on an individual basis, without specific reference to kidney size measurements.\nDialysis.\nTwo modalities of dialysis can be used in the treatment of ADPKD patients: peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis. Epidemiological data shows that ADPKD affects 5\u201313.4% of patients undergoing hemodialysis in Europe and in the United States, and about 3% in Japan. Peritoneal dialysis has usually been contra-indicated in ADPKD patients with large kidney and liver volumes, due to expected physical difficulties in the procedure and possible complications; however, no difference is seen in long-term morbidity between hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis in ADPKD.\nKidney transplant.\nKidney transplantation is accepted as the preferred treatment for ADPKD patients with ESRD. Among American patients on the kidney-transplant waiting list (as of December 2011), 7256 (8.4%) were listed due to cystic kidney disease and of the 16,055 renal transplants performed in 2011, 2057 (12.8%) were done for patients with cystic kidney disease, with 1,189 from deceased donors and 868 from living donors.\nNovel Therapies.\nThere are several novel therapies currently underway aimed at slowing the progression of disease in APKD. Alternative therapeutic options include water therapy, the use of lipid-lowering agents, antiproliferative analogues, and synthetic peptides.\nWater Therapy\nIncreased water intake downregulates vasopressin activity. As a result, water therapy has been explored as a potential therapeutic intervention for individuals with ADPKD; however, studies examining its role in ADPKD advancement remain unclear.\nHMG-CoA reductase inhibitors\nThe progression of ADPKD leads to a decline in kidney function, with a marked decrease in glomerular filtration rate. As a result, treatment with statins is recommended by current guidelines for managing chronic kidney disease. The effect of statins on slowing ADPKD is inconclusive, with some trials showing a decrease in total kidney volume, while others showed no benefit on either total kidney volume or glomerular filtration rate.\nSomatostatin analogs\nSomatostatin is are artificial peptide designed to mimic the function of an endogenous hormone that has many regulatory functions within the body, including restraining cell proliferation. Small phase 2 studies have shown that somatostatin analogues are effective at reducing the rate of total kidney volume growth and preserving glomerular filtration rate. The use of somatostatin analogues may be restricted due to their side effects, which commonly include gastrointestinal issues such as diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and gas, as well as conditions like gallstones and elevated blood sugar. \nAnti-proliferative agents\nProliferation of epithelial cells lining the cyst results in cyst expansion and contributes to disease progression. As a result of this mechanism, antiproliferative agents such as tyrosine kinase inhibitor bosutinib. However, results in clinical trials have shown mixed results, with studies showing a decrease in total kidney volume. \nPrognosis.\nIn ADPKD patients, gradual cyst development and expansion result in kidney enlargement, and during the disease, glomerular filtration rate remains normal for decades before kidney function starts to progressively deteriorate, making early prediction of renal outcome difficult. The CRISP study, mentioned in the treatment section above, contributed to build a strong rationale supporting the prognostic value of total kidney volume (TKV) in ADPKD; TKV (evaluated by MRI) increases steadily and a higher rate of kidney enlargement correlated with accelerated decline of GFR, while patient height-adjusted TKV (HtTKV) \u2265600 ml/m predicts the development of stage 3 chronic kidney disease within 8 years.\nBesides TKV and HtTKV, the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) has also been tentatively used to predict the progression of ADPKD. After the analysis of CT or MRI scans of 590 patients with ADPKD treated at the Mayo Translational Polycystic Kidney Disease Center, Irazabal and colleagues developed an imaging-based classification system to predict the rate of eGFR decline in patients with ADPKD. In this prognostic method, patients are divided into five subclasses of estimated kidney growth rates according to age-specific HtTKV ranges (1A, &lt;1.5%; 1B, 1.5\u20133.0%; 1C, 3.0\u20134.5%; 1D, 4.5\u20136.0%; and 1E, &gt;6.0%) as delineated in the CRISP study. The decline in eGFR over the years following initial TKV measurement is significantly different between all five patient subclasses, with those in subclass 1E having the most rapid decline. Some of the most common causes of death in patients with ADPKD are various infections (25%), a ruptured berry aneurysm (15%), or coronary/hypertensive heart disease (40%).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24596", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24596", "title": "Po (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "24597", "revid": "40487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24597", "title": "Potsdamer Platz", "text": "Public square and traffic intersection in Berlin, Germany\nPotsdamer Platz (, \"Potsdam Square\") is a public square and traffic intersection in the center of Berlin, Germany, lying about south of the Brandenburg Gate and the Reichstag (German Parliament Building), and close to the southeast corner of the Tiergarten park. It is named after the city of Potsdam, some to the south west, and marks the point where the old road from Potsdam passed through the city wall of Berlin at the Potsdam Gate. Initially, the open area near the city gate was used for military drills and parades. In the 19th into the 20th century, it developed from an intersection of suburban thoroughfares into the most bustling traffic intersection in Europe. The area was totally destroyed during World War II and then left desolate during the Cold War era when the Berlin Wall bisected it. Following German reunification in 1990, Potsdamer Platz underwent extensive redevelopment throughout the 1990s and early 2000s. Today, it is a bustling commercial and cultural hub featuring corporate offices, retail spaces, restaurants, cinemas, and hotels.\nHistorical background.\nThe history of Potsdamer Platz can be traced to 29 October 1685, when the Tolerance Edict of Potsdam was signed, whereby Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg-Prussia from 1640 to 1688, allowed large numbers of religious refugees, including Jews from Austria and Huguenots expelled from France, to settle on his territory to repopulate it following the Thirty Years' War (1618\u201348). Several new districts were founded around the city's perimeter, just outside the old fortifications. The largest of these was Friedrichstadt, just south west of the historic core of Berlin, begun in 1688 and named after the new elector, Frederick William III, who became King Frederick I of Prussia. Its street layout followed the Baroque-style grid pattern much favoured at the time, and was based on two main axes: Friedrichstra\u00dfe running north\u2013south, and Leipziger Strasse running east\u2013west. All the new suburbs were absorbed into Berlin around 1709\u201310. In 1721-3 a south-westwards expansion of Friedrichstadt was planned under the orders of King Frederick William I, and this was completed in 1732\u20134 by architect Philipp Gerlach (1679\u20131748). In this expansion, a new north\u2013south axis emerged: Wilhelmstrasse.\nIn 1735\u20131737, after Friedrichstadt's expansion was complete, the Berlin Customs Wall was erected around the city's new perimeter. Potsdamer Platz would eventually develop around the gate at the west end of Leipziger Strasse, which turned south toward the hamlet of Sch\u00f6neberg after leaving the city. This road, which had developed into part of a trading route running across Europe from Paris to St. Petersburg via Aachen, Berlin and K\u00f6nigsberg, became Elector Frederick William's route of choice to Potsdam, the location of his palace, in 1660. After Frederick II became king in 1740, the road was significantly improved, and became known as Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe; the gate became \"Potsdamer Tor\" (Potsdam Gate).\nJust inside the gate was a large octagonal area, created at the time of Friedrichstadt's expansion in 1732-4 and bisected by Leipziger Strasse; this was one of several parade grounds for the thousands of soldiers garrisoned in Berlin at the height of the Kingdom of Prussia. Initially known as the \"Achteck\" (Octagon), on 15 September 1814 it was renamed Leipziger Platz after the site of Prussia's final decisive defeat of Napoleon Bonaparte at the Battle of Leipzig, which brought to an end the Wars of Liberation that had been going on since 1806. The gate itself was redesignated \"Leipziger Tor\" (Leipzig Gate) around the same time, but reverted to its old name a few years later.\nBeing outside Berlin, and therefore not subject to the same planning guidelines, Potsdamer Platz grew in a piecemeal and haphazard way, unlike Leipziger Platz, which had been planned and built all at once by Johann Philipp Gerlach. Prussian architect Friedrich David Gilly proposed a unified redesign of the two squares in 1797, but it was never built. In 1815, his pupil, Karl Friedrich Schinkel, proposed the area as the location for a National Memorial Cathedral, to be known as the \"Residenzkirche\", but this was never built either, due to lack of funds. However, Schinkel did get to rebuild the gate in 1823\u20131824, replacing what was little more than a gap in the customs wall with a much grander affair consisting of two matching Doric-style stone gate-houses, like little temples, facing each other across Leipziger Strasse. The one on the north side served as the customs house and excise collection point, while its southern counterpart was a military guardhouse, set up to prevent desertions of Prussian soldiers, which had become a major problem. The new gate was dedicated on 23 August 1824. Schinkel's proposal to add a garden was not implemented, but in 1828 a plan by gardener and landscape architect Peter Joseph Lenn\u00e9 went ahead. He redesigned the Tiergarten, a large wooded park formerly the Royal Hunting Grounds, gave his name to Lenn\u00e9stra\u00dfe, a thoroughfare forming part of the southern boundary of the park very close to Potsdamer Platz, and transformed a muddy ditch to the south into one of Berlin's busiest waterways, the Landwehrkanal.\nMeanwhile, country peasantry were generally not welcome in the city, and so the gates also served to restrict access. However, the country folk were permitted to set up trading posts of their own just outside the gates, and the Potsdam Gate especially. It was hoped that this would encourage development of all the country lanes into proper roads; in turn it was hoped that these would emulate Parisian boulevards\u2014broad, straight and magnificent, but the main intention was to enable troops to be moved quickly. Thus Potsdamer Platz was off and running.\nIt was not called that until 8 July 1831, but the area outside the Potsdam Gate began to develop in the early 19th century as a district of quiet villas, for as Berlin became even more congested, many of its richer citizens moved outside the customs wall and built spacious new homes around the trading post, along the newly developing boulevards, and around the southern edge of the Tiergarten. The development was piecemeal, but in 1828 this area just to the west of Potsdamer Platz, sandwiched between the Tiergarten and the north bank of the future Landwehrkanal, received royal approval for a more purposeful metamorphosis into a residential colony of the affluent, gradually filling with palatial houses and villas. These became the homes of civil servants, officers, bankers, artists and politicians among others, and earned the area the nickname \"Millionaires' Quarter\" although its official designation was \"Friedrichvorstadt\" (Friedrich's Suburb), or the \"Tiergartenviertel\" (Tiergarten Quarter).\nMany of the properties in the neighborhood were the work of architect Georg Friedrich Heinrich Hitzig (1811\u201381), a pupil of Schinkel who also built the original \"English Embassy\" in Leipziger Platz, where the vast Wertheim department store would stand, although Friedrichvorstadt's focal point and most notable building was the work of another architect\u2014and another pupil of Schinkel. The \"Matthiaskirche\" (St. Matthew's Church), built in 1844\u20136, was an Italian Romanesque-style building in alternating bands of red and yellow brick, and designed by Friedrich August St\u00fcler (1800\u201365). This church, one of fewer than half a dozen surviving pre-World War II buildings in the entire area, forms the centrepiece of today's \"Kulturforum\" (Cultural Forum).\nMeanwhile, many of the Huguenots fleeing religious persecution in France, and their descendants, had also been living around the trading post and cultivating local fields. Noticing that traffic queues often built up at the Potsdam Gate due to delays in making the customs checks, these people had begun to offer coffee, bread, cakes and confectionery from their homes or from roadside stalls to travelers passing through, thus beginning the tradition of providing food and drink around the future Potsdamer Platz. Larger and more purpose-built establishments began to take their place, and they in turn were superseded by bigger and grander ones. The former district of quiet villas was by now anything but quiet: Potsdamer Platz had taken on an existence all its own whose sheer pace of life rivalled anything within the city.\nBy the mid-1860s direct taxation had made the customs wall redundant, and so in 1866\u20137 most of it was demolished along with all the city gates except two\u00a0\u2013 the Brandenburg Gate and the Potsdam Gate. The removal of the customs wall allowed its former route to be turned into yet another road running through Potsdamer Platz, thus increasing still further the amount of traffic passing through. This road, both north and south of the platz, was named K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tzer Stra\u00dfe after the Prussian victory over Austria at the Battle of K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tz on 3 July 1866, in the Austro-Prussian War.\nThe railways arrive.\nThe railway first came to Berlin in 1838, with the opening of the Potsdamer Bahnhof, terminus of a 26\u00a0km line linking the city with Potsdam, opened throughout by 29 October (in 1848 the line would be extended to Magdeburg and beyond). Since the city authorities would not allow the new line to breach the customs wall, still standing at the time, it had to stop just short, at Potsdamer Platz, but it was this that kick-started the real transformation of the area, into the bustling focal point that Potsdamer Platz became.\nThree years later a second railway terminus opened. Six hundred meters to the southeast, with a front facade facing Askanischer Platz, the Anhalter Bahnhof was the Berlin terminus of a line running as far as J\u00fcterbog and extended to Dessau, Kothen and beyond.\nBoth termini began life modestly, but to cope with increasing demand, both went on to much bigger and better things, a new Potsdamer Bahnhof, destined to be Berlin's busiest station, opening on 30 August 1872 and a new Anhalter Bahnhof, destined to be the city's biggest and finest, on 15 June 1880. This latter station benefitted from the closure of a short-lived third terminus in the area\u00a0\u2013 the Dresdner Bahnhof, located south of the Landwehrkanal, which lasted from 17 June 1875 until 15 October 1882.\nA railway line once ran through Potsdamer Platz: a connecting line opened in October 1851 and running around the city just inside the customs wall, crossing numerous streets and squares at street level, and whose purpose was to allow goods to be transported between the various Berlin stations, thus creating a hated traffic obstruction that lasted for twenty years. Half a dozen or more times a day, Potsdamer Platz ground to a halt while a train of 60 to 100 wagons trundled through at walking pace preceded by a railway official ringing a bell. The construction of the Ringbahn around the city's perimeter, linked to all the major stations, allowed the connecting line to be scrapped in 1871, although the Ringbahn itself was not complete and open for all traffic until 15 November 1877.\nPotsdamer Platz was served by both of Berlin's two local rail systems. The U-Bahn arrived first, from the south; begun on 10 September 1896, it opened on 18 February 1902, with a new and better sited station being provided on 29 September 1907, and the line itself being extended north and east on 1 October 1908. In 1939 the S-Bahn followed, its North-South Link between Unter den Linden and Yorckstra\u00dfe opening in stages during the year, the Potsdamer Platz S-Bahn station itself opening on 15 April.\nBy the second half of the 19th century, Berlin had been growing at a tremendous rate for some time, but its growth accelerated even faster after the city became the capital of the new German Empire on 18 January 1871. Potsdamer Platz and neighbouring Leipziger Platz came into their own afterward. Now firmly in the centre of a metropolis whose population eventually reached 4.4\u00a0million, making it the third largest city in the world after London and New York, the area was ready to take on its most celebrated role. Vast hotels and department stores, hundreds of smaller shops, theatres, dance-halls, caf\u00e9s, restaurants, bars, beer palaces, wine-houses and clubs, all started to appear. Some of these places became internationally known.\nAlso, a very large government presence, with many German imperial departments, Prussian state authorities and their various sub-departments, came into the area, taking over 26 former palaces and aristocratic mansions in Leipziger Platz, Leipziger Strasse and Wilhelmstra\u00dfe. Even the Reichstag itself, the German Parliament, occupied the former home of the family of composer Felix Mendelssohn (1809\u201347) in Leipziger Strasse before moving in 1894 to the vast new edifice near the Brandenburg Gate, erected by Paul Wallot (1841\u20131912). Next door, the Herrenhaus, or Prussian House of Lords (the Upper House of the Prussian State Parliament), occupied a former porcelain factory for a while, before moving to an impressive new building erected on the site of the former Mendelssohn family home in 1899\u20131904 by Friedrich Schulze Colditz (1843\u20131912). This building backed on to an equally grand edifice in the next street (Prinz-Albrecht-Stra\u00dfe), also by Colditz, that had been built for the Preu\u00dfischer Landtag (the Prussian Lower House), in 1892\u20139.\nPotsdamer Platz was also the location of Germany's first electric street lights, installed in 1882 by the electrical giant Siemens, founded and based in the city.\nInterwar years.\nThe heyday of Potsdamer Platz was in the 1920s and 1930s. By this time it had developed into the busiest traffic center in all of Europe, and the heart of Berlin's nightlife. It had acquired an iconic status, on a par with Piccadilly Circus in London or Times Square in New York. It was a key location that helped to symbolize Berlin; it was known worldwide, and a legend grew up around it. It represented the geographical center of the city, the meeting place of five of its busiest streets in a star-shaped intersection deemed the transport hub of the entire continent. These were:\nAs well as the stations and other facilities and attractions already mentioned, in the immediate area was one of the world's biggest and most luxurious department stores: Wertheim. Founded by German merchant Georg Wertheim (1857\u20131939), designed by architect Alfred Messel (1853\u20131909), opened in 1897 and extended several times over the following 40 years, it ultimately possessed a floor area double that of the Reichstag, a 330-metre-long granite and plate glass facade along Leipziger Strasse, 83 elevators, three escalators, 1,000 telephones, 10,000 lamps, five kilometers of pneumatic tubing for moving items from the various departments to the packing area, and a separate entrance directly from the nearby U-Bahn station. It also contained a summer garden, winter garden and roof garden, an enormous restaurant and several smaller eating areas, its own laundry, a theater and concert booking office, its own bank, whose strongrooms were underground at the eastern end of the building, and a large fleet of private delivery vehicles. In the run-up to Christmas Wertheim was transformed into a fairytale kingdom, and was well known to children from all over Germany and far beyond.\nIn Stresemannstrasse, and paralleling the Potsdamer Bahnhof on its eastern side, was another great magnet for shoppers and tourists alike\u00a0\u2013 a huge multi-national-themed eating establishment: the Haus Vaterland. Designed by architect Franz Heinrich Schwechten (1841\u20131924), who was also responsible for the Anhalter Bahnhof and the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, it was erected in 1911\u201312 as the Haus Potsdam. 93 m in length and with a dome rising 35 m above the pavement at the north (Stresemannstrasse) end, it contained the world's largest restaurant\u00a0\u2013 the 2,500-seat Caf\u00e9 Piccadilly, plus a 1,200-seat theatre and numerous offices. These included (from 1917 to 1927), the headquarters of Universum Film AG (aka UFA or Ufa), Germany's biggest film company.\nOn 16 August 1914, less than three weeks after the start of World War I, the Caf\u00e9 Piccadilly was given a new name\u00a0\u2013 the more patriotic-sounding Caf\u00e9 Vaterland. However, in 1927\u20138 the architect and entrepreneur Carl Stahl-Urach (1879\u20131933) transformed the whole building into a gastronomic fantasy land, financed and further elaborated upon by new owners the Kempinski organisation. It reopened on 31 August 1928 as the Haus Vaterland, offering \"The World in One House,\" and could now hold up to 8,000 guests at a time. The Caf\u00e9 Vaterland had remained largely untouched, but the 1,200-seat theatre was now a 1,400-seat cinema. The rest of the building had been turned into a large number of theme restaurants, all served from a central kitchen containing the largest gas-fueled cooking plant in Europe. These included: Rheinterrasse, L\u00f6wenbr\u00e4u (Bavarian beer restaurant), Grinzing (Viennese caf\u00e9 and wine bar), Bodega (Spanish winery), Csarda (Hungarian), Wild West Bar (aka the Arizona Bar) (American), Osteria (Italian), Komb\u00fcse (Bremen drinking den\u00a0\u2013 literally \"galley\"), R\u00fcbchen (Teltow, named after the well-known turnip dish \"Teltower R\u00fcbchen\", made with turnips grown locally in the small town of Teltow just outside Berlin), plus a Turkish caf\u00e9 and Japanese tearoom; additionally there was a large ballroom. Up to eight orchestras and dance bands regularly performed in different parts of the building, plus a host of singers, dancers and other entertainers. It should be pointed out here though that not all of these attractions existed simultaneously, owing to changes in those countries that Germany was or was not allied to, in the volatile years leading up to and during World War II, a good example being the closure of the Wild West Bar following America's entry into the war as an enemy of Germany.\nAmong the major hotels at or near Potsdamer Platz were two designed by the same architect, Otto Rehnig (1864\u20131925), and opened in the same year, 1908. One was the 600-room Hotel Esplanade (sometimes known as the \"Grand Hotel Esplanade\"), in Bellevuestrasse. Charlie Chaplin and Greta Garbo were guests there, and Kaiser Wilhelm II himself held regular \"gentlemen's evenings\" and other functions there in a room that came to be named after him\u00a0\u2013 the Kaisersaal.\nThe other was the Hotel Excelsior, also 600 rooms but superior provision of other facilities made it the largest hotel in Continental Europe, located in Stresemannstrasse opposite the Anhalter Bahnhof and connected to it by a 100-metre-long subterranean passageway complete with a parade of underground shops.\nTwo other hotels which shared the same architect, in this case Ludwig Heim (1844\u20131917), were the 68-room Hotel Bellevue (sometimes known as the \"Grand Hotel Bellevue\"), built 1887\u20138, and the 110-room Palast Hotel, built 1892\u20133 on the site of an earlier hotel. These stood on either side of the northern exit from Potsdamer Platz along Ebertstra\u00dfe. The Bellevue was well known for its Winter Garden.\nMeanwhile, facing the Palast Hotel across the entrance to Leipziger Platz (the Potsdam Gate), was the 400-room Hotel F\u00fcrstenhof, by Richard Bielenberg (1871\u20131929) and Josef Moser (1872\u20131963), erected in 1906\u20131907, also on the site of an earlier building. With its 200-metre-long main facade along Stresemannstrasse, the F\u00fcrstenhof was less opulent than some of the other hotels mentioned, despite its size, but was still popular with business people. The new U-Bahn station was being built at the same time as the hotel and actually ran through the hotel's basement, cutting it in half, thus making the construction of both into something of a technical challenge, but unlike the Wertheim department store (and contrary to several sources), the hotel did not enjoy a separate entrance directly from the station.\nThe Weinhaus Huth, with its distinctive corner cupola, was a wedge-shaped structure located in the angle between Potsdamer Strasse and Linkstrasse (literally \"Left Street\"), and with entrances in both streets. Wine merchant Friedrich Karl Christian Huth, whose great-grandfather had been \"kellermeister\" (cellar-master) to King Friedrich II back in 1769, had founded the firm in 1871 and taken over the former building in Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe on 23 March 1877. His son, the wine wholesale dealer William (\"Willy\") Huth (1877\u20131967), took over the business in 1904 and, a few years later, commissioned the replacement of the building by a new one on the same site. Running right through the block into Linkstrasse, this new Weinhaus Huth was designed by the architects Conrad Heidenreich (1873\u20131937) and Paul Michel (1877\u20131938), and opened on 2 October 1912, and contained a wine restaurant on the ground floor, and wine storage space above, so it had to take a lot of weight. It was thus given a strong steel skeleton, which would stand the building in very good stead some three decades after its completion. Famous for its fine claret, numerous members of European society were made welcome there as guests. A total of 15 chefs were employed there, and Alois Hitler Jr., the stepbrother of the future Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler, was a waiter there in the 1920s, before he opened his own restaurant and hotel at Wittenbergplatz, in the western part of the city.\nCaf\u00e9 Josty was one of two rival caf\u00e9s (the other being the \"Astoria\", later \"Caf\u00e9 Eins A\"), occupying the broad corner between Potsdamer Strasse and Bellevuestrasse. The Josty company had been founded in 1793 by two Swiss brothers, Johann and Daniel Josty, who had emigrated to Berlin from Sils in Switzerland and set up a bakery from which the caf\u00e9 was a 1796 offshoot. It had occupied various locations including (from 1812 till 1880), a site in front of the Berlin City Palace, before moving to Potsdamer Platz in the latter year. A major player on the Berlin caf\u00e9 scene, Josty attracted writers, artists, politicians and international society: it was one of \"the\" places to be seen. The writer Theodor Fontane, painter Adolph von Menzel, and Dadaist Kurt Schwitters were all guests; Karl Liebknecht, the Spartacus Communist movement leader read a lot here and even made some key political speeches from the pavement terrace, while author Erich K\u00e4stner wrote part of his 1929 bestseller for children, \"Emil und die Detektive\" (Emil and the Detectives), on the same terrace and made the caf\u00e9 the setting for an important scene in the book.\nDespite the prestige associated with its name, Caf\u00e9 Josty closed in 1930. It then went through an odyssey of re-openings, closures and relaunches under a number of different names including \"Conditorei Friediger\", \"Caf\u00e9 Wiener\", \"Engelhardt Brau\" and \"Kaffee Potsdamer Platz\" (sometimes appearing to have two or more names simultaneously), before its eventual destruction in World War II.\nAmong the many beer palaces around Potsdamer Platz were two in particular which contained an extensive range of rooms and halls covering a large area. The Alt-Bayern in Potsdamer Strasse was erected by architect Wilhelm Walther (1857\u20131917) and opened in 1904. After closing in 1914, it underwent a revamp before reopening in 1926 under the new name Bayernhof.\nMeanwhile, in Bellevuestrasse, sandwiched between Caf\u00e9 Josty and the Hotel Esplanade but extending right through the block with a separate entrance in Potsdamer Strasse, was the Weinhaus Rheingold, built by Bruno Schmitz (1858\u20131916) and opened on 6 February 1907. Intended to be a concert venue until concerns were raised about increased traffic problems in the already congested streets, it was ruled that it should serve a gastronomic purpose only. Altogether it could accommodate 4,000 guests at a time, 1,100 of these in its main hall alone. Many of the total of 14 banquet and beer halls had a Wagnerian theme\u00a0\u2013 indeed, the very name of the complex was taken from the Wagner opera \"Das Rheingold\", the first of the four parts of the cycle Der Ring des Nibelungen, although this name did hark back to the building's planned former role as a concert venue. Another building by the same architect but which still stands\u00a0\u2013 the \"Rosengarten\" in Mannheim, has a remarkably similar main facade.\nFinally, on the corner between Potsdamer Strasse and the Potsdamer Bahnhof, stood Bierhaus Siechen, built by Johann Emil Schaudt (1874\u20131957), opened in 1910 and relaunched under a new name, Pschorr-Haus.\nAt 8.00 p.m. on 29 October 1923, Germany's first radio broadcast was made from a building (Vox-Haus) close by in Potsdamer Strasse. Standing alongside the Weinhaus Rheingold's Potsdamer Strasse entrance, this five-storey steel-framed edifice had been erected as an office building in 1907\u20138 by architect and one-time Berlin inspector of buildings Otto Stahn (1859\u20131930), who was also responsible for the city's Oberbaumbr\u00fccke over the River Spree. In 1920 the Vox-group had taken over the building and the following year commissioned its remodelling by Swiss architect Rudolf Otto Salvisberg (1882\u20131940), and then erected two transmitting antennae. Despite several upgrades between December 1923 and July 1924, the nearby Hotel Esplanade's formidable bulk prevented the transmitter from functioning effectively and so in December 1924 it was superseded by a better sited new one, but Vox-Haus lived on as the home of Germany's first radio station, Radiostunde Berlin, founded in 1923, renamed Funkstunde in March 1924, but it moved to a new home in 1931 and closed in 1934.\nIn addition, the former Millionaires' Quarter just to the west of Potsdamer Platz had become a much favoured location for other countries to site their embassies. By the early 1930s there were so many diplomats living and working in the area that it came to be redesignated the \"Diplomatic Quarter\". By 1938, 37 out of 52 embassies and legations in Berlin, and 28 out of 29 consulates, were situated here.\nThe first traffic light tower in Germany was erected at Potsdamer Platz on 20 October 1924 and went into service on 15. December 1924 in an attempt to control the sheer volume of traffic passing through.\nThis traffic had grown to extraordinary levels. Even in 1900, more than 100,000 people, 20,000 cars, horse-drawn vehicles and handcarts, plus many thousands of bicycles, passed through the platz daily. By the 1920s the number of cars had soared to 60,000. The trams added greatly to this. The first four lines had appeared in 1880, rising to 13 by 1897, all horse-drawn, but after electrification between 1898 and 1902 the number of lines had soared to 35 by 1908 and ultimately reached 40, carrying between them 600 trams every hour, day and night. Services were run by a large number of companies.\nAfter 1918 most of the tram companies joined. In 1923, at the peak of the Hyperinflation the tram traffic was stopped for two days and a new communal company called \"Berliner Stra\u00dfenbahn-Betriebs-GmbH\" was founded. Finally in 1929 all communal traffic companies (Underground, Tram and Buses) were unified into the \"Berliner Verkehrsbetriebe\" (Berlin Transport Services) company.\nAt the Potsdamer Platz up to 11 policemen at a time had tried to control all this traffic but with varying success. The delays in tram traffic increased and the job was very dangerous for the policemen. The \"Berliner Stra\u00dfenbahn-Betriebs-GmbH\" started researches to control the traffic on the main streets and places in 1924. Berlin traffic experts visited colleagues in Paris, London and New York. They had to organize the traffic, define traffic rules and select a solution to control the traffic. In New York, Fifth Avenue they found traffic light towers designed by Joseph H. Freedlander in 1922 which can be regarded as a model for the Berlin tower.\nThe Potsdamer Platz five-sided 8.5 m high traffic tower was designed by Jean Kramer, a German architect. The traffic lights were delivered by Siemens &amp; Halske and mounted on top of the tower cabin. A solitary policeman sat in a small cabin at the top of the tower and switched the lights around manually, until they were automated in 1926. Yet some officers still remained on the ground in case people did not pay any attention to the lights. The tower remained until October 1937, when it was removed to allow for excavations for the new S-Bahn underground line. On 26 September 1997, a replica of the tower was erected, just for show, close to its original location by Siemens, to celebrate the company's 150th anniversary. The replica was moved again on 29 September 2000, to the place where it stands today.\nThe traffic problems that had blighted Potsdamer Platz for decades continued to be a big headache, despite the new lights, and these led to a strong desire to solve them once and for all. By now Berlin was a major centre of innovation in many different fields including architecture. In addition, the city's colossal pace of change (compared by some to that of Chicago), had caused its chief planner, Martin Wagner (1885\u20131957), to foresee the entire centre being made over totally as often as every 25 years. These factors combined to produce some far more radical and futuristic plans for Potsdamer Platz in the late 1920s and early 1930s, especially around 1928\u20139, when the creative fervour was at its peak. On the cards was an almost total redevelopment of the area. One design submitted by Wagner himself comprised an array of gleaming new buildings arranged around a vast multi-level system of fly-overs and underpasses, with a huge glass-roofed circular car-park in the middle. Unfortunately the worldwide Great Depression of the time, triggered by the Wall Street crash of 1929, meant that most of the plans remained on the drawing board. However, in Germany this depression was virtually a continuation of an economic morass that had blighted the country since the end of World War I, partly the result of the war reparations the country had been made to pay, and this morass had brought about the closure and demolition of the Grand Hotel Belle Vue, on the corner of Bellevuestrasse and K\u00f6niggr\u00e4tzer Strasse, thus enabling one revolutionary new building to struggle through to reality despite considerable financial odds.\nColumbushaus was the result of a plan by the French retail company Galeries Lafayette, whose flagship store was the legendary Galeries Lafayette in Paris, to open a counterpart in Berlin, on the Grand Hotel Belle Vue's former site, but financial worries made them pull out. Undaunted, the architect, Erich Mendelsohn (1887\u20131953), erected vast advertising boards around the perimeter of the site, and the revenue generated by these enabled him to proceed with the development anyway. Columbushaus was a ten-storey ultra-modern office building, years ahead of its time, containing Germany's first artificial ventilation system, and whose elegance and clean lines won it much praise. However, despite a Woolworths store on its ground floor, a major travel company housed on the floor above, and a restaurant offering fine views over the city from the top floor, the economic situation of the time meant that it would not be followed by more buildings in that vein: no further redevelopment in the immediate vicinity of Potsdamer Platz occurred prior to World War II, and so Columbushaus would always seem out of place in that location. Nevertheless, its exact position showed that the platz was starting to be opened out: the former hotel had mostly stood on a large flagged area laid out in front of it, indicating that the new building curved away from the existing street line; this would have enabled future street widening to take place.\nHitler and Germania plans.\nColumbushaus was completed and opened in January 1933, the same month that the Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler (1889\u20131945) came to power. Hitler had big plans for Berlin, to transform it into the \"Welthauptstadt\" (World Capital) Germania, to be realised by his architect friend Albert Speer (1905\u201381). Under these plans the immediate vicinity of Potsdamer Platz would have got off fairly lightly, although the Potsdamer Bahnhof (and the Anhalter Bahnhof a short distance away) would have lost their function. The new North-South Axis, the linchpin of the scheme, would have severed their approach tracks, leaving both termini stranded on the wrong side of it. All trains arriving in Berlin would have run into either of two vast new stations located on the Ringbahn to the north and south of the centre respectively, to be known as \"Nordbahnhof\" (North Station) and \"S\u00fcdbahnhof\" (South Station), located at Wedding and S\u00fcdkreuz. In Speer's plan the former Anhalter Bahnhof was earmarked to become a public swimming pool; the intended fate of the Potsdamer Bahnhof has not been documented.\nMeanwhile, the North-South Axis would have cut a giant swathe passing just to the west of Potsdamer Platz, some 5\u00a0km long and up to 100 m wide, and lined with Nazi government edifices on a gargantuan scale. The eastern half of the former Millionaires' Quarter, including St\u00fcler's Matthiaskirche, would have been totally eradicated. New U-Bahn and S-Bahn lines were planned to run directly beneath almost the whole length of the axis, and the city's entire underground network reoriented to gravitate towards this new hub (at least one tunnel section, around 220 metres in length, was actually constructed and still exists today, buried some 20 metres beneath the Tiergarten, despite having never seen a train). This was in addition to the S-Bahn North-South Link beneath Potsdamer Platz itself, which went forward to completion, opening in stages in 1939. In the event, a substantial amount of demolition did take place in Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe, between the platz itself and the Landwehrkanal, and this became the location of the one Germania building that actually went forward to a state of virtual completion: architect Theodor Dierksmeier's \"Haus des Fremdenverkehrs\" (House of Tourism), basically a giant state-run travel agency. More significantly, its curving eastern facade marked the beginnings of the \"Runden Platz\" (Round Platz), a huge circular public space at the point where the North-South Axis and Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe intersected. Additionally, the southern edge of the Tiergarten was to be redefined, with a new road planned to slice through the built-up area immediately to the north of Columbushaus (although Columbushaus itself would remain unscathed); this road would line up with Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe, one block to the north of Leipziger Platz. Here Albert Speer erected Hitler's enormous new Reichskanzlei building, and yet even this was little more than a dry run for an even larger structure some distance further away.\nMeanwhile, the Nazi influence was no less evident at Potsdamer Platz than anywhere else in Berlin. As well as swastika flags and propaganda everywhere, Nazi-affiliated concerns occupied a great many buildings in the area, especially Columbushaus, where they took over most of the upper floors. As if to emphasise their presence, they used the building to advertise their own weekly publication: a huge neon sign on its roof proclaimed \"DIE BRAUNE POST\u00a0\u2013 N.S. SONNTAGSZEITUNG\" (The Brown Post\u00a0\u2013 N.S. Sunday Newspaper), the \"N.S.\" standing for \"Nationalsozialist\" (National Socialist), i.e. Nazi. Probably Potsdamer Platz's most prominent landmark in the mid-1930s, the sign first appears in photographs dated 1935 but was gone again by 1938. On an even darker note, those Nazi concerns included the Gestapo, who set up a secret prison in an upper part of the building, complete with interrogation and torture rooms. Meanwhile, in another part of the building, the Information Office of the Olympic Games Organising Committee was housed. Here much of the planning of the 1936 Berlin Summer Olympic Games took place.\nWorld War II.\nAs was the case in most of central Berlin, almost all of the buildings around Potsdamer Platz were turned to rubble by air raids and heavy artillery bombardment during the last years of World War II. The three most destructive raids (out of 363 that the city suffered), occurred on 23 November 1943, and 3 and 26 February 1945. Things were not helped by the very close proximity of Hitler's Reich Chancellery, just one block away in Vo\u00dfstra\u00dfe, and many other Nazi government edifices nearby as well, and so Potsdamer Platz was right in a major target area.\nOnce the bombing and shelling had largely ceased, the ground invasion began as Soviet forces stormed the centre of Berlin street by street, building by building, aiming to capture the Reich Chancellery and other key symbols of the Nazi government. When the city was divided into sectors by the occupying Allies at the end of the war, the square found itself on the boundary between the American, British and Soviet sectors.\nDespite all the devastation, commercial life reappeared in the ruins around Potsdamer Platz within just a few weeks of war's end. The lower floors of a few buildings were patched up enough to allow business of a sort to resume. The U-Bahn and S-Bahn were partially operational again from 2 June 1946, fully from 16 November 1947 (although repairs were not completed until May 1948) and trams by 1952. Part of the Haus Vaterland reopened in 1948 in a much simplified form. The new East German state-owned retail business H.O. (\"Handelsorganisation\", meaning Trading Organisation), had seized almost all of Wertheim's former assets in the newly created German Democratic Republic but, unable to start up the giant Leipziger Platz store again (it was too badly damaged), it opened a new \"Kaufhaus\" (department store) on the ground floor of Columbushaus. An office of the \"Kasernierte Volkspolizei\" (literally \"Barracked People's Police\") \u2013 the military precursor of the \"Nationale Volksarmee\" (National People's Army), occupied the floor above. Meanwhile, a row of new single-storey shops was erected along Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe. Out on the streets, even the flower-sellers, for whom the area had once been renowned, were doing brisk business again.\nThe area around Potsdamer Platz had also become a focus for black market trading. Since the American, British and Soviet Occupation Zones converged there, people theoretically only had to walk a few paces across sector boundaries to avoid the respective police officials.\nThe Cold War.\nMeanwhile, friction between the Western Allies and Soviets was steadily rising. The Soviets even took to marking out their border by stationing armed soldiers along it at intervals of a few metres, day and night, in all weathers. Since there was not, as yet, a fixed marker, the borders were prone to abuse, which eventually resulted (in August 1948), in white lines in luminous paint appearing across roads and even through ruined buildings to try to deter the Soviets from making unauthorised incursions into the American and British zones. These measures were only partially successful: after further skirmishes in which shots were fired, barbed wire entanglements were stretched across some roads, a foretaste of things to come.\nThe free Berlin press versus the wise Berliner.\nRemembering the effective use of propaganda in the leadup to the second World War, the opposing camps later began berating one another with enormous signs displaying loud political slogans, facing each other across the border zone. That on the western side was erected first, in direct response to the ban on sales of Western newspapers in East Berlin, and comprised an illuminated display board 30 m wide and 1.5 m deep, facing east, supported on three steel lattice towers 25 m high and topped by the words \"DIE FREIE BERLINER PRESSE MELDET\" (The Free Berlin Press Announces). Important messages were spelt out on the display board using up to 2,000 bulbs. The sign was switched on for the first time on 10 October 1950, watched by a large crowd. On 18 November, the Communist authorities in the east ordered its destruction using a catapult made from a compressed air hose loaded with pebbles and small pieces of metal. However, the order was not executed and the sign lasted until 1974, an eventual victim of its own high maintenance costs.\nNot to be outdone, East Berlin had meanwhile erected a sign of its own. This was up and running by 25 November 1950, less than seven weeks after its western counterpart, albeit for a much shorter time period. (It was demolished on 29 January 1953.) Facing towards West Berlin was the proclamation \"DER KLUGE BERLINER KAUFT BEI DER H.O.\" (The Wise Berliner Buys With The HO) Underneath were the words \"N\u00c4CHSTE VERKAUFSSTELLEN\" (Next Sales Premises), between two arrows pointing left and right, suggesting that large shopping developments were forthcoming in the immediate vicinity, although these never appeared.\nWhat was not apparent from the western side however, was that East Berlin's construction boasted its own illuminated display board facing east, whose messages comprised the version of the news that the Communist authorities in the east wanted their citizens to believe. In addition, the East Berlin sign was carefully placed so that, when viewed from further away down Leipziger Strasse, its display board obscured the West Berlin sign standing beyond it. Over the next two years, West Berlin would regularly raise or lower its sign to make it more easily visible from the East again\u00a0\u2013 and then East Berlin would raise or lower its own construction to obscure it once more. Furthermore, the East German Government also exploited the huge facade of the nearby Columbushaus as a further propaganda tool.\nThe 1953 uprising.\nMore significantly, living and working conditions in East Germany were rapidly worsening under Communist rule. Tensions finally reached breaking point and a Workers' Uprising took place on 17 June 1953, to be quickly and brutally crushed when Soviet tanks rolled in, and some of the worst violence occurred around Potsdamer Platz, where several people were killed by the Volkspolizei. No one really knows how many people died during the uprising itself, or by the subsequent death sentences. There are 55 known victims, but other estimates state at least 125. West German estimates were much higher: in 1966 the West German Ministry for Inter-German Affairs claimed that 383 people died in the uprising, including 116 \"functionaries of the SED regime\", with an additional 106 executed under martial law or condemned to death, while 1,838 were injured and 5,100 arrested, 1,200 of these sentenced to a total of six thousand years in penal camps. It was also claimed that 17 or 18 Soviet soldiers were executed for refusing to shoot demonstrating workers, but this remains unconfirmed by post-1990 research. Whatever the casualty figures, for the second time in eight years, the \"busiest and most famous square in Europe\" had been transformed into a bloody battleground. Columbushaus, with its H.O. store on the ground floor and military police station above, had been a prime target in the insurrection and been burnt out yet again, along with the Haus Vaterland and other premises. This time, they were not rehabilitated.\nAs Cold War tensions rose still further during the 1950s, restrictions were placed on travel between the Soviet sector (East Berlin) and the western sectors (West Berlin). For the second time in its history, the Potsdam Gate (or what remained of it), was like a dividing line between two different worlds. Lying on this invisible frontier, Potsdamer Platz was no longer an important destination for Berliners. Similarly, neither East Berlin nor West Berlin regarded their half as a priority area for redevelopment, seeking instead to distance themselves from the traditional heart of the city and develop two new centres for themselves, well away from the troubled border zone. West Berlin inevitably chose the Kurf\u00fcrstendamm and the area around the Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church, while East Berlin built up Alexanderplatz and turned Frankfurter Allee (which they renamed Stalinallee in 1949, Karl-Marx-Allee in 1961), into their own showpiece boulevard. Potsdamer Platz, meanwhile, was more or less left to rot, as one by one the ruined buildings were cleared away, neither side having the will to repair or replace them. On the western side things did improve with the development of the Cultural Forum, whose site roughly equates with the former Millionaires' Quarter.\nThe Berlin Wall.\nWith the construction of the Berlin Wall on 13 August 1961, along the intracity frontier, Potsdamer Platz now found itself physically divided in two. What had once been a busy intersection had become totally desolate. With the clearance of most of the remaining bomb-damaged buildings on both sides (on the eastern side, this was done chiefly to give border guards a clear view of would-be escapees and an uninterrupted line of fire), little was left in an area of dozens of hectares. Further demolitions occurred up until 1976 when the Haus Vaterland finally disappeared. After that, only two buildings in the immediate vicinity of Potsdamer Platz still stood\u00a0\u2013 one complete, the other in a half-ruined fragmented form: the Weinhaus Huth's steel skeleton had enabled the building to withstand the pounding of World War II virtually undamaged, and it stood out starkly amid a great levelled wasteland, although now occupied only by groups of squatters. A short distance away stood portions of the former Hotel Esplanade, including the Kaisersaal, used at various times as a much scaled-down hotel, cinema, nightclub and occasional film-set (scenes from Cabaret were shot there). Apart from these, no other buildings remained. Below ground, the U-Bahn section through Potsdamer Platz had closed entirely; although the S-Bahn line itself remained open, it suffered from a quirk of geography in that it briefly passed through East German territory en route from one part of West Berlin to another. Consequently, Potsdamer Platz S-Bahn station became the most infamous of several \"Geisterbahnhofe\" (ghost stations), through which trains ran without stopping, its previously bustling platforms now decrepit, sealed off from the outside world, and patrolled by armed guards.\nDuring its 28 years in limbo, Potsdamer Platz exuded a strange fascination towards many people on the western side, especially tourists and also visiting politicians and heads of state. For the benefit of the former, the row of post-war single-storey shops in Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe now sold a wide variety of souvenir goods, many of which were purchased by coach-loads of curious visitors brought specially to this sad location. An observation platform had been erected, primarily for military personnel and police but used increasingly by members of the public, so that they could gaze over the Wall at the wilderness beyond. Meanwhile, among the many V.I.P.s who came to look were U.S. Senator Robert F. Kennedy (22 February 1962), Prime Minister Harold Wilson of the United Kingdom (6 March 1965), Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom (27 May 1965), Charles, Prince of Wales (3 November 1972), U.S. President Jimmy Carter (15 July 1978), and U.S. Vice President George H. W. Bush (1 February 1983).\nSome scenes of the 1987 Wim Wenders movie \"Der Himmel \u00fcber Berlin\" (English title: \"Wings of Desire\") were filmed on the old, almost entirely void Potsdamer Platz before the Berlin Wall fell. In one scene an old man named Homer, played by actor Curt Bois, searches in vain for Potsdamer Platz, but finds only rubble, weeds and the graffiti-covered Berlin Wall. The movie thus gives a good impression of the surroundings at the time, which are completely unlike what can be seen today.\nThe fall of the Wall.\nAfter the initial opening of the Berlin Wall on 9 November 1989, Potsdamer Platz became one of the earliest locations where the Wall was \"breached\" to create a new border crossing between East and West Berlin. The crossing began operating on 11 November 1989.\nThe crossing required the dismantling of both the inner and outer walls and the clearance of the \"death zone\" or \"no man's land\" between the two. A temporary road, lined with barriers, was created across this zone and checkpoints were set up just inside East German territory. Proper dismantling of the entire wall began on 13 June 1990, and all border checks were abolished on 1 July 1990 as East Germany joined West Germany in a currency union.\nRoger Waters' \"The Wall\" concert.\nOn 21 July 1990, ex-Pink Floyd member Roger Waters staged a gigantic charity concert of his former band's rock extravaganza \"The Wall\" to commemorate the end of the division between East and West Germany. The concert took place at Potsdamer Platz\u00a0\u2013 specifically an area of the former no man's land just to the north of the Reich Chancellery site, and featured many guest superstars. It was preparations for this concert, rather than historical interest, that brought about the first detailed post-Cold War survey of the area with a view to determining what, if anything, was left of Hitler's bunker and any other underground installations. Although sections of the main F\u00fchrerbunker were found, partially destroyed or filled in, another bunker complex was found further north that even the East German authorities had apparently missed, plus other cavities beneath land bordering the east side of Ebertstra\u00dfe, although these turned out to be underground garages belonging to a former SS accommodation block.\nRoutes through Potsdamer Platz after reunification.\nAfter major refurbishment, the S-Bahn line and station reopened on 1 March 1992, followed by the U-Bahn on 13 November 1993. An additional station on the U-Bahn, called Mendelssohn-Bartholdy-Park, was opened immediately north of the Landwehrkanal on 1 October 1998. A new U-Bahn station has also been built at Potsdamer Platz itself, although a decision is still pending on whether to proceed with completion of the line passing through it; in the meantime the station area serves as an impromptu art gallery and exhibition space. A new underground main-line station or \"Regionalbahnhof\" (Bahnhof Potsdamer Platz) has also been constructed, opened on 26 July 2006. There are also plans to reintroduce trams to Potsdamer Platz. In addition, many bus routes pass through the platz, while for people with their own cars there are some 5,000 parking spaces, 3,500 of which are underground.\nThe annual Berlin Marathon, which takes place in the last weekend of September, was first held in 1974 but due to the division of the city was confined to West Berlin up till and including 1989. Beginning in 1990 the course was re-routed into part of East Berlin, and in 2001 a further adjustment meant that the course has since run through Potsdamer Platz. Typically the leaders will pass through the platz about ten minutes before they cross the finish line.\nAnother annual tradition that began in West Berlin (in 1952) and was re-routed into the east via Potsdamer Platz following German reunification is the \"Weihnachtszug\" (Christmas train). It now does a regular two-hour round trip at weekends in the run-up to Christmas for families with children, starting and finishing at the Potsdamer Platz S-Bahn station. It did not run in 2009 or 2010 due to equipment problems, but is expected to be operational again in 2011.\nEurope's largest building site.\nAfter 1990, the square became the focus of attention again, as a large (some 60 hectares), attractive location which had suddenly become available in the centre of a major European city. A lot of more than at Potsdamer Platz had been acquired by Daimler-Benz in 1987 as an expression of faith in Berlin; in 1990, adjacent plots were bought by Sony and ABB. The area was widely seen as one of the hottest, most exciting building sites in Europe, and the subject of much debate amongst architects and planners. If Berlin needed to re-establish itself on the world stage, then Potsdamer Platz was one of the key areas where the city had an opportunity to express itself. More than just a building site, Potsdamer Platz was a \"statement of intent\". In particular, due to its location straddling the erstwhile border between east and west, it was widely perceived as a \"linking element,\" reconnecting the two-halves of the city in a way that was symbolic as well as physical, helping to heal the historical wounds by providing an exciting new mecca attracting Berliners from both sides of the former divide. Whether fairly or unfairly, a great deal was riding on the project, and expectations were high.\nThe Berlin Senate (city government) organised a design competition for the redevelopment of Potsdamer Platz and much of the surrounding area. Eventually attracting 17 entrants, a winning design was announced in October 1991, that from the Munich-based architectural firm of Hilmer &amp; Sattler. They had to fight off some stiff competition though, including a last-minute entry by British architect Richard Rogers.\nThe Berlin Senate then chose to divide the area into four parts, each to be sold to a commercial investor, who then planned new construction according to Hilmer &amp; Sattler's masterplan. During the building phase Potsdamer Platz was the largest building site in Europe. While the resulting development is impressive in its scale and confidence, the quality of its architecture has been praised and criticised in almost equal measure.\nDaimler.\nThe largest of the four parts went to Daimler-Benz, who charged Italian architect Renzo Piano with creating an overall design for their scheme while sticking to the underlying requirements of Hilmer &amp; Sattler's masterplan. A $2 billion development bordering the west side of the former Potsdamer Bahnhof site, some of its 19 individual buildings were then erected by other architects, who submitted their own designs while maintaining Piano's key elements. The primary materials used for the buildings' facades are brick, terra cotta and sandstone, creating hues of beige, soft brown and ocher.\nThe first spade at the start of the Daimler-Benz development was turned by the Mayor of Berlin, Eberhard Diepgen, on 11 October 1993. During construction, the contractors erected a bright red three-story building called the \"Info Box\", where computer graphics help convey the scope of one of the most complex building projects ever attempted; it quickly became a highly popular attraction with thousands of visitors each week.\nThe finished complex was officially opened by the Federal President of Germany, Roman Herzog, on 2 October 1998, in a glittering ceremony featuring large-scale celebrations and musical performances. The 19 buildings include the offices of Daimler-Benz themselves (through their former subsidiary \"debis\", whose 21-storey main tower rises to 106 metres and is the tallest building in the new Potsdamer Platz development), also offices of British professional services company PricewaterhouseCoopers; \"Berliner Volksbank\" (Germany's largest cooperative bank) by Arata Isozaki; a five-star hotel designed by Rafael Moneo and managed by Hyatt, with 342 rooms and suites; and the 25-storey, 103-metre-high Potsdamer Platz No. 1, known as the \"Kollhoff Tower\" by architect Hans Kollhoff.\nPotsdamer Platz No. 1 also houses the \"Panoramapunkt\" viewing platform, located 100 m above ground level, which is accessed by riding Europe's fastest elevator (8.65 metres per second). From the Panoramapunkt one can see such landmarks as the Brandenburg Gate, Reichstag, Federal Chancellery, Bellevue Palace, Cathedral, Television Tower, Gendarmes Market, Holocaust Memorial and Kaiser Wilhelm Memorial Church. The Kollhoff Tower's facade needed major repairs due to water penetration and frost damage just seven years after completion, and was under scaffolding for many months.\nThe Daimler complex also contains the former Weinhaus Huth, now restored to its former glory and occupied by a restaurant, caf\u00e9, and an exhibition space for Daimler AG's art collection (\"Daimler Contemporary\"). Across the complex, various artworks from the collection are installed, including pieces by Keith Haring (\"Untitled (The Boxers)\"), Mark di Suvero (\"Galileo\"), Robert Rauschenberg (\"The Riding Bikes\") and Frank Stella (\"Prinz Friedrich Arthur von Homburg\"). From 2000 until 2010, \"Balloon Flower (Blue)\" (1995\u20132000) by Jeff Koons was located at Marlene Dietrich Platz.\nSony.\nThe second largest part went to Sony, who erected their new European headquarters on a triangular site immediately to the north of Daimler-Benz and separated from it by the re-routed Potsdamer Stra\u00dfe. This new Sony Centre, designed by Helmut Jahn, is an eye-catching monolith of glass and steel featuring an enormous tent-like conical roof, its shape reportedly inspired by Mount Fuji in Japan, covering an elliptical central public space up to 102 metres across, and thus differing substantially from Hilmer &amp; Sattler's original plan for the site. Its 26-storey, 103-metre-high \"Bahn Tower\" is so named because it houses the corporate headquarters of Deutsche Bahn, the German state railway system.\nSurviving parts of the former Hotel Esplanade have been incorporated into the north side of the Sony development, including the Kaisersaal which, in a complex and costly operation in March 1996, was moved in one piece (all 1,300 tonnes of it), some 75 metres from its former location, to the spot that it occupies today (it even had to make two right-angled turns during the journey, while maintaining its own orientation). Nearby is a new Caf\u00e9 Josty, opened early in 2001, while between the two is \"Josty's Bar,\" which is housed in the Esplanade's former breakfast room. This, like the Kaisersaal, had to be relocated, but here the room was dismantled into some 500 pieces to be reassembled where it stands now.\nTopped out on 2 September 1998, the Sony Centre was formally opened on 14 June 2000 (although many of its public attractions had been up and running since 20 January), in another grand ceremony with more music\u00a0\u2013 this time with Sony's Japanese chairman Norio Ohga himself conducting the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra. A keen lover of classical music, he had helped to choose the site because of its close proximity to the orchestra's home in the Cultural Forum.\nBeisheim.\nThe third part became the Beisheim Center and adjoining buildings, on another triangular site bordered on the east side by Ebertstra\u00dfe, financed entirely out of his own pocket by the German businessman Otto Beisheim. The office and shopping complex also houses the five-star Ritz Carlton and Marriott hotels.\nPark Kolonnaden.\nThe fourth part is the Park Kolonnaden, a range of buildings running down the east side of the Potsdamer Bahnhof site, parallelling Daimler-Benz. This complex occupies the site of the former Haus Vaterland, and its principal building, which for a few years was the headquarters of the large German trade union ver.di (\"Vereinte Dienstleistungsgewerkschaft\", meaning United Services Union), rises to 45 metres and has a curving glass facade designed to evoke the shape of that erstwhile landmark.\nLeipziger Platz.\nOther developments, more piecemeal in nature, have recreated the octagonal layout of neighbouring Leipziger Platz immediately to the east. One of these is \"Kanada Haus\", the new embassy of Canada, on the platz's north-west diagonal. Its turf-cutting ceremony was carried out on 18 February 2002 by the Canadian Prime Minister, Jean Chr\u00e9tien, and it was officially opened on 29 April 2005.\nControversy.\nThe whole project was subject to much controversy from the start; not everyone approved of how the district was commercialised and replanned. The decision by the Berlin Senate to divide the land between just four investors \u2013 while numerous others had submitted bids \u2013 provoked scepticism. The remarkably low price Daimler-Benz paid to secure their plot prompted questions from the Berlin Auditor-General's office and the European Union in Brussels, which resulted in Daimler-Benz being billed an additional sum. There were wrangles over land-usage: although a central feature of the Daimler-Benz development is a top shopping mall \u2013 the \"Arkaden\" (Arcades), this did not form part of the plans until the Berlin Senate belatedly insisted that a shopping mall be included. Despite its undoubted success, this in turn led to what many saw as an \"Americanisation\" of the area, with even its private security force being kitted out in something resembling New York Police uniforms.\nFurther wrangles effectively brought work on the north side of Leipziger Platz to a complete stop for several years; even now there are some \"fake facades\" where completed new buildings should be, while a long-running dispute over who owned the Wertheim department store site (or had claims to the revenue from its sale by the government), left another large gap in the central Berlin cityscape that is only now finally being redeveloped. This development, known as Leipziger Platz 12, is a large complex with facades in three streets (Leipziger Strasse, Wilhelmstrasse and Vossstrasse) as well as Leipziger Platz itself, and when completed will contain 270 stores, 270 apartments, a hotel, a fitness centre and offices. However, this development brought about the demise (after several stays of execution), of the legendary Tresor nightclub and centre for techno music. Founded on 8 March 1991 in the basement strongrooms of the former Wertheim store's bank, these having survived the decades largely undamaged, the club finally closed on 16 April 2005 (it reopened on 24 May 2007 in a renovated power plant on K\u00f6penicker Stra\u00dfe).\nFacilities and attractions.\nThe rebuilt Potsdamer Platz now attracts around 70,000 visitors a day, rising to 100,000 at weekends. It is a particularly popular attraction for visitors: the \"Arkaden\" shopping mall is in length. There are also four major hotels and a casino, the Spielbank Berlin.\nFilm and theatre.\nThe Theater am Potsdamer Platz is a theatre for musicals seating over 1600 people. It is known as the Berlinale Palast during the Berlin International Film Festival, serving as the venue for the premieres of competition films and several special gala films, as well as the opening and awards ceremonies.\nThe CinemaxX Potsdamer Platz is a multiplex cinema containing 19 screens and seating up to 3,500 people. It has been the main Berlinale screening cinema since 2000, two years after its opening in 1998. \nSince 2000, the two Potsdamer Platz venues have served as the two principal venues of the festival.\nFuture.\nWhilst on the surface the new Potsdamer Platz appears so far to have lived up to its expectations as a futuristic centre of commerce at the heart of Europe's youngest capital city, there has been much debate as to just how successful it really is. Certainly its long-term success and viability have become much harder to judge since the recent worldwide economic downturn, a situation compounded by the actions of its two principal owner-occupiers. Daimler and Sony caused a major surprise on 2 October 2007 when both announced that they were putting their respective complexes at Potsdamer Platz on the market. Whilst neither intended to move out, both felt it preferable to rent the space from new owners rather than continue to be the owners themselves (and so be responsible for the buildings' upkeep and maintenance). Daimler had recently come through a painful separation from their former American subsidiary Chrysler and needed a quick injection of cash in order to refocus on automotive production. The announcement came on the ninth anniversary of their complex's official opening, a fact not lost on many people. Sony meanwhile, put their decision down to a need to review their global strategy in the face of a fast-changing worldwide economic climate.\nOn 17 December 2007, Daimler announced that they were selling their entire complex of 19 buildings at Potsdamer Platz to SEB Asset Management, a Frankfurt-based subsidiary of the Swedish banking group SEB. On 28 February 2008, Sony made a similar announcement, of impending sale to a consortium led by American investment banking giant (now bank holding company) Morgan Stanley. Both deals were finalised by the end of March 2008. Whilst the amounts involved have not been publicly disclosed, it is believed that neither Daimler nor Sony recouped all of their original investments (what Daimler managed to get was reportedly well short).\nThe development is a commercial success at street level. The numbers of shoppers visiting the Arkaden, guests passing through the doors of the many bars, cafes and restaurants, theatres and cinemas, hotels and casino (not to mention passengers thronging the platforms of the stations), all point to a thriving focal point right at the very heart of Berlin. Detractors however, may draw attention to the floors above and point out the high percentage of office and residential space that allegedly still stands empty more than a decade after its completion. Although examples of \"over-provision\" like this can be found all over Berlin, it is Potsdamer Platz that, rightly or wrongly, has been used to highlight the problem.\nThe other major sticking point, which is reportedly causing concern at government level, is that the majority of people going to Potsdamer Platz are visitors to the city, implying that the original vision of the development as a linking element attracting Berliners themselves, and Berliners from both sides of the former divide, has not really materialised. There are criticisms that the development does not sit easily with or connect with its surroundings, and as a result Berliners have had difficulty accepting it as \"theirs\" (despite the fact that the choice of Hilmer &amp; Sattler's masterplan was partly because it was the only one to address the way the development juxtaposed with the Cultural Forum immediately to the west, although the Cultural Forum has itself faced similar criticisms of its own). Another, more psychological factor that has played a part here is that a long-standing mutual distrust or antipathy felt between former East Berliners and West Berliners (\"Ossis\" and \"Wessis\" according to the well-known slang terms), is still very much in evidence in the city and elsewhere in Germany, and bold civil engineering projects and architectural statements are not going to make it go away by themselves. Politicians past and present have been accused of short-sightedness in speculating that they would.\nIt was feared that the economic downturn might exacerbate all these problems. On the whole, however, Potsdamer Platz seems to have weathered the storm. Meanwhile, Deutsche Bahn AG were due to relocate to a purpose-built new structure at Berlin's new main train station (Berlin Hauptbahnhof), when the lease on the Sony Center's Bahn Tower expired in 2010. However, in April 2008 Deutsche Bahn announced that they were seeking to extend the lease on the Bahn Tower by another three years. This deal was finalised in late 2009. Since then the lease has been extended to 15 years.\nTransport.\nBefore World War II, Potsdamer Platz had much streetcar traffic. The last remnants were removed in 1991.\nUnlike, for example, Friedrichstrasse station, Potsdamer Platz is not a really important intersection point for the U and S-Bahn system. However, due to its location on the north\u2013south route to the main station, parallel to the aboveground buildings, it was also connected to the regional traffic with a tunnel station. Regional trains of the DB and the ODEG, the S-Bahn (north\u2013south tunnel) and the U2 underground line currently stop at Potsdamer Platz regional train station. Via numerous bus lines, the course can also be reached. In the medium term, a tram connection through the Leipziger Strasse is planned, which can be supplemented or even replaced by the long-planned U3 underground line. In the north\u2013south direction, another S-Bahn line (planning name: S21), in particular for better public transport development of the main station, to be built in the long term. After upgrades on the Berlin Dresden railway, the airport express (FEX) is to run via Potsdamer Platz. The planned rebuild of the trunk line will reconnect Potsdamer Platz with Potsdam.\nEssentially, four major roads, in the east\u2013west direction, Potsdamer Strasse and Leipziger Strasse, and in the north\u2013south direction, Ebertstrasse and Stresemannstrasse, lead traffic to Potsdamer Platz. Smaller streets within the individual quarters provide for the connection of the underground parking garages. In addition, in 2006, a connection between the Uferstra\u00dfe on the Landwehrkanal and the main tunnel was put into operation, the Tunnel Tiergarten Spreebogen is part of the Bundesstrasse 96.\nOn 2 March 2008, a statue by the Berlin artist Alexander Polzin dedicated to Italian philosopher, priest, cosmologist, and occultist Giordano Bruno (1548\u20131600), was erected inside one of the entrances to the Potsdamer Platz Regionalbahnhof.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24598", "revid": "37132022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24598", "title": "Pointing device", "text": "Human interface device for computers\nA pointing device is a human interface device that allows a user to input spatial (i.e., continuous and multi-dimensional) data to a computer. Graphical user interfaces (GUI) and CAD systems allow the user to control and provide data to the computer using physical gestures by moving a hand-held mouse or similar device across the surface of the physical desktop and activating switches on the mouse. Movements of the pointing device are echoed on the screen by movements of the pointer (or cursor) and other visual changes. Common gestures are point and click and drag and drop.\nWhile the most common pointing device by far is the mouse, many more devices have been developed. However, the term \"mouse\" is commonly used as a metaphor for devices that move a computer cursor.\nFitts's law can be used to predict the speed with which users can use a pointing device.\nClassification.\nTo classify several pointing devices, a certain number of features can be considered. For example, the device's movement, controlling, positioning or resistance. The following points should provide an overview of the different classifications.\nIn case of a direct-input pointing device, the on-screen pointer is at the same physical position as the pointing device (e.g., finger on a touch screen, stylus on a tablet computer). An indirect-input pointing device is not at the same physical position as the pointer but translates its movement onto the screen (e.g., computer mouse, joystick, stylus on a graphics tablet).\nAn absolute-movement input device (e.g., stylus, finger on touch screen) provides a consistent mapping between a point in the input space (location/state of the input device) and a point in the output space (position of pointer on screen). \nA relative-movement input device (e.g., mouse, joystick) maps displacement in the input space to displacement in the output state. It therefore controls the relative position of the cursor compared to its initial position.\nAn isotonic pointing device is movable and measures its displacement (mouse, pen, human arm) whereas an isometric device is fixed and measures the force which acts on it (trackpoint, force-sensing touch screen). \nAn elastic device increases its force resistance with displacement (joystick).\nA position-control input device (e.g., mouse, finger on touch screen) directly changes the absolute or relative position of the on-screen pointer.\nA rate-control input device (e.g., trackpoint, joystick) changes the speed and direction of the movement of the on-screen pointer.\nAnother classification is the differentiation between whether the device is physically translated or rotated.\nDifferent pointing devices have different degrees of freedom (DOF). A computer mouse has two degrees of freedom, namely its movement on the x- and y-axis. However the Wiimote has 6 degrees of freedom: x-, y- and z-axis for movement as well as for rotation.\nAs mentioned later in this article, pointing devices have different possible states. Examples for these states are \"out of range, tracking or dragging\".\nExamples\nBuxton's taxonomy.\nThe following table shows a classification of pointing devices by their number of dimensions (columns) and which property is sensed (rows) introduced by Bill Buxton. The sub-rows distinguish between mechanical intermediary (i.e. stylus) (M) and touch-sensitive (T). It is rooted in the human motor/sensory system. Continuous manual input devices are categorized. Sub-columns distinguish devices that use comparable motor control for their operation. The table is based on the original graphic of Bill Buxton's work on \"Taxonomies of Input\".\nBuxton's Three-State-Model.\nThis model describes different states that a pointing device can assume. The three common states as described by Buxton are \"out of range, tracking and dragging\". Not every pointing device can switch to all states.\nFitts' Law.\nFitts's law (often cited as Fitts' law) is a predictive model of human movement primarily used in human\u2013computer interaction and ergonomics. This scientific law predicts that the time required to rapidly move to a target area is a function of the ratio between the distance to the target and the width of the target. Fitts's law is used to model the act of pointing, either by physically touching an object with a hand or finger, or virtually, by pointing to an object on a computer monitor using a pointing device.\nIn other words, this means for example, that more time is needed to click on a small button which is distant to the cursor, than to click a large button near the cursor. Thereby it is generally possible to predict the speed which is needed for a selective movement to a certain target.\nMathematical formulation.\nThe common metric to calculate the average time to complete the movement is the following:\n formula_1\nwhere:\nThis results in the interpretation that, as mentioned before, large and close targets can be reached faster than little, distant targets.\nApplying Fitts' Law in user interface design.\nAs mentioned above, the size and distance of an object influence its selection. Additionally this effects the user experience. Therefore, it is important, that Fitts' Law is considered while designing user interfaces. Below some basic principles are mentioned.\n Command buttons for example should have different sizes than non-interactive elements. Larger interactive objects are easier to select with any pointing device.\n Due to the fact, that the cursor gets pinned on the edges and corners of a graphical user interface, those points can be accessed faster than other spots on the display.\n They should support immediate selection of interactive elements in order to reduce the user's \"travel time\".\n Within menus like dropdown menus or top-level navigation, the distance increases the further the user goes down the list. However in pie menus, the distance to the different buttons is always the same. In addition, the target areas in pie menus are larger.\n To operate a task bar, the user needs a higher level of precision, thus more time. Generally they hinder the movement through the interface.\nControl-Display Gain.\nThe Control-Display Gain (or CD gain) describes the proportion between movements in the control space to the movements in the display space. For example, a hardware mouse moves in another speed or distance than the cursor on the screen. Even if these movements take place in two different spaces, the units for measurement have to be the same in order to be meaningful (e.g. meters instead of pixels). The CD gain refers to the scale factor of these two movements:\n formula_2\nThe CD gain settings can be adjusted in most cases. However, a compromise has to be found: with high gains it is easier to approach a distant target, with low gains this takes longer. High gains hinder the selection of targets, whereas low gains facilitate this process. The Microsoft, macOS and X window systems have implemented mechanisms which adapt the CD gain to the user's needs. e.g. the CD gain increases when the user's movement velocity increases (historically referred to as \"mouse acceleration\").\nCommon pointing devices.\nMotion-tracking pointing devices.\nMouse.\nA mouse is a small handheld device pushed over a horizontal surface.\nA mouse moves the graphical pointer by being slid across a smooth surface. The conventional roller-ball mouse uses a ball to create this action: the ball is in contact with two small shafts that are set at right angles to each other. As the ball moves these shafts rotate, and the rotation is measured by sensors within the mouse. The distance and direction information from the sensors is then transmitted to the computer, and the computer moves the graphical pointer on the screen by following the movements of the mouse. Another common mouse is the optical mouse. This device is very similar to the conventional mouse but uses visible or infrared light instead of a roller-ball to detect the changes in position.\nAdditionally there is the mini-mouse, which is a small egg-sized mouse for use with laptop computers; usually small enough for use on a free area of the laptop body itself, it is typically optical, includes a retractable cord and uses a USB port to save battery life.\nTrackball.\nA trackball is a pointing device consisting of a ball housed in a socket containing sensors to detect rotation of the ball about two axis, similar to an upside-down mouse: as the user rolls the ball with a thumb, fingers, or palm the pointer on the screen will also move. Tracker balls are commonly used on CAD workstations for ease of use, where there may be no desk space on which to use a mouse. Some are able to clip onto the side of the keyboard and have buttons with the same functionality as mouse buttons. There are also wireless trackballs which offer a wider range of ergonomic positions to the user.\nJoystick.\nIsotonic joysticks are handle sticks where the user can freely change the position of the stick, with more or less constant force.\nIsometric joysticks are where the user controls the stick by varying the amount of force they push with, and the position of the stick remains more or less constant. Isometric joysticks are often cited as more difficult to use due to the lack of tactile feedback provided by an actual moving joystick.\nPointing stick.\nA pointing stick is a pressure-sensitive small nub used like a joystick. It is usually found on laptops embedded between the \"G\", \"H\", and \"B\" keys. It operates by sensing the force applied by the user. The corresponding \"mouse\" buttons are commonly placed just below the space bar. It is also found on mice and some desktop keyboards.\nWii Remote.\nThe Wii Remote, also known colloquially as the Wiimote, is the primary controller for Nintendo's Wii console. A main feature of the Wii Remote is its motion sensing capability, which allows the user to interact with and manipulate items on screen via gesture recognition and pointing through the use of accelerometer and optical sensor technology.\nFinger tracking.\nA finger tracking device tracks fingers in the 3D space or close to the surface without contact with a screen. Fingers are triangulated by technologies like stereo camera, time-of-flight and laser. Good examples of finger tracking pointing devices are LM3LABS' Ubiq'window and http://\nPosition-tracking pointing devices.\nGraphics tablet.\nA graphics tablet or digitizing tablet is a special tablet similar to a touchpad, but controlled with a pen or stylus that is held and used like a normal pen or pencil. The thumb usually controls the clicking via a two-way button on the top of the pen, or by tapping on the tablet's surface.\nA cursor (also called a puck) is similar to a mouse, except that it has a window with cross hairs for pinpoint placement, and it can have as many as 16 buttons. A pen (also called a stylus) looks like a simple ballpoint pen but uses an electronic head instead of ink. The tablet contains electronics that enable it to detect movement of the cursor or pen and translate the movements into digital signals that it sends to the computer.\" This is different from a mouse because each point on the tablet represents a point on the screen.\nStylus.\nA stylus is a small pen-shaped instrument that is used to input commands to a computer screen, mobile device or graphics tablet.\nThe stylus is the primary input device for personal digital assistants, smartphones and some handheld gaming systems such as the Nintendo DS that require accurate input, although devices featuring multi-touch finger-input with capacitive touchscreens have become more popular than stylus-driven devices in the smartphone market.\nTouchpad.\nA touchpad or trackpad is a flat surface that can detect finger contact. It is a stationary pointing device, commonly used on laptop computers. At least one physical button normally comes with the touchpad, but the user can also generate a mouse click by tapping on the pad. Advanced features include pressure sensitivity and special gestures such as scrolling by moving one's finger along an edge.\nIt uses a two-layer grid of electrodes to measure finger movement: one layer has vertical electrode strips that handle vertical movement, and the other layer has horizontal electrode strips to handle horizontal movements.\nTouchscreen.\nA touchscreen is a device embedded into the screen of the TV monitor, or system LCD monitor screens of laptop computers. Users interact with the device by physically pressing items shown on the screen, either with their fingers or some helping tool.\nSeveral technologies can be used to detect touch. Resistive and capacitive touchscreens have conductive materials embedded in the glass and detect the position of the touch by measuring changes in electric current. Infrared controllers project a grid of infrared beams inserted into the frame surrounding the monitor screen itself, and detect where an object intercepts the beams.\nModern touchscreens could be used in conjunction with stylus pointing devices, while those powered by infrared do not require physical touch, but just recognize the movement of hand and fingers in some minimum range distance from the real screen.\nTouchscreens became popular with the introduction of palmtop computers like those sold by the Palm, Inc. hardware manufacturer, some high range classes of laptop computers, mobile smartphone like HTC or the Apple iPhone, and the availability of standard touchscreen device drivers into the Symbian, Palm OS, Mac OS X, and Microsoft Windows operating systems.\nPressure-tracking pointing devices.\nIsometric Joystick.\nIn contrast to a 3D Joystick, the stick itself doesn't move or just moves very little and is mounted in the device chassis. To move the pointer, the user has to apply force to the stick. Typical representatives can be found on notebook's keyboards between the \"G\" and \"H\" keys. By performing pressure on the TrackPoint, the cursor moves on the display.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24600", "revid": "50942284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24600", "title": "Pete Best", "text": "British musician, former member of the Beatles (born 1941)\nRandolph Peter Best (n\u00e9\u00a0Scanland; born 24 November 1941) is a British retired musician who was the drummer for the Beatles from 1960 to 1962. He was dismissed shortly before the band achieved worldwide fame and is one of several people referred to as a fifth Beatle.\nBest's mother, Mona Best (1924\u20131988), opened the Casbah Coffee Club in the cellar of the Bests' house in Liverpool. The Beatles (at the time known as the Quarrymen) played some of their first concerts at the club. The Beatles invited Best to join the band on 12 August 1960, on the eve of the group's first Hamburg season of club dates. Ringo Starr eventually replaced Best on 16 August 1962 when the group's manager, Brian Epstein, fired Best at the request of John Lennon, Paul McCartney, and George Harrison following the band's first recording session. Over 30 years later, Best received a significant monetary payout for his work with the Beatles after the release of their 1995 compilation of their early recordings on \"Anthology 1\"; Best played the drums on 10 of the album's tracks, including the Decca auditions.\nAfter being a member of several commercially unsuccessful groups, Best left the music industry to pursue a career as a civil servant for 20 years before forming the Pete Best Band, active from 1988 until 2025.\nEarly life.\nBest's mother, Mona Best, was born in Delhi, India, the daughter of Thomas (a major from Ireland) and Mary Shaw. Pete Best, her first child, was born on 24 November 1941 in Madras, then part of British India. Best's biological father was marine engineer Donald Peter Scanland, who subsequently died during World War II. Best's mother was training to become a doctor in the service of the Red Cross when she met Johnny Best, who came from a family of sports promoters in Liverpool who ran Liverpool Stadium, a boxing arena. During World War II, Johnny Best was a commissioned officer serving as a Physical Training Instructor in India and was the Army's middleweight boxing champion. Soon after their marriage on 7 March 1944 at St Thomas's Cathedral, Bombay, Rory Best was born. In 1945, the Best family sailed for four weeks to Liverpool on the \"Georgic\", the last troop ship to leave India, carrying single and married soldiers who had previously been a part of General William Slim's forces in south-east Asia. The ship docked in Liverpool on 25 December 1945.\nBest's family lived for a short time at the family home, \"Ellerslie\" in West Derby until Best's mother fell out with her sister-in-law, Edna, who resented her brother's choice of wife. The family then moved to a small flat on Cases Street, Liverpool, but Mona Best was always looking for a large house\u2014as she had been used to in India\u2014instead of one of the smaller semi-detached houses prevalent in the area. The Bests moved to 17 Queenscourt Road in 1948 and remained there for nine years.\nBest passed the eleven plus exam at Blackmoor Park primary school in West Derby and was studying at the Liverpool Collegiate Grammar School in Shaw Street when he decided he wanted to be in a music group. Mona bought him a drum kit from Blackler's music store, and Best formed his own band, the Black Jacks. \nIn 1957, Rory Best saw a large Victorian house for sale at 8 Hayman's Green and told Mona about it. The Best family claim that Mona had pawned all her jewellery to place a bet on Never Say Die, a horse that was ridden by Lester Piggott in the 1954 Epsom Derby; it won at 33\u20131, and she saved her winnings and in 1957 used them to buy the house. The house, built around 1860, had previously been owned by the West Derby Conservative Club and was unlike many other family houses in Liverpool as it was set back from the road and had 15 bedrooms and an acre of land. All the rooms were painted dark green or brown, and the large garden was totally overgrown. Mona later opened The Casbah Coffee Club in the house's large cellar. The idea for the club first came from Best, as he asked his mother for somewhere his friends could meet and listen to the popular music of the day. As The Quarrymen, John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ken Brown played at the club after helping Mona to finish painting the walls. Chas Newby and Bill Barlow joined the Black Jacks, as did Ken Brown, but only after he had left the Quarrymen. The Black Jacks later became the resident group at the Casbah, after the Quarrymen cancelled their residency because of an argument about money.\nIn 1960, Neil Aspinall became good friends with the young Best and rented a room in the Bests' house. During one of the extended business trips of Best's stepfather, Aspinall became romantically involved with Mona and in 1962, a son, Vincent Roag Best, was born to Aspinall and Mona. Aspinall later became the Beatles' road manager and denied the story for years before publicly admitting that Roag was indeed his son.\nThe Beatles.\nIn 1960, Beatles' manager Allan Williams arranged a season of bookings in Hamburg, beginning on 17 August 1960, but complained the group did not impress him and hoped that he could find a better act.\nHaving no permanent drummer, Paul McCartney looked for someone to fill the Hamburg position. Best had been seen playing in the Casbah with his own group, the Black Jacks, and it was observed that he played the bass drum on all four beats in the bar, which pushed the rhythm. In Liverpool, his female fans knew him as being \"mean, moody, and magnificent\", which convinced McCartney he would be suitable for the group. After the Black Jacks broke up, McCartney persuaded Best to go to Hamburg with the band, by saying they would each earn \u00a315 per week (). As Best had passed his school exams (unlike Lennon, McCartney and Harrison, who had failed most of theirs), he had the chance to attend teacher-training college, but he decided that playing in Hamburg would be a better career move. Best had an audition in the Jacaranda Club, which Williams owned, and travelled to Hamburg the next day. Williams later said that the audition with Best was unnecessary, as the group had not found any other drummer willing to travel to Hamburg, but did not tell Best in case he asked for more money.\nOn their first trip to Hamburg, the group soon realised that the stage suits they wore could not withstand the hours of sweating and jumping about on stage every night, so they all bought leather jackets, jeans and cowboy boots, which were much tougher. Best initially preferred to play in cooler short sleeves on stage, which did not match the sartorial style of the group, even though he was later photographed wearing a leather jacket and jeans. Lennon, McCartney, Harrison and Stuart Sutcliffe were introduced to recreational drugs in Hamburg. As they played for hours every night, they often took Preludin to keep themselves awake, which they received from German customers or Astrid Kirchherr, whose mother bought them. Lennon often took four or five, but Best always refused.\nThe Beatles first played a complete show with Best on 17 August 1960 at the Indra Club in Hamburg, and the group slept in the Bambi Kino cinema in a small, dirty room with bunk beds, a cold and noisy former storeroom directly behind the screen. Upon first seeing the Indra, where they were booked to play, Best remembered it as a depressing place patronised by a few tourists and having heavy, old, red curtains that made it seem shabby compared to the larger Kaiserkeller. As Best had been the only group member to study O-Level German at school, he could converse with the club's owner, Bruno Koschmider, and the clientele. After the Indra closed following complaints about the noise, the group started a residency in the Kaiserkeller.\nIn October 1960, the group left Koschmider's club to work at the Top Ten Club, which Peter Eckhorn ran, as he offered the group more money and a slightly better place to sleep. In doing so, they broke their contract with Koschmider. When Best and McCartney returned to the Bambi Kino to retrieve their belongings, they found it in almost total darkness. As a snub to Koschmider, McCartney found a condom, attached it to a nail on the concrete wall of the room, and set it alight. No real damage was done, but Koschmider reported them both for attempted arson. Best and McCartney spent three hours in a local prison and were subsequently deported on 30 November 1960, as was George Harrison, for working under the legal age limit.\nBack in Liverpool, the group members had no contact with each other for two weeks, but Best and his mother made numerous phone calls to Hamburg to recover the group's equipment. In late 1961, Mona arranged all the bookings for the group in Liverpool after they parted company with Williams.\nChas Newby, the ex-Black Jacks guitarist, was invited to play bass for four concerts, as bassist Stuart Sutcliffe had decided to stay in Hamburg. Newby played with the group at Litherland Town Hall and at the Casbah. He was shocked at the vast improvement in their playing and singing and remembered Best's drumming to be very powerful, which pushed the group to play harder and louder. It was probably thanks to McCartney that Best developed a loud drumming style, as he often told Best in Hamburg to \"crank it up\" (play as loud as possible). When the group returned to Hamburg, by which time McCartney had switched to bass, Best was asked to sing a speciality number written by McCartney, \"Pinwheel Twist\", while McCartney played drums.\n\"My Bonnie\".\nThe reunited Beatles returned to Hamburg in April 1961. While they played at the Top Ten Club, singer Tony Sheridan recruited them to act as his backing band on a recording for the German Polydor label, produced by bandleader Bert Kaempfert, who signed the group to a Polydor contract at the first session on 22 June 1961. On 31 October 1961, Polydor released the recording \"My Bonnie\" (\"Mein Herz ist bei dir nur\" / My heart is only for you), which appeared on the German charts under the name \"Tony Sheridan and the Beat Brothers\"\u2014a generic name used for whoever happened to be in Sheridan's backup band. The song was later released in the UK. There was a second recording session on 23 June that year and a third in May 1962.\nDecca and Parlophone.\nBrian Epstein, who had been unofficially managing the Beatles for less than a month, arranged a recording audition at Decca Records in London on New Year's Day 1962. The group recorded 15 songs, mostly cover versions, plus three Lennon\u2013McCartney songs. Best also recorded the song \"Going Back Manchester\" with Lennon at this time, which would later feature as a bonus track on the special edition of his album \"Best of the Beatles\", the rights of the song belonging to Best due to a legal technicality. A month later, Decca informed Epstein the group had been rejected. All band members except for Best were informed of the rejection. Epstein officially became the Beatles' manager on 24 January 1962, with the contract signed in Best's house.\nEpstein negotiated ownership of the Decca audition tape, which he transferred to an acetate disc, to promote the band to other record companies in London. In the meantime, Epstein negotiated the release of the Beatles from their recording contract with Bert Kaempfert and Polydor Records in Germany, which expired on 22 June 1962. As a part of this contract, the Beatles recorded at Polydor's Studio Rahlstedt on 24 May 1962 in Hamburg as a sessions band, backing Tony Sheridan. \nThe record producer at EMI, George Martin, met Epstein on 9 May 1962 at the Abbey Road studios, and was impressed with his enthusiasm. He agreed to sign the Beatles on a recording contract, based on listening to the Decca audition tape, without having met or seen them perform live. Soon after the recording contract was signed, the Beatles performed a \"commercial test\" (i.e. an evaluation of a signed artist) on 6 June 1962 in Studio Two at the Abbey Road studios. The Beatles were not new to studio recording, and Best's drumming had been found acceptable by Polydor in Hamburg. However, Martin was alerted to Best's unsuitability for British studio work. EMI engineer Norman Smith stated in a 2006 video interview that \"it was mainly down to what he was playing and not how he was playing,\" when \"Love Me Do\" was first recorded, referring to the head arrangement. Martin, however, found Best's timing inadequate and wanted to replace Best with an experienced studio session drummer for the recordings, a common practice at the time. \nMartin stated years later:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I decided that the drums, which are really the backbone of a good rock group, didn't give the boys enough support. They needed a good solid beat, and I said to Brian, 'Look, it doesn't matter what you do with the boys, but on record, nobody need know. I'm gonna use a hot drummer.' Brian [Epstein] said, 'Okay, fine.' I felt guilty because I felt maybe I was the catalyst that had changed his [Best's] life\u2026\nDismissal.\nWhen Lennon, McCartney, and Harrison learned that Martin and the engineers preferred replacing Best with a session drummer for their upcoming recording session on 4 September 1962, they considered dismissing Best from the group. Eventually, they asked Epstein to handle this. Epstein agonised over the decision. As he wrote in his autobiography, \"A Cellarful of Noise\", he \"wasn't sure\" about Martin's assessment of Best's drumming and \"was not anxious to change the membership of the Beatles at a time when they were developing as personalities \u2026 I asked the Beatles to leave the group as it was\". Epstein also asked Liverpool DJ Bob Wooler, who knew the Beatles intimately, for advice, to which Wooler replied that it was not a good idea, as Best was very popular with the fans. Part of the dilemma for Epstein that arose at that time (when the band had not yet achieved national success, but rather local status as a good band with limited income) was that Best was an asset at gigs, popular with the group's female fans, and put on a good show, ensuring venues would have a solid audience. The counter-argument, however, was the larger consideration of the band's having the best music produced for record sales. Lennon, McCartney, and Harrison ultimately decided that record production was more important than having a drummer for live stage performances who was more image than substance. In the meantime, Epstein refrained from telling Best that EMI had made a recording contract with the band, which was orally since June and in writing at the end of July 1962. There might have been legal issues had Best known.\nEpstein decided that \"if the group was to remain happy, Pete Best must go.\" Best played his last two gigs with the Beatles on 15 August at the Cavern Club, Liverpool. Epstein summoned Best to his office and dismissed him on Thursday, 16 August, ten weeks and a day after the first recording session. Epstein asked Best to play with the Beatles on 16 and 17 August at the Riverpark Ballroom, Chester, and Best agreed but had a change of heart and did not turn up; Johnny Hutchinson of the Big Three was rushed in as a substitute.\n\"Mersey Beat\" magazine's editor, Bill Harry, claimed that Epstein initially offered the vacant drummer position in the group to Hutchinson, whom he also managed. Hutchinson is said to have refused the job, saying, \"Pete Best is a very good friend of mine. I couldn't do the dirty on him.\" However, McCartney and Harrison have said they wanted Starr from the beginning after he sat in with them at shows on several occasions when Best was absent. Best says that Epstein revealed at the dismissal meeting that Starr would become the new drummer.\nBest had been good friends with Neil Aspinall since 1961 when Aspinall had rented a room in the house where Best lived with his parents. While still part of the group, Best had asked Aspinall to become the band's road manager and personal assistant. Aspinall accepted the job and bought an old Commer van for \u00a380 (). Aspinall was waiting for Best downstairs in Epstein's NEMS record shop after the dismissal meeting. The two went to the \"Grapes\" pub on Mathew Street, the same street as the Cavern Club, where the group had played. Aspinall was furious at the news, insisting to Best that he would resign from the Beatles. Best strongly advised him to remain with the group. Aspinall's relationship with Mona Best (and their three-week-old baby, Roag) had ended. At the Riverpark Ballroom gig, Aspinall asked Lennon why they had fired Best, to which Lennon replied, \"It's got nothing to do with you; you're only the driver.\"\nStarr had previously played with Rory Storm and the Hurricanes \u2013 the alternating band at the Kaiserkeller \u2013 and had substituted whenever Best was ill or unable to play in Hamburg and Liverpool. Bill Harry reported Best's dismissal on the front page of \"Mersey Beat\" magazine, upsetting many Beatles fans. The group encountered some jeering and heckling in the street and on stage for weeks afterwards, with some fans shouting, \"Pete forever, Ringo never!\" One agitated fan headbutted Harrison in The Cavern, giving him a black eye.\nAs Best's replacement, Starr accompanied the band on their second recording session with EMI at Abbey Road studios on 4 September 1962. George Martin initially refused to let Starr play. He was unfamiliar with Starr and wanted to avoid any risk of his drumming not being up to par. On 11 September 1962, at the third EMI recording session, Martin used session musician Andy White on the drums for the whole session instead of Starr, as Martin had already booked White after the first session with Best. Starr played the tambourine on some songs while White played the drums. Starr told biographer Hunter Davies years later that he had thought, \"That's the end. They're pulling a Pete Best on me.\"\nReasons for dismissal.\nDrumming ability.\nLennon said Best was recruited only because they needed a drummer to go to Hamburg. \"We were pretty sick of Pete Best, too, because he was a lousy drummer, you know? He never improved, you know?[...] And we were always going to dump him when we could find a decent drummer\"[...] \"By the time we'd rolled back from Germany, we'd trained him to keep a, you know, a stick to keep going up and down at four in the bar; he couldn't do much else.\"\nMcCartney stated Best was \"good, but a bit limited\". McCartney remembered:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;George Martin was used to drummers being very 'in time' because all the big-band session drummers he used had a great sense of time. Now, our Liverpool drummers had a sense of spirit, emotion, economy even, but not a deadly sense of time. This would bother producers making a record. George took us to one side and said, 'I'm really unhappy with the drummer. Would you consider changing him?' We said, 'No, we can't!' It was one of those terrible things you go through as kids. Can we betray him? No. But our career was on the line. Maybe they were going to cancel our contract.\nMcCartney later suggested Starr's drumming was a significant improvement over Best's:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The truth was, we just kind of fell in love with Ringo's drumming. Ringo was in another band, and we had Pete, and we were working, and we used to see this other band. We said, \"God, that drummer's good.\" And one night, Pete couldn't do it and Ringo sat in for him. And we all just went \"[Gasp].\" Behind us was this powerhouse and this person who was, like, taking care of the job. And we went, \"Oh dear.\"\nHarrison also recalled preferring Starr's drumming. He said \"Ringo kept sitting in with the band. And every time Ringo sat in with the band, it just seemed like, this was it.\"\nFor his part, Starr said, \"I felt I was a much better drummer than [Best] was.\"\nCritic Richie Unterberger described Best's drumming at the Decca audition as \"thinly textured and rather unimaginative\", adding that Best \"pushes the beat a little too fast for comfort\". Unterberger thought Starr to be \"more talented\". Mike Savage, the session engineer, said \"I thought Pete Best was very average and didn't keep good time. You could pick up a better drummer in any pub in London. If you've got a quarter of the group being very average, that isn't good. The drummer should be the rock. If the rock isn't good, you start thinking, no. If Decca was going to sign the Beatles, we wouldn't have used Pete Best on the record.\" Beatles' historian Ian MacDonald, recounting the Decca audition, said that \"Best's limitations as a drummer are nakedly apparent\". MacDonald notes, of the EMI recording session on 6 June that \"this audition version [of \"Love Me Do\"] shows one of the reasons why Best was sacked. In moving to the ride cymbal for the first middle eight, he slows down and the group falters.\" Beatles' critic Alan W. Pollack compared the Best, Starr, and Andy White versions of \"Love Me Do\", and concluded that Best was \"an incredibly unsteady and tasteless drummer\" on his version.\nAfter the Beatles signed a contract, EMI producer Ron Richards said, \"Pete Best wasn't very good. It was me who said to [producer] George Martin he's useless. We've got to change this drummer.\" Martin said, \"[Best] couldn't play drums very well. I mean, he couldn't keep time too well. And I was aware that the band weren't tight. They needed that sort of binding force that a good drummer should give them. So I said to [Beatles manager] Brian [Epstein] I'll get another drummer for the recording session.\"\nStill, Martin claimed to be surprised to learn that Best had been fired from stage shows, hearing the news from Mona via telephone. He said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I never suggested that Pete Best must go. All I said was that for the purposes of the Beatles' first record, I would rather use a sessions man. I never thought that Brian Epstein would let him go. He seemed to be the most saleable commodity as far as looks went. It was a surprise when I learned that they had dropped Pete. The drums were important to me for a record, but they didn't matter much otherwise. Fans don't pay particular attention to the quality of the drumming.\nAccording to biographer Bob Spitz, \"All Pete could do was play Fours\", a style of drumming that uses kick drum notes on every quarter note to hold down the beat. Spitz's book also contains an account by engineer Ron Richards of his failed attempts to teach Best somewhat more complicated beats for different songs.\nBest has said he did not believe this was the \"real reason\" and that it \"never held up water\". On \"Late Night with David Letterman\", he said the reason was \"jealousy\".\nIn 1968, authorised Beatles biographer Hunter Davies opined that the firing of Best was \"one of the few murky incidents in the Beatles' history. There was something sneaky about the way it was done.\" Over twenty years later, Mark Lewisohn concluded that \"Despite his alleged shortcomings, it was still shabby treatment for Pete... The Beatles had had two years in which to dismiss him but hadn't done so, and now \u2013 as they were beginning to reap the rewards for their long, hard slog, with money rolling in and an EMI contract secured \u2013 he was out. It was the most underhanded, unfortunate and unforgivable chapter in the Beatles' rise to monumental power.\"\nBand chemistry.\nEpstein claimed in his autobiography that Lennon, McCartney and Harrison thought Best was \"too conventional to be a Beatle\" and added, \"though he was friendly with John, he was not liked by George and Paul\". It has been documented, in Cynthia Lennon's book \"John\" and elsewhere, that while Lennon, McCartney, and Harrison usually spent their offstage time together in Hamburg and Liverpool, writing songs or socialising, Best generally went off alone. This left Best on the outside, as he was not privy to many of the group's experiences, references and in-jokes.\nA German photographer, Astrid Kirchherr, asked if they would not mind letting her take photographs of them in a photo session, which impressed them, as other groups had only snapshots taken by friends. The next morning Kirchherr took photographs on the Heiligengeistfeld, a municipal event area close to the Reeperbahn. In the afternoon, Kirchherr took them to her mother's house in Altona \u2013 minus Best, who decided not to attend. Dot Rhone, McCartney's then-girlfriend who later visited Hamburg, described Best as being very quiet and never taking part in conversations with the group.\nIt has been claimed that Epstein became exasperated with Best's refusal to adopt the mop-top-style Beatle haircut as part of their unified look, as he preferred to keep his quiffed hairstyle, though Best later stated that he was never asked to change his hairstyle. In a 1995 BBC Radio Merseyside interview, Kirchherr explained: \"My boyfriend, Klaus Voormann, had this hairstyle, and Stuart [Sutcliffe] liked it very, very much. He was the first one who really got the nerve to get the Brylcreem out of his hair and asking me to cut his hair for him. Pete Best has really curly hair, and it wouldn't work.\"\nMcCartney explained why Geoff Britton, one-time drummer in his subsequent band Wings, \"didn't last long\" in that group: \"It's like in the Beatles, we had Pete Best. He was a really good drummer, but there just was something; he wasn't quite like the rest of us; we had like a sense of humour in common, and he was nearly in with it all, but it's a fine line, you know, as to what is exactly in and what is nearly in. So he left the band and we were looking for someone who would fit.\" He told Mark Lewisohn, similarly, that when George Martin suggested \"changing\" their drummer the Beatles responded: \"Well, we're quite happy with him, he works great in the clubs\", but also that \"Pete had never quite been like the rest of us. We were the wacky trio, and Pete was perhaps a little more sensible; he was slightly different from us; he wasn't quite as artsy as we were.\"\nHarrison said, \"Pete kept being sick and not showing up for gigs\", and admitted, \"I was quite responsible for stirring things up. I conspired to get Ringo in for good; I talked to Paul and John until they came round to the idea.\"\nDifficulties between Mona Best and others.\nBefore Epstein took the Beatles on, Mona had been handling most of the management and promotional work. According to promoter and manager Joe Flannery, Mona had done a great deal for the band by arranging several important early gigs and lending them a badly-needed helping hand when they returned from Hamburg the first time, but this came at the cost of having to contend with her overbearing nature. At this crucial time in the history of the Beatles, Lennon confided to Flannery that he considered Mona \"bossy like [his aunt] Mimi\" and believed that she was using the Beatles only for the sake of her son Pete. However, this should be weighed against the fact that the Beatles' cordial relations with Mona soon resumed. She often met them while visiting Neil Aspinall at his London home. On these occasions, the Beatles often had small gifts for her, which they had acquired on their travels. For her part, Mona allowed them to use her father's military medals in the photo shoot for the \"Sgt. Pepper\" album cover.\nAlthough Epstein's publicly stated reluctance to fire Best quickly became a matter of record in the early biographies, he had found Mona to be the cause of mounting aggravation. She had contractual ties to the band, making it difficult to dismiss Pete; breaking the group would nullify any contract Mona held. Meanwhile, Epstein's distaste for her interference in the Beatles' management, including her \"aggressive opinions about his handling of her son's career\", was obvious to everyone, and he also reportedly considered Mona a loose cannon who must not be allowed to interfere in his operations. Moreover, the very recent birth of her son Roag further complicated matters. Although Best was not personally responsible for this development, it might have caused a scandal at a crucial moment in the Beatles' career had it become generally known. Epstein would have been horrified at the prospect.\nPopularity.\nBest's popularity with fans was reportedly a source of friction, as many female fans considered him the band's best-looking member. Radio Merseyside presenter Spencer Leigh wrote a book chronicling Best's firing, suggesting that the other members, McCartney in particular, were jealous. In an issue of Bill Harry's \"Mersey Beat\" music publication in Liverpool, dated 31 August 1961, Bob Wooler reported on the Beatles' local musical impact and singled out Best for particular praise, calling the group \"musically authoritative and physically magnetic, example the mean, moody magnificence of drummer Pete Best \u2013 a sort of teenage Jeff Chandler\". During the \"Teenagers' Turn\" showcase in Manchester, Lennon, McCartney and Harrison walked on stage to applause, but when Best walked on, the girls screamed. Afterwards, attentive female fans surrounded Best at the stage door, while the other members were ignored after signing a few autographs. McCartney's father, Jim McCartney, was present at the time and admonished Best: \"Why did you have to attract all the attention? Why didn't you call the other lads back? I think that was very selfish of you.\" Lennon called the accusations of jealousy a \"myth\".\nIn 1963, on British television, Mona, with Pete present, said of his dismissal:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mona: \"From the point of clash of personalities, well, probably that may be it because Peter did have a terrific fan club, you know, compared to the others.\"\n[Interviewer: Too good looking perhaps?] \nMona: \"I'll leave that for other people to say, but from my point of view, we haven't come here to sort of throw any sticks and stones at the boys because there is no really hard feeling. There was at first, but as they say, success is hard to come by, and these things do happen, but it's just the way that it was done that has annoyed us. That's all. If it had been done a bit more straightforward, it would have been more to the mark.\"\nAfter the Beatles.\nLennon, McCartney, and Harrison all later stated that they regretted the manner in which Best was sacked. Lennon admitted that \"we were cowards when we sacked him. We made Brian do it.\" McCartney stated: \"I do feel sorry for him because of what he could have been on to.\" Harrison said: \"We weren't very good at telling Pete he had to go\", and \"historically, it may look like we did something nasty to Pete and it may have been that we could have handled it better.\" Starr, on the other hand, felt he had no apology to make: \"I never felt sorry\u2026 I was not involved.\"\nAfter Best was dismissed, Epstein offered him a position as drummer for the Mersey Beats, but Best turned it down. Feeling let down and depressed, he sat at home for two weeks, not wanting to face anybody or answer the inevitable questions about why he had been sacked. On 25 September 1962, Best's solicitor sent a demand letter to Epstein threatening to sue for wrongful dismissal unless Best received damages. The letter argued that since Best's name was on the Beatles' original management contract, Epstein was still required to find work for him. Epstein sent a response letter that made three arguments: he had already arranged for Best to join another group, Best had lacked the necessary talent to \"fulfil his obligations\" to the Beatles, and Best had left the Beatles voluntarily. The band's next management contract, signed by Starr instead of Best, contained a provision allowing for one member to be dismissed at the behest of Epstein and at least two other band members; the provision was never invoked.\nEpstein secretly arranged with his booking agent partner, Joe Flannery, for Best to join Lee Curtis and the All-Stars, which broke off from Curtis to become Pete Best &amp; the All-Stars. They signed to Decca Records, releasing the single \"I'm Gonna Knock on Your Door\" in 1964, which was commercially unsuccessful.\nThe Pete Best Combo.\nBest later moved to the United States along with songwriters Wayne Bickerton and Tony Waddington. As the Pete Best Four, and later as the Pete Best Combo (a quintet), they toured the United States with a combination of 1950s songs and original tunes, recording for small labels, but they had little success. They ultimately released an album on Savage Records, \"Best of the Beatles\": a play on Best's name, leading to disappointment for record buyers who neglected to read the song titles on the front cover and expected a Beatles compilation album. The group disbanded shortly afterwards. Bickerton and Waddington were to find greater success as songwriters in the 1960s and 1970s, writing a series of hits for the American female group the Flirtations and the British group the Rubettes. In 1996, the record label Cherry Red reissued the Pete Best Combo's recordings as a compact disc compilation. Richie Unterberger, reviewing the CD, stated that the music's \"energy level is reasonably high\", that Bickerton and Waddington's songwriting is \"kind of catchy\", but that Best's drumming is \"ordinary\".\nAmerican garage rock band Lyres recorded a cover version of Pete Best Combo's \"The Way I Feel About You\" on their 1984 album \"On Fyre\".\nLater years.\nBest decided to leave show business. In 1968, when Hunter Davies' was researching his authorised Beatles biography, Best was unwilling to discuss his association with the Beatles for the book. Years later, he stated in his autobiography, \"the Beatles themselves certainly never held out a helping hand and only contributed to the destruction with their readily printed gossip that I had never really been a Beatle, that I didn't smile, that I was unsociable and definitely not a good mixer. There was not a single friendly word from any one of them\". This culminated in a Beatles' interview published in \"Playboy\" magazine in February 1965 in which Lennon stated that \"Ringo used to fill in sometimes if our drummer was ill. With his periodic illness.\" Starr added, \"He took little pills to make him ill.\" Best sued the Beatles for defamation of character, eventually agreeing to an out-of-court settlement for much less than the $18\u00a0million he had sought.\nDavies recalled that while working with the Beatles on their authorised biography in 1968, \"when the subject of Pete Best came up, they seemed to cut off as if he had never touched their lives. They showed little reaction[...] I suppose it reminded them not just that they had been rather sneaky in the handling of Pete Best's sacking, never telling him to his face, but that for the grace of God, or Brian Epstein, circumstances might have been different and they could have ended up [like Pete].\" Best attempted suicide in the 1960s, but his mother, Mona, and his brother, Rory, prevented him from completing it.\nIn 1963, Best married Kathy, a Woolworths sales clerk whom he met at an early Beatles show; they have remained married and have two daughters and four grandchildren. Best did shift work loading bread into the back of delivery vans, earning \u00a38 a week (). His education qualifications subsequently helped him become a civil servant working at the Garston Jobcentre in Liverpool, where he rose from employment officer to training manager for the Northwest of England, and remembered \"a steady stream of real-life Yosser Hughes types\" imploring him to give them jobs. The most he could do, he recalls, was to offer to retrain them in other fields, \"which was an emotional issue for people who had done one kind of work all their lives.\"\nEventually, Best began giving interviews to the media, writing about his time with the group and serving as a technical advisor for the television film \"Birth of the Beatles\". He found a modicum of independent fame and has admitted to being a fan of his former band's music and owning their records. In 1995, the surviving Beatles released \"Anthology 1\", which featured ten tracks with Best as drummer, including songs from the Decca and Parlophone auditions. Best received a substantial windfall \u2013 between \u00a31million and \u00a34million \u2013 from the sales, although he was not interviewed for the book or the documentaries. According to writer Philip Norman, the first time Best knew about the royalties due him for the use of those tracks \"was a phone call\" from Paul McCartney himself, \"the one who'd been so keen to get rid of him\" \u2013 the first time they'd spoken since it happened. \"Some wrongs need to be righted,\" McCartney told him. \"There's some money here that's owing to you and you can take it or leave it\" \u2013 Best took it. However, Best asserts that it was Neil Aspinall and not McCartney who phoned him. \"Paul McCartney claims he called me but he didn't,\" Best told \"The Irish Times\".\nThe collage of torn photographs on the \"Anthology 1\" album cover includes an early group photo that featured Best, but Best's head was removed, revealing a photo of Starr's head, taken from the \"Please Please Me\" cover photo (the missing section of the photograph appears on the cover of Best's album \"Haymans Green\"). A small photograph of Best can be seen on the left side of the \"Anthology\" cover. Best appeared in an advertisement for Carlsberg lager that was broadcast during the first commercial break of the first episode of the \"Anthology\" TV series on ITV in November 1995. The tagline was \"Probably the Pete Best lager in the world\", a variation of Carlsberg's well-known slogan.\nThe Pete Best Band.\nIn 1988, after twenty years of turning down all requests to play drums in public, Best finally relented, appearing at a Beatles convention in Liverpool. He and his brother Roag performed, and afterwards, his wife and mother both told him, \"You don't know it, but you're going to go back into show business.\" The Pete Best Band's album \"Haymans Green\", made entirely from original material, was released on 16 September 2008 in the US, 24 October 2008 worldwide, excluding the UK, and 27 October 2008 in the UK.\nFollowing a long run of regularly touring the world with the Pete Best Band, and sharing the drumming with his younger brother Roag, Best announced his retirement from public appearances and performing on 5 April 2025, \"due to personal circumstances.\"\nHonours.\nOn 6 July 2007, Best was inducted into the \"All You Need Is Liverpool\" Music Hall of Fame as the debut Charter Member. Best was presented with a framed certificate before his band performed. Liverpool further honoured Best with the announcement, on 25 July 2011, that two new streets in the city would be named Pete Best Drive and Casbah Close. On 3 November 2025, the main belt asteroid 1989 SD8 was named in his honour.\nPortrayals in media.\nFilm and television.\nBest is portrayed in several films about the Beatles. In the 1979 biopic \"Birth of the Beatles\", for which Best was a technical advisor, he is played by Ryan Michael. In both the 1994 film \"Backbeat\" and in the 2000 television biopic \"\", Best is played by Liverpool native Scot Williams. The 2008 Rainn Wilson film \"The Rocker\", about a drummer kicked out of a glam metal band through no fault of his own, was inspired by Best's termination. Best had a cameo in the movie. In \"Midas Man\", a 2024 biopic about Brian Epstein, Best is played by Adam Lawrence.\nTheatre.\n\"BEST!\", a comedy play written by Liverpool playwright Fred Lawless, was staged at the Liverpool Everyman Theatre and the Dublin Theatre Festival in 1995 and 1996. The play, which was mainly fiction, showed an alternate history scenario where after Pete Best's sacking, he went on to become a world-famous rock superstar while his ex-group struggled as one hit wonders. The play was critically acclaimed in both the \"Liverpool Echo\" and also in Spencer Leigh's 1998 book \"Drummed Out: The Sacking of Pete Best\".\nPete Best is a main character in David Harrower's 2001 play \"Presence\", premiered at the Royal Court Theatre, London, dramatising the Beatles' time in Hamburg.\nAndrew Games portrayed Pete Best in BestBeat, which was performed at the Unity Theatre in 2018. The play depicted Best's dismissal in 1962.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24602", "revid": "46004010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24602", "title": "Port Adelaide Football Club", "text": "Australian rules football club\nPort Adelaide Football Club is a professional Australian rules football club based in Alberton, South Australia. The club's senior men's team plays in the Australian Football League (AFL), where it is nicknamed the Power, while its reserves men's team competes in the South Australian National Football League (SANFL), where it is nicknamed the Magpies. Since its founding, the club has won an unequalled 36 SANFL premierships and four Championship of Australia titles, in addition to an AFL Premiership in 2004. It has fielded a women's team in the AFL Women's (AFLW) competition since 2022 (S7). \nFounded in 1870, Port Adelaide is the oldest professional football club in South Australia and was a founding member of the South Australian Football Association, later renamed the SANFL. Port Adelaide has repeatedly asserted itself as a dominant force within South Australian football, going undefeated in all competitions in 1914, and enjoying sustained periods of success under coaches Fos Williams and John Cahill, sharing a combined 19 premierships between them. The club's sustained success in the SANFL eventually led it being granted a licence to compete in the AFL from 1997, becoming the second South Australian based side in the competition after the Adelaide Football Club in 1991. In its time in the AFL, the club has claimed four minor premierships and one premiership. Port Adelaide holds a unique status among AFL clubs, being the only pre-existing non-Victorian club to have entered the AFL from another league. It has an intense rivalry with intra-city opponents Adelaide; the two compete in a twice-yearly fixture known as the Showdown, while historically it enjoyed a long-standing rivalry with fellow SANFL club Norwood. It has played home games in the SANFL, at both senior and reserves level, at its club headquarters of Alberton Oval, since 1880, and the venue is also used for home games in the AFLW and occasional pre-season fixtures in the AFL. In the national competition the club has played home games at Adelaide Oval since the venue's redevelopment concluded in 2014. \nPort Adelaide first adopted the colours of black and white in 1902, in a design commonly known as the 'prison bars' guernsey, which the club wears to this day in the SANFL and in home showdown fixtures. Upon entering the AFL in 1997, the colours of teal and silver were added to the club palette and the Power nickname was adopted, to enable differentiation from the Collingwood Football Club, who wear black and white stripes and are nicknamed the Magpies.\nClub history.\n1870\u20131901: early years.\nPort Adelaide was formed on 12 May 1870 as a joint football and cricket club, created by locals to benefit the growing number of workers associated with the surrounding wharves and industries of Port Adelaide. The first training session of the newly formed club took place two days later. The Port Adelaide Football Club played its first match against a newly established club from North Adelaide called the Young Australian. Prior to 1877, football in South Australia was yet to be formally organised by a single body and as a result there were two main sets of rules in use across the state. In an effort to create a common set of rules, Port Adelaide was invited to join seven other clubs in the formation of the South Australian Football Association (SAFA), the first ever governing body of Australian rules football.\nIn 1879, the club played reigning Victorian Football Association (VFA) premiers Geelong at Adelaide Oval in what was Port Adelaide's first game against an interstate club. It played its first match outside of South Australia two years later, when it travelled to Victoria to contest a game against the Sale Football Club.\nThe club won its first premiership in 1884, when it ended Norwood's run of six consecutive premierships. It later contested the SAFA's first grand final in 1889, as Port Adelaide and Norwood had finished the season with equal minor round records. Norwood went on to defeat Port Adelaide by two goals. Port Adelaide won its second SAFA premiership the following year, and went on to be crowned \"Champions of Australia\" for the first time after defeating VFA premiers South Melbourne.\nAs the 1890s continued, Australia was affected by a severe depression that forced many players to move interstate to find work. This exodus translated into poor on-field results for the club. By 1896, the club was in crisis and finished last, causing the club's committee to meet with the aim of revitalising the club. The revitalisation had immediate results, helping Port Adelaide win a third premiership in 1897, one of only four occurrences since 1877 where a team won a premiership after finishing last the previous year. Stan Malin won Port Adelaide's first Magarey Medal in 1899.\nDuring the 19th century, the club had nicknames including the Cockledivers, the Seaside Men, the Seasiders and the Magentas. In 1900, Port finished bottom in the six-team competition, which it has not done in any senior league until 2024.\n1902\u20131915: 'Prison Bars' and the 'Invincibles'.\nPort Adelaide began wearing black and white guernseys in 1902 after it was having trouble finding dyes that would last for its blue and magenta guernseys. After finishing the 1902 season on top of the ladder, Port Adelaide was disqualified from their finals game against South Adelaide after the club disputed the use of an unaccredited umpire. The 1902 SAFA premiership was subsequently awarded to North Adelaide after they defeated South Adelaide in the Grand Final a week later. Port Adelaide offered to play North Adelaide after the conclusion of the season, but the SAFA refused to allow it. Port Adelaide won the premiership the following year.\nIn the early 1910s, Port Adelaide became a consistent premiership contender, setting up the club to win three more Championships of Australia. Port Adelaide won the South Australian Football League (SAFL) premiership in 1910 defeating Sturt 8.12 (60) to 5.11 (41) in the Grand Final. The club would go on to defeat Collingwood for the 1910 Championship of Australia title, and Western Australian Football League (WAFL) premiers East Fremantle in an exhibition match. They also defeated a combination of some of the WAFL's best players in another match. Although Port Adelaide had success in the minor rounds the following two seasons, dropping only one game in 1911 and going undefeated in 1912, it was knocked out of contention by West Adelaide both times. The club won the SAFL premiership in 1913, dropping only two games during the minor round and defeating North Adelaide in the Grand Final. They also defeated Fitzroy for the 1913 Championship of Australia.\nThe 1914 Port Adelaide Football Club season is unique in SANFL history, being the only occasion in which a team has gone undefeated. The club won all its pre-season matches, won all fourteen SAFL games and the 1914 SAFL Grand Final where it held North Adelaide to a single goal for the match 13.15 (93) to 1.8 (14). It also became the first to score over 1000 points during the minor round. The club met Victorian Football League (VFL) premiers Carlton in the Championship of Australia, defeating them by 34 points to claim a record fourth title. At the end of the 1914 season, a combined team from the six other SAFL clubs played Port Adelaide and lost to the subsequently-dubbed \"Invincibles\" by 58 points.\n1916\u20131949: two World Wars and the Great Depression.\nPort Adelaide's early-century success was hindered by World War I. During the war, the club lost three players as casualties. A scaled-back competition referred to as the 'Patriotic League' was organised during wartime in which Port Adelaide won the 1916 and 1917 instalments. Port Adelaide initially struggled to replicate its past success after the war. After eventually winning the 1921 premiership under the captaincy of Harold Oliver, many of Port Adelaide's champion players from before the war started to retire, and the club's performance declined. It won only a single premiership between 1922 and 1935.\nBy the mid-1930s, Port Adelaide's form began to recover. It suffered two narrow grand final losses in 1934 and 1935, before winning consecutive premierships the following two years. During 1939, Bob Quinn, in his third year as a player for the club, coached the team to a Grand Final win over West Torrens. Many Port Adelaide players also enlisted for military service during this time. The club suffered six player casualties during the war.\nJust as had happened in 1914, the league was hit hard by player losses in World War II. Due to a lack of able men, the league's eight teams were reduced to four and Port Adelaide temporarily merged with nearby West Torrens from 1942 to 1944. The joint club played in all three Grand Finals during this period, winning the 1942 instalment, but losing the 1943 and 1944 editions to the Norwood-North Adelaide combination. While normal competition resumed in 1945, Port Adelaide was unable to regain its pre-war success in the rest of the decade. In particular, it lost the 1945 SANFL Grand Final after a remarkable comeback from West Torrens. The 'All Australian', predecessor to the modern 'All-Australian' team, was created by \"Sporting Life\" magazine in 1947, with Bob Quinn being named in the side as captain.\n1950\u20131973: Fos Williams era and Jack Oatey rivalry.\nDuring the 1950s, Port Adelaide reestablished itself as a perennial contender, winning seven premierships. At the end of the 1949, having missed two finals series in a row, the Port Adelaide Football Club's committee sought out a coach that could win the club its next premiership. Following a failed attempt to obtain Jim Deane, the decision was made to appoint Fos Williams, a rover from West Adelaide. In his second season as player-coach in 1951, Williams led the club to their first standalone premiership in 12 seasons, defeating North Adelaide by 11 points. In the 1951 post-season, Port Adelaide lost an exhibition match to reigning VFL premiers Geelong.\nIn the mid-1950s, Port Adelaide and Melbourne, often the premiers of South Australian and Victorian leagues respectively, played exhibition matches at Norwood Oval. The most notable game was the 1955 match, which had an estimated crowd of 23,000. The match went down to the last 15 seconds when Frank Adams kicked a decisive behind to give Melbourne a one-point victory.\nGeof Motley took over the captain-coaching role at the club in 1959 when Williams retired from his playing career and also took a break from coaching. That year, the club won the premiership and equalled a national record of six consecutive Grand Final victories, having won each premiership from 1954 to 1959. Port Adelaide's premiership streak was brought to an end in the 1960 preliminary final with a 27-point loss to Norwood.\nWilliams returned in 1962, and coached Port Adelaide to win three of the next four premierships. In 1965 he coached his ninth and last premiership in front of 62,543 people, the largest-ever crowd at Adelaide Oval. After the 1965 Grand Final, Port Adelaide's success was limited by the dominance of Sturt, which won seven premierships over this period under the leadership of Jack Oatey. Despite playing in 6 of the next 10 grand finals, Port Adelaide failed to win another premiership in that span.\n1974\u20131996: John Cahill, SANFL domination and AFL licence.\nOne of Port Adelaide's leading players during the Fos Williams era was John Cahill. After retiring from playing in 1973 and following the departure of Fos Williams to West Adelaide in 1974, he took over as coach and began another era of premiership success for the club. In 1976, Cahill took Port Adelaide to its first Grand Final under his leadership, facing Sturt. Sturt won in front of an official attendance of 66,897, the record for football in South Australia. The actual crowd was estimated at 80,000, much bigger than the official figure. The following year, Port Adelaide won the premiership to break a 12-year drought.\nThe 1980 season was Port Adelaide's most dominant since 1914. The club completed its fourth ever 'Triple Crown', winning the premiership, Magarey Medal and having the SANFL's leading goalkicker in a single season. The Magarey Medal was awarded to Russell Ebert for a record 4th time and Tim Evans set the then-league goal kicking record of 146 goals in a season. The club set a new record for most points scored during a season at 3,176, whilst also having conceding only 1,687 points. The club's win\u2013loss record was 19\u20132 with one draw and a percentage of 165.31, its best percentage since 1914.\nFollowing the 1982 season, Cahill was offered a contract by Collingwood to coach their club in the VFL. In his stead, Russell Ebert became coach in 1983. During his five years as coach, Port Adelaide made the finals three times, and achieved a win rate of above 55%. John Cahill returned as coach from the 1988 season, winning the premiership that year. He won a further five premierships, totalling a record-equalling ten over his coaching career.\nTwo key events of the late 1980s were attempts by the VFL to further expand outside of Victoria and financial difficulties in the SANFL. In 1989, seven of the ten SANFL clubs were recording losses and the combined income of the SANFL and WAFL had dropped to 40% of that of the VFL. During May 1990, the SANFL clubs unanimously accepted a SANFL proposal to not enter a club from South Australia until 1993. Weeks later, Port Adelaide, suffering from a mixture of ambition and frustration, started secret negotiations with the VFL in the town of Quorn for entry to the competition in 1991. When knowledge of Port Adelaide's negotiations to gain an AFL licence were made public, the other nine SANFL clubs called a crisis meeting to discuss options. Plans were made to kick Port Adelaide out of the SANFL should they succeed, and to prevent them from using Football Park as a home ground. SANFL clubs urged Justice Olssen to make an injunction against the bid, which he agreed to. During these meetings, an option was discussed to make a counter offer to the AFL. On the 16th of August, the SANFL officially launched a submission for a composite team. After legal action from all parties, the AFL agreed to accept the SANFL's bid to enter the composite team, which was named the Adelaide Football Club.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"These twenty blokes, everyone whose helped us, are sensational people and all the views that you have read in the press the one thing that really matters is that there will always be a Port Adelaide Football Club.\"\u2014\u200a\nDuring December 1994, Max Basher announced that Port Adelaide had won the tender for the second South Australian AFL licence on the condition that a merger take place between two existing AFL clubs to keep the league at the club limit imposed by the AFL in 1993. As such, the licence would not be made available until at least 1996, and was not guaranteed. With the merger of the Brisbane Bears and Fitzroy looming, the club was advised on 21 May 1996 by the AFL that they would take part in the 1997 AFL season.\n1997\u20132010: AFL entry, Mark Williams and club debt.\nFollowing confirmation of their entry in 1997, the club began preparations to enter the league. John Cahill began the transition to the AFL, with Stephen Williams, a son of Fos Williams, taking over the SANFL coaching position from midway through the 1996 season. Cahill then set about forming a group which would form the inaugural squad. Brownlow Medallist and 1990 Port Adelaide premiership player, Gavin Wanganeen, was signed from Essendon and made captain of a team made up of six existing Port Adelaide players, two from the Adelaide Crows, seven players from other SANFL clubs and 14 recruits from interstate. The AFL's father\u2013son rule for the club was set at 200 games for SANFL players before 1997, compared to only 100 for Victorian clubs.\nOn 29 March 1997, Port Adelaide played its first AFL premiership match against Collingwood at the MCG, suffering a 79-point defeat. It won its first AFL game in round 3 against Geelong, and defeated cross-town rivals and eventual premiers Adelaide by 11 points in the first Showdown in round 4. The club finished its first season 9th, missing the finals on percentage behind Brisbane. Following the 1998 season, John Cahill retired from his coaching position.\nIn 1999, Mark Williams, another son of Fos Williams, took over as coach of Port Adelaide and led the club to many notable first achievements in the AFL over the next decade. They earned a spot in the AFL finals for the first time in Williams' first season. They were eliminated by the season's eventual premier, North Melbourne, by 44 points in their qualifying final. Port Adelaide had a very successful 2001 season, starting with a maiden pre-season competition victory. Port Adelaide finished their 2001 home-and-away season in third place, though the club would lose both finals it contested. In 2002, Port Adelaide built on its success and won its first AFL minor premiership. However, they lost to the eventual premiers, the Brisbane Lions, in the preliminary final. Port Adelaide continued its home-and-away dominance in 2003 and again claimed the minor premiership; however, like the previous year, Port Adelaide was eliminated in the preliminary final, which led to certain elements of the press calling Port Adelaide \"chokers\" as well as trucking magnate Allan Scott in early 2004\u2014who was the founder and owner of Scott's Transport, Port Adelaide's major sponsor\u2014publicly calling for Williams' dismissal.\nThe 2004 season started strongly for Port Adelaide, winning five of their first six matches. Although they lost three of their next five games, the club would only lose a single game between Round 12 and the end of the home-and-away season. This resulted in the club claiming the minor premiership for third consecutive year. Port Adelaide won its qualifying final against Geelong, earning a home preliminary final. Port Adelaide made it through to its first AFL grand final after defeating St Kilda in a preliminary final by six points, with Gavin Wanganeen kicking the winning goal. The following week, Port Adelaide faced the Brisbane Lions in the 2004 AFL Grand Final, who were attempting to win a record-equalling fourth straight AFL premiership. Port Adelaide led by 15 points at quarter time, but a strong second quarter by Brisbane meant only one point separated the sides at half time. Late in the third quarter, Port Adelaide took the ascendency to lead by 17 points at three-quarter time, and dominated the final term to win by 40 points: 17.11 (113) to 10.13 (73). Byron Pickett was awarded with the Norm Smith Medal for being judged the best player in the match, tallying 20 disposals and kicking three goals. Upon helping win Port Adelaide's first AFL premiership and earning the Jock McHale Medal as the coach of the premiership-winning side, an exuberant Williams took to the field after the siren and ripped off his tie in a mock choking gesture, later exclaiming during his acceptance speech: \"Allan Scott, you were wrong!\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Port Adelaide are the winningest team in Australia. The ol' Port Adelaide have won 36 premierships, today, at the MCG, may just be their finest hour.\"\u2014\u200a\nPort Adelaide had limited success in the middle of the decade. In 2005, the club made the finals for the fifth consecutive season, where they contested the only Showdown final to date, with rivals Adelaide winning by 83 points. In 2007, Port Adelaide finished the minor round second on the ladder with 15\u20137 record. They reached that year's grand final, where they were defeated by Geelong by an AFL record margin of 119 points, 24.19 (163) to 6.8 (44).\nFollowing their second grand final, Port Adelaide began experiencing financial troubles and also saw a decline in performance. By 2009, the club had accumulated a consolidated debt totalling $5.1\u00a0million and was unable to pay its players; they had lost $1.6\u00a0million the season before. The AFL delayed giving the club financial support, instead urging it to sort out deals with SANFL as a predecessor to any league support. On 20 May, Port were handed $2.5\u00a0million in debt relief by the SANFL, and on 15 June were handed a $1\u00a0million grant by the AFL commission. Plans for a re-merging of the two teams was rejected by the SANFL early during 2010, though they eventually signed off on the proposal during November 2010.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"He (Demetriou) said he could not imagine an AFL competition without Port Adelaide in it. I thought that was a really strong statement of leadership.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe 2010 season saw Mark Williams step down as senior coach. Matthew Primus took over as caretaker coach for Port Adelaide after Mark Williams stood down. He led the club to five wins from its final seven games.\n2011\u20132025: Matthew Primus, Ken Hinkley and independence.\nOn 9 September 2010, Matthew Primus was appointed as the senior coach of the club for the next three years. The SANFL sought to take control of Port Adelaide in 2011. Despite underwriting $5\u00a0million of Port's debt in 2010, the takeover failed when the SANFL was unable to get a line of credit to cover Port Adelaide's future debts. After the failure of the takeover, AFL Chief executive Andrew Demetriou offered $9\u00a0million over the next three years to help the club, ahead of the move to the Adelaide Oval. Port Adelaide suffered its worst season result in 141 years, finishing sixteenth with 3 wins for the season. Rounds 20 and 21 saw the club lose to Collingwood and Hawthorn by record margins of 138 and 165 respectively. The following season, Matthew Primus stepped down from his position as coach, following a loss to Greater Western Sydney.\nOn 8 October 2012, Ken Hinkley was announced as the new senior coach of the club. During the same week, David Koch was named chairman of the club and numerous board members were replaced. The club finished the home and away season 7th on the ladder, qualifying for finals for the first time since 2007. Port travelled to Melbourne to play Collingwood at the MCG in an Elimination Final where they won by 24 points; they then lost to Geelong by 16 points the following week in a Semi-final.\nAs the club entered the 2014 season, both Port Adelaide and Adelaide moved their home games from Football Park to the redeveloped Adelaide Oval. Port Adelaide signed up a record 48,968 members for the 2014 season, an increase of 23% from the previous year, and averaged 44,824 at home games. Amidst the change, Port Adelaide's license was transferred from the SANFL to the club for a sum of approximately $7 million, giving the club independent control of its operations for the first time in its history. Port Adelaide finished fifth on the ladder, with a win\u2013loss record of 14\u20138. They hosted Richmond in the elimination finals, kicking the first seven goals of the game and leading by as much as 87 points before recording a 57-point victory. After defeating Fremantle in the semi-finals, the club's season ended with a three-point loss to Hawthorn in the preliminary finals.\nIn 2017, Port Adelaide made finals after winning 14 games to finish fifth on the ladder. Port Adelaide's season came to an end in an elimination final loss to West Coast by 2 points in extra time. In the 2020 AFL season, Port Adelaide qualified for the finals as minor premiers for the first time since 2004, making it to the preliminary final and being defeated by eventual premiers Richmond by 6 points. Port Adelaide returned to the AFL finals in the 2021 season, finishing in second place at the end of the home-and-away season and qualifying for a second consecutive preliminary final, where they were defeated by the Western Bulldogs by 71 points. Despite this, Ollie Wines became the first Port Adelaide player to win the Brownlow Medal, the league's highest individual honour, winning the award with a record-equalling tally of votes. The side then suffered a slump in form, losing the first five games of the 2022 season and failing to qualify for the finals. Senior coach Ken Hinkley, whose contract was set to expire at the end of the 2023 season, was extended for a further two seasons in August 2023, at a time when Port returned to the top four and qualified for the finals, though were eliminated in straight sets at the hands of the Brisbane Lions and Greater Western Sydney. Despite further pressure on the coach following a heavy mid-season loss, Port had a winning finish to the regular season to close in second position. In the finals, they were defeated by more than 80 points by Geelong in a home qualifying final, then narrowly defeated Hawthorn in the semi-final and finally were well beaten by minor premiers Sydney at the SCG, slumping the club to a 6-9 finals win-loss record in Hinkley's tenure, which included four consecutive preliminary final defeats (2014, 2020, 2021 and 2024). Hinkley broke the club record for most AFL games coached in the preliminary final loss, eclipsing Mark Williams' record of 273 games. In February 2025, the club announced that Hinkley's tenure as senior coach would conclude at the end of the 2025 season, and that assistant coach Josh Carr would take over the position. Hinkley's final season ended with 9 wins and 14 losses, the worst win-loss record in his tenure, and the club ended in 13th position on the ladder. \nAFLW involvement.\n Port Adelaide supported the local Port Adelaide Women's Football Club (nicknamed the Magpies and wearing the \"Prison Bar\" guernsey) who had been playing in the Adelaide Amateur Football League since 2003. Port Adelaide first showed interest in an AFL Women's side in 2015. The club signed Erin Phillips as their marquee player in the event that the club was admitted to the AFLW for the 2017 season. However, logistical demands related to the club's China program prevented the club from submitting a bid. The club subsequently attempted to enter a side in the SANFL Women's League (SANFLW), but this approach was rejected by the South Australian Football Commission. In 2018 The Port Adelaide Women's Football Club in the amateur league was shut down. In May 2021, the AFL Commission announced that the remaining four clubs without AFLW teams would be admitted to the competition by the end of 2023, with the clubs to bid for entry order. Port Adelaide's bid to enter the competition was successful, with the AFL Commission deciding all four clubs would debut in the AFLW in 2022 season 7.\nSANFL presence (post\u2013AFL entry).\nAs part of Port Adelaide's initial bid for the 1994 AFL licence, the club had no plans to maintain a presence in the SANFL. After winning the tender for the licence, however, an agreement was created with the SANFL for Port Adelaide to field two separate clubs in the SANFL and AFL, at the request of the other SANFL clubs. This agreement resulted in the creation of the Port Adelaide Magpies Football Club, a separate legal entity to Port Adelaide Football Club. For the first few years after 1997, the Port Adelaide Magpies were forced to train at Ethelton to ensure they would not gain any advantage using the upgraded Alberton AFL training facilities. Additionally, Port Adelaide AFL-listed players who were not selected for the senior team were randomly drafted to other SANFL clubs to play matches until the two Port Adelaide entities merged. This arrangement was necessitated as the other SANFL clubs did not want the Port Adelaide Magpies side to gain any use of the Port Adelaide Football Club AFL resources, fearing any potential advantages would make the Magpies too strong in the SANFL. Australian football historian John Devaney described the forced separation of Port Adelaide's SANFL and AFL operations as being \"akin to the enforced splitting up of families associated with military conquest or warfare\".\nIn response to financial trouble suffered by both Port Adelaide entities, the \"One Port Adelaide Football Club\" movement was launched by former players Tim Ginever and George Fiacchi on 20 August 2010, in an effort to merge Port Adelaide's AFL and SANFL operations. A website was created that claimed 50,000 signatures were needed for the merger. On 16 November 2010, following approval from all nine SANFL clubs, the club formalised the off-field merger between the two entities. On 10 September 2013, Port Adelaide and the SANFL agreed to a model to allow all its AFL-listed players (not selected to play for Port Adelaide in the AFL) to play for the SANFL side. As part of the arrangement, the club lost its recruiting zones and could no longer field sides in the junior SANFL competitions, and as a result established an 18\u201322-year-old academy training team to compete in the league's reserves competition. In 2018, Port Adelaide and the league jointly agreed that it would no longer field a team in the SANFL Reserves competition.\nPort Adelaide initially still had success in the SANFL after accession into the AFL, with the Port Adelaide Magpies winning back-to-back Grand Finals in 1998 and 1999. However, the club would not make another grand final until the 2014 season, where it was defeated by Norwood by four points. Port Adelaide featured in two further grand finals against Sturt and Glenelg, though it would be defeated in both.\nThe club did not field a team in the SANFL in the 2020 season due to AFL restrictions imposed during the COVID-19 pandemic, though it re-joined the competition in 2021. Lower-table and mid-table finishes occurred over the next few years. In December 2023, the \"Herald Sun\" reported that the club had applied for entry into the Victorian Football League (VFL) or a national reserves competition in 2025, thereby transitioning its reserves team out of the SANFL. The application occurred after Port Adelaide chairperson David Koch lamented the \"different rules to the other SANFL clubs which makes success difficult and frankly, has a detrimental impact on the development of our AFL players\". By the end of 2024 the club and SANFL negotiated and approved changes to player recruiting rules for both AFL clubs fielding reserve teams in the competition, ensuring Port Adelaide's continued presence in the SANFL.\nClub symbols and identity.\nClub guernseys.\nCaptain and No. 1 guernsey.\nThe tradition dictating that the captain of the Port Adelaide Football Club wear the number one guernsey started when Clifford Keal wore the number as club captain for the first time in 1924. The tradition was cemented, at least in the view of then-secretary Charles Hayter, when in 1929 he received a letter from a junior Kilkenny player requesting a number one Port Adelaide guernsey as he had just become captain of his underage team. Hayter granted the wish of the junior and provided him with a number one Port Adelaide guernsey. Since 1924, there have been few exceptions to the tradition. The most notable exception was Geof Motley, who followed the captaincy of Fos Williams. Following his appointment as captain-coach, Motley elected to continue wearing the number 17, and continued to do so for the remainder of his career. When Motley handed the captaincy to John Cahill in 1967, at the insistence of coach Fos Williams, the tradition of Port Adelaide captains wearing the number one guernsey resumed. When co-captains were appointed for the 2019 season the No. 1 guernsey was temporarily retired. It was re-instated the following season when the club returned to appointing a single captain.\nNumber panel.\nThe white number panel on the back of the Port Adelaide guernsey originates from the first decade of the twentieth century when club secretary James Hodge took the club across Australia to play matches against interstate teams. During the early 1900s, it was commonplace that touring teams would wear numbers, allowing spectators to identify unknown footballers. Port Adelaide attached a white square to the back of its guernsey, with black numbers to be printed on the square. This design would continue to be used after the introduction of numbers into the SANFL, and was interchangeably with a black square and white numbers. The design bearing the black square eventually became the design of choice until 1928. The club introduced a 'permanent' white panel for the 1928 season, which would remain until the club was forced to merge with West Torrens during WWII. The club reintroduced the panel in 1953 and has since continuously used it in the SANFL. The panel was also present on the club's AFL guernsey until it was phased out in 2009. The number panel returned to the club's guernsey in 2017. The white panel is also intended to resemble the white back of a local Magpie species that is present on the badge of South Australia.\n'Prison Bar' guernsey.\nHistorically, the black-and-white 'Prison Bar' guernsey, alternatively and historically known as the Wharf Pylon guernsey, has been Port Adelaide's most iconic guernsey design. The club first adopted the guernsey in the 1902 season, after having difficulty finding magenta and blue dyes that could repeatedly last the rigours of an Australian rules football match. The guernsey was designed to be a literal depiction of the wharves and pylons that were prominent along the docks of Port Adelaide at the turn of the 20th century. Prior to adopting the guernsey the club had won 3 premierships over 31 years. After adopting the guernsey, the club won 33 premierships and 3 Championships of Australia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Anyone that put on the guernsey acted like the guernsey intended it to act. It wasn't built around the player wearing the guernsey. It was the guernsey using a player.\"\u2014\u200a\nThe Prison Bar nickname first originated from fans of rival football clubs, in particular those of Norwood. The nickname was used in a derogatory fashion, in an attempt to liken the club to a criminal stereotype. The nickname first appeared in media in early 1993, in a match report written by former cricketer Alan Shiell. The nickname was subsequently accepted by the Port Adelaide fanbase, becoming a popular nickname for the design among fans.\nUpon joining the AFL, Port Adelaide, along with being required to find a new logo, song and nickname, was also forced to replace the Prison Bar guernsey because existing club Collingwood, already using the Magpie logo and nickname, also wore a similar guernsey with vertical black and white stripes. A new guernsey was ultimately created, incorporating teal into its design.\nSince the club's entry to the AFL, Port Adelaide has made numerous requests to the AFL to wear the Prison Bar guernsey in specific games, only some of which have been approved. The club was first granted the right to wear an AFL-approved Prison Bar guernsey (a replica of the 1914 premiership design) in the Heritage Round of the 2003 season. During 2007, following controversy the year prior in which the AFL declined Port Adelaide the right to wear their heritage guernsey, the AFL and Port Adelaide reached an agreement whereby the club could wear its traditional guernsey in the heritage round, with the proviso that in future seasons its players can only wear it in home heritage round games and provided that such a game is not against Collingwood. No heritage rounds have been held since this agreement was reached. In 2014, the AFL declined Port Adelaide permission to wear its traditional guernsey for celebrating of 100 years since its 1914 Championship of Australia. On 2 September 2014, the AFL cleared the club to use the guernsey in their final against Richmond, following controversy about their prior decision to have Port Adelaide wear their clash strip. For their 150th anniversary, the club was granted permission to wear the guernsey in its Showdown match in the 2020 season. The following year, Port Adelaide requested permission to permanently wear the guernsey in all future Showdown matches, but this proposal was rejected by the AFL.\nSupport for the guernsey remains extremely high, with the merchandise for a single game against Carlton in 2013 generating over $500,000. On 9 September 2020, it was revealed that memorabilia associated with the Prison Bar guernsey raised $2,000,000 for the club in 2020, and the Prison Bar guernsey itself was the highest-selling piece of merchandise in the AFL that year. Towards the end of 2018, a group of supporters organised to push for the return of the club's traditional guernsey full time from the start of the 2020 AFL season, to coincide with the club's 150th anniversary year, and a supporter petition in 2019 calling for the reinstatement of the guernsey reached 10,000 signatures. On 29 July 2021, club president David Koch revealed that, if the club wore the Prison Bar guernsey without permission, it would be deducted four premiership points along with a fine. The club negotiated an agreement with Collingwood to return the guernsey for the 2023 home Showdown match; an agreement which has since been extended to include all future home showdown matches. The club's AFL Women's team wore the guernsey in its home showdown match against Adelaide in Round 1 of the 2024 season.\nLogo evolution.\nPort Adelaide has adopted different insignia on several occasions throughout its history.\nUp until 2020, all of the club's insignia in the SANFL were designed around featuring one or multiple Magpies. The original club crest, adopted in 1900, featured a tan football and magpies perched on a gum tree with a black and white striped flag on the left and the Australian Red Ensign on the right. The ensign switched to blue sporadically through the 1910s before the flags were dropped in 1928. From 1930 until 2019, the logo always featured a dexter (left-facing) magpie, perched upon a gum branch (1930 to 1953) or a fence wire (1954 to 1974). The last Magpies-specific logo, used by the club between 1975 and 2019 in the SANFL, was situated inside a circular disc as was the case at all other SANFL clubs. It made mention of \"Magpies\" in the logo for the first time and was the longest standing in the club's history.\nUpon entering the AFL in 1997, Port were required to adopt colours and an insignia that distinguished it from Collingwood, who already had the nickname of the 'Magpies'. The club designed a new logo with a silver fist clutching a lightning bolt, in front of both a Prison Bar design and teal background, showcasing both new colours the club adopted. The logo was slightly altered in 2001 with the lightning bolt and fist defined and the reference to \"Port\" dropped. Ahead of the 2020 season, Port Adelaide's 150th anniversary, the club unveiled a commemorative logo to be worn by both the senior AFL team and reserves SANFL team. The logo features the \"PA\" acronym, 1870 to acknowledge the foundation year, the black-and-white prison bars, the chevron design of the AFL guernsey and a teal outline. Although initially intended to be used exclusively in 2020, feedback from supporters, key stakeholders and investors prompted the club to retain the logo in 2021 and beyond.\nClub songs.\nOver the years, Port Adelaide has used various songs and music at its games. The club has had two main official songs in the SANFL and one in the AFL, in addition to other songs representing the club unofficially. In its first season during 1870 the club invited local brass bands to play during the club's first games at Glanville. In 1882 a song based on Harry Clifton's \"Work, Boys, Work (and be contented)\" was written for the club as a tribute to the recently retired player Thomas Smith. Following the end of the First World War, the club adopted the song was \"The Pride of Port Adelaide is my football team\". The song remained in use until 1971, when Port Adelaide secretary Bob McLean decided to change the club song to \"Cheer, Cheer the Black and the White\" after hearing the South Melbourne Football Club's song based on the Notre Dame Fighting Irish football team's \"Victory March\". As Sydney was already using the Notre Dame Victory March when Port Adelaide entered the AFL, the club was forced to find a new song. \"Cheer, Cheer the Black and the White\" is still used by the club in the SANFL competition.\nDue to the club's need for a new song upon their entry to the AFL, Port Adelaide adopted \"Power to Win\", written for the club by Quentin Eyers and Les Kaczmarek. The song was first played at AFL level after Port Adelaide's win against Geelong in Round 3, 1997 at Football Park. Since 2016, an alternative Pitjantjatjara language version of the song ('Nganana wanangara kanyini' \u2013 literally, 'We have the lightning bolt') has been used by the club on occasions such as Indigenous Round. As the club's official nickname was shortened to 'The Power', rather than the original 'Port Power'. the line in the song \"..til the flag is ours for the taking, Port Power!\" was eventually changed, removing the word 'Port' and the song was re-recorded.\nSince March 2014, Port Adelaide has used \"Never Tear Us Apart\" by the Australian band INXS as the club's unofficial anthem leading up to the opening bounce at its new home of Adelaide Oval. The song is used as a reference to the various and unique difficulties the club faced when trying to enter the AFL, primarily in regards to the separation of its SANFL and AFL operations. Port Adelaide's use of the song stemmed from a trip the club took to Anfield in November 2012 while they were in England to play an exhibition match against the Western Bulldogs. Seeing the Anfield crowd's rendition of \"You'll Never Walk Alone\", Matthew Richardson, Port's general manager of marketing and consumer business, sought to replicate the pre-match experience. During a meeting in mid 2013, the idea of an anthem was raised; various songs were suggested, including \"Power and the Passion\" by Midnight Oil and \"Power to the People\" by John Schumann. \"Never Tear Us Apart\" by INXS was suggested by Port Adelaide's events manager, Tara MacLeod, and the song was accepted, as it resonated with the Power's history: when the Power entered the AFL in 1997, it was forced to cut ties with its traditional base, the Port Adelaide Magpies, forming separate administrations and causing division amongst supporters. Initially the song was introduced to coincide with the 60-second countdown before the start of a match, with the music playing over the top of a video montage. The song proved to be a success among the fans, with them adopting the song as well as raising scarves above their heads as the song was being sung.\nHome grounds.\nGlanville Hall Estate/Buck's Flat (1870\u20131879).\nAfter foundation, it was decided by the inaugural president of Port Adelaide, John Hart Jr., that the club's home ground would be Glanville Hall Estate, a property owned by his immediate family. The area in which the teams played was often referred to as 'Buck's Flat'. The club was forced to cease using the ground following 1879, as the property was sold at an auction.\nAlberton Oval (1880\u2013present).\nAlberton Oval has been Port Adelaide's home ground in the SANFL since 1880, excluding 1975 and 1976. Following the end of its operations at Glanville Hall, Port Adelaide was forced to find a new ground to operate from. It was decided that the club would use Alberton Oval for the 1880 season. On 15 May 1880, Port Adelaide played its first match at Alberton Oval. The following year, the decision was made by the club to start leasing the oval from the Port Adelaide Council for the sum of 10 shillings a year. The oval is also used for training purposes for both AFL and SANFL operations, aside from 1997 through 2001 when SANFL training temporarily moved to Ethelton.\nIn 1975 and 1976, Port Adelaide was temporarily locked out of the ground following a dispute between the Port Adelaide Council, the SANFL and the Club over seating arrangements at the ground. The club usually split its seating revenue 50/50 with the SANFL during this time period, an arrangement the SANFL held with each club. However, the Port Adelaide Council wanted to take 50% of all game day revenue, leaving the remaining half to the two to split between themselves. In 1975, the SANFL refused to accept the offer for the ground provided by the council, resulting in the temporary suspension of Port Adelaide's lease on the ground. This prevented Port Adelaide from playing any games at the venue and, the following year, training at the venue. With the 1977 season pending, the issues between the council and the club were resolved and the club was permitted to return that year.\nThe ground possesses two notable grandstands named after individuals important to the club. The Fos Williams Family Stand is the oldest remaining structure at Alberton Oval, first constructed in 1903. The other grandstand, the Robert B. Quinn MM Grandstand, was first opened in 1972. The ground also has the bordering Allan Scott Power Headquarters for the administration of Port Adelaide, which opened in 1999 and is named after the club's initial major sponsor.\nFootball Park (1997\u20132013).\nPort Adelaide first played at Football Park on 15 June 1974. Despite not being officially recognised as a 'home ground' in the SANFL, it hosted night matches for every team, as well as all finals between 1974 and 2014 regardless of 'home' team. During 1975 and 1976, Port Adelaide sold some of their home games (to be played at their temporary home, Adelaide Oval) to Football Park.\nUpon the club's entry to the AFL, fellow South Australian club Adelaide was already using the ground for their home matches. Port Adelaide was assigned the ground as its home venue, alongside its existing tenants. Port Adelaide's first official AFL match at the ground was on 6 April 1997, where they were defeated by Essendon by 33 points.\nPlanned upgrades to the stadium were cancelled following news that Port Adelaide, alongside both Adelaide and the SANFL, would make use of Adelaide Oval from 2014 onward, as it had been recently redeveloped. It hosted its final AFL match on 31 August that year, where Port Adelaide was defeated by a point by Carlton. The ground remains the headquarters of Adelaide, though features such as the ground's grandstands have been demolished.\nAdelaide Oval (2014\u2013present).\nSince 2014, Adelaide Oval has been the home ground of Port Adelaide's AFL team, shared with Adelaide.\nAdelaide Oval has historically been used for SANFL finals (until 1974) and the Championship of Australia match. During the 1975 and 1976 seasons, Port Adelaide's SANFL Team was forced to play out of the ground following their dispute with the local council, using it for both match day playing and training purposes over the period. Its role as the primary venue for SANFL finals was supplanted by Football Park in 1974, following disagreements between the SANFL and South Australian Cricket Association (SACA).\nFollowing extensive redevelopment in the early 2010s and negotiations between the SANFL and SACA over the use of the ground, the ground was cleared for football usage purposes, allowing Port Adelaide to use the ground as its home ground from the 2014 season onwards. Port Adelaide also played the first official AFL match at the venue in 2011 against Melbourne.\nAdelaide Oval has two notable stands named after significant Port Adelaide individuals, the Fos Williams Stand, and the Gavin Wanganeen Stand. Both were named after the redevelopment of the Eastern Stand at the ground, and are featured alongside other famous individuals from the SANFL and Adelaide.\nClub creed.\nFos Williams authored the club's creed in 1962.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"We, the players and management of the Port Adelaide Football Club, accept the heritage which players and administrators have passed down to us; in doing so, we do not intend to rest in idleness, but shall strive with all our power to further this club's unexcelled achievements.To do this, we believe that there is great merit and noble achievement in winning a Premiership. That to be successful, each and every one of us must be active, aggressive and devoted to this cause.We agree that success is well within our reach and have confidence that each member of both the team and management will suffer personal sacrifices for the common end.Also, we know that, should after striving to our utmost, after giving our everything still not be successful, our efforts will become a further part of this club's enviable tradition.Finally, we concede there can be honour in defeat, but to each of us, honourable defeat of our club and guernsey can only come after human endeavour on the playing field is completely exhausted.\"\nFos Williams\nRivalries.\nAFL.\nAdelaide.\nPort Adelaide has a fierce rivalry with fellow South Australian AFL team Adelaide. Matches between the two teams are known as the 'Showdown'. The rivalry between Adelaide and Port Adelaide is often considered to be among the best rivalries in the Australian Football League, with Malcolm Blight, Australian Football Hall of Fame Legend, stating in 2009 that \"there is no doubt it is the greatest rivalry in football\". The Showdown rivalry also significantly draws upon the bitter, winner take all, competition for the two South Australian licences to join the AFL in the 1980s and early 1990s.\nBrisbane Lions.\nThis rivalry dates back to 1997, the inaugural season of Port Adelaide and the newly merged Brisbane Lions. In their early days, the two clubs had multiple close encounters, with a draw in two of their first three meetings. In the early 2000s, the rivalry reached its peak as the two clubs would be the most dominant of the era, meeting in multiple finals and consistently finishing at the top of the ladder from 2001 to 2004. Notable encounters include a Round 22 match in 2002 to determine the minor premiership that year, which Port Adelaide won by a single goal, and a Round 17 match in 2003 with 7 lead changes in the final quarter, which Port Adelaide won by a point. The rivalry culminated with the 2004 AFL Grand Final, where Port Adelaide defeated Brisbane to win their first premiership, ending Brisbane's chance to win a record-tying fourth consecutive premiership. The rivalry has since simmered down.\nSANFL.\nNorwood.\nThe rivalry between Port Adelaide and the Norwood Football Club is one of the longest standing rivalries in South Australian league football. The two clubs met for the first time in 1878, where Port Adelaide hosted Norwood, with the visitors winning 1\u20130. However, the rivalry between the two clubs would first begin in 1882, where Port Adelaide's first win over Norwood was controversially overruled by the league, with a follow-up game overshadowed by a misunderstanding at the gate which almost prevented Norwood players accessing the venue.\nThe clubs met in 14 Grand Finals prior to Port Adelaide's accession into the AFL and share over 60 premierships between them. In 1884, Port Adelaide won the premiership, bringing Norwood's run of six premierships in a row to an end. In 1960, Norwood brought Port Adelaide's own record run of six premierships to an end defeating them by 27 points in the 1960 Preliminary Final. They have met in three Grand Finals following Port Adelaide's entry to the AFL, with Port Adelaide winning in 1999 and Norwood winning in 1997 and 2014. The two clubs are the only clubs in any of the elite Australian Rules Football leagues (the SANFL, WAFL, and VFL/AFL) to win six successive premierships.\nPlaying lists.\nSANFL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCorporate.\nSponsors.\n Current major sponsors \n Key China game sponsors \n Apparel sponsors \nSupporters.\nThe Port Adelaide Football Club has historically drawn its supporter base in the region of Port Adelaide. Since the club's entry to the AFL, support for the club had increased within suburbs of Adelaide \u2013 notably, the northern suburbs. It has also experienced growth in regional South Australia.\nPort Adelaide has many supporter groups from all around Australia, with every state and territory except Tasmania having an officially recognised supporter group. Among these, the Port Adelaide Cheer Squad, the official supporter group from Adelaide, creates banners to be used by the club and has official seating to cheer at home games. There are also a number of unofficial supporter groups who perform activities for the club and its fans, such as the Outer Army and the Alberton Crowd.\nPartnerships.\nIndigenous community.\nThe Port Adelaide Football Club has a long-standing connection to the indigenous community. Initial club president John Hart Jr., alongside his father, were the founders of The Adelaide Milling and Mercantile Company in Port Adelaide, which employed Kaurna people alongside non-indigenous workers as early as the 1850s. John Hart Sr. advocated for other settlers to refrain from killing and eating black swans as they were a totem of the Kaurna people. Harry Hewitt was named in Port Adelaide's side when they defeated Fitzroy by two goals on Adelaide Oval in 1891 and is the club's first known Indigenous Australian player. During the 1950s, St Francis House in Glanville housed young indigenous boys, many of whom played for Port Adelaide. Richie Bray became the club's first known Indigenous player to win a premiership, featuring in the 1962, 1963 and 1965 premierships winning teams.\nPort Adelaide has been represented by 62 indigenous players across the SANFL and AFL competitions throughout its history. Upon the club's entry to the AFL in 1997, the club appointed its first Indigenous captain in Gavin Wanganeen. Wanganeen would later become the first indigenous player in the AFL to play 300 games, and the first indigenous player to join the board of an AFL club.\nIn 2008, the club started the Aboriginal Power Cup to help promote academic and healthy outcomes for indigenous students in South Australia.\nChina partnership.\nOn 14 April 2016, Port Adelaide announced it had struck a three-year multimillion-dollar partnership with leading Chinese property developer Shanghai Cred, where Port Adelaide would take primary responsibility for developing Australian rules football in China. This involved the club holding annual training camps and providing sponsorship in China, as well as producing AFL programs and broadcasting games in the country via China Central Television and other networks. The same day, it was revealed by then Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull that Port Adelaide had an intention to play an in-season AFL match in China. As part of the partnership, Port Adelaide also agreed to annually run an Australian rules football program in over 20 Chinese schools, culminating in a football carnival the same week the AFL premiership match is held in Shanghai.\nThe first AFL game played for premiership points was played in May 2017 between the Gold Coast Suns and Port Adelaide. In October 2018, the AFL announced St Kilda would be taking over from the Gold Coast Suns in the China fixture, with Gold Coast citing guernsey disagreements as a reason for exiting the deal. In 2019, 4.01 million people watched the match between Port Adelaide and St Kilda. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the match was not played in the 2020 or 2021 AFL seasons.\nIn film.\nThe club celebrated 150 years in 2020, and in that year the documentary film \"This Is Port Adelaide\" premiered at the Adelaide Film Festival. The film was made by Adelaide director Nicole Miller, who had directed the TV series \"The AFL Show\", which explained the sport to a Chinese audience. Miller was mentored by Justin Kurzel. The film was co-produced by Miller, James Moody, and Paul Ryan, cinematography was by Isaac Walgos and it was edited by Matt Gierke. Benjamin Speed composed the film score.\nAfter being released in cinemas in February 2021, the film was released on Stan on 4 June 2021.\nClub honour boards.\nHonour Board.\nIn the Port Adelaide clubrooms at Alberton Oval there is a large wooden honour board with gold text that details every season of the club from 1870 to the present.\nHall of Fame.\nPort Adelaide launched the club Hall of Fame on 20 February 1998, when it inducted inaugural 18 members into the Hall of Fame. It has since honoured 40 more players, coaches, administrators and club servants who have played a major part in the club, in addition to two eras of premiership teams.\nGreatest Team.\nIn June 2001, the Port Adelaide Football Club announced its 'Greatest Team' from the prior two centuries, consisting of the most successful players from the club. Between the 22 players inducted, they shared 201 premiership medals, 532 state games, 16 Magarey Medals and numerous other football accolades. The club hailed the group the \"Greatest Team of the Greatest Club\".\nClub achievements.\nPort Adelaide is one of the most successful clubs in senior level football, having won a record 37 senior premierships across the AFL and SANFL competitions. The club won its first premiership in 1884, while its most recent senior level premiership was in 2004. The club has won a record 4 Championship of Australia titles, and have won the Stanley H. Lewis trophy 12 times, second to only Norwood (14). Port Adelaide has had two notable periods of success under the leadership of Fos Williams, who coached 9 premierships, and John Cahill, who coached 10.\nPlayer achievements.\nCompetition awards.\nBrownlow Medal (AFL fairest and best)\nMagarey Medal (SANFL best and fairest)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAFLCA Champion Player of the Year\nAFL Rising Star (Best player under 21)\nGrand final best on ground awards.\nNorm Smith Medal (AFL Grand Final best on ground)\nJack Oatey Medal (SANFL Grand Final best on ground)\nClub awards.\nJohn Cahill Medal (best and fairest)\nAllan Robert McLean Medal (SANFL best and fairest)\nGavin Wanganeen Medal (Best player under 21)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFos Williams Medal (Best Team Man)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCoaches' Award (Most Improved Player) \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJohn McCarthy Medal (Community Award)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll-Australian.\nAn All-Australian team is considered a 'best-of' selection of players for each calendar year, with each player represented in their team position. Each team is selected by a panel of experts.\nSporting Life's All Australian.\nSporting Life Magazine first pioneered the concept of an All-Australian 'team of the year' in 1947, and would run each year until 1955. The AFL does not recognise the teams selected by Sporting Life.\nOfficial.\nAll Australian teams from the Interstate Carnivals and Australian Football League have been endorsed as official by governing bodies of the sport, such as the Australian National Football Council and the AFL.\nInterstate carnivals\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAustralian Football League\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24603", "revid": "5846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24603", "title": "Proteasome", "text": "Protein complexes which degrade ubiquitin-tagged proteins by proteolysis\nProteasomes are essential protein complexes responsible for the degradation of proteins by proteolysis, a chemical reaction that breaks peptide bonds. Enzymes that help such reactions are called proteases. Proteasomes are found inside all eukaryotes and archaea, and in some bacteria.\nIn eukaryotes, proteasomes are located both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm. The proteasomal degradation pathway is essential for many cellular processes, including the cell cycle, the regulation of gene expression, and responses to oxidative stress. The importance of proteolytic degradation inside cells and the role of ubiquitin in proteolytic pathways was acknowledged in the award of the 2004 Nobel Prize in Chemistry to Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Hershko and Irwin Rose.\nThe core 20S proteasome (blue in the adjacent figure) is a cylindrical, compartmental protein complex of four stacked rings forming a central pore. Each ring is composed of seven individual proteins. The inner two rings are made of seven \"\u03b2 subunits\" that contain three to seven protease active sites, within the central chamber of the complex. Access to these proteases is gated on the top of the 20S, and access is regulated by several large protein complexes, including the 19S Regulatory Particle forming the 26S Proteasome. In eukaryotes, proteins that are tagged with Ubiquitin are targeted to the 26S proteasome and is the penultimate step of the Ubiquitin Proteasome System (UPS). Proteasomes are part of a major mechanism by which cells regulate the concentration of particular proteins and degrade misfolded proteins.\nProteins that are destined for degradation by the 26S proteasome require two main elements: 1) the attachment of a small protein called ubiquitin and 2) an unstructured region of about 25 amino acids. Proteins that lack this unstructured region can have another motor, cdc48 in yeast or P97 in humans, generate this unstructured region by a unique mechanism where ubiquitin is unfolded by cdc48 and its cofactors Npl4/Ufd1. The tagging of a target protein by ubiquitin is catalyzed by cascade of enzymes consisting of the Ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1), Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and ubiquitin ligases (E3). Once a protein is tagged with a single ubiquitin molecule, this is a signal to other ligases to attach additional ubiquitin molecules. The result is a \"polyubiquitin chain\" that is bound by the proteasome, allowing it to degrade the tagged protein in an ATP dependent manner. The degradation process by the proteasome yields peptides of about seven to eight amino acids long, which can then be further degraded into shorter amino acid sequences and used in synthesizing new proteins.\nDiscovery.\nBefore the discovery of the ubiquitin\u2013proteasome system, protein degradation in cells was thought to rely mainly on lysosomes, membrane-bound organelles with acidic and protease-filled interiors that can degrade and then recycle exogenous proteins and aged or damaged organelles. However, work by Joseph Etlinger and Alfred L. Goldberg in 1977 on ATP-dependent protein degradation in reticulocytes, which lack lysosomes, suggested the presence of a second intracellular degradation mechanism. This was shown in 1978 to be composed of several distinct protein chains, a novelty among proteases at the time. Later work on modification of histones led to the identification of an unexpected covalent modification of the histone protein by a bond between a lysine side chain of the histone and the C-terminal glycine residue of ubiquitin, a protein that had no known function. It was then discovered that a previously identified protein associated with proteolytic degradation, known as ATP-dependent proteolysis factor 1 (APF-1), was the same protein as ubiquitin. The proteolytic activities of this system were isolated as a multi-protein complex originally called the multi-catalytic proteinase complex by Sherwin Wilk and Marion Orlowski. Later, the ATP-dependent proteolytic complex that was responsible for ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation was discovered and was called the 26S proteasome.\nMuch of the early work leading up to the discovery of the ubiquitin proteasome system occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s at the Technion in the laboratory of Avram Hershko, where Aaron Ciechanover worked as a graduate student. Hershko's year-long sabbatical in the laboratory of Irwin Rose at the Fox Chase Cancer Center provided key conceptual insights, though Rose later downplayed his role in the discovery. The three shared the 2004 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work in discovering this system.\nAlthough electron microscopy (EM) data revealing the stacked-ring structure of the proteasome became available in the mid-1980s, the first structure of the proteasome core particle was not solved by X-ray crystallography until 1994. Groundbreaking work on cryo-EM by Wolfgang Baumeister's group revealed the overall architecture of the 26S proteasome and enabled biochemical experiments to provide a general mechanism for ubiquitin dependent degradation. In 2018, the first structure of the yeast 26S proteasome followed by the first atomic structures of the human 26S proteasome holoenzyme in complex with a polyubiquitylated protein substrate were solved by cryogenic electron microscopy, confirming the mechanisms by which the substrate is recognized, deubiquitylated, unfolded and degraded by the 26S proteasome. Detailed biochemistry has provided a general mechanism for ubiquitin-dependent degradation by the proteasome: binding of a substrate to the proteasome, engagement of an unstructured region to the AAA motor accompanied by a major conformational change of the proteasome, translocation dependent de-ubiquitination by Rpn11, followed by unfolding and proteolysis by the 20S core particle.\nCryo-Electron tomography (Cryo-ET) has also provided unique insight into proteasomes within cells. Looking at neurons, proteasomes were found to be in the same ground-state and processing states as determined by cryo-EM. Interestingly, most proteasomes were in the ground state suggesting that they were ready to start working when a cell undergoes proteotoxic stress. In a separate study, when protein aggregates in the form of poly-Gly-Ala repeats are overexpressed, proteasome are captured stalled on these aggregates. Cryo-ET of green algae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii found that 26S proteasomes within the nucleus cluster around the Nuclear pore complex and are specifically attached to the membrane.\nStructure and organization.\nThe proteasome subcomponents are often referred to by their Svedberg sedimentation coefficient (denoted \"S\"). The proteasome most exclusively used in mammals is the cytosolic 26S proteasome, which is about in molecular mass containing one 20S protein subcomplex and one 19S regulatory cap subcomplex. Doubly capped proteasomes are referred to as 30S proteasomes also exist in the cell. The 20S core is hollow and provides an enclosed cavity in which proteins are degraded; openings at the two ends of the core are gates that allow the target protein to enter. Each end of the core particle can associate with a 19S regulatory subunit that contains multiple ATPase active sites and ubiquitin binding sites; it is this structure that recognizes polyubiquitinated proteins and transfers them to the catalytic core.\nSeveral alternative caps can also bind the 20S core: 11S (PA26) or Blm10 (PA200) are also known to associate with the core and can bind either one or both sides. An alternative form of regulatory subunit called the 11S particle can associate with the core in essentially the same manner as the 19S particle; the 11S may play a role in degradation of foreign peptides such as those produced after infection by a virus. Archaea and bacteria also have proteasomes and have alternative caps that bind their cores. The following will discuss the structure and function of these subcomplexes.\n20S core particle.\nThe number and diversity of subunits contained in the 20S core particle depends on the organism; the number of distinct and specialized subunits is larger in multicellular than unicellular organisms and larger in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. All 20S particles consist of four stacked heptameric ring structures that are themselves composed of two different types of subunits; \u03b1 subunits are structural in nature, whereas \u03b2 subunits are predominantly catalytic. The \u03b1 subunits are pseudoenzymes homologous to \u03b2 subunits. They are assembled with their N-termini adjacent to that of the \u03b2 subunits. The outer two rings in the stack consist of seven \u03b1 subunits each, which serve as docking domains for the regulatory particles and the alpha subunits N-termini (Pfam https://) form a gate that blocks unregulated access of substrates to the interior cavity. The inner two rings each consist of seven \u03b2 subunits and in their N-termini contain the protease active sites that perform the proteolysis reactions. Three distinct catalytic activities were identified in the purified complex: chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like and peptidylglutamyl-peptide hydrolyzing. The size of the proteasome is relatively conserved and is about 150 angstroms (\u00c5) by 115\u00a0\u00c5. The interior chamber is at most 53\u00a0\u00c5 wide, though the entrance can be as narrow as 13\u00a0\u00c5, suggesting that substrate proteins must be at least partially unfolded to enter.\nIn archaea such as \"Thermoplasma acidophilum\", all the \u03b1 and all the \u03b2 subunits are identical, whereas eukaryotic proteasomes such as those in yeast contain seven distinct types of each subunit. In mammals, the \u03b21, \u03b22, and \u03b25 subunits are catalytic; although they share a common mechanism, they have three distinct substrate specificities considered chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and peptidyl-glutamyl peptide-hydrolyzing (PHGH). Alternative \u03b2 forms denoted \u03b21i, \u03b22i, and \u03b25i can be expressed in hematopoietic cells in response to exposure to pro-inflammatory signals such as cytokines, in particular, interferon gamma. The proteasome assembled with these alternative subunits is known as the \"immunoproteasome\", whose substrate specificity is altered relative to the normal proteasome.\nRecently an alternative proteasome was identified in human cells that lack the \u03b13 core subunit. These proteasomes (known as the \u03b14-\u03b14 proteasomes) instead form 20S core particles containing an additional \u03b14 subunit in place of the missing \u03b13 subunit. These alternative '\u03b14-\u03b14' proteasomes have been known previously to exist in yeast. Although the precise function of these proteasome isoforms is still largely unknown, cells expressing these proteasomes show enhanced resistance to toxicity induced by metallic ions such as cadmium.\nThe peptides that are formed by the 20S core have recently been shown to act as important metabolites for both programmed cell death and for immunity. Molecular glues that target BRD4 for degradation, lead to 26S proteasome generated peptides that release Inhibitor of apoptosis (IAPs) leading to Apoptosis, suggesting that the peptides generated by the 26S act as secondary metabolites that drive major cell processes.\n19S regulatory particle.\nThe 19S particle in eukaryotes consists of 19 individual proteins and is divisible into two subassemblies, a 9-subunit base that binds directly to the \u03b1 ring of the 20S core particle, and a 10-subunit lid. Six of the nine base proteins are ATPase subunits from the AAA Family, and an evolutionary homolog of these ATPases exists in archaea, called PAN (proteasome-activating nucleotidase). The association of the 19S and 20S particles requires the binding of ATP to the 19S ATPase subunits, and ATP hydrolysis is required for the assembled complex to degrade folded and ubiquitinated proteins. Note that only the step of substrate unfolding requires energy from ATP hydrolysis, while ATP-binding alone can support all the other steps required for protein degradation (e.g., complex assembly, gate opening, translocation, and proteolysis). In fact, ATP binding to the ATPases by itself supports the rapid degradation of unfolded proteins. However, while ATP hydrolysis is required for unfolding only, it is not yet clear whether this energy may be used in the coupling of some of these steps.\nIn 2012, two independent efforts have elucidated the molecular architecture of the 26S proteasome by single particle electron microscopy. In 2016, three independent efforts have determined the first near-atomic resolution structure of the human 26S proteasome in the absence of substrates by cryo-EM. In the heart of the 19S, directly adjacent to the 20S, are the AAA-ATPases (AAA proteins) that assemble to a heterohexameric ring of the order Rpt1/Rpt2/Rpt6/Rpt3/Rpt4/Rpt5. This ring is a trimer of dimers: Rpt1/Rpt2, Rpt6/Rpt3, and Rpt4/Rpt5 dimerize via their N-terminal coiled-coils. These coiled-coils protrude from the hexameric ring. The largest regulatory particle non-ATPases Rpn1 and Rpn2 bind to the tips of Rpt1/2 and Rpt6/3, respectively. The ubiquitin receptor Rpn13 binds to Rpn2 and completes the base sub-complex. The lid covers one half of the AAA-ATPase hexamer (Rpt6/Rpt3/Rpt4) and, unexpectedly, directly contacts the 20S via Rpn6 and to lesser extent Rpn5. The subunits Rpn9, Rpn5, Rpn6, Rpn7, Rpn3, and Rpn12, which are structurally related among themselves and to subunits of the COP9 complex and eIF3 (hence called PCI subunits) assemble to a horseshoe-like structure enclosing the Rpn8/Rpn11 heterodimer. Rpn11, the deubiquitinating enzyme, is placed at the mouth of the AAA-ATPase hexamer, ideally positioned to remove ubiquitin moieties immediately before translocation of substrates into the 20S. The second ubiquitin receptor identified to date, Rpn10, is positioned at the periphery of the lid, near subunits Rpn8 and Rpn9.\nConformational changes of 19S.\nThese initial structures showed that the 19S RP adopted a number of states (termed s1, s2, s3, and s4 in yeast) which provided a model for how substrates were recruited and subsequently degraded by the proteasome. A hallmark of the AAA-ATPase configuration in this predominant low-energy state is a staircase- or lockwasher-like arrangement of the AAA-domains. These states could be manipulated upon the addition of ATPgS, substrate, or by the non-essential DUB Ubp6. The s1 state was proposed to be the resting state of the proteasome, allowing for a protein substrate to engage the AAA motor. Upon binding a substrate, the proteasome would shift to a processing state, in which a central channel from the top of the AAA motor into the 20S proteolytic chamber would form allowing a direct passage of a substrate from the 19S RP into the proteolytic site. Subsequent studies with the human proteasome have shown many more sub-states, and provide a model for ATP dependent translocation of a substrate.\nIn 2018, the first structure of a processing proteasome bound to a substrate was solved using cryo-EM, confirming biochemistry that showed that de-ubiquitination by Rpn11 was performed in a translocation dependent manner and revealing key steps in translocation. Subsequently, a major effort has elucidated the detailed structures of deubiquitylation, initiation of translocation and processive unfolding of substrates by determining seven atomic structures of substrate-engaged 26S proteasome simultaneously.\nRegulation of the 20S by the 19S.\nThe 19S regulatory particle is responsible for stimulating the 20S to degrade proteins. A primary function of the 19S regulatory ATPases is to open the gate in the 20S that blocks the entry of substrates into the degradation chamber. The mechanism by which the proteasomal ATPase open this gate has been recently elucidated. 20S gate opening, and thus substrate degradation, requires the C-termini of the proteasomal ATPases, which contains a specific motif (i.e., HbYX motif). The ATPases C-termini bind into pockets in the top of the 20S, and tether the ATPase complex to the 20S proteolytic complex, thus joining the substrate unfolding equipment with the 20S degradation machinery. Binding of these C-termini into these 20S pockets by themselves stimulates opening of the gate in the 20S in much the same way that a \"key-in-a-lock\" opens a door. The precise mechanism by which this \"key-in-a-lock\" mechanism functions has been structurally elucidated in the context of human 26S proteasome at near-atomic resolution, suggesting that the insertion of five C-termini of ATPase subunits Rpt1/2/3/5/6 into the 20S surface pockets are required to fully open the 20S gate, confirming work previously done on yeast proteasome.\nOther regulatory particles.\n11S.\n20S proteasomes can also associate with a second type of regulatory particle, the 11S regulatory particle, a heptameric structure that does not contain any ATPases and can promote the degradation of short peptides but not of complete proteins. It is presumed that this is because the complex cannot unfold larger substrates. This structure is also known as PA28, REG, or PA26. The mechanisms by which it binds to the core particle through the C-terminal tails of its subunits and induces \u03b1-ring conformational changes to open the 20S gate suggest a similar mechanism for the 19S particle. The expression of the 11S particle is induced by interferon gamma and is responsible, in conjunction with the immunoproteasome \u03b2 subunits, for the generation of peptides that bind to the major histocompatibility complex.\nBLM10/PA200.\nYet another type of non-ATPase regulatory particle is the Blm10 (yeast) or PA200/PSME4 (human). It opens only one \u03b1 subunit in the 20S gate and itself folds into a dome with a very small pore over it.\nArchaeal Proteasomes.\nArchaea also contain a proteasome degradation pathway with a 20S core and a regulatory particle consisting of the Proteasome-Activating Nucleotidase (PAN), that shares similarities to the 19S proteasome. Like the eukaryotic 19S, PAN is a AAA-ATPase, containing N-terminal coiled coils, an OB ring, an ATPase domain with an HBXY motif that interacts with the archaeal 20S.\nBacterial Proteasomes.\nActinobacteria have acquired a proteasome degradation pathway, including its own 20S core particle and a AAA protein motor, MPA (mycobacterial proteasome activator). Unlike the base subcomplex of the 19S, MPA is a homohexameric motor complex, containing the ATPase sites, a tandem (oligosaccharide/oligonucleotide-binding) OB ring, and Coiled coils that extend off N-termini off the OB ring. The C-terminus contains HBXY motifs that contact the 20S core particle in a similar way as with other regulatory particles. Targeting to MPA requires a prokaryotic protein, Prokaryotic ubiquitin-like protein (or Pup) that functions as ubiquitin as a tag that can be attached to a protein substrate, though the structure of Pup is unrelated to that of ubiquitin. Once attached, a puplyated protein can be targeted to MPA through the coiled-coil and can be directed through the AAA motor into the 20S for degradation.\nAssembly.\nThe assembly of the proteasome is a complex process due to the number of subunits that must associate to form an active complex. The \u03b2 subunits are synthesized with N-terminal \"propeptides\" that are post-translationally modified during the assembly of the 20S particle to expose the proteolytic active site. The 20S particle is assembled from two half-proteasomes, each of which consists of a seven-membered pro-\u03b2 ring attached to a seven-membered \u03b1 ring. The association of the \u03b2 rings of the two half-proteasomes triggers threonine-dependent autolysis of the propeptides to expose the active site. These \u03b2 interactions are mediated mainly by salt bridges and hydrophobic interactions between conserved alpha helices whose disruption by mutation damages the proteasome's ability to assemble. The assembly of the half-proteasomes, in turn, is initiated by the assembly of the \u03b1 subunits into their heptameric ring, forming a template for the association of the corresponding pro-\u03b2 ring. The assembly of \u03b1 subunits has not been characterized.\nOnly recently, the assembly process of the 19S regulatory particle has been elucidated to considerable extent. The 19S regulatory particle assembles as two distinct subcomponents, the base and the lid. Assembly of the base complex is facilitated by four assembly chaperones, Hsm3/S5b, Nas2/p27, Rpn14/PAAF1, and Nas6/gankyrin (names for yeast/mammals). These assembly chaperones bind to the AAA-ATPase subunits and their main function seems to be to ensure proper assembly of the heterohexameric AAA-ATPase ring. To date it is still under debate whether the base complex assembles separately, whether the assembly is templated by the 20S core particle, or whether alternative assembly pathways exist. In addition to the four assembly chaperones, the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp6/Usp14 also promotes base assembly, but it is not essential. The lid assembles separately in a specific order and does not require assembly chaperones.\nProtein degradation process.\nUbiquitination and targeting.\nProteins are targeted for degradation by the proteasome with covalent modification of a lysine residue that requires the coordinated reactions of three enzymes. In the first step, a ubiquitin-activating enzyme (known as E1) hydrolyzes ATP and adenylylates a ubiquitin molecule. This is then transferred to E1's active-site cysteine residue in concert with the adenylylation of a second ubiquitin. This adenylylated ubiquitin is then transferred to a cysteine of a second enzyme, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2). In the last step, a member of a highly diverse class of enzymes known as ubiquitin ligases (E3) recognizes the specific protein to be ubiquitinated and catalyzes the transfer of ubiquitin from E2 to this target protein. A target protein must be labeled with at least four ubiquitin monomers (in the form of a polyubiquitin chain) before it is recognized by the proteasome lid. It is therefore the E3 that confers substrate specificity to this system. The number of E1, E2, and E3 proteins expressed depends on the organism and cell type, but there are many different E3 enzymes present in humans, indicating that there is a huge number of targets for the ubiquitin proteasome system.\nThe ubiquitin protein itself is 76 amino acids long and was named due to its ubiquitous nature, as it has a highly conserved sequence and is found in all known eukaryotic organisms. The genes encoding ubiquitin in eukaryotes are arranged in tandem repeats, possibly due to the heavy transcription demands on these genes to produce enough ubiquitin for the cell. It has been proposed that ubiquitin is the slowest-evolving protein identified to date. Ubiquitin contains seven lysine residues to which another ubiquitin can be ligated, resulting in different types of polyubiquitin chains. Chains in which each additional ubiquitin is linked to lysine 48 of the previous ubiquitin have a role in proteasome targeting, while other types of chains may be involved in other processes.\nIntrinsic Ubiquitin Receptors of the Proteasome.\nPolyubiquitinated proteins are targeted to the proteasome through three identified Ubiquitin receptors: Rpn1, Rpn10, and Rpn13, that decorate the 19S RP and can direct an unstructured region of the target substrate into the N-domain of the AAA motor. Each was identified individually and characterized to bind ubiquitin.\nRpn10.\nRpn10 was the first ubiquitin receptor identified on the proteasome. Rpn10 has a von Willebrand factor type A (VWA) attached to either a single Ubiquitin Interaction Motif (UIM), in yeast, or two UIMs in higher eukaryotes. The VWA domain binds between the base subcomplex and lid subcomplex of the 19S RP, while the UIM extends into a space over the AAA motor, though the UIM has not been seen in cryo-EM structures. NMR studies have shown that the UIM of Rpn10 binds mono-ubiquitin, and K48 di-ubiquitin with higher affinity. More recently, the C-terminus of Rpn10 in higher eukaryotes has been shown to bind an E3 ligase, UBE3A/E6AP (see Proteasomal Ligases).\nRpn13.\nRpn13 was identified as a ubiquitin receptor using a Yeast-2-hybrid screen. Ubiquitin binding to Rpn13 is through the pleckstrin-like receptor for the Ub (PRU) domain. and mutations to the PRU block binding to ubiquitin. Rpn13 binds the proteasome through Rpn2 and sits at the top of the 19S, positioned over the OB ring of the motor. Rpn13 also binds and activates a Deubiquitinating enzyme, UCH37 (see below).\nRpn1.\nUbiquitin binds Rpn1 via two sites, termed the T1 and T2 sites that were identified using NMR. Rpn1 also provides a docking site for Ubp6.\nThe affinities for ubiquitin for these receptors in isolation has been measured through a variety of methods. They are all in the micromolar range, however a substrate that has both a ubiquitin signal and an unstructured region has a Michaelis menten constant in the hundreds of nanomolar range, suggesting that the unstructured region in key in engaging a substrate.\nPotential additional ubiquitin receptors..\nInterestingly, mutations of Rpn1, Rpn10, and Rpn13 in yeast are not lethal, suggesting that additional sites may exist. The coiled-coil of Rpt4/5 has been proposed as a binding site by cross-linking mass spec and this has been visualized by cryo-EM.\nProteasomal Deubiquitinases.\nUbiquitin chains conjugated to a protein targeted for proteasomal degradation are normally removed by any one of the three proteasome-associated deubiquitylating enzymes (DUBs), which are Rpn11, Ubp6/USP14 and UCH37. Rpn11 is the essential DUB responsible for the en block removal of the ubiquitin signal from the substrate, while Ubp6/USP14 and UCH37 have been proposed to edit the ubiquitin code. Ubp6 knockouts in Saccharomyces cerevisiae are viable, and there is no homolog of UCH37 in budding yeast, though they exist in Schizosaccharomyces pombe and higher eukaryotes. This process recycles ubiquitin and is essential to maintain the ubiquitin reservoir in cells.\nRpn11 (POH1).\nRpn11 is an intrinsic, stoichiometric subunit of the 19S regulatory particle and is essential for the function of 26S proteasome. Rpn11 is a zinc-dependent, metalloprotease of the JAB1/MPN/Mov34 metalloenzyme (JAMM) family of DUBs, that was identified to be the essential DUB responsible for the en block removal of the ubiquitin chain from the protein substrate. Rpn11 forms an obligate dimer with Rpn8 forming an active DUB able to cleave all ubiquitin linkages. The active site of Rpn11 is formed through metal coordination of the catalytic zinc and this site is covered by an Insert-1 loop that covers this active site. The structure is very similar to that of a related JAMM DUB, AMSH, that is responsible for K63 ubiquitin cleavage, however it lacks the residues that are key for AMSH's linkage specificity. The structure of Rpn11 bound to ubiquitin revealed that the C-terminus of Ubiquitin pushes the insert-1 loop into an beta-sheet providing access to the catalytic zinc. This structure combined with detailed biochemistry revealed that the DUB activity of Rpn11 was accelerated at least 10-fold by the translocation of the protein substrate, suggesting that the translocation delivered the Ub substrate to the active site of Rpn11. This model of translocation-dependent deubiquitination was later confirmed by cryoEM of both the yeast and human proteasome bound to a substrate, both of which recapitulated the crystal structure of Ubiquitin bound to Rpn11. Single molecule studies on the yeast proteasome confirmed that the DUB rates measured by biochemistry were indeed stimulated by translocation. More recent biochemical and single molecule studies have shown that on top of being the essential DUB, Rpn11 is also a ubiquitin receptor that acts as an allosteric sensor to enable proper engagement of a substrate by the proteasome.\nIn addition to binding Ubiquitin, Rpn11 has also recently been shown to be a binding spot for many proteasome associated factors. Three recent cryo-EM studies have shown that PITHD1 (Proteasome Interacting Thioredoxin Domain 1) and TXNL1 (Thioredoxin-like protein 1) bind the proteasome by binding Rpn2/Rpn10 and making an interaction with the insert-1 loop of Rpn11. PITHD1 binds the proteasome in a resting state and has been proposed to be a dormancy factor, while TXNL1 binds in a processing state, suggesting that it may have an active role in aiding protein degradation. Cryo-EM has also shown that Rpn11 can bind the Ubiquitin-like domain of midnolin, a protein that enables ubiquitin-independent degradation of transcription factors (see the section on ubiquitin-independent degradation).\nUSP14/UBP6.\nIn contrast to Rpn11, USP14 and UCH37 are the DUBs that do not always associated with the proteasome and are not essential for ubiquitin dependent degradation. Instead, these DUBs are proposed to \"edit\" the ubiquitin code of a substrate that is already engaged with the proteasome. In cells, about 10-40% of the proteasomes were found to have USP14 associated. Ubp6/USP14 is a member of the Ubiquitin Specific Protease (USP) family, utilizing a catalytic cysteine to cleave ubiquitin. Along with the USP, Ubp6/USP14 contains a Ubiquitin-like protein (UBL) that binds the proteasome. Ubp6/USP14 is largely activated by the proteasome and exhibit a very low DUB activity alone. Once activated, USP14 was found to suppress proteasome function by its DUB activity and by inducing parallel pathways of proteasome conformational transitions, one of which turned out to directly prohibit substrate insertion into the AAA-ATPase, as first observed biochemically and later confirmed by time-resolved cryogenic electron microscopy. It appears that USP14 regulates proteasome function at multiple checkpoints by both catalytically competing with Rpn11 and allosterically reprogramming the AAA-ATPase states, which is rather unexpected for a DUB. These observations imply that the proteasome regulation may depend on its dynamic transitions of conformational states.\nUCH37.\nUCH37 is a Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase that activated upon binding the 26S proteasome through the ubiquitin receptor Rpn13. UCH37 is activated upon binding the proteasome through the C-terminal DEUBAD (DUB adaptor) domain that binds Rpn2.\nProteasomal ligases.\nWhile Ubp6 and UCH37 can remodel the ubiquitin code on a substrate by removing Ubiquitins, Ubiquitin ligases can also associate with the proteasome and attach ubiquitins. For the 26S, this includes Hul5 in yeast (or UBE3C in humans) and UBE3A/E6AP in humans.\nHul5 was first identified in yeast as a 26S associated ligase along with Ubp6 and they were proposed to remodel ubiquitin chains at the proteasome. Biochemical studies show that Hul5 can attach additional ubiquitins onto a ubiquitinated substrate effectively acting as an Ubiquitin ligase. Hul5 has been proposed to bind Rpn2 in yeast, however this interaction has not been shown structurally. Further work needs to be done to understand how Hul5 works and what substrates are processed by Hul5.\nUBE3A/E6AP binds the C-terminus of Rpn10 in mammals. NMR has shown that a previously described disordered region of Rpn10 becomes order upon binding E6AP forming a tight interaction in the low nanomolar range.\nProteasomal chaperones.\nIn addition to DUBs and Ligases, many other proteins associate with the proteasome and are important for degradation. These proteins typically consist of a Ubiquitin-like domain (UBL) and a Ubiquitin associating domain (UBA) with Dsk2, Rad23, and Ddi1 being classified as Proteasomal Chaperones. Dsk2 and Rad23 have UBLs that bind the receptors of the proteasome. Ddi1 has been shown to bind long K48-Ubiquitin chains and act as a protease and is probably not directly interacting with the proteasome.\nUnfolding and translocation.\nAfter a protein has been ubiquitinated, it is recognized by the 19S regulatory particle in an ATP-dependent binding step. The substrate protein must then enter the interior of the 20S subunit to come in contact with the proteolytic active sites. Because the 20S particle's central channel is narrow and gated by the N-terminal tails of the \u03b1 ring subunits, the substrates must be at least partially unfolded before they enter the core. The passage of the unfolded substrate into the core is called \"translocation\" and necessarily occurs after deubiquitination. For an idealized substrate, translocation drives deubiquitination. However, the order in which substrates are deubiquitinated and unfolded is not yet clear. Which of these processes is the rate-limiting step in the overall proteolysis reaction depends on the specific substrate; for some proteins, the unfolding process is rate-limiting, while deubiquitination is the slowest step for other proteins. The extent to which substrates must be unfolded before translocation is suggested to be around 20 amino acid residues by the atomic structure of the substrate-engaged 26S proteasome in the deubiquitylation-compatible state, but substantial tertiary structure, and in particular nonlocal interactions such as disulfide bonds, are sufficient to inhibit degradation. The presence of intrinsically disordered protein segments of sufficient size, either at the protein terminus or internally, has also been proposed to facilitate efficient initiation of degradation.\nThe gate formed by the \u03b1 subunits prevents peptides longer than about four residues from entering the interior of the 20S particle. The ATP molecules bound before the initial recognition step are hydrolyzed before translocation. While energy is needed for substrate unfolding, it is not required for translocation. The assembled 26S proteasome can degrade unfolded proteins in the presence of a non-hydrolyzable ATP analog, but cannot degrade folded proteins, indicating that energy from ATP hydrolysis is used for substrate unfolding. Passage of the unfolded substrate through the opened gate occurs via facilitated diffusion if the 19S cap is in the ATP-bound state.\nThe mechanism for unfolding of globular proteins is necessarily general, but somewhat dependent on the amino acid sequence. Long sequences of alternating glycine and alanine have been shown to inhibit substrate unfolding, decreasing the efficiency of proteasomal degradation; this results in the release of partially degraded byproducts, possibly due to the decoupling of the ATP hydrolysis and unfolding steps. Such glycine-alanine repeats are also found in nature, for example in silk fibroin; in particular, certain Epstein\u2013Barr virus gene products bearing this sequence can stall the proteasome, helping the virus propagate by preventing antigen presentation on the major histocompatibility complex.\nProteolysis.\nThe proteasome functions as an endoprotease. The mechanism of proteolysis by the \u03b2 subunits of the 20S core particle is through a threonine-dependent nucleophilic attack. This mechanism may depend on an associated water molecule for deprotonation of the reactive threonine hydroxyl. Degradation occurs within the central chamber formed by the association of the two \u03b2 rings and normally does not release partially degraded products, instead reducing the substrate to short polypeptides typically 7\u20139 residues long, though they can range from 4 to 25 residues, depending on the organism and substrate. The biochemical mechanism that determines product length is not fully characterized. Although the three catalytic \u03b2 subunits have a common mechanism, they have slightly different substrate specificities, which are considered chymotrypsin-like, trypsin-like, and peptidyl-glutamyl peptide-hydrolyzing (PHGH)-like. These variations in specificity are the result of interatomic contacts with local residues near the active sites of each subunit. Each catalytic \u03b2 subunit also possesses a conserved lysine residue required for proteolysis.\nAlthough the proteasome normally produces very short peptide fragments, in some cases these products are themselves biologically active and functional molecules. Certain transcription factors regulating the expression of specific genes, including one component of the mammalian complex NF-\u03baB, are synthesized as inactive precursors whose ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal degradation converts them to an active form. Such activity requires the proteasome to cleave the substrate protein internally, rather than processively degrading it from one terminus. It has been suggested that long loops on these proteins' surfaces serve as the proteasomal substrates and enter the central cavity, while the majority of the protein remains outside. Similar effects have been observed in yeast proteins; this mechanism of selective degradation is known as \"regulated ubiquitin/proteasome dependent processing\" (RUP).\nUbiquitin-independent degradation.\nAlthough most substrates must be ubiquitinated before being degraded by the 26S proteasome, there are some exceptions to this general rule, especially when the proteasome plays a normal role in the post-translational processing of the protein. The proteasomal activation of NF-\u03baB by processing p105 into p50 via internal proteolysis is one major example. Some proteins that are hypothesized to be unstable due to intrinsically unstructured regions, are degraded in a ubiquitin-independent manner. Ubiquitin-independent mechanisms targeting key cell cycle regulators such as p53 have also been reported, although p53 is also subject to ubiquitin-dependent degradation. Finally, structurally abnormal, misfolded, or highly oxidized proteins are also subject to ubiquitin-independent and 19S-independent degradation under conditions of cellular stress.\nThe most well-known example of a ubiquitin-independent proteasome substrate is the enzyme ornithine decarboxylase (ODC). ODC is degraded upon the expression and binding to a cofactor, Ornithine decarboxylase antizyme (AZ) that breaks the ODC dimer. ODC contains either a C-terminal disordered region (in human) or an N-terminal disordered region (in yeast) is necessary for degradation and is proposed to engage the AAA motor of the 19S RP, however the mechanistic details of this interaction have yet to be identified. Another example of ubiquitin independent degradation is Thymidine synthetase, where an N-terminal disordered region is essential for degradation.\nFAT10 (or Ubiquitin D) is a tandem UBL protein that is also degraded by the proteasome in a ubiquitin independent manner. Recent biochemical and structural studies show that FAT10 is degraded upon binding of NUB1 that unfolds the first UBL of FAT10 enabling engagement by the 26S proteasome. The NUB1-FAT10 complex also exposes a UBL on NUB1 that binds Rpn1, positioning FAT10 above the central channel of the proteasome. Midnolin was identified as a protein that targeted transcription factors to the proteasome for ubiquitin independent degradation. Recent structural studies show that the UBL of midnolin binds binds Rpn11, a helix binds Rpn1, and the CATCH domain binds the transcription factor, providing a model for how ubiquitin independent degradation occurs.\nPathogens also have learned to take advantage of ubiquitin-independent degradation. For plants, a parasitic \"Phytoplasma,\" expresses SAP05, a protein that binds transcription factors and target them for degradation by the 26S proteasome by binding the VWA domain of Rpn10. Interestingly, SAP05 does not bind the insect vector Rpn10. Crystal structures show how SAP05 binds both these TFs and Rpn10 indicating that SAP05 places the TFs near the entry of the AAA motor allowing for ubiquitin independent degradation.\nEvolution.\nThe 20S proteasome is both ubiquitous and essential in eukaryotes and archaea. The bacterial order Actinomycetales, also share homologs of the 20S proteasome, whereas most bacteria possess heat shock genes hslV and hslU, whose gene products are a multimeric protease arranged in a two-layered ring and an ATPase. The hslV protein has been hypothesized to resemble the likely ancestor of the 20S proteasome. In general, HslV is not essential in bacteria, and not all bacteria possess it, whereas some protists possess both the 20S and the hslV systems. Many bacteria also possess other homologs of the proteasome and an associated ATPase, most notably ClpP and ClpX. This redundancy explains why the HslUV system is not essential.\nSequence analysis suggests that the catalytic \u03b2 subunits diverged earlier in evolution than the predominantly structural \u03b1 subunits. In bacteria that express a 20S proteasome, the \u03b2 subunits have high sequence identity to archaeal and eukaryotic \u03b2 subunits, whereas the \u03b1 sequence identity is much lower. The presence of 20S proteasomes in bacteria may result from lateral gene transfer, while the diversification of subunits among eukaryotes is ascribed to multiple gene duplication events.\nCell cycle control.\nCell cycle progression is controlled by ordered action of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), activated by specific cyclins that demarcate phases of the cell cycle. Mitotic cyclins, which persist in the cell for only a few minutes, have one of the shortest life spans of all intracellular proteins. After a CDK-cyclin complex has performed its function, the associated cyclin is polyubiquitinated and destroyed by the proteasome, which provides directionality for the cell cycle. In particular, exit from mitosis requires the proteasome-dependent dissociation of the regulatory component cyclin B from the mitosis promoting factor complex. In vertebrate cells, \"slippage\" through the mitotic checkpoint leading to premature M phase exit can occur despite the delay of this exit by the spindle checkpoint.\nEarlier cell cycle checkpoints such as post-restriction point check between G1 phase and S phase similarly involve proteasomal degradation of cyclin A, whose ubiquitination is promoted by the anaphase promoting complex (APC), an E3 ubiquitin ligase. The APC and the Skp1/Cul1/F-box protein complex (SCF complex) are the two key regulators of cyclin degradation and checkpoint control; the SCF itself is regulated by the APC via ubiquitination of the adaptor protein, Skp2, which prevents SCF activity before the G1-S transition.\nIndividual components of the 19S particle have their own regulatory roles. Gankyrin, a recently identified oncoprotein, is one of the 19S subcomponents that also tightly binds the cyclin-dependent kinase CDK4 and plays a key role in recognizing ubiquitinated p53, via its affinity for the ubiquitin ligase MDM2. Gankyrin is anti-apoptotic and has been shown to be overexpressed in some tumor cell types such as hepatocellular carcinoma.\nLike eukaryotes, some archaea also use the proteasome to control cell cycle, specifically by controlling ESCRT-III-mediated cell division.\nRegulation of plant growth.\nIn plants, signaling by auxins, or phytohormones that order the direction and tropism of plant growth, induces the targeting of a class of transcription factor repressors known as Aux/IAA proteins for proteasomal degradation. These proteins are ubiquitinated by SCFTIR1, or SCF in complex with the auxin receptor TIR1. Degradation of Aux/IAA proteins derepresses transcription factors in the auxin-response factor (ARF) family and induces ARF-directed gene expression. The cellular consequences of ARF activation depend on the plant type and developmental stage, but are involved in directing growth in roots and leaf veins. The specific response to ARF derepression is thought to be mediated by specificity in the pairing of individual ARF and Aux/IAA proteins.\nApoptosis.\nBoth internal and external signals can lead to the induction of apoptosis, or programmed cell death. The resulting deconstruction of cellular components is primarily carried out by specialized proteases known as caspases, but the proteasome also plays important and diverse roles in the apoptotic process. The involvement of the proteasome in this process is indicated by both the increase in protein ubiquitination, and of E1, E2, and E3 enzymes that is observed well in advance of apoptosis. During apoptosis, proteasomes localized to the nucleus have also been observed to translocate to outer membrane blebs characteristic of apoptosis.\nProteasome inhibition has different effects on apoptosis induction in different cell types. In general, the proteasome is not required for apoptosis, although inhibiting it is pro-apoptotic in most cell types that have been studied. Apoptosis is mediated through disrupting the regulated degradation of pro-growth cell cycle proteins. However, some cell lines\u00a0\u2014 in particular, primary cultures of quiescent and differentiated cells such as thymocytes and neurons\u00a0\u2014 are prevented from undergoing apoptosis on exposure to proteasome inhibitors. The mechanism for this effect is not clear, but is hypothesized to be specific to cells in quiescent states, or to result from the differential activity of the pro-apoptotic kinase JNK. The ability of proteasome inhibitors to induce apoptosis in rapidly dividing cells has been exploited in several recently developed chemotherapy agents such as bortezomib and salinosporamide A.\nResponse to cellular stress.\nIn response to cellular stresses\u00a0\u2013 such as infection, heat shock, or oxidative damage\u00a0\u2013 heat shock proteins that identify misfolded or unfolded proteins and target them for proteasomal degradation are expressed. Both Hsp27 and Hsp90\u2014chaperone proteins have been implicated in increasing the activity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, though they are not direct participants in the process. Hsp70, on the other hand, binds exposed hydrophobic patches on the surface of misfolded proteins and recruits E3 ubiquitin ligases such as CHIP to tag the proteins for proteasomal degradation. The CHIP protein (carboxyl terminus of Hsp70-interacting protein) is itself regulated via inhibition of interactions between the E3 enzyme CHIP and its E2 binding partner.\nSimilar mechanisms exist to promote the degradation of oxidatively damaged proteins via the proteasome system. In particular, proteasomes localized to the nucleus are regulated by PARP and actively degrade inappropriately oxidized histones. Oxidized proteins, which often form large amorphous aggregates in the cell, can be degraded directly by the 20S core particle without the 19S regulatory cap and do not require ATP hydrolysis or tagging with ubiquitin. However, high levels of oxidative damage increases the degree of cross-linking between protein fragments, rendering the aggregates resistant to proteolysis. Larger numbers and sizes of such highly oxidized aggregates are associated with aging.\nDysregulation of the ubiquitin proteasome system may contribute to several neural diseases. It may lead to brain tumors such as astrocytomas. In some of the late-onset neurodegenerative diseases that share aggregation of misfolded proteins as a common feature, such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease, large insoluble aggregates of misfolded proteins can form and then result in neurotoxicity, through mechanisms that are not yet well understood. Decreased proteasome activity has been suggested as a cause of aggregation and Lewy body formation in Parkinson's. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that yeast models of Parkinson's are more susceptible to toxicity from \u03b1-synuclein, the major protein component of Lewy bodies, under conditions of low proteasome activity. Impaired proteasomal activity may underlie cognitive disorders such as the autism spectrum disorders, and muscle and nerve diseases such as inclusion body myopathy.\nRole in the immune system.\nThe proteasome plays a straightforward but critical role in the function of the adaptive immune system. Peptide antigens are displayed by the major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC) proteins on the surface of antigen-presenting cells. These peptides are products of proteasomal degradation of proteins originated by the invading pathogen. Although constitutively expressed proteasomes can participate in this process, a specialized complex composed of proteins, whose expression is induced by interferon gamma, are the primary producers of peptides which are optimal in size and composition for MHC binding. These proteins whose expression increases during the immune response include the 11S regulatory particle, whose main known biological role is regulating the production of MHC ligands, and specialized \u03b2 subunits called \u03b21i, \u03b22i, and \u03b25i with altered substrate specificity. The complex formed with the specialized \u03b2 subunits is known as the \"immunoproteasome\". Another \u03b25i variant subunit, \u03b25t, is expressed in the thymus, leading to a thymus-specific \"thymoproteasome\" whose function is as yet unclear.\nThe strength of MHC class I ligand binding is dependent on the composition of the ligand C-terminus, as peptides bind by hydrogen bonding and by close contacts with a region called the \"B pocket\" on the MHC surface. Many MHC class I alleles prefer hydrophobic C-terminal residues, and the immunoproteasome complex is more likely to generate hydrophobic C-termini.\nDue to its role in generating the activated form of NF-\u03baB, an anti-apoptotic and pro-inflammatory regulator of cytokine expression, proteasomal activity has been linked to inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Increased levels of proteasome activity correlate with disease activity and have been implicated in autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.\nThe proteasome is also involved in Intracellular antibody-mediated proteolysis of antibody-bound virions. In this neutralisation pathway, TRIM21 (a protein of the tripartite motif family) binds with immunoglobulin G to direct the virion to the proteasome where it is degraded.\nProteasome inhibitors.\nProteasome inhibitors have effective anti-tumor activity in cell culture, inducing apoptosis by disrupting the regulated degradation of pro-growth cell cycle proteins. This approach of selectively inducing apoptosis in tumor cells has proven effective in animal models and human trials.\nLactacystin, a natural product synthesized by \"Streptomyces\" bacteria, was the first non-peptidic proteasome inhibitor discovered and is widely used as a research tool in biochemistry and cell biology. Lactacystin was licensed to Myogenics/Proscript, which was acquired by Millennium Pharmaceuticals, now part of Takeda Pharmaceuticals. Lactacystin covalently modifies the amino-terminal threonine of catalytic \u03b2 subunits of the proteasome, particularly the \u03b25 subunit responsible for the proteasome's chymotrypsin-like activity. This discovery helped to establish the proteasome as a mechanistically novel class of protease: an amino-terminal threonine protease.\nBortezomib (Boronated MG132), a molecule developed by Millennium Pharmaceuticals and marketed as Velcade, is the first proteasome inhibitor to reach clinical use as a chemotherapy agent. Bortezomib is used in the treatment of multiple myeloma. Notably, multiple myeloma has been observed to result in increased proteasome-derived peptide levels in blood serum that decrease to normal levels in response to successful chemotherapy. Studies in animals have indicated that bortezomib may also have clinically significant effects in pancreatic cancer. Preclinical and early clinical studies have been started to examine bortezomib's effectiveness in treating other B-cell-related cancers, particularly some types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Clinical results also seem to justify use of proteasome inhibitor combined with chemotherapy, for B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia Proteasome inhibitors can kill some types of cultured leukemia cells that are resistant to glucocorticoids.\nThe molecule ritonavir, marketed as Norvir, was developed as a protease inhibitor and used to target HIV infection. However, it has been shown to inhibit proteasomes as well as free proteases; to be specific, the chymotrypsin-like activity of the proteasome is inhibited by ritonavir, while the trypsin-like activity is somewhat enhanced. Studies in animal models suggest that ritonavir may have inhibitory effects on the growth of glioma cells.\nProteasome inhibitors have also shown promise in treating autoimmune diseases in animal models. For example, studies in mice bearing human skin grafts found a reduction in the size of lesions from psoriasis after treatment with a proteasome inhibitor. Inhibitors also show positive effects in rodent models of asthma.\nLabeling and inhibition of the proteasome is also of interest in laboratory settings for both \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\" study of proteasomal activity in cells. The most commonly used laboratory inhibitors are lactacystin and the peptide aldehyde MG132 initially developed by Goldberg lab. Fluorescent inhibitors have also been developed to specifically label the active sites of the assembled proteasome.\nClinical significance.\nThe proteasome and its subunits are of clinical significance for at least two reasons: (1) a compromised complex assembly or a dysfunctional proteasome can be associated with the underlying pathophysiology of specific diseases, and (2) they can be exploited as drug targets for therapeutic interventions. More recently, more effort has been made to consider the proteasome for the development of novel diagnostic markers and strategies. An improved and comprehensive understanding of the pathophysiology of the proteasome should lead to clinical applications in the future.\nThe proteasomes form a pivotal component for the ubiquitin\u2013proteasome system (UPS) and corresponding cellular Protein Quality Control (PQC). Protein ubiquitination and subsequent proteolysis and degradation by the proteasome are important mechanisms in the regulation of the cell cycle, cell growth and differentiation, gene transcription, signal transduction and apoptosis. Proteasome defects lead to reduced proteolytic activity and the accumulation of damaged or misfolded proteins, which may contribute to neurodegenerative disease, cardiovascular diseases, inflammatory responses and autoimmune diseases, and systemic DNA damage responses leading to malignancies.\nResearch has implicated UPS defects in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative and myodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Pick's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington's disease, Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease, and motor neuron diseases, polyglutamine (PolyQ) diseases, muscular dystrophies and several rare forms of neurodegenerative diseases associated with dementia. As part of the ubiquitin\u2013proteasome system (UPS), the proteasome maintains cardiac protein homeostasis and thus plays a significant role in cardiac ischemic injury, ventricular hypertrophy and heart failure. Additionally, evidence is accumulating that the UPS plays an essential role in malignant transformation. UPS proteolysis plays a major role in responses of cancer cells to stimulatory signals that are critical for the development of cancer. Accordingly, gene expression by degradation of transcription factors, such as p53, c-jun, c-Fos, NF-\u03baB, c-Myc, HIF-1\u03b1, MAT\u03b12, STAT3, sterol-regulated element-binding proteins and androgen receptors are all controlled by the UPS and thus involved in the development of various malignancies. Moreover, the UPS regulates the degradation of tumor suppressor gene products such as adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) in colorectal cancer, retinoblastoma (Rb). and von Hippel\u2013Lindau tumor suppressor (VHL), as well as a number of proto-oncogenes (Raf, Myc, Myb, Rel, Src, Mos, ABL). The UPS is also involved in the regulation of inflammatory responses. This activity is usually attributed to the role of proteasomes in the activation of NF-\u03baB which further regulates the expression of pro inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-\u03b1, IL-\u03b2, IL-8, adhesion molecules (ICAM-1, VCAM-1, P-selectin) and prostaglandins and nitric oxide (NO). Additionally, the UPS also plays a role in inflammatory responses as regulators of leukocyte proliferation, mainly through proteolysis of cyclines and the degradation of CDK inhibitors. Lastly, autoimmune disease patients with SLE, Sj\u00f6gren syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) predominantly exhibit circulating proteasomes which can be applied as clinical biomarkers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24606", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24606", "title": "Pantothenic Acid", "text": ""}
{"id": "24607", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24607", "title": "Persians", "text": "Iranian ethnic group\nPersians, or the Persian people, are an Iranian ethnic group from West Asia. They are indigenous to the Iranian plateau and comprise the majority of the population of Iran. They have a common cultural system and are native speakers of the Persian language. In the Western world, \"Persian\" was largely understood as a demonym for all Iranians rather than as an ethnonym for the Persian people, but this understanding shifted in the 20th century.\nThe Persians were originally an ancient Iranian people who had migrated to Persis (also called \"Persia proper\" and corresponding with Iran's Fars Province) by the 9th century BCE. Together with their compatriots, they established and ruled some of the world's most powerful empires, which are well-recognized for their massive cultural, political, and social influence in the ancient Near East and beyond. The Persian people have contributed greatly to art and science, and Persian literature is one of the world's most prominent literary traditions both inside and outside of Iran. The regional prestige of their civilization was the basis for the development of many noteworthy Persianate societies, especially among the Turkic peoples, throughout Central Asia and South Asia.\nIn contemporary terminology, Persian-speaking people from Afghanistan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan are known as \"Tajiks\", with the former two countries having mutually intelligible Persian varieties known as Dari and Tajiki, respectively; whereas those from the Caucasus (primarily in the Republic of Azerbaijan and in Dagestan, Russia), albeit heavily assimilated, are known as \"Tats\". Historically, however, the terms \"Tajik\" and \"Tat\" were used synonymously and interchangeably with \"Persian\". Many influential Persian figures hailed from outside of Iran's modern borders\u2014to the northeast in Afghanistan and Central Asia, and, to a lesser extent, to the northwest in the Caucasus proper. In historical contexts, especially in English, \"Persian\" may be defined more loosely (often as a national identity) to cover all subjects of the ancient Persian polities, regardless of their ethnic background.\nEthnonym.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"Persian\", meaning \"from Persia\", derives from Latin , itself deriving from Greek (), a Hellenized form of Old Persian (), which evolves into () in modern Persian. In the Bible, particularly in the books of Daniel, Esther, Ezra, and Nehemya, it is given as ().\nA Greek folk etymology connected the name to Perseus, a legendary character in Greek mythology. Herodotus recounts this story, devising a foreign son, Perses, from whom the Persians took the name. Apparently, the Persians themselves knew the story, as Xerxes I tried to use it to suborn the Argives during his invasion of Greece, but ultimately failed to do so.\nHistory of usage.\nAlthough Persis (Persia proper) was only one of the provinces of ancient Iran, varieties of this term (e.g., \"Persia\") were adopted through Greek sources and used as an exonym for all of the Persian Empire for many years. Thus, especially in the Western world, the names \"Persia\" and \"Persian\" came to refer to all of Iran and its subjects.\nSome medieval and early modern Islamic sources also used cognates of the term \"Persian\" to refer to various Iranian peoples and languages, including the speakers of Khwarazmian, Mazanderani, and Old Azeri. 10th-century Iraqi historian Al-Masudi refers to \"Pahlavi\", \"Dari\", and \"Azari\" as dialects of the Persian language. In 1333, medieval Moroccan traveler and scholar Ibn Battuta referred to the Afghans of Kabul as a specific sub-tribe of the Persians. Lady Mary (Leonora Woulfe) Sheil, in her observation of Iran during the Qajar era, states that the Kurds and the Leks would consider themselves as belonging to the race of the \"old Persians\".\nOn 21 March 1935, the king of Iran Reza Shah of the Pahlavi dynasty issued a decree asking the international community to use the term \"Iran\", the native name of the country, in formal correspondence. However, the term \"Persian\" is still historically used to designate the predominant population of the Iranian peoples living in the Iranian cultural continent.\nHistory.\nPersia is first attested in Assyrian sources from the third millennium BC in the Old Assyrian form , meaning \"Land of the horses\" designating a region belonging to the Sumerians. The name of this region was adopted by a nomadic ancient Iranian people who migrated to the region in the west and southwest of Lake Urmia, eventually becoming known as \"the Persians\". The ninth-century BC Neo-Assyrian inscription of the Black Obelisk of Shalmaneser III, found at Nimrud, gives it in the Late Assyrian forms and as a region and a people located in the Zagros Mountains, the latter likely having migrated southward and transferred the name of the region with them to what would become Persis (Persia proper, i.e., modern-day Fars), and that is considered to be the earliest attestation to the ancient Persian people.\nThe ancient Persians played a major role in the downfall of the Neo-Assyrian Empire. The Medes, another group of ancient Iranian people, unified the region under an empire centered in Media, which would become the region's leading cultural and political power of the time by 612 BC. Meanwhile, under the dynasty of the Achaemenids, the Persians formed a vassal state to the central Median power. In 552 BC, the Achaemenid Persians revolted against the Median monarchy, leading to the victory of Cyrus the Great over the throne in 550 BC. The Persians spread their influence to the rest of what is considered to be the Iranian Plateau, and assimilated with the non-Iranian indigenous groups of the region, including the Elamites and the Mannaeans.\nAt its greatest extent, the Achaemenid Empire stretched from parts of Eastern Europe in the west to the Indus Valley in the east, making it the largest empire the world had yet seen. The Achaemenids developed the infrastructure to support their growing influence, including the establishment of the cities of Pasargadae and Persepolis. The empire extended as far as the limits of the Greek city states in modern-day mainland Greece, where the Persians and Athenians influenced each other in what is essentially a reciprocal cultural exchange. Its legacy and impact on the kingdom of Macedon was also notably huge, even for centuries after the withdrawal of the Persians from Europe following the Greco-Persian Wars.\nDuring the Achaemenid era, Persian colonists settled in Asia Minor. In Lydia (the most important Achaemenid satrapy), near Sardis, there was the Hyrcanian plain, which, according to Strabo, got its name from the Persian settlers that were moved from Hyrcania. Similarly near Sardis, there was the plain of Cyrus, which further signified the presence of numerous Persian settlements in the area. In all these centuries, Lydia and Pontus were reportedly the chief centers for the worship of the Persian gods in Asia Minor. According to Pausanias, as late as the second century AD, one could witness rituals which resembled the Persian fire ceremony at the towns of Hyrocaesareia and Hypaepa. Mithridates III of Cius, a Persian nobleman and part of the Persian ruling elite of the town of Cius, founded the Kingdom of Pontus in his later life, in northern Asia Minor. At the peak of its power, under the infamous Mithridates VI the Great, the Kingdom of Pontus also controlled Colchis, Cappadocia, Bithynia, the Greek colonies of the Tauric Chersonesos, and for a brief time the Roman province of Asia. After a long struggle with Rome in the Mithridatic Wars, Pontus was defeated; part of it was incorporated into the Roman Republic as the province of Bithynia and Pontus, and the eastern half survived as a client kingdom.\nFollowing the Macedonian conquests, the Persian colonists in Cappadocia and the rest of Asia Minor were cut off from their co-religionists in Iran proper, but they continued to practice the Iranian faith of their forefathers. Strabo, who observed them in the Cappadocian Kingdom in the first century BC, records (XV.3.15) that these \"fire kindlers\" possessed many \"holy places of the Persian Gods\", as well as fire temples. Strabo, who wrote during the time of Augustus (r.\u200927 BC\u00a0\u2013\u00a0AD 14), almost three hundred years after the fall of the Achaemenid Persian Empire, records only traces of Persians in western Asia Minor; however, he considered Cappadocia \"almost a living part of Persia\".\nThe Iranian dominance collapsed in 330 BC following the conquest of the Achaemenid Empire by Alexander the Great, but reemerged shortly after through the establishment of the Parthian Empire in 247 BC, which was founded by a group of ancient Iranian people rising from Parthia. Until the Parthian era, Iranian identity had an ethnic, linguistic, and religious value. However, it did not yet have a political import. The Parthian language, which was used as an official language of the Parthian Empire, left influences on Persian, as well as on the neighboring Armenian language.\nThe Parthian monarchy was succeeded by the Persian dynasty of the Sasanians in 224 AD. By the time of the Sasanian Empire, a national culture that was fully aware of being Iranian took shape, partially motivated by restoration and revival of the wisdom of \"the old sages\" (). Other aspects of this national culture included the glorification of a great heroic past and an archaizing spirit. Throughout the period, Iranian identity reached its height in every aspect. Middle Persian, which is the immediate ancestor of Modern Persian and a variety of other Iranian dialects, became the official language of the empire and was greatly diffused among Iranians.\nThe Parthians and the Sasanians would also extensively interact with the Romans culturally. The Roman\u2013Persian wars and the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian wars would shape the landscape of West Asia, Europe, the Caucasus, North Africa, and the Mediterranean Basin for centuries. For a period of over 400 years, the Sasanians and the neighboring Byzantines were recognized as the two leading powers in the world. Cappadocia in Late Antiquity, now well into the Roman era, still retained a significant Iranian character; Stephen Mitchell notes in the \"Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity\": \"Many inhabitants of Cappadocia were of Persian descent and Iranian fire worship is attested as late as 465\".\nFollowing the Arab conquest of the Sasanian Empire in the medieval times, the Arab caliphates established their rule over the region for the next several centuries, during which the long process of the Islamization of Iran took place. Confronting the cultural and linguistic dominance of the Persians, beginning by the Umayyad Caliphate, the Arab conquerors began to establish Arabic as the primary language of the subject peoples throughout their empire, sometimes by force, further confirming the new political reality over the region. The Arabic term , denoting \"people unable to speak properly\", was adopted as a designation for non-Arabs (or non-Arabic speakers), especially the Persians. Although the term had developed a derogatory meaning and implied cultural and ethnic inferiority, it was gradually accepted as a synonym for \"Persian\" and still remains today as a designation for the Persian-speaking communities native to the modern Arab states of the Middle East. A series of Muslim Iranian kingdoms were later established on the fringes of the declining Abbasid Caliphate, including that of the ninth-century Samanids, under the reign of whom the Persian language was used officially for the first time after two centuries of no attestation of the language, now having received the Arabic script and a large Arabic vocabulary. Persian language and culture continued to prevail after the invasions and conquests by the Mongols and the Turks (including the Ilkhanate, Ghaznavids, Seljuks, Khwarazmians, and Timurids), who were themselves significantly Persianized, further developing in Asia Minor, Central Asia, and South Asia, where Persian culture flourished by the expansion of the Persianate societies, particularly those of Turco-Persian and Indo-Persian blends.\nAfter over eight centuries of foreign rule within the region, the Iranian hegemony was reestablished by the emergence of the Safavid Empire in the 16th century. Under the Safavid Empire, focus on Persian language and identity was further revived, and the political evolution of the empire once again maintained Persian as the main language of the country. During the times of the Safavids and subsequent modern Iranian dynasties such as the Qajars, architectural and iconographic elements from the time of the Sasanian Persian Empire were reincorporated, linking the modern country with its ancient past. Contemporary embracement of the legacy of Iran's ancient empires, with an emphasis on the Achaemenid Persian Empire, developed particularly under the reign of the Pahlavi dynasty, providing the motive of a modern nationalistic pride. Iran's modern architecture was then inspired by that of the country's classical eras, particularly with the adoption of details from the ancient monuments in the Achaemenid capitals Persepolis and Pasargadae and the Sasanian capital Ctesiphon. Fars, corresponding to the ancient province of Persia, with its modern capital Shiraz, became a center of interest, particularly during the annual international Shiraz Arts Festival and the 2,500th anniversary of the founding of the Persian Empire. The Pahlavi rulers modernized Iran, and ruled it until the 1979 revolution.\nAnthropology.\nIn modern Iran, the Persians make up the majority of the population. They are native speakers of the modern dialects of Persian, which serves as the country's official language.\nPersian language.\nThe Persian language belongs to the western group of the Iranian branch of the Indo-European language family. Modern Persian is classified as a continuation of Middle Persian, the official religious and literary language of the Sasanian Empire, itself a continuation of Old Persian, which was used by the time of the Achaemenid Empire. Old Persian is one of the oldest Indo-European languages attested in original text. Samples of Old Persian have been discovered in present-day Iran, Armenia, Egypt, Iraq, Romania (Gherla), and Turkey. The oldest attested text written in Old Persian is from the Behistun Inscription, a multilingual inscription from the time of Achaemenid ruler Darius the Great carved on a cliff in western Iran.\nRelated groups.\nThere are several ethnic groups and communities that are either ethnically or linguistically related to the Persian people, living predominantly in Iran, and also within Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, the Caucasus, Turkey, Iraq, and the Arab states of the Persian Gulf.\nThe Tajiks are a people native to Tajikistan, Afghanistan, and Uzbekistan who speak Persian in a variety of dialects. The Tajiks of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan are native speakers of Tajik, which is the official language of Tajikistan, and those in Afghanistan speak Dari, one of the two official languages of Afghanistan.\nThe Tat people, an Iranian people native to the Caucasus (primarily living in the Republic of Azerbaijan and the Russian republic of Dagestan), speak a language (Tat language) that is closely related to Persian. The origin of the Tat people is traced to an Iranian-speaking population that was resettled in the Caucasus by the time of the Sasanian Empire.\nThe Lurs, an ethnic Iranian people native to western Iran, are often associated with the Persians and the Kurds. They speak various dialects of the Luri language, which is considered to be a descendant of Middle Persian.\nThe Hazaras, making up the third largest ethnic group in Afghanistan, speak a variety of Persian by the name of Hazaragi, which is more precisely a part of the Dari dialect continuum. The Aimaqs, a semi-nomadic people native to Afghanistan, speak a variety of Persian by the name of Aimaqi, which also belongs to the Dari dialect continuum.\nPersian-speaking communities native to modern Arab countries are generally designated as \"Ajam\", including the Ajam of Bahrain, the Ajam of Iraq, and the Ajam of Kuwait.\nThe Parsis are a Zoroastrian community of Persian descent who migrated to South Asia, to escape religious persecution after the fall of the Sassanian Empire. They have had a significant role in the development of India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka, and also played a role in the development of Iranian nationalism during the late Qajar years and Pahlavi dynasty. They are primarily located in the western regions of India principally the states of Gujarat and Maharashtra, with smaller communities in other parts of India and in South and Southeast Asia. They speak a dialect version of Gujarati, and no longer speak in Persian. They do however continue to use Avestan as their liturgical language. The Parsis have adapted many practices and tendencies of the Indian groups that surrounded them, such as Indian dress norms, and the observance of many Indian festivals and ceremonies.\nCulture.\nFrom Persis and throughout the Median, Achaemenid, Parthian, and Sasanian empires of ancient Iran to the neighboring Greek city states and the kingdom of Macedon, and later throughout the medieval Islamic world, all the way to modern Iran and others parts of Eurasia, Persian culture has been extended, celebrated, and incorporated. This is due mainly to its geopolitical conditions, and its intricate relationship with the ever-changing political arena once as dominant as the Achaemenid Empire.\nThe artistic heritage of the Persians is eclectic and has included contributions from both the east and the west. Due to the central location of Iran, Persian art has served as a fusion point between eastern and western traditions. Persians have contributed to various forms of art, including calligraphy, carpet weaving, glasswork, lacquerware, marquetry (khatam), metalwork, miniature illustration, mosaic, pottery, and textile design.\nLiterature.\nThe Persian language is known to have one of the world's oldest and most influential literatures. Old Persian written works are attested on several inscriptions from between the 6th and the 4th centuries BC, and Middle Persian literature is attested on inscriptions from the Parthian and Sasanian eras and in Zoroastrian and Manichaean scriptures from between the 3rd to the 10th century AD. New Persian literature flourished after the Arab conquest of Iran with its earliest records from the 9th century, and was developed as a court tradition in many eastern courts. The \"Shahnameh\" of Ferdowsi, the works of Rumi, the \"Rubaiyat\" of Omar Khayyam, the \"Panj Ganj\" of Nizami Ganjavi, the \"Div\u0101n\" of Hafez, \"The Conference of the Birds\" by Attar of Nishapur, and the miscellanea of \"Gulistan\" and \"Bustan\" by Saadi Shirazi are among the famous works of medieval Persian literature. A thriving contemporary Persian literature has also been formed by the works of writers such as Ahmad Shamlou, Forough Farrokhzad, Mehdi Akhavan-Sales, Parvin E'tesami, Sadegh Hedayat, and Simin Daneshvar, among others.\nNot all Persian literature is written in Persian, as works written by Persians in other languages\u2014such as Arabic and Greek\u2014might also be included. At the same time, not all literature written in Persian is written by ethnic Persians or Iranians, as Turkic, Caucasian, and Indic authors have also used Persian literature in the environment of Persianate cultures.\nArchitecture.\nThe most notable examples of ancient Persian architecture are the works of the Achaemenids hailing from Persis. Achaemenid architecture, dating from the expansion of the empire around 550 BC, flourished in a period of artistic growth that left a legacy ranging from Cyrus the Great's solemn tomb at Pasargadae to the structures at Persepolis and Naqsh-e Rostam. The Bam Citadel, a massive structure at constructed on the Silk Road in Bam, is from around the 5th century BC. The quintessential feature of Achaemenid architecture was its eclectic nature, with elements from Median architecture, Assyrian architecture, and Asiatic Greek architecture all incorporated.\nThe architectural heritage of the Sasanian Empire includes, among others, castle fortifications such as the Fortifications of Derbent (located in North Caucasus, now part of Russia), the Rudkhan Castle and the Shapur-Khwast Castle, palaces such as the Palace of Ardashir and the Sarvestan Palace, bridges such as the Shahrestan Bridge and the Shapuri Bridge, the Archway of Ctesiphon, and the reliefs at Taq-e Bostan.\nArchitectural elements from the time of Iran's ancient Persian empires have been adopted and incorporated in later period. They were used especially during the modernization of Iran under the reign of the Pahlavi dynasty to contribute to the characterization of the modern country with its ancient history.\nGardens.\nXenophon, in his \"Oeconomicus\", states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The Great King [Cyrus II]...in all the districts he resides in and visits, takes care that there are (\"paradise\") as they [Persians] call them, full of the good and beautiful things that the soil produce.\"\nThe Persian garden, the earliest examples of which were found throughout the Achaemenid Empire, has an integral position in Persian architecture. Gardens assumed an important place for the Achaemenid monarchs, and utilized the advanced Achaemenid knowledge of water technologies, including aqueducts, earliest recorded gravity-fed water rills, and basins arranged in a geometric system. The enclosure of this symmetrically arranged planting and irrigation by an infrastructure such as a palace created the impression of \"paradise\". The word \"paradise\" itself originates from Avestan (Old Persian ; New Persian , ), which literally translates to \"walled-around\". Characterized by its quadripartite (\"\u010d\u0101rb\u0101q\") design, the Persian garden was evolved and developed into various forms throughout history, and was also adopted in various other cultures in Eurasia. It was inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List in June 2011.\nCarpets.\nCarpet weaving is an essential part of the Persian culture, and Persian rugs are said to be one of the most detailed hand-made works of art.\nAchaemenid rug and carpet artistry is well recognized. Xenophon describes the carpet production in the city of Sardis, stating that the locals take pride in their carpet production. A special mention of Persian carpets is also made by Athenaeus of Naucratis in his \"Deipnosophistae\", as he describes a \"delightfully embroidered\" Persian carpet with \"preposterous shapes of griffins\".\nThe Pazyryk carpet, a Scythian pile-carpet dating back to the 4th century BC that is regarded as the world's oldest existing carpet, depicts elements of Assyrian and Achaemenid designs, including stylistic references to the stone slab designs found in Persian royal buildings.\nMusic.\nAccording to the accounts reported by Xenophon, a great number of singers were present at the Achaemenid court. However, little information is available from the music of that era. The music scene of the Sasanian Empire has a more available and detailed documentation than the earlier periods, and is especially more evident within the context of Zoroastrian musical rituals. Overall, Sasanian music was influential and was adopted in the subsequent eras.\nIranian music, as a whole, utilizes a variety of musical instruments that are unique to the region, and has remarkably evolved since the ancient and medieval times. In traditional Sasanian music, the octave was divided into seventeen tones. By the end of the 13th century, Iranian music also maintained a twelve-interval octave, which resembled the western counterparts.\nObservances.\nThe Iranian New Year's Day, Nowruz, which translates to \"new day\", is celebrated by Persians and other peoples of Iran to mark the beginning of spring on the vernal equinox on the first day of Farvardin, the first month of the Iranian calendar, which corresponds to around March 21 in the Gregorian calendar. An ancient tradition that has been preserved in Iran and several other countries that were under the influence of the ancient empires of Iran, Nowruz has been registered on UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists. In Iran, the Nowruz celebrations (incl. Charshanbe Suri and Sizdebedar) begin on the eve of the last Wednesday of the preceding year in the Iranian calendar and last on the 13th day of the new year. Islamic festivals are also widely celebrated by Muslim Persians.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24608", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24608", "title": "List of Polish painters", "text": "\"This is an alphabetical listing of Polish painters. This list is incomplete. If a notable Polish painter is , please add the name \"'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also* External links\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n * See also* External links"}
{"id": "24609", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24609", "title": "Peano postulates", "text": ""}
{"id": "24611", "revid": "41244038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24611", "title": "Pope Hilary", "text": ""}
{"id": "24612", "revid": "1315865455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24612", "title": "Procedural law", "text": "Sum of the legal norms in court procedures\nProcedural law, adjective law, in some jurisdictions referred to as remedial law, or rules of court, comprises the rules by which a court hears and determines what happens in civil, lawsuit, criminal or administrative proceedings. The rules are designed to ensure a fair and consistent application of due process (in the U.S.) or fundamental justice (in other common law countries) to all cases that come before a court.\nSubstantive law, which refers to the actual claim and defense whose validity is tested through the procedures of procedural law, is different from procedural law. In the context of procedural law, procedural rights may also refer not exhaustively to rights to information, access to justice, and right to counsel, rights to public participation, and right to confront accusers,\u00a0as well as the basic presumption of innocence (meaning the prosecution regularly must meet the burden of proof, although different jurisdictions have various exceptions), with those rights encompassing general civil and political rights. In environmental law, these procedural rights have been reflected within the UNECE Convention on \"Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters\" known as the Aarhus Convention (1998).\nLegal procedure.\nAlthough different legal processes aim to resolve many kinds of legal disputes, the legal procedures share some common features. All legal procedure, for example, is concerned with due process. Absent very special conditions, a court can not impose a penalty \u2014 civil or criminal \u2014 against an individual who has not received\nnotice of a lawsuit being brought against them, or who has not received a fair opportunity to present evidence for themselves.\nThe standardization for the means by which cases are brought, parties are informed, evidence is presented, and facts are determined is intended to maximize the fairness of any proceeding. Nevertheless, strict procedural rules have certain drawbacks. For example, they impose specific time limitations upon the parties that may either hasten or (more frequently) slow down the pace of proceedings. Furthermore, a party who is unfamiliar with procedural rules may run afoul of guidelines that have nothing to do with the merits of the case, and yet the failure to follow these guidelines may severely damage the party's chances. Procedural systems are constantly torn between arguments that judges should have greater discretion in order to avoid the rigidity of the rules, and arguments that judges should have less discretion in order to avoid an outcome based more on the personal preferences of the judge than on the law or the facts.\nLegal procedure, in a larger sense, is also designed to affect the best distribution of judicial resources. For example, in most courts of general jurisdiction in the United States, criminal cases are given priority over civil cases, because criminal defendants stand to lose their freedom, and should therefore be accorded the first opportunity to have their case heard.\nEuropean history and concepts.\nProcedural law and substantive law in various languages.\n\"Procedural law\" in contrast to \"substantive law\" is a concept available in various legal systems and languages. Similar to the English expressions are the Spanish words \"derecho adjetivo\" and \"derecho material\" or \"derecho sustantivo\", as well as the Portuguese terms for them, \"direito adjetivo\" and \"direito substantivo\". Other ideas are behind the German expressions \"formelles Recht\" (or \"Verfahrensrecht\") and \"materielles Recht\" as well as the French \"droit formel/droit mat\u00e9riel\", the Italian \"diritto formale/diritto materiale\" and the Swedish \"formell r\u00e4tt/materiell r\u00e4tt\"; all of which, taken literally, mean \"formal\" and \"material\" law.\nThe same opposition can be found in the Russian legal vocabulary, with \"\u043c\u0430\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0438\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\" for substantive law and \"\u043f\u0440\u043e\u0446\u0435\u0441\u0441\u0443\u0430\u043b\u044c\u043d\u043e\u0435 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\" for procedural. Similar to Russian, in Bulgarian \"\u043c\u0430\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0438\u0430\u043b\u043d\u043e \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\" means substantive law and \"\u043f\u0440\u043e\u0446\u0435\u0441\u0443\u0430\u043b\u043d\u043e \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u043e\" is used for procedural. In Chinese, \"procedural law\" and \"substantive law\" are represented by these characters: \"\u7a0b\u5e8f\u6cd5\" and \"\u5b9e\u4f53\u6cd5\". In Germany, the expressions \"formelles Recht\" and \"materielles Recht\" were developed in the 19th century, because only during that time was the Roman \"actio\" split into procedural and substantive components.\nSubstance of procedural law/substantive law in Europe.\nIn the European legal systems, the Roman law had been of great influence. In ancient times the Roman civil procedure applied to many countries. One of the main issues of the procedure has been the \"actio\" (similar to the English word \"act\"). In the procedure of the \"legis actiones\" the \"actio\" included both procedural and substantive elements. Because during this procedure the \"praetor\" had granted, or denied, litigation by granting or denying, respectively, an \"actio\". By granting the \"actio\" the \"praetor\" in the end has created claims. I.e. a procedural act caused substantive claims to exist. Such priority (procedure over substance) is contrary to what we think of the relationship nowadays. But it has not only been an issue of priority and whether the one serves the other. Since the \"actio\" had been composed of elements of procedure and substance it was difficult to separate both parts again.\nEven the scientific handling of law, which developed during medieval times in the new universities in Italy (in particular in Bologna, Mantua), did not come to a full and clear separation. The English system of \"writs\" in the Middle Ages had a similar problem to the Roman tradition with the \"actio\". In Germany, the unity of procedure and substance in the \"actio\" definitely was brought to an end with the codification of the \"B\u00fcrgerliches Gesetzbuch\" (BGB) which came into force on January 1, 1900. The expression \"Anspruch\" (\u00a7 194 of BGB) - meaning \"claim\" - has been \"cleared\" from procedural elements. And this was the time for \"founding\" the terms \"formelles / materielles Recht\". However, after World War II the expression \"formelles Recht\" was found to be \"contaminated\" and to a broad extent has been replaced by \"Prozessrecht\", narrowing the idea behind it to \"law of litigation\" (thereby excluding e.g. the law of other procedures and the law on competences).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24613", "revid": "49944770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24613", "title": "Pantoum", "text": "Malay verse form\nThe pantoum is a poetic form derived from the pantun, a Malay verse form: specifically from the \"pantun berkait\", a series of interwoven quatrains.\nStructure.\nThe pantoum is a form of poetry similar to a villanelle in that there are repeating lines throughout the poem. It is composed of a series of quatrains; the second and fourth lines of each stanza are repeated as the first and third lines of the next stanza. The pattern continues for any number of stanzas, except for the final stanza, which differs in the repeating pattern. The first and third lines of the last stanza are the second and fourth of the penultimate; the first line of the poem is the last line of the final stanza, and the third line of the first stanza is the second of the final. Ideally, the meaning of lines shifts when they are repeated although the words remain exactly the same: this can be done by shifting punctuation, punning, or simply recontextualizing.\nA four-stanza pantoum is common (although more may be used), and in the final stanza, lines one and three from the first stanza can be repeated, or new lines can be written. The pantoum form is as follows:\n&lt;poem&gt;Stanza 1\nA\nB\nC\nD\nStanza 2\nB\nE\nD\nF\nStanza 3\nE\nG\nF\nH\nStanza 4\nG\nI (or A or C)\nH\nJ (or A or C)&lt;/poem&gt;\nVerse forms.\nThe pantoum is derived from the \"pantun berkait\", a series of interwoven quatrains. An English translation of such a \"pantun berkait\" appeared in William Marsden's \"A Dictionary and Grammar of the Malayan Language\" in 1812. Victor Hugo published an unrhymed French version by Ernest Fouinet of this poem in the notes to \"Les Orientales\" (1829) and subsequent French poets began to make their own attempts at composing original \"pantoums\". Leconte de Lisle published five pantoums in his \"Po\u00e8mes tragiques\" (1884).\nThere is also the imperfect pantoum, in which the final stanza differs from the form stated above, and the second and fourth lines may be different from any preceding lines.\nBaudelaire's famous poem \"Harmonie du soir\" is usually cited as an example of the form, but it is irregular. The stanzas have rhyme scheme ABBA rather than the expected ABAB, and the last line, which is supposed to be the same as the first, is original.\nPoets.\nAmerican poets such as Clark Ashton Smith, John Ashbery, Marilyn Hacker, Donald Justice (\"Pantoum of the Great Depression\"), Carolyn Kizer, and David Trinidad have done work in this form, as has Irish poet Caitriona O'Reilly. \nThe December 2015 issue of First Things featured a pantoum by James Matthew Wilson, \"The Christmas Preface.\"\nMusic.\nClaude Debussy set Charles Baudelaire's \"Harmonie du soir\" in his \"Cinq po\u00e8mes de Charles Baudelaire\" in the form of a pantoum. Perhaps inspired by this setting, Maurice Ravel entitled the second movement of his Piano Trio, \"Pantoum (Assez vif)\". While Ravel never commented on the significance of the movement's title, Brian Newbould has suggested that the poetic form is reflected in the way the two themes are developed in alternation.\nNeil Peart used the form (with one difference from the format listed above) for the lyrics of \"The Larger Bowl (A Pantoum)\", the fourth track on Rush's 2007 album \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\", also released as a single.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24614", "revid": "50930098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24614", "title": "Pope Sylvester II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 999 to 1003\nPope Sylvester II (; c.\u2009946 \u2013 12 May 1003), originally known as Gerbert of Aurillac, was a scholar and teacher who served as the bishop of Rome and ruled the Papal States from 999 to his death. He endorsed and promoted study of Moorish and Greco-Roman arithmetic, mathematics and astronomy, reintroducing to Western Christendom the abacus, armillary sphere, and water organ, which had been lost to Latin Europe since the fall of the Western Roman Empire. He is said to be the first in Christian Europe (outside of Al-Andalus) to introduce the decimal numeral system using the Hindu\u2013Arabic numeral system.\nEarly life.\nGerbert was born about 946, or at any rate between 945 and 950. His exact birthplace is unknown, but it must have been in what was then the Duchy of Aquitaine, part of the Kingdom of France. More precise proposals include the town of Belliac, near the present-day commune of Saint-Simon, Cantal, or Aurillac. Another speculated location is the province of Auvergne. Gerbert's parents, wanting him to have a quality education, took him to receive instruction at the nearby Benedictine Abbey. Here, Gerbert became a pupil of a monk named Raimund, who admired his desire of knowledge and assisted him in his studies.\nAround 963, he entered the Monastery of St. Gerald of Aurillac. In 967, Count Borrell II of Barcelona (947\u2013992) visited the monastery, and the abbot asked the count to take Gerbert with him so that the lad could study mathematics in Catalonia and acquire there some knowledge of Arabic learning. While away from the monastery, Gerbert pursued studies in Barcelona, and also received Arabic instruction at Seville and C\u00f3rdoba.\nScholarly work.\nGerbert studied under the direction of Bishop Atto of Vich, some 60\u00a0km north of Barcelona, and probably also at the nearby Monastery of Santa Maria de Ripoll. Like all Catalan monasteries, it contained manuscripts from Muslim Spain and especially from C\u00f3rdoba, one of the intellectual centres of Europe at that time: the library of al-Hakam II, for example, had thousands of books (from science to Greek philosophy). This is where Gerbert was introduced to mathematics and astronomy. Borrell II was facing major defeat from the Andalusian powers so he sent a delegation to C\u00f3rdoba to request a truce. Bishop Atto was part of the delegation that met with al-\u1e24akam II, who received him with honour. Gerbert was fascinated by the stories of the Mozarab Christian bishops and judges who dressed and talked like the Moors, well-versed in mathematics and natural sciences like the great teachers of the Islamic madrasahs. This sparked Gerbert's veneration for the Moors and his passion for mathematics and astronomy.\nAbacus and numerals.\nGerbert learned of Hindu\u2013Arabic digits and applied this knowledge to the abacus, but probably without the numeral zero. According to the 12th-century historian William of Malmesbury, Gerbert got the idea of the computing device of the abacus from a Moorish scholar from University of Al-Qarawiyyin. The abacus that Gerbert reintroduced into Europe had its length divided into 27 parts with 9 number symbols (this would exclude zero, which was represented by an empty column) and 1,000 characters in all, crafted out of animal horn by a shieldmaker of Rheims. According to his pupil Richer, Gerbert could perform speedy calculations with his abacus that were extremely difficult for people in his day to think through using only Roman numerals. Due to Gerbert's reintroduction, the abacus became widely used in Europe once again during the 11th century.\nBernelinus of Paris, who was probably a pupil of Gerbert, wrote a book called the \"Liber Abaci\" (not to be confused with Fibonacci's \"Liber Abaci\") where he discussed the abacus' design. In this book, he individually introduced the \"Hindu-Arabic\" symbols the abacus used and related them to the more common Latin numerical nouns. Bernelinus' \"Liber Abaci\" has survived in 11 manuscripts from the 11th and 12th centuries. In two of them, probably the oldest ones, the number 3 is reproduced in a form that differs from the other manuscripts. This symbol is reminiscent of the \"Tironian note\" for the Latin word \"ter\" from the Roman shorthand. The reason for this is not known, but it is speculated that Bernelinus did not want to use an \"unbeliever\" symbol to indicate the number that represents the Holy Trinity.\nArmillary sphere and sighting tube.\nAlthough lost to Europe since the terminus of the Greco-Roman era, Gerbert reintroduced the astronomical armillary sphere to Latin Europe via the Islamic civilization of Al-Andalus, which was at that time at the \"cutting edge\" of civilization. The details of Gerbert's armillary sphere are revealed in letters from Gerbert to his former student and monk Remi of Tr\u00e8ves and to his colleague Constantine, the abbot of Micy, as well as the accounts of his former student and French nobleman Richer, who served as a monk in Rheims. Richer stated that Gerbert discovered that stars coursed in an oblique direction across the night sky. Richer described Gerbert's use of the armillary sphere as a visual aid for teaching mathematics and astronomy in the classroom.\nHistorian Oscar G. Darlington asserts that Gerbert's division by 60 degrees instead of 360 allowed the lateral lines of his sphere to equal to six degrees. By this account, the polar circle on Gerbert's sphere was located at 54 degrees, several degrees off from the actual 66\u00b0 33'. His positioning of the Tropic of Cancer at 24 degree was nearly exact, while his positioning of the equator was correct by definition. Richer also revealed how Gerbert made the planets more easily observable in his armillary sphere:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He succeeded equally in showing the paths of the planets when they come near or withdraw from the earth. He fashioned first an armillary sphere. He joined the two circles called by the Greeks \"coluri\" and by the Latins \"incidentes\" because they fell upon each other, and at their extremities he placed the poles. He drew with great art and accuracy, across the \"colures\", five other circles called parallels, which, from one pole to the other, divided the half of the sphere into thirty parts. He put six of these thirty parts of the half-sphere between the pole and the first circle; five between the first and the second; from the second to the third, four; from the third to the fourth, four again; five from the fourth to the fifth; and from the fifth to the pole, six. On these five circles he placed obliquely the circles that the Greeks call \"loxos\" or \"zoe\", the Latins \"obliques\" or \"vitalis\" (the zodiac) because it contained the figures of the animals ascribed to the planets. On the inside of this oblique circle he figured with an extraordinary art the orbits traversed by the planets, whose paths and heights he demonstrated perfectly to his pupils, as well as their respective distances.\nRicher wrote about another of Gerbert's last armillary spheres, which had sighting tubes fixed on the axis of the hollow sphere that could observe the constellations, the forms of which he hung on iron and copper wires. This armillary sphere was also described by Gerbert in a letter to his colleague Constantine. Gerbert instructed Constantine that, if doubtful of the position of the pole star, he should fix the sighting tube of the armillary sphere into position to view the star he suspected was it, and if the star did not move out of sight, it was thus the pole star. Furthermore, Gerbert instructed Constantine that the north pole could be measured with the upper and lower sighting tubes, the Arctic Circle through another tube, the Tropic of Cancer through another tube, the equator through another tube, and the Tropic of Capricorn through another tube.\nScientific library.\nIn late 984, Gerbert sent a letter to abbot Eberhard of Tours concerning the foundation of a large scientific library. He dedicated immense sums of money to establishing the library and purchasing texts from a wide variety of western European authors. He wrote to many monks and abbots in Europe requesting classical literature from their monasteries. Gerbert was also able to acquire some work from earlier era authors such as Cicero and Statius. Two specific requests Gerbert made that documentation exists for are letters sent to Lupitus of Barcelona and Bishop Mir\u00f3 Bonfill of Girona, asking the former for an astrology book and the latter for an arithmetic book. It can be inferred from this that the library contained many volumes of books covering a wide variety of topics, but the exact size and influence the library had is seemingly unknown.\nEcclesiastical career.\nIn 969, Borrell II made a pilgrimage to Rome, taking Gerbert with him. There Gerbert met Pope John XIII and Emperor Otto I. The pope persuaded Otto I to employ Gerbert as a tutor for his young son, Otto II. Some years later, Otto I gave Gerbert leave to study at the cathedral school of Rheims where he was soon appointed a teacher by Archbishop Adalberon in 973. He remained in this position until 989, with the only gap being his time as the head of the monastery of Bobbio from 981 to 983. When Otto II became sole emperor in 973, he appointed Gerbert the abbot of the monastery of Bobbio and also appointed him as count of the district, but the abbey had been ruined by previous abbots, and Gerbert soon returned to Rheims. After the death of Otto II in 983, Gerbert became involved in the politics of his time. In 985, with the support of his archbishop, he opposed King Lothair of France's attempt to take Lorraine from Emperor Otto III by supporting Hugh Capet. Hugh became king of France, ending the Carolingian line of kings in 987.\nAdalberon died on 23 January 989. Gerbert was a natural candidate for his succession, but King Hugh appointed Arnulf, an illegitimate son of King Lothair, instead. Arnulf was deposed in 991 for alleged treason against Hugh, and Gerbert was elected his successor. There was so much opposition to Gerbert's elevation to the See of Rheims, however, that Pope John XV (985\u2013996) sent a legate to France who temporarily suspended Gerbert from his episcopal office. Gerbert sought to show that this decree was unlawful, but a further synod in 995 declared Arnulf's deposition invalid. Gerbert then became the teacher of Otto III, and Pope Gregory V (996\u2013999), Otto III's cousin, appointed him archbishop of Ravenna in 998.\nWith imperial support, Gerbert was elected to succeed Gregory V as pope in 999. Gerbert took the name of Sylvester II, alluding to Sylvester I (314\u2013335), the advisor to Emperor Constantine I (324\u2013337). Soon after he became pope, Sylvester II confirmed the position of his former rival Arnulf as archbishop of Rheims. As pope, he took energetic measures against the widespread practices of simony and concubinage among the clergy, maintaining that only capable men of spotless lives should be allowed to become bishops. In 1001, the Roman populace revolted, forcing Otto III and Sylvester II to flee to Ravenna. Otto III led two unsuccessful expeditions to regain control of the city and died on a third expedition in 1002. Sylvester II returned to Rome soon after the emperor's death, although the rebellious nobility remained in power, and he died a little later. Sylvester is buried in St. John Lateran.\nLegacy.\nGerbert of Aurillac was a noted humanist. He read Virgil, Cicero and Boethius; he studied Latin translations of Porphyry and Aristotle. He had a very accurate classification of the different disciplines of philosophy. He was the first French pope.\nGerbert was said to be one of the most noted scientists of his time. Gerbert wrote a series of works dealing with matters of the quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, music), which he taught using the basis of the trivium (grammar, logic, and rhetoric). In Rheims, he constructed a hydraulic-powered organ with brass pipes that excelled all previously known instruments, where the air had to be pumped manually. In a letter of 984, Gerbert asks Lupitus of Barcelona for a book on astrology and astronomy, two terms historian S. Jim Tester says Gerbert used synonymously. Gerbert is sometimes credited with the invention of the first mechanical clock in 996, though it was perhaps only an elaborate water clock, as the verge and foliot does not appear to have been invented until the 13th century. Gerbert may have been the author of a description of the astrolabe that was edited by Hermannus Contractus some 50 years later. Besides these, as Sylvester II he wrote a dogmatic treatise, \"De corpore et sanguine Domini\"\u2014On the Body and Blood of the Lord.\nLegends.\nThe legend of Gerbert grows from the work of the English monk William of Malmesbury in \"De Rebus Gestis Regum Anglorum\" and a polemical pamphlet, \"Gesta Romanae Ecclesiae contra Hildebrandum\", by Cardinal Beno, a partisan of Emperor Henry IV who opposed Pope Gregory VII in the Investiture Controversy. According to the legend, Gerbert traveled to Spain in order to further his knowledge of the lawful arts, as defined by the quadrivium. Gerbert quickly became more knowledgeable than anyone around him in mathematics, astronomy, and astrology. This is the point in William of Malmesbury's testimony where Gerbert is said to have begun learning the dark arts. During Gerbert's time in Spain, he was said to live with a Saracen philosopher, who was responsible for giving this knowledge to Sylvester. This knowledge was first obtained through using money and promises as bartering chips for the philosoper's books, which Gerbert translated and learned from. Despite his efforts, there was one book that Gerbert was not able to coax from the philosopher. This book was said to contain all of the knowledge the Saracen philosopher had on the dark arts. After resorting to using wine, and intimacy with his daughter, Gerbert was able to steal the book from under the philosopher's pillow while he slept. Gerbert fled, pursued by the victim, who could trace the thief by the stars, but Gerbert was aware of the pursuit, and hid hanging from a wooden bridge, where, suspended between heaven and earth, he was invisible to the magician.\nGerbert was supposed to have built a brazen head. This \"robotic\" head would answer his questions with \"yes\" or \"no\". He was also reputed to have had a pact with a female demon called Meridiana, who had appeared after he had been rejected by his earthly love, and with whose help he managed to ascend to the papal throne (another legend tells that he won the papacy playing dice with the Devil).\nAccording to the legend, Meridiana (or the bronze head) told Gerbert that if he should ever read a Mass in Jerusalem, the Devil would come for him. Gerbert then cancelled a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, but when he read Mass in the church Santa Croce in Gerusalemme (\"Holy Cross of Jerusalem\") in Rome, he became sick soon afterwards and, dying, he asked his cardinals to cut up his body and scatter it across the city. In another version, he was even attacked by the Devil while he was reading the Mass, and the Devil mutilated him and gave his gouged-out eyes to demons to play with in the Church. Repenting, Sylvester II then cut off his hand and his tongue.\nThe inscription on Gerbert's tomb reads in part (\"This place will yield to the sound [of the last trumpet] the limbs of buried Sylvester II, at the advent of the Lord\", mis-read as \"will make a sound\") and has given rise to the curious legend that his bones will rattle in that tomb just before the death of a pope.\nThe story of the crown and papal legate authority allegedly given to Stephen I of Hungary by Sylvester in the year 1000 (hence the title 'apostolic king') is noted by the 19th-century historian Lewis L. Kropf as a possible forgery of the 17th century. Likewise, the 20th-century historian Zoltan J. Kosztolnyik states that \"it seems more than unlikely that Rome would have acted in fulfilling Stephen's request for a crown without the support and approval of the emperor.\"\nThough the testimony of William of Malmesbury did much to discredit and defame Gerbert, there were many important intellectual distinctions made from it. For example, the legend of Gerbert of Aurilac's talking head helped to describe the line between prohibited and permitted knowledge. Gerbert did work in music theory, mathematics, geometry, and several other fields accepted and taught in the quadrivium. All of the works he did related to these subjects were not brought into question and were accepted as well as appreciated. But works done outside of the accepted liberal arts was condemned, including things learned from bird's songs and flight patterns, as well as the necromancy he was rumored to have taken part in.\nHonours.\nHungary issued a commemorative stamp honouring Pope Sylvester II on 1 January 1938, and France honoured him in 1964 by issuing a postage stamp.\nWorks.\nGerbert's writings were printed in volume 139 of the \"Patrologia Latina\". Darlington notes that Gerbert's preservation of his letters might have been an effort of his to compile them into a textbook for his pupils that would illustrate proper letter writing. His books on mathematics and astronomy were not research-oriented; his texts were primarily educational guides for his students.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24616", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24616", "title": "Paraphilias", "text": ""}
{"id": "24618", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24618", "title": "Porpoises", "text": ""}
{"id": "24619", "revid": "33860665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24619", "title": "Pottery", "text": "Craft of making objects from clay\nPottery is the process and the products of forming vessels and other objects with clay and other raw materials, which are fired at high temperatures to give them a hard and durable form. The place where such wares are made by a \"potter\" is also called a \"pottery\" (plural \"potteries\"). The definition of \"pottery\", used by the ASTM International, is \"all fired ceramic wares that contain clay when formed, except technical, structural, and refractory products\". End applications include tableware, decorative ware, sanitary ware, and in technology and industry such as electrical insulators and laboratory ware. In art history and archaeology, especially of ancient and prehistoric periods, pottery often means only vessels, and sculpted figurines of the same material are called terracottas. \nPottery is one of the oldest human inventions, originating before the Neolithic period, with ceramic objects such as the Gravettian culture Venus of Doln\u00ed V\u011bstonice figurine discovered in the Czech Republic dating back to 29,000\u201325,000 BC. However, the earliest known pottery vessels were discovered in Jiangxi, China, which date back to 18,000 BC. Other early Neolithic and pre-Neolithic pottery artifacts have been found, in J\u014dmon Japan (10,500 BC), the Russian Far East (14,000 BC), Sub-Saharan Africa (9,400 BC), South America (9,000s\u20137,000s BC), and the Middle East (7,000s\u20136,000s BC).\nPottery is made by forming a clay body into objects of a desired shape and heating them to high temperatures (600\u20131600\u00a0\u00b0C) in a bonfire, pit or kiln, which induces reactions that lead to permanent changes including increasing the strength and rigidity of the object. Much pottery is purely utilitarian, but some can also be regarded as ceramic art. An article can be decorated before or after firing.\nPottery is traditionally divided into three types: earthenware, stoneware and porcelain. All three may be glazed and unglazed. All may also be decorated by various techniques. In many examples the group a piece belongs to is immediately visually apparent, but this is not always the case; for example fritware uses no or little clay, so falls outside these groups. Historic pottery of all these types is often grouped as either \"fine\" wares, relatively expensive and well-made, and following the aesthetic taste of the culture concerned, or alternatively \"coarse\", \"popular\", \"folk\" or \"village\" wares, mostly undecorated, or, and often less well-made.\nCooking in pottery became less popular once metal pots became available, but is still used for dishes that benefit from the qualities of pottery cooking, typically slow cooking in an oven, such as biryani, cassoulet, daube, tagine, jollof rice, kedjenou, cazuela and types of baked beans.\nMain types.\nEarthenware.\nThe earliest forms of pottery were made from clays that were fired at low temperatures, initially in pit-fires or in open bonfires. They were hand formed and undecorated. Earthenware can be fired as low as 600\u00a0\u00b0C, and is normally fired below 1200\u00a0\u00b0C. \nBecause unglazed earthenware is porous, it has limited utility for the storage of liquids or as tableware. However, earthenware has had a continuous history from the Neolithic period to today. It can be made from a wide variety of clays, some of which fire to a buff, brown or black colour, with iron in the constituent minerals resulting in a reddish-brown. Reddish coloured varieties are called terracotta, especially when unglazed or used for sculpture. The development of ceramic glaze made impermeable pottery possible, improving the popularity and practicality of pottery vessels. Decoration has evolved and developed through history.\nStoneware.\nStoneware is pottery that has been fired in a kiln at a relatively high temperature, from about 1,100\u00a0\u00b0C to 1,200\u00a0\u00b0C, and is stronger and non-porous to liquids. The Chinese, who developed stoneware very early on, classify this together with porcelain as high-fired wares. In contrast, stoneware could only be produced in Europe from the late Middle Ages, as European kilns were less efficient, and the right type of clay less common. It remained a speciality of Germany until the Renaissance.\nStoneware is very tough and practical, and much of it has always been utilitarian, for the kitchen or storage rather than the table. But \"fine\" stoneware has been important in China, Japan and the West, and continues to be made. Many utilitarian types have also come to be appreciated as art.\nPorcelain.\nPorcelain is made by heating materials, generally including kaolin, in a kiln to temperatures between . This is higher than used for the other types, and achieving these temperatures was a long struggle, as well as realizing what materials were needed. The toughness, strength and translucence of porcelain, relative to other types of pottery, arises mainly from vitrification and the formation of the mineral mullite within the body at these high temperatures.\nAlthough porcelain was first made in China, the Chinese traditionally do not recognise it as a distinct category, grouping it with stoneware as \"high-fired\" ware, opposed to \"low-fired\" earthenware. This confuses the issue of when it was first made. A degree of translucency and whiteness was achieved by the Tang dynasty (AD 618\u2013906), and considerable quantities were being exported. The modern level of whiteness was not reached until much later, in the 14th century. Porcelain was also made in Korea and in Japan from the end of the 16th century, after suitable kaolin was located in those countries. It was not made effectively outside East Asia until the 18th century.\nArchaeology.\nThe study of pottery can help to provide an insight into past cultures. Fabric analysis (see section below), used to analyse the fabric of pottery, is important part of archaeology for understanding the archaeological culture of the excavated site by studying the fabric of artifacts, such as their usage, source material composition, decorative pattern, color of patterns, etc. This helps to understand characteristics, sophistication, habits, technology, tools, trade, etc. of the people who made and used the pottery. Carbon dating reveals the age. Sites with similar pottery characteristics have the same culture, those sites which have distinct cultural characteristics but with some overlap are indicative of cultural exchange such as trade or living in vicinity or continuity of habitation, etc. Examples are black and red ware, redware, Sothi-Siswal culture and Painted Grey Ware culture. The six fabrics of Kalibangan is a good example of use of fabric analysis in identifying a differentiated culture which was earlier thought to be typical Indus Valley civilisation (IVC) culture.\nPottery is durable, and fragments, at least, often survive long after artifacts made from less-durable materials have decayed past recognition. Combined with other evidence, the study of pottery artefacts is helpful in the development of theories on the organisation, economic condition and the cultural development of the societies that produced or acquired pottery. The study of pottery may also allow inferences to be drawn about a culture's daily life, religion, social relationships, attitudes towards neighbours, attitudes to their own world and even the way the culture understood the universe.\nIt is valuable to look into pottery as an archaeological record of potential interaction between peoples. When pottery is placed within the context of linguistic and migratory patterns, it becomes an even more prevalent category of social artifact. As proposed by Olivier P. Gosselain, it is possible to understand ranges of cross-cultural interaction by looking closely at the \"cha\u00eene op\u00e9ratoire\" of ceramic production.\nThe methods used to produce pottery in early Sub-Saharan Africa are divisible into three categories: techniques visible to the eye (decoration, firing and post-firing techniques), techniques related to the materials (selection or processing of clay, etc.), and techniques of molding or fashioning the clay. These three categories can be used to consider the implications of the reoccurrence of a particular sort of pottery in different areas. Generally, the techniques that are easily visible (the first category of those mentioned above) are thus readily imitated, and may indicate a more distant connection between groups, such as trade in the same market or even relatively close settlements. Techniques that require more studied replication (i.e., the selection of clay and the fashioning of clay) may indicate a closer connection between peoples, as these methods are usually only transmissible between potters and those otherwise directly involved in production. Such a relationship requires the ability of the involved parties to communicate effectively, implying pre-existing norms of contact or a shared language between the two. Thus, the patterns of technical diffusion in pot-making that are visible via archaeological findings also reveal patterns in societal interaction.\nChronologies based on pottery are often essential for dating non-literate cultures and are often of help in the dating of historic cultures as well. Trace-element analysis, mostly by neutron activation, allows the sources of clay to be accurately identified and the thermoluminescence test can be used to provide an estimate of the date of last firing. Examining sherds from prehistory, scientists learned that during high-temperature firing, iron materials in clay record the state of the Earth's magnetic field at that moment.\nFabric analysis.\nThe \"clay body\" is also called the \"paste\" or the \"fabric\", which consists of 2 things, the \"clay matrix\" \u2013 composed of grains of less than 0.02\u00a0mm grains which can be seen using the high-powered microscopes or a scanning electron microscope, and the \"clay inclusions\" \u2013 which are larger grains of clay and could be seen with the naked eye or a low-power binocular microscope. For geologists, fabric analysis means spatial arrangement of minerals in a rock. For Archaeologists, the \"fabric analysis\" of pottery entails the study of \"clay matrix\" and \"inclusions\" in the clay body as well as the \"firing temperature and conditions\". Analysis is done to examine the following 3 in detail:\nThe Six fabrics of Kalibangan is a good example of fabric analysis.\nClay bodies and raw materials.\nBody, or clay body, is the material used to form pottery. Thus a potter might prepare, or order from a supplier, such an amount of earthenware body, stoneware body or porcelain body. The compositions of clay bodies varies considerably, and include both prepared and 'as dug'; the former being by far the dominant type for studio and industry. The properties also vary considerably, and include plasticity and mechanical strength before firing; the firing temperature needed to mature them; properties after firing, such as permeability, mechanical strength and colour.\nThere can be regional variations in the properties of raw materials used for pottery, and these can lead to wares that are unique in character to a locality.\nThe main ingredient of the body is clay. Some different types used for pottery include:\nIt is common for clays and other raw materials to be mixed to produce clay bodies suited to specific purposes. Various mineral processing techniques are often utilised before mixing the raw materials, with comminution being effectively universal for non-clay materials.\nExamples of non-clay materials include:\nProduction.\nThe production of pottery includes the following stages:\nShaping.\nBefore being shaped, clay must be prepared. This may include kneading to ensure an even moisture content throughout the body. Air trapped within the clay body needs to be removed, or de-aired, and can be accomplished either by a machine called a vacuum pug or manually by wedging. Wedging can also help produce an even moisture content. Once a clay body has been kneaded and de-aired or wedged, it is shaped by a variety of techniques, which include:\nDrying.\nPrior to firing, the water in an article needs to be removed. A number of different stages, or conditions of the article, can be identified:\nFiring.\nFiring produces permanent and irreversible chemical and physical changes in the body. It is only after firing that the article or material is pottery. In lower-fired pottery, the changes include sintering, the fusing together of coarser particles in the body at their points of contact with each other. In the case of porcelain, where higher firing-temperatures are used, the physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of the constituents in the body are greatly altered. In all cases, the reason for firing is to permanently harden the wares, and the firing regime must be appropriate to the materials used.\nTemperature.\nAs a rough guide, modern earthenwares are normally fired at temperatures in the range of about to ; stonewares at between about to ; and porcelains at between about to . Historically, reaching high temperatures was a long-lasting challenge, and earthenware can be fired effectively as low as , achievable in primitive pit firing. The time spent at any particular temperature is also important, the combination of heat and time is known as heatwork.\nKilns can be monitored by pyrometers, thermocouples and pyrometric devices.\nAtmosphere.\nThe atmosphere within a kiln during firing can affect the appearance of the body and glaze. Key to this is the differing colours of the various oxides of iron, such as iron(III) oxide (also known as ferric oxide or Fe2O3) which is associated with brown-red colours, whilst iron(II) oxide (also known as ferrous oxide or FeO) is associated with much darker colours, including black. The oxygen concentration in the kiln influences the type, and relative proportions, of these iron oxides in fired the body and glaze: for example, where there is a lack of oxygen during firing the associated carbon monoxide (CO) will readily react with oxygen in Fe2O3 in the raw materials and cause it to be reduced to FeO.\nAn oxygen deficient condition, called a reducing atmosphere, is generated by preventing the complete combustion of the kiln fuel; this is achieved by deliberately restricting the supply of air or by supplying an excess of fuel.\nMethods.\nFiring pottery can be done using a variety of methods, with a kiln being the usual firing method. Both the maximum temperature and the duration of firing influences the final characteristics of the ceramic. Thus, the maximum temperature within a kiln is often held constant for a period of time to \"soak\" the wares to produce the maturity required in the body of the wares.\nKilns may be heated by burning combustible materials, such as wood, coal and gas, or by electricity. The use of microwave energy has been investigated.\nWhen used as fuels, coal and wood can introduce smoke, soot and ash into the kiln which can affect the appearance of unprotected wares. For this reason, wares fired in wood- or coal-fired kilns are often placed in the kiln in saggars, ceramic boxes, to protect them. Modern kilns fuelled by gas or electricity are cleaner and more easily controlled than older wood- or coal-fired kilns and often allow shorter firing times to be used.\nNiche techniques include:\nDecorating.\nPottery may be decorated in many different ways. Some decoration can be done before or after the firing, and may be undertaken before or after glazing.\nGlazing.\nGlaze is a glassy coating on pottery, and reasons to use it include decoration, ensuring the item is impermeable to liquids, and minimizing the adherence of pollutants.\nGlaze may be applied by spraying, dipping, trailing or brushing on an aqueous suspension of the unfired glaze. The colour of a glaze after it has been fired may be significantly different from before firing. To prevent glazed wares sticking to kiln furniture during firing, either a small part of the object being fired (for example, the foot) is left unglazed or, alternatively, special refractory \"spurs\"\" are used as supports. These are removed and discarded after the firing.\nSome specialised glazing techniques include:\nHealth and environmental issues.\nAlthough many of the environmental effects of pottery production have existed for millennia, some of these have been amplified with modern technology and scales of production. The principal factors for consideration fall into two categories:\nHistorically, lead poisoning (\"plumbism\") was a significant health concern to those glazing pottery. This was recognised at least as early as the nineteenth century. The first legislation in the UK to limit pottery workers exposure to lead was included in the Factories Act Extension Act in 1864, with further introduced in 1899.\nSilicosis is an occupational lung disease caused by inhaling large amounts of crystalline silica dust, usually over many years. Workers in the ceramic industry can develop it due to exposure to silica dust in the raw materials; colloquially it has been known as 'Potter's rot'. Less than 10 years after its introduction, in 1720, as a raw material to the British ceramics industry the negative effects of calcined flint on the lungs of workers had been noted. In one study reported in 2022, of 106 UK pottery workers 55 per cent had at least some stage of silicosis. Exposure to siliceous dusts is reduced by either processing and using the source materials as aqueous suspension or as damp solids, or by the use of dust control measures such as local exhaust ventilation. These have been mandated by legislation, such as \"The Pottery (Health and Welfare) Special Regulations 1950\" in the UK. The Health and Safety Executive in the UK has produced guidelines on controlling exposure to respirable crystalline silica in potteries, and the British Ceramics Federation provide a guidance booklet.\nEnvironmental concerns include off-site water pollution, air pollution, disposal of hazardous materials, disposal of rejected ware and fuel consumption.\nHistory.\nA great part of the history of pottery is prehistoric, part of past pre-literate cultures. Therefore, much of this history can only be found among the artifacts of archaeology. Because pottery is so durable, pottery and shards of pottery survive for millennia at archaeological sites, and are typically the most common and important type of artifact to survive. Many prehistoric cultures are named after the pottery that is the easiest way to identify their sites, and archaeologists develop the ability to recognise different types from the chemistry of small shards.\nBefore pottery becomes part of a culture, several conditions must generally be met.\nHistory by region.\nBeginnings of pottery.\nPottery may well have been discovered independently in various places, probably by accidentally creating it at the bottom of fires on a clay soil. The earliest-known ceramic objects are Gravettian figurines such as those discovered at Doln\u00ed V\u011bstonice in the modern-day Czech Republic. The Venus of Doln\u00ed V\u011bstonice is a Venus figurine, a statuette of a nude female figure dated to 29,000\u201325,000 BC (Gravettian industry). But there is no evidence of pottery vessels from this period. Weights for looms or fishing-nets are a very common use for the earliest pottery. Sherds have been found in China and Japan from a period between 12,000 and perhaps as long as 18,000 years ago. As of 2012, the earliest pottery vessels found anywhere in the world, dating to 20,000 to 19,000 years before the present, was found at Xianren Cave in the Jiangxi province of China.\nOther early pottery vessels include those excavated from the Yuchanyan Cave in southern China, dated from 16,000 BC, and those found in the Amur River basin in the Russian Far East, dated from 14,000 BC.\nThe Odai Yamamoto I site, belonging to the J\u014dmon period, currently has the oldest pottery in Japan. Excavations in 1998 uncovered earthenware fragments which have been dated as early as 14,500 BC.\nThe term \"J\u014dmon\" means \"cord-marked\" in Japanese. This refers to the markings made on the vessels and figures using sticks with cords during their production. Recent research has elucidated how J\u014dmon pottery was used by its creators.\nIt appears that pottery was independently developed in Sub-Saharan Africa during the 10th millennium BC, with findings dating to at least 9,400 BC from central Mali, and in South America during the 9,000s\u20137,000s BC. The Malian finds date to the same period as similar finds from East Asia \u2013 the triangle between Siberia, China and Japan \u2013 and are associated in both regions to the same climatic changes (at the end of the ice age new grassland develops, enabling hunter-gatherers to expand their habitat), met independently by both cultures with similar developments: the creation of pottery for the storage of wild cereals (pearl millet), and that of small arrowheads for hunting small game typical of grassland. Alternatively, the creation of pottery in the case of the Incipient J\u014dmon civilisation could be due to the intensive exploitation of freshwater and marine organisms by late glacial foragers, who started developing ceramic containers for their catch.\nEast Asia.\nIn Japan, the J\u014dmon period has a long history of development of J\u014dmon pottery which was characterized by impressions of rope on the surface of the pottery created by pressing rope into the clay before firing. Glazed Stoneware was being created as early as the 15th century BC in China. A form of Chinese porcelain became a significant Chinese export from the Tang dynasty (AD 618\u2013906) onwards. Korean potters adopted porcelain as early as the 14th century AD. The ceramic industry has developed greatly since the Goryeo dynasty, and Goryeo ware, a celadon with unique inlaying techniques, was produced. Later, when white porcelain became common and celadon fell, they created unique ceramics such as Buncheong. Japan's white porcelain was influenced by potters kidnapped during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592\u20131598), called The Ceramic Wars, and Japanese engineers introduced it during the Fall of the Ming dynasty's. Typically, Korean potters who settled in Arita pass on pottery techniques, Shonzui Goradoyu-go brought back the secret of its manufacture from the Chinese kilns at Jingdezhen.\nIn contrast to Europe, the Chinese social elite used pottery extensively at table, for religious purposes, and for decoration, and the standards of fine pottery were very high. From the Song dynasty (960\u20131279) for several centuries, the tastes of Chinese elites favoured plain-coloured and exquisitely formed pieces; during this period porcelain was perfected in Ding ware, although it was the only one of the Five Great Kilns of the Song period to use it. The traditional Chinese category of high-fired wares includes stoneware types such as Ru ware, Longquan celadon and Guan ware. Painted wares such as Cizhou ware had a lower status, though they were acceptable for making pillows.\nThe arrival of Chinese blue and white porcelain was probably a product of the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) dispersing artists and craftsmen across its large empire. Both the cobalt stains used for the blue colour, and the style of painted decoration, usually based on plant shapes, were initially borrowed from the Islamic world, which the Mongols had also conquered. At the same time Jingdezhen porcelain, produced in Imperial factories, took the undisputed leading role in production. The new elaborately painted style was now favoured at court, and gradually more colours were added.\nThe secret of making such porcelain was sought in the Islamic world and later in Europe when examples were imported from the East. Many attempts were made to imitate it in Italy and France. However it was not produced outside of East Asia until 1709 in Germany.\nSouth Asia.\nCord-Impressed style pottery belongs to \"Mesolithic\" ceramic tradition that developed among Vindhya hunter-gatherers in Central India during the Mesolithic period. This ceramic style is also found in later Proto-Neolithic phase in nearby regions. This early type of pottery, also found at the site of Lahuradewa, is currently the oldest known pottery tradition in South Asia, dating back to 7,000\u20136,000 BC. Wheel-made pottery began to be made during the Mehrgarh Period II (5,500\u20134,800 BC) and Merhgarh Period III (4,800\u20133,500 BC), known as the ceramic Neolithic and Chalcolithic. Pottery, including items known as the ed-Dur vessels, originated in regions of the Saraswati River / Indus River and have been found in a number of sites in the Indus Civilization.\nDespite an extensive prehistoric record of pottery, including painted wares, little \"fine\" or luxury pottery was made in the subcontinent in historic times. Hinduism discourages eating off pottery, which probably largely accounts for this. Most traditional Indian pottery vessels are large pots or jars for storage, or small cups or lamps, occasionally treated as disposable. In contrast there are long traditions of sculpted figures, often rather large, in terracotta; this continues with the Bankura horses in Panchmura, West Bengal.\nSoutheast Asia.\nPottery in Southeast Asia is as diverse as its ethnic groups. Each ethnic group has their own set of standards when it comes to pottery arts. Potteries are made due to various reasons, such as trade, food and beverage storage, kitchen usage, religious ceremonies, and burial purposes.\nWest Asia.\nAround 8000 BC during the Pre-pottery Neolithic period, and before the invention of pottery, several early settlements became experts in crafting beautiful and highly sophisticated containers from stone, using materials such as alabaster or granite, and employing sand to shape and polish. Artisans used the veins in the material to maximum visual effect. Such objects have been found in abundance on the upper Euphrates river, in what is today eastern Syria, especially at the site of Bouqras.\nThe earliest history of pottery production in the Fertile Crescent starts the Pottery Neolithic and can be divided into four periods, namely: the Hassuna period (7000\u20136500 BC), the Halaf period (6500\u20135500 BC), the Ubaid period (5500\u20134000 BC), and the Uruk period (4000\u20133100 BC). By about 5000 BC pottery-making was becoming widespread across the region, and spreading out from it to neighbouring areas.\nPottery making began in the 7th millennium BC. The earliest forms, which were found at the Hassuna site, were hand formed from slabs, undecorated, unglazed low-fired pots made from reddish-brown clays. Within the next millennium, wares were decorated with elaborate painted designs and natural forms, incising and burnished.\nThe invention of the potter's wheel in Mesopotamia sometime between 6,000 and 4,000 BC (Ubaid period) revolutionised pottery production. Newer kiln designs could fire wares to to which enabled increased possibilities. Production was now carried out by small groups of potters for small cities, rather than individuals making wares for a family. The shapes and range of uses for ceramics and pottery expanded beyond simple vessels to store and carry to specialized cooking utensils, pot stands and rat traps. As the region developed new organizations and political forms, pottery became more elaborate and varied. Some wares were made using moulds, allowing for increased production for the needs of the growing populations. Glazing was commonly used and pottery was more decorated.\nIn the Chalcolithic period in Mesopotamia, Halafian pottery achieved a level of technical competence and sophistication, not seen until the later developments of Greek pottery with Corinthian and Attic ware.\nEurope.\nEurope's oldest pottery, dating from circa 6700 BC, was found on the banks of the Samara River in the middle Volga region of Russia. These sites are known as the Yelshanka culture.\nThe early inhabitants of Europe developed pottery in the Linear Pottery culture slightly later than the Near East, circa 5500\u20134500 BC. In the ancient Western Mediterranean elaborately painted earthenware reached very high levels of artistic achievement in the Greek world; there are large numbers of survivals from tombs. Minoan pottery was characterized by complex painted decoration with natural themes. The classical Greek culture began to emerge around 1000 BC featuring a variety of well crafted pottery which now included the human form as a decorating motif. The pottery wheel was now in regular use. Although glazing was known to these potters, it was not widely used. Instead, a more porous clay slip was used for decoration. A wide range of shapes for different uses developed early and remained essentially unchanged during Greek history.\nFine Etruscan pottery was heavily influenced by Greek pottery and often imported Greek potters and painters. Ancient Roman pottery made much less use of painting, but used moulded decoration, allowing industrialized production on a huge scale. Much of the so-called red Samian ware of the Early Roman Empire was produced in modern Germany and France, where entrepreneurs established large potteries. Excavations at Augusta Raurica, near Basel, Switzerland, have revealed a pottery production site in use from the 1st to the 4th century AD. \nPottery was hardly seen on the tables of elites from Hellenistic times until the Renaissance, and most medieval wares were coarse and utilitarian, as the elites ate off metal vessels. Painted Hispano-Moresque ware from Spain, developing the styles of Al-Andalus, became a luxury for late medieval elites, and was adapted in Italy into \"maiolica\" in the Italian Renaissance. Both of these were faience or tin-glazed earthenware, and fine faience continued to be made until around 1800 in various countries, especially France, with Nevers faience and several other centres. In the 17th century, imports of Chinese export porcelain and its Japanese equivalent raised the market \nexpectations of fine pottery, and European manufacturers eventually learned to make porcelain, often in the form of soft-paste porcelain, and from the 18th century European porcelain and other wares from a great number of producers became extremely popular, reducing Asian imports.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe city of Stoke-on-Trent is widely known as \"The Potteries\" because of the large number of pottery factories or, colloquially, \"Pot Banks\". It was one of the first industrial cities of the modern era where, as early as 1785, two hundred pottery manufacturers employed 20,000 workers. Josiah Wedgwood (1730\u20131795) was the dominant leader.\nIn North Staffordshire hundreds of companies produced all kinds of pottery, from tablewares and decorative pieces to industrial items. The main pottery types of earthenware, stoneware and porcelain were all made in large quantities, and the Staffordshire industry was a major innovator in developing new varieties of ceramic bodies such as bone china and jasperware, as well as pioneering transfer printing and other glazing and decorating techniques. In general Staffordshire was strongest in the middle and low price ranges, though the finest and most expensive types of wares were also made.\nBy the late 18th century North Staffordshire was the largest producer of ceramics in the UK, despite significant hubs elsewhere. Large export markets took Staffordshire pottery around the world, especially in the 19th century. Production had begun to decline in the late 19th century, as other countries developed their industries, and declined notably after World War II. Employment fell from 45,000 in 1975 to 23,000 in 1991, and 13,000 in 2002.\nArabic pottery.\nEarly Islamic pottery followed the forms of the regions which the Arabs conquered. Eventually, however, there was cross-fertilization between the regions. This was most notable in the Chinese influences on Islamic pottery. Trade between China and Islam took place via the system of trading posts over the lengthy Silk Road. Middle Eastern nations imported stoneware and later porcelain from China. China imported the minerals for Cobalt blue from the Islamic ruled Persia to decorate their blue and white porcelain, which they then exported to the Islamic world.\nLikewise, Arabic art contributed to a lasting pottery form identified as Hispano-Moresque in Andalucia. Unique Islamic forms were also developed, including fritware, lusterware and specialized glazes like tin-glazing, which led to the development of the popular maiolica.\nOne major emphasis in ceramic development in the Muslim world was the use of tile and decorative tilework.\nAmericas.\nMost evidence points to an independent development of pottery in the Native American cultures, with the earliest known dates from Brazil, from 9,500 to 5,000 years ago and 7,000 to 6,000 years ago. Further north in Mesoamerica, dates begin with the Archaic Era (3500\u20132000 BC), and into the Formative period (2000 BC \u2013 AD 200). These cultures did not develop the stoneware, porcelain or glazes found in the Old World. Maya ceramics include finely painted vessels, usually beakers, with elaborate scenes with several figures and texts. Several cultures, beginning with the Olmec, made terracotta sculpture, and sculptural pieces of humans or animals that are also vessels are produced in many places, with Moche portrait vessels among the finest.\nAfrica.\nThe oldest pottery in the world outside of east Asia can be found in Africa. In 2007, Swiss archaeologists discovered pieces of some of the oldest pottery in Africa at Ounjougou in the central region of Mali, dating to at least 9,400 BC. Excavations in the Bosumpra Cave on the Kwahu Plateau in southeastern Ghana, have revealed well-manufactured pottery using a variety of surface decoration techniques dating from the early tenth millennium cal. BC. Following the emergence of pottery traditions in the Ounjougou region of Mali around 11,900 BP and in the Bosumpra region of Ghana soon after, ceramics later arrived in the Iho Eleru region of Nigeria. In later periods, a relationship of the introduction of pot-making in some parts of Sub-Saharan Africa with the spread of Bantu languages has been long recognized, although the details remain controversial and awaiting further research, and no consensus has been reached.\nUse of pottery was then found in the Bir Kiseiba region, with a surplus of pottery shards dated roughly 9,300 BC. Archeological digs around Sub-Saharan Africa have continued to bring more history of ceramic use to light, including pottery shards found in Ravin de la Mouche, which were carbon dated to roughly 7,500 BC. After 8,000 BC the prevalence of ceramics in Sub-Saharan Africa surged, becoming a continent wide phenomenon.\nOceania.\nPottery has been found in archaeological sites across the islands of Oceania, attributed to an ancient archaeological culture called the Lapita. Another form of pottery called \"Plainware\" is found throughout sites of Oceania. The relationship between Lapita pottery and Plainware is not altogether clear. The need for pottery eventually diminished with settlement of islands further east towards Polynesia as peoples there adapted to cooking using earth ovens.\nThe Indigenous Australians never developed pottery. After Europeans came to Australia and settled, they found deposits of clay which were analysed by English potters as excellent for making pottery. Less than 20 years later, Europeans came to Australia and began creating pottery. Since then, ceramic manufacturing, mass-produced pottery and studio pottery have flourished in Australia.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24621", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24621", "title": "En plein air", "text": "Act of painting outdoors\nEn plein air (; French for 'outdoors'), or plein-air painting, is the act of painting outdoors.\nThis method contrasts with studio painting or academic rules that might create a predetermined look. The theory of 'En plein air' painting is credited to Pierre-Henri de Valenciennes (1750\u20131819), first expounded in a treatise titled \"Reflections and Advice to a Student on Painting, Particularly on Landscape\" (1800), where he developed the concept of landscape portraiture by which the artist paints directly onto canvas \"in situ\" within the landscape.\nIt enabled the artist to better capture the changing details of weather and light. The invention of portable canvases and easels allowed the practice to develop, particularly in France, and in the early 1830s the Barbizon School of painting in natural light was highly influential.\nAmongst the most prominent features of this school were its tonal qualities, colour, loose brushwork, and softness of form. These were variants that were particularly relevant to the mid 19th-century Hudson River School and to Impressionism.\nHistory.\nBefore the 19th century, artists had mixed their own paints from raw pigments that they often ground themselves from a variety of media. This had made for inconvenient portability and kept most painting activities confined to the studio. However, in the 1830s, the Barbizon school in France that included Charles-Fran\u00e7ois Daubigny and Th\u00e9odore Rousseau used the practice of \"en plein air\" to depict the changing appearance of light accurately as weather conditions altered.\nThis situation improved later in the 1800s when tubes of oil paint became available, allowing \"En plein air\" painting to become viable for more artists. This was in part because of the invention of the collapsible paint tube in 1841 by American portraitist John G. Rand. \nIn the early 1860s, four young painters: Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Alfred Sisley and Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bazille, met whilst studying under the academic artist Charles Gleyre. They discovered that they shared an interest in painting landscape and contemporary life, and they often ventured into the countryside together to paint in the open air. They discovered that they could paint in sunlight directly from nature, and making use of the vivid synthetic pigments that were available, they began to develop a lighter and brighter manner of painting that extended further the Realism of Gustave Courbet and the Barbizon school. It was radical practise at its inception, but by the later decades of the 19th century the theory had been absorbed into normal artistic practise.\nThere were artists' colonies across France, such as the one at \u00c9taples on the C\u00f4te d'Opal that included landscape impressionists Eug\u00e8ne Chigot and Henri Le Sidaner. The latter artist specialised in translating nocturne light to canvas using oil and pastel.\nThe Macchiaioli were a group of Italian painters active in Tuscany in the second half of the nineteenth century, who, breaking with the antiquated conventions taught by the Italian academies of art, did much of their painting outdoors in order to capture natural light, shade, and colour. This practice relates the Macchiaioli to the French Impressionists who came to prominence a few years later, although the Macchiaioli pursued somewhat different purposes. Their movement began in Florence in the late 1850s.\nIn England the Newlyn School was also a major proponent of the technique in the latter 19th century. There were lesser known artist colonies practising, including a loose collective at Amberley in West Sussex centred around the Paris trained Edward Stott who produced atmospheric rural landscapes that were highly popular among some late Victorians.\nThe movement expanded to America, starting in California then moving to other American locales notable for their natural light qualities, including the Hudson River Valley in New York.\nThe act of outdoor painting from observation has been continually popular well into the 21st century.\nEquipment and challenges.\nIt was during the mid-19th century that the \"box easel\", typically known as the \"French box easel\" or \"field easel\", was invented. It is uncertain who developed it, but these highly portable easels with telescopic legs and built-in paint box and palette made it easier to go into the forest and up the hillsides. Still made today, they remain a popular choice (even for home use) since they fold up to the size of a briefcase and thus are easy to store.\nThe Pochade Box is a compact box that allows the artist to keep all their supplies and palette within the box and have the work on the inside of the lid. Some designs allow for a larger canvas which can be held by clamps built into the lid. There are designs which can also hold a few wet painting canvases or panels within the lid. These boxes have a rising popularity as while they are mainly used for \"plein air\" painting, they can also be used in the studio, home, or classroom. Since pochade boxes are mainly used for painting on location, the canvas or work surface may be small, usually not more than 20 inches (50\u00a0cm).\nChallenges include the type of paint used to paint outdoors, animals, bugs, onlookers, and environmental conditions such as weather. Acrylic paint may harden and dry quickly in warm, sunny weather, and it cannot be reused. On the opposite side of the spectrum is the challenge of painting in moist or damp conditions with precipitation. The advent of \"plein air\" painting predated the invention of acrylics. The traditional and well-established method of painting \"en plein air\" incorporates the use of oil paint.\nAdvocates.\nFrench impressionist painters such as Claude Monet, Camille Pissarro, Alfred Sisley, and Pierre-Auguste Renoir advocated \"plein air\" painting, and much of their work was done outdoors in the diffuse light of a large white umbrella. Claude Monet was an avid \"en plein air\" artist who deduced that to seize the closeness and likeness of an outside setting at a specific moment one had to be outside to do so rather than just paint an outside setting in their studio. In the second half of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century in Russia, painters such as Vasily Polenov, Isaac Levitan, Valentin Serov, Konstantin Korovin and I. E. Grabar were known for painting \"en plein air\".\nIn the late 19th century, \"plein air\" painting was not limited to the Old World. American impressionists too, such as those of the Old Lyme school, were avid painters \"en plein air\". American impressionist painters noted for this style during this era included Guy Rose, Robert William Wood, Mary DeNeale Morgan, John Gamble, and Arthur Hill Gilbert. In Australia in the 1880s and 1890s, Arthur Streeton, Frederick McCubbin, Tom Roberts and other members of the Heidelberg School of Australian impressionism were also committed \"plein airists\". \nIn Canada in the 1920s, the Group of Seven and Tom Thomson are examples of \"en plein air\" advocates. Canadian painter George Agnew Reid (1860\u20131947) was also very interested in plein air painting. As a teacher at the Ontario College of Art (now OCAD University), he instituted outdoor classes for his students. In his own painting practice, Reid's work took on plein air qualities, such as simplified forms, impressionist influence, and outdoor subject matter.\nNotable artists (selected).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24622", "revid": "44822735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24622", "title": "Pacta sunt servanda", "text": "Latin legal phrase\nPacta sunt servanda (\"agreements must be kept\") is a brocard and a fundamental principle of law which holds that treaties or contracts are binding upon the parties that entered into the treaty or contract. It is customary international law. According to Hans Wehberg, a professor of international law, \"few rules for the ordering of Society have such a deep moral and religious influence\" as this principle.\nIn its most common sense, the principle refers to private contracts and prescribes that the provisions, i.e. clauses, of a contract are law between the parties to the contract, and therefore implies that neglect of their respective obligations is a violation of the contract. The first known expression of the brocard is in the writings of the canonist Cardinal Hostiensis from the 13th century AD, which were published in the 16th.\nHistory of the brocard.\nAccording to tradition, the brocard origins can be traced back to Cicero's De Legibus in its full form:\n\"Pacta sunt servanda pietate\" which can be translated as \"Let vows be piously performed.\"\nModern jurisprudence.\nIn both civil law and common law jurisdictions, the principle is related to the general principle of correct behavior in commerce, including the assumption of good faith. While most jurisdictions in the world have some form of good faith within their legal systems, there exists debate as to how good faith should be evaluated and measured. For example, in the United States\u2014a common law jurisdiction\u2014the implied duty of good faith and fair dealing exists in all commercial contracts.\nInternational law.\nUnder international law, \"every treaty in force is binding upon the parties to it and must be performed by them in good faith.\" This entitles states party to the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (signed 23 May 1969 and entered into force on 27 January 1980) to require that obligations instituted by treaties be honored and to rely on such obligations being honored. This basis of good faith for treaties implies that a party to a treaty cannot invoke provisions of its municipal (domestic) law as justification for negligence of its obligations pursuant to the treaty in question.\nThe only limits to application of \"pacta sunt servanda\" are the peremptory norms of general international law, which are denominated \"jus cogens\", i.e. compelling law. The legal principle of \"clausula rebus sic stantibus\" in customary international law also permits non-satisfaction of obligations pursuant to treaty because of a compelling change of circumstances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24623", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24623", "title": "Paul Laurence Dunbar", "text": "African-American writer (1872\u20131906)\nPaul Laurence Dunbar (June 27, 1872 \u2013 February 9, 1906) was an American poet, novelist, and short story writer of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Born in Dayton, Ohio to parents who had been enslaved in Kentucky before the American Civil War, Dunbar began writing stories and verse when he was a child. He published his first poems at the age of 16 in a Dayton newspaper, and served as president of his high school's literary society.\nDunbar's popularity increased rapidly after his work was praised by William Dean Howells, a leading editor associated with \"Harper's Weekly\". Dunbar became one of the first African-American writers to establish an international reputation. In addition to his poems, short stories, and novels, he also wrote the lyrics for the musical comedy \"In Dahomey\" (1903), the first all-African-American musical produced on Broadway in New York. The musical later toured in the United States and the United Kingdom. Suffering from tuberculosis, which then had no cure, Dunbar died in Dayton, Ohio, at the age of 33.\nMuch of Dunbar's more popular work in his lifetime was written in the \"Negro dialect\" associated with the antebellum South, though he also used the Midwestern regional dialect of James Whitcomb Riley. Dunbar also wrote in conventional English in other poetry and novels and is considered the first important African American sonnet writer. Since the late 20th century, scholars have become more interested in these other works.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nPaul Laurence Dunbar was born at 311 Howard Street in Dayton, Ohio, on June 27, 1872, to parents who were enslaved in Kentucky before the American Civil War. After being emancipated, his mother Matilda moved to Dayton with other family members, including her two sons Robert and William from her first marriage. Dunbar's father Joshua escaped from slavery in Kentucky before the war ended. He traveled to Massachusetts and volunteered for the 55th Massachusetts Infantry Regiment, one of the first two black units to serve in the war. The senior Dunbar also served in the 5th Massachusetts Cavalry Regiment. Paul Dunbar was born six months after Joshua and Matilda's wedding on Christmas Eve, 1871.\nThe marriage of Dunbar's parents was troubled, and Dunbar's mother left Joshua soon after having their second child, a daughter. Joshua died on August 16, 1885, when Paul was 13 years old.\nDunbar wrote his first poem at the age of six and gave his first public recital at the age of nine. His mother assisted him in his schooling, having learned to read expressly for that purpose. She often read the Bible with him, and thought he might become a minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Church. It was the first independent black denomination in America, founded in Philadelphia in the early 19th century.\nDunbar was the only African-American student during his years at Central High School in Dayton. Orville Wright was a classmate and friend. Well-accepted, he was elected as president of the school's literary society, and became the editor of the school newspaper and a debate club member.\nWriting career.\nAt the age of 16, Dunbar published the poems \"Our Martyred Soldiers\" and \"On The River\" in 1888 in Dayton's \"The Herald\" newspaper. In 1890, Dunbar wrote and edited \"The Tattler\", Dayton's first weekly African-American newspaper. It was printed by the fledgling company of his high-school acquaintances, Wilbur and Orville Wright. The paper lasted six weeks.\nAfter completing his formal schooling in 1891, Dunbar took a job as an elevator operator, earning a salary of four dollars a week. He had hoped to study law, but was not able to because of his mother's limited finances. He was restricted at work because of racial discrimination. Dunbar was an elevator attendant in the same building in which Eva Best's father conducted an architect's office, and she became acquainted with Dunbar and his literary endeavors through seeing him in her father's building. She was among the first persons to recognize the poetry of Dunbar and was influential in bringing him before the public.\nIn 1892, Dunbar asked the Wrights to publish his dialect poems in book form, but the brothers did not have a facility that could print books. They suggested he go to the United Brethren Publishing House which, in 1893, printed Dunbar's first collection of poetry, \"Oak and Ivy\". Dunbar subsidized the printing of the book, and quickly earned back his investment in two weeks by selling copies personally, often to passengers on his elevator.\nThe larger section of the book, the \"Oak\" section, consisted of traditional verse, whereas the smaller section, the \"Ivy\", featured light poems written in dialect. The work attracted the attention of James Whitcomb Riley, the popular \"Hoosier Poet\". Both Riley and Dunbar wrote poems in both standard English and dialect.\nHis literary gifts were recognized, and older men offered to help him financially. Attorney Charles A. Thatcher offered to pay for college, but Dunbar wanted to persist with writing, as he was encouraged by his sales of poetry. Thatcher helped promote Dunbar, arranging work to read his poetry in the larger city of Toledo at \"libraries and literary gatherings.\" In addition, psychiatrist Henry A. Tobey took an interest and assisted Dunbar by helping distribute his first book in Toledo and sometimes offering him financial aid. Together, Thatcher and Tobey supported the publication of Dunbar's second verse collection, \"Majors and Minors\" (1896).\nDespite frequently publishing poems and occasionally giving public readings, Dunbar had difficulty supporting himself and his mother. Many of his efforts were unpaid and he was a reckless spender, leaving him in debt by the mid-1890s.\nOn June 27, 1896, the novelist, editor, and critic William Dean Howells published a favorable review of Dunbar's second book, \"Majors and Minors\" in \"Harper's Weekly\". Howells' influence brought national attention to the poet's writing. Though Howell praised the \"honest thinking and true feeling\" in Dunbar's traditional poems, he particularly praised the dialect poems. In this period, there was an appreciation for folk culture, and black dialect was believed to express one type of that. The new literary fame enabled Dunbar to publish his first two books as a collected volume, titled \"Lyrics of Lowly Life\", which included an introduction by Howells.\nDunbar maintained a lifelong friendship with the Wright brothers. Through his poetry, he met and became associated with black leaders Frederick Douglass and Booker T. Washington, and was close to his contemporary James D. Corrothers. Dunbar also became a friend of Brand Whitlock, a journalist in Toledo who went to work in Chicago. Whitlock joined the state government and had a political and diplomatic career.\nBy the late 1890s, Dunbar started to explore the short story and novel forms; in the latter, he frequently featured white characters and society.\nLater work.\nDunbar was prolific during his relatively short career: he published a dozen books of poetry, four books of short stories, four novels, lyrics for a musical, and a play.\nHis first collection of short stories, \"Folks From Dixie\" (1898), a sometimes \"harsh examination of racial prejudice\", had favorable reviews.\nThis was not the case for his first novel, \"The Uncalled\" (1898), which critics described as \"dull and unconvincing\". Dunbar explored the spiritual struggles of a white minister Frederick Brent, who had been abandoned as a child by his alcoholic father and raised by a virtuous white spinster, Hester Prime. (Both the minister and woman's names recalled Nathaniel Hawthorne's \"The Scarlet Letter,\" which featured a central character named Hester Prynne.) With this novel, Dunbar has been noted as one of the first African Americans to cross the \"color line\" by writing a work solely about white society. Critics at the time complained about his handling of the material, not his subject. The novel was not a commercial success.\nDunbar's next two novels also explored lives and issues in white culture, and some contemporary critics found these lacking as well. However, literary critic Rebecca Ruth Gould argues that one of these, \"The Sport of the Gods\", culminates as an object lesson in the power of shame \u2013 a key component of the scapegoat mentality \u2013 to limit the law\u2019s capacity to deliver justice.\nIn collaboration with the composer Will Marion Cook, and Jesse A. Shipp, who wrote the libretto, Dunbar wrote the lyrics for \"In Dahomey,\" the first musical written and performed entirely by African Americans. It was produced on Broadway in 1903; the musical comedy successfully toured England and the United States over a period of four years and was one of the more successful theatrical productions of its time.\nDunbar's essays and poems were published widely in the leading journals of the day, including \"Harper's Weekly\", the \"Saturday Evening Post\", the \"Denver Post\", \"Current Literature\" and others. During his life, commentators often noted that Dunbar appeared to be purely black African, at a time when many leading members of the African-American community were notably of mixed race, often with considerable European ancestry.\nIn 1897 Dunbar traveled to England for a literary tour; he recited his works on the London circuit. He met the young black composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor, who set some of Dunbar's poems to music. Coleridge-Taylor was influenced by Dunbar to use African and American Negro songs and tunes in future compositions. Also living in London at the time, African-American playwright Henry Francis Downing arranged a joint recital for Dunbar and Coleridge-Taylor, under the patronage of John Hay, a former aide to President Abraham Lincoln, and at that time the American ambassador to Great Britain. Downing also lodged Dunbar in London while the poet worked on his first novel, \"The Uncalled\" (1898).\nDunbar was active in the area of civil rights and the uplifting of African Americans. He was a participant in the March 5, 1897, meeting to celebrate the memory of abolitionist Frederick Douglass. The attendees worked to found the American Negro Academy under Alexander Crummell.\nMarriage and declining health.\nAfter returning from the United Kingdom, Dunbar married Alice Ruth Moore, on March 6, 1898. She was a teacher and poet from New Orleans whom he had met three years earlier. Dunbar called her \"the sweetest, smartest little girl I ever saw\". A graduate of Straight University (now Dillard University), a historically black college, Moore is best known for her short story collection, \"Violets\". She and her husband also wrote books of poetry as companion pieces. An account of their love, life and marriage was portrayed in \"Oak and Ivy,\" a 2001 play by Kathleen McGhee-Anderson.\nIn October 1897 Dunbar took a job at the Library of Congress in Washington, DC. He and his wife moved to the capital, where they lived in the comfortable LeDroit Park neighborhood. At the urging of his wife, Dunbar soon left the job to focus on his writing, which he promoted through public readings. While in Washington, DC, Dunbar attended Howard University after the publication of \"Lyrics of Lowly Life\".\nIn 1900, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis, then often fatal, and his doctors recommended drinking whisky to alleviate his symptoms. On the advice of his doctors, he moved to Colorado with his wife, as the cold, dry mountain air was considered favorable for TB patients. Dunbar and his wife separated in 1902, after he nearly beat her to death but they never divorced. Depression and declining health drove him to a dependence on alcohol, which further damaged his health.\nDunbar returned to Dayton in 1904 to be with his mother. He died of tuberculosis on February 9, 1906, at the age of 33. He was interred in the Woodland Cemetery in Dayton.\nLiterary style.\nDunbar's work is known for its close attention to craft in his formal poetry as well as his dialect poetry. These traits were well matched to the tune-writing ability of Carrie Jacobs-Bond (1862\u20131946), with whom he collaborated.\nUse of dialect.\nDunbar wrote much of his work in conventional English, while using African-American dialect for some of it, as well as regional dialects. Dunbar felt there was something suspect about the marketability of dialect poems, as if blacks were limited to a constrained form of expression not associated with the educated class. One interviewer reported that Dunbar told him, \"I am tired, so tired of dialect\", though he is also quoted as saying, \"my natural speech is dialect\" and \"my love is for the Negro pieces\".\nDunbar credited William Dean Howells with promoting his early success, but was dismayed at the critic's encouragement that he concentrate on dialect poetry. Angered that editors refused to print his more traditional poems, Dunbar accused Howells of \"[doing] me irrevocable harm in the dictum he laid down regarding my dialect verse.\" Dunbar was continuing in a literary tradition that used Negro dialect; his predecessors included such writers as Mark Twain, Joel Chandler Harris and George Washington Cable.\nTwo brief examples of Dunbar's work, the first in standard English and the second in dialect, demonstrate the diversity of the poet's works:\n\"What dreams we have and how they fly\"\n\"Like rosy clouds across the sky;\"\n\"Of wealth, of fame, of sure success,\"\n\"Of love that comes to cheer and bless;\"\n\"And how they wither, how they fade,\"\n\"The waning wealth, the jilting jade \u2014\"\n\"The fame that for a moment gleams,\"\n\"Then flies forever, \u2014 dreams, ah \u2014 dreams!\"\n\"Sunshine on de medders,\"\n\"Greenness on de way;\"\n\"Dat's de blessed reason\"\n\"I sing all de day.\"\n\"Look hyeah! What you axing'?\"\n\"What meks me so merry?\"\n\" 'Spect to see me sighin\"'\n\"W'en hit's wa'm in Febawary?\"\nCritical response and legacy.\nDunbar became the first African-American poet to earn national distinction and acceptance. \"The New York Times\" called him \"a true singer of the people \u2013 white or black.\" Frederick Douglass once referred to Dunbar as, \"one of the sweetest songsters his race has produced and a man of whom [he hoped] great things.\"\nHis friend and writer James Weldon Johnson highly praised Dunbar, writing in \"The Book of American Negro Poetry:\"\nPaul Laurence Dunbar stands out as the first poet from the Negro race in the United States to show a combined mastery over poetic material and poetic technique, to reveal innate literary distinction in what he wrote, and to maintain a high level of performance. He was the first to rise to a height from which he could take a perspective view of his own race. He was the first to see objectively its humor, its superstitions, its short-comings; the first to feel sympathetically its heart-wounds, its yearnings, its aspirations, and to voice them all in a purely literary form.\nThis collection was published in 1931, following the Harlem Renaissance, which led to a great outpouring of literary and artistic works by African American people. They explored new topics, expressing ideas about urban life and migration to the North. In his writing, Johnson also criticized Dunbar for his dialect poems, saying they had fostered stereotypes of blacks as comical or pathetic, and reinforced the restriction that blacks write only about scenes of antebellum plantation life in the South.\nDunbar has continued to influence other writers, lyricists, and composers. Composer William Grant Still used excerpts from four dialect poems by Dunbar as epigraphs for the four movements of his Symphony No. 1 in A-flat, \"Afro-American\" (1930). The next year it was premiered, the first symphony by an African American to be performed by a major orchestra for a US audience. Dunbar's vaudeville song \"Who Dat Say Chicken in Dis Crowd?\" may have influenced the development of \"Who dat? Who dat? Who dat say gonna beat dem Saints?\", the popular chant associated with the New Orleans Saints football team, according to Dunbar scholar Hollis Robbins. In 2025, Chicago-based Will Liverman released two-album project called \u201cThe Dunbar/Moore Sessions,\u201d inspired by the poetry of the couple.\nMaya Angelou titled her autobiography \"I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings\" (1969) from a line in Dunbar's poem \"Sympathy\", at the suggestion of jazz musician and activist Abbey Lincoln. Angelou said that Dunbar's works had inspired her \"writing ambition.\" She returns to his symbol of a caged bird as a chained slave in much of her writings.\nDunbar's home in Dayton, Ohio, has been preserved as Paul Laurence Dunbar House, a state historical site that is included in the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park, administered by the National Park Service.\nNumerous schools and other places have been named in honor of Dunbar, including Paul Laurence Dunbar High School in Lexington, Kentucky, Paul Laurence Dunbar High School in Dayton, Ohio, Paul Laurence Dunbar High School in Baltimore, MD, Paul Laurence Dunbar Vocational High School in Chicago, Illinois, and several others. The main library at Wright State University in Dayton and a branch library in Dallas, Texas, are also named for Dunbar, whilst the Dunbar Apartments in Harlem, New York were built by John D. Rockefeller Jr. to provide housing for African Americans. Dunbar Park in Chicago features a statue of Dunbar that was created by sculptor Debra Hand and installed in 2014.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24624", "revid": "18130370", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24624", "title": "Pop music", "text": "Genre of music\nPop music, or simply pop, is a genre of popular music that originated in its modern form during the mid-1950s in the United States and the United Kingdom. During the 1950s and 1960s, pop music encompassed rock and roll and the youth-oriented styles it influenced. Rock and pop music remained roughly synonymous until the late 1960s, after which \"pop\" became associated with music that was more commercial, ephemeral, and accessible.\nIdentifying factors of pop music usually include repeated choruses and hooks, short to medium-length songs written in a basic format (often the verse\u2013chorus structure), and rhythms or tempos that can be easily danced to. Much of pop music also borrows elements from other styles such as rock, hip hop, urban, dance, Latin, and country.\nThe terms \"popular music\" and \"pop music\" are often used interchangeably, as the former also describes \"all\" music that is targeted for mass appeal (compare art music) and includes many disparate styles.\nDefinitions and etymology.\nDavid Hatch and Stephen Millward describe pop music as \"a body of music which is distinguishable from popular, jazz, and folk music\".\nDavid Boyle, a music researcher, states pop music as any type of music that a person has been exposed to by the mass media. Most individuals think that pop music is just the singles charts and not the sum of all chart music. The music charts contain songs from a variety of sources, including classical, jazz, rock, and novelty songs. As a genre, pop music is seen to exist and develop separately. Therefore, the term \"pop music\" may be used to describe a distinct genre, designed to appeal to all, often characterized as \"instant singles-based music aimed at teenagers\" in contrast to rock music as \"album-based music for adults\".\nPop music evolves along with the term's definition. According to music writer Bill Lamb, popular music is defined as \"the music since industrialization in the 1800s that is most in line with the tastes and interests of the urban middle class.\" The term \"pop song\" was first used in 1926, in the sense of a piece of music \"having popular appeal\". Hatch and Millward indicate that many events in the history of recording in the 1920s can be seen as the birth of the modern pop music industry, including in country, blues, and hillbilly music.\nAccording to the website of \"The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", the term \"pop music\" \"originated in Britain in the mid-1950s as a description for rock and roll and the new youth music styles that it influenced\". \"The Oxford Dictionary of Music\" states that while pop's \"earlier meaning meant concerts appealing to a wide audience [...] since the late 1950s, however, pop has had the special meaning of non-classical mus[ic], usually in the form of songs, performed by such artists as The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, ABBA, etc.\" \"Grove Music Online\" also states that \"in the early 1960s, [the term] 'pop music' competed terminologically with beat music [in England], while in the US its coverage overlapped (as it still does) with that of 'rock and roll'\".\nFrom about 1967, the term \"pop music\" was increasingly used in opposition to the term rock music, a division that gave generic significance to both terms. While rock aspired to authenticity and an expansion of the possibilities of popular music, pop was more commercial, ephemeral, and accessible. According to British musicologist Simon Frith, pop music is produced \"as a matter of enterprise not art\", and is \"designed to appeal to everyone\" but \"doesn't come from any particular place or mark off any particular taste\". Frith adds that it is \"not driven by any significant ambition except profit and commercial reward ... and, in musical terms, it is essentially conservative\". It is \"provided from on high (by record companies, radio programmers, and concert promoters) rather than being made from below.\u00a0... Pop is not a do-it-yourself music but is professionally produced and packaged\". \nCharacteristics.\nAccording to Frith, characteristics of pop music include an aim of appealing to a general audience, rather than to a particular sub-culture or ideology, and an emphasis on craftsmanship rather than formal \"artistic\" qualities. Besides, Frith also offers three identifying characteristics of pop music: light entertainment, commercial imperatives, and personal identification. Pop music grew out of a light entertainment and easy listening tradition. Pop music is more conservative than other music genres such as folk, blues, country, and tradition. Many pop songs do not contain themes of resistance, opposition, or politics, rather focusing more on love and relationships. Therefore, pop music does not challenge its audiences socially, and does not cause political activism. Frith also said the main purpose of pop music is to create revenue. It is not a medium of free articulation of the people. Instead, pop music seeks to achieve the instant empathy with cliche personalities, stereotypes, and melodrama that appeals to listeners. Music scholar Timothy Warner said pop music typically has an emphasis on recording, production, and technology, rather than live performance; a tendency to reflect existing trends rather than progressive developments; and seeks to encourage dancing or uses dance-oriented rhythms.\nThe main medium of pop music is the song, often between two and a half and three and a half minutes in length, generally marked by a consistent and noticeable rhythmic element, a mainstream style and a simple traditional structure. The structure of many popular songs is that of a verse and a chorus, the chorus serving as the portion of the track that is designed to stick in the ear through simple repetition both musically and lyrically. The chorus is often where the music builds towards and is often preceded by \"the drop\" where the bass and drum parts \"drop out\". Common variants include the verse-chorus form and the thirty-two-bar form, with a focus on melodies and catchy hooks, and a chorus that contrasts melodically, rhythmically and harmonically with the verse. The beat and the melodies tend to be simple, with limited harmonic accompaniment. The lyrics of modern pop songs typically focus on simple themes\u00a0\u2013 often love and romantic relationships\u00a0\u2013 although there are notable exceptions.\nHarmony and chord progressions in pop music are often \"that of classical European tonality, only more simple-minded.\" Clich\u00e9s include the barbershop quartet-style harmony (i.e. ii \u2013 V \u2013 I) and blues scale-influenced harmony. There was a lessening of the influence of traditional views of the circle of fifths between the mid-1950s and the late 1970s, including less predominance for the dominant function.\nIn October 2023, \"Billboard\" compiled a list of \"the 500 best pop songs\". In doing so, they noted the difficulty of defining \"pop songs\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One of the reasons pop can be hard to summarize is because there\u2019s no real sonic or musical definition to it. There are common elements to a lot of the biggest pop songs, but at the end of the day, \"pop\" means \"popular\" first and foremost, and just about any song that becomes popular enough...can be considered a pop song.\nDevelopment and influence.\nTechnology and media.\nIn the 1940s, improved microphone design allowed a more intimate singing style and, ten or twenty years later, inexpensive and more durable 45 rpm records for singles \"revolutionized the manner in which pop has been disseminated\", which helped to move pop music to \"a record/radio/film star system\". Another technological change was the widespread availability of television in the 1950s with televised performances, which meant that \"pop stars had to have a visual presence\". In the 1960s, the introduction of inexpensive, portable transistor radios meant that teenagers in the developed world could listen to music outside of the home. By the early 1980s, the promotion of pop music had been greatly affected by the rise of music television channels like MTV, which \"favoured those artists such as Michael Jackson and Madonna who had a strong visual appeal\".\nMulti-track recording (from the 1960s) and digital sampling (from the 1980s) have also been used as methods for the creation and elaboration of pop music. During the mid-1960s, pop music made repeated forays into new sounds, styles, and techniques that inspired public discourse among its listeners. The word \"progressive\" was frequently used, and it was thought that every song and single was to be a \"progression\" from the last. Music critic Simon Reynolds writes that beginning with 1967, a divide would exist between \"progressive\" pop and \"mass/chart\" pop, a separation which was \"also, broadly, one between boys and girls, middle-class and working-class.\"\nThe latter half of the 20th century included a large-scale trend in American culture in which the boundaries between art and pop music were increasingly blurred. Between 1950 and 1970, there was a debate of pop versus art. Since then, certain music publications have embraced the music's legitimacy, a trend referred to as \"poptimism\".\nStylistic evolution.\nThroughout its development, pop music has absorbed influences from other genres of popular music. Early pop music drew on traditional pop, an American counterpart to German Schlager and French Chanson, however compared to the pop of European countries, traditional pop originally emphasized influences ranging from Tin Pan Alley songwriting, Broadway theatre, and show tunes. As the genre evolved more influences ranging from classical, folk, rock, country, electronic music, and other popular genres became more prominent. In 2016, a \"Scientific Reports\" study that examined over 464,000 recordings of popular music recorded between 1955 and 2010 found that, compared to 1960s pop music, contemporary pop music uses a smaller variety of pitch progressions, greater average volume, less diverse instrumentation and recording techniques, and less timbral variety. \"Scientific American\"'s John Matson reported that this \"seems to support the popular anecdotal observation that pop music of yore was \"better\", or at least more varied, than today's top-40 stuff\". However, he also noted that the study may not have been entirely representative of pop in each generation.\nIn the 1960s, the majority of mainstream pop music fell in two categories: guitar, drum and bass groups or singers backed by a traditional orchestra. Since early in the decade, it was common for pop producers, songwriters, and engineers to freely experiment with musical form, orchestration, unnatural reverb, and other sound effects. Some of the best known examples are Phil Spector's Wall of Sound and Joe Meek's use of homemade electronic sound effects for acts like the Tornados. At the same time, pop music on radio and in both American and British film moved away from refined Tin Pan Alley to more eccentric songwriting and incorporated reverb-drenched electric guitar, symphonic strings, and horns played by groups of properly arranged and rehearsed studio musicians. A 2019 study held by New York University in which 643 participants had to rank how familiar a pop song is to them, songs from the 1960s turned out to be the most memorable, significantly more than songs from recent years 2000 to 2015.\nBefore the progressive pop of the late 1960s, performers were typically unable to decide on the artistic content of their music. Assisted by the mid-1960s economic boom, record labels began investing in artists, giving them the freedom to experiment, and offering them limited control over their content and marketing. This situation declined after the late 1970s and would not reemerge until the rise of Internet stars. Indie pop, which developed in the late 1970s, marked another departure from the glamour of contemporary pop music, with guitar bands formed on the then-novel premise that one could record and release their own music without having to procure a record contract from a major label.\nThe 1980s are commonly remembered for an increase in the use of digital recording, associated with the usage of synthesizers, with synth-pop music and other electronic genres featuring non-traditional instruments increasing in popularity. By 2014, pop music worldwide had been permeated by electronic dance music. In 2018, researchers at the University of California, Irvine, concluded that pop music has become 'sadder' since the 1980s. The elements of happiness and brightness have eventually been replaced with electronic beats making pop music more 'sad yet danceable'.\nInternational spread and crosspollination.\nPop music has been dominated by the American and (from the mid-1960s) British music industries, whose influence has made pop music something of an international monoculture, but most regions and countries have their own form of pop music, sometimes producing local versions of wider trends, and lending them local characteristics. Some of these trends (for example Europop) have had a significant impact on the development of the genre.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe story of pop music is largely the story of the intertwining pop culture of the United States and the United Kingdom in the postwar era.\n\u00a0\u2014 Bob Stanley\nAccording to \"Grove Music Online\", \"Western-derived pop styles, whether coexisting with or marginalizing distinctively local genres, have spread throughout the world and have come to constitute stylistic common denominators in global commercial music cultures\". Some non-Western countries, such as Japan, have developed a thriving pop music industry, most of which is devoted to Western-style pop. Japan has for several years produced a greater quantity of music than everywhere except the US. The spread of Western-style pop music has been interpreted variously as representing processes of Americanization, homogenization, modernization, creative appropriation, cultural imperialism, or a more general process of globalization.\nOne of the pop music styles that developed alongside other music styles is Latin pop, which rose in popularity in the US during the 1950s with early rock and roll success Ritchie Valens. Later, Los Lobos and Chicano rock gained in popularity during the 1970s and 1980s, and musician Selena saw large-scale popularity in the 1980s and 1990s, along with crossover appeal with fans of Tejano musicians Lydia Mendoza and Little Joe. With later Hispanic and Latino Americans seeing success within pop music charts, 1990s pop successes stayed popular in both their original genres and in broader pop music. Latin pop hit singles, such as \"Macarena\" by Los del R\u00edo and \"Despacito\" by Luis Fonsi, have seen record-breaking success on worldwide pop music charts.\nNotable pop artists of the late 20th century that became global superstars include Whitney Houston, Michael Jackson, Madonna, George Michael, and Prince.\n21st century.\nAt the beginning of the 2000s, the trends that dominated during the late 1990s still continued, but the music industry started to change as people began to download music from the internet. People were able to discover genres and artists that were outside of the mainstream and propel them to fame, but at the same time smaller artists had a harder time making a living because their music was being pirated. Popular artists were Avril Lavigne, Justin Timberlake, NSYNC, Christina Aguilera, Destiny's Child, and Britney Spears. Pop music often came from many different genres, with each genre in turn influencing the next one, blurring the lines between them and making them less distinct. This change was epitomized in Spears' highly influential 2007 album \"Blackout\", which under the influence of producer Danja, mixed the sounds of EDM, avant-funk, R&amp;B, dance music, and hip hop.\nBy 2010, pop music impacted by dance music came to be dominant on the charts. Instead of radio setting the trends, it was now the club. At the beginning of the 2010s, Will.i.am stated, \"The new bubble is all the collective clubs around the world. Radio is just doing its best to keep up.\" Songs that talked of escapism through partying became the most popular, influenced by the impulse to forget the economic troubles during the Great Recession; this style of pop music is now known as recession pop. Throughout the 2010s, a lot of pop music also began to take cues from alternative pop. Popularized by artists such as Lana Del Rey and Lorde in the early 2010s and later inspiring other highly influential artists including Billie Eilish and Taylor Swift, it gave space to a more sad and moody tone within pop music.\nIn the 2020s, Canadian pop singer the Weeknd's song \"Blinding Lights\", became a staple hit of the decade, reaching the top spot of \"Billboard\"'s greatest Hot 100 songs of all time, surpassing \"The Twist\" by Chubby Checker. It also broke the record for the first song to hit 5 billion streams on the Spotify streaming platform, becoming the most-streamed song of all time in the platform's history. This further led to a success from pop music dominating other streaming platforms like Spotify, Apple Music and YouTube Music, alongside other artists like Taylor Swift, Drake, Ariana Grande and Olivia Rodrigo, with the former becoming a successful artist of the century while breaking numerous music records like album sales, streaming and touring.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24625", "revid": "1308996995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24625", "title": "Paul Wertico", "text": "American drummer (born 1953)\nPaul Wertico (born January 5, 1953, in Chicago, Illinois) is an American drummer. He gained recognition as a member of the Pat Metheny Group from 1983 until 2001, leaving the group to spend more time with his family and to pursue other musical interests.\nMusic career.\nGroups.\nAfter Pat Metheny heard the Simon &amp; Bard Group with Wertico and bassist Steve Rodby, he invited both to join his band. During his time with Metheny, Wertico played on ten albums and four videos, appeared on television, and toured around the world. He won seven Grammy Awards (for \"Best Jazz Fusion Performance,\" \"Best Contemporary Jazz Performance,\" and \"Best Rock Instrumental Performance\"), magazine polls, and received several gold records.\nHe formed the Paul Wertico Trio with John Moulder and Eric Hochberg and collaborated with Larry Coryell, Kurt Elling, and Jeff Berlin. From 2000 to 2007, he was a member of SBB, the platinum-record-winning Polish progressive rock band. Wertico was a member of the Larry Coryell Power Trio until Coryell's death in 2017.\nIn 2009, Wertico became a member of the jazz-rock group Marbin with Israeli musicians Danny Markovitch and Dani Rabin. The group performed as Paul Wertico's Mid-East/Mid-West Alliance and recorded an album for the Chicago Sessions label that received accolades from the \"Chicago Tribune\", \"DRUM!\", and \"Modern Drummer\".\nWertico formed Wertico Cain &amp; Gray with multi-instrumentalists David Cain and Larry Gray. Their debut album \"Sound Portraits\" (2013) won Best Live Performance Album in the 13th Annual Independent Music Awards, and their fourth album \"Realization\" (2015) was nominated for Best Live Performance Album and Best Long Form Video in the 15th Annual Independent Music Awards.\nAppearances and other work.\nWertico played drums on Paul Winter's 1990 Grammy-nominated album, \"Earth: Voices of a Planet\". He played on vocalist Kurt Elling's 1995 Grammy-nominated album, \"Close Your Eyes\", as well as Elling's 1997 Grammy-nominated album, \"The Messenger\", 1998 Grammy-nominated album, \"This Time It's Love\", and 2003 Grammy-nominated album, \"Man in the Air\".\nSome of the many other artists Paul has played with: Eddie Harris, Lee Konitz, Dave Liebman, Sam Rivers, Bob Mintzer, Terry Gibbs, Buddy DeFranco, Roscoe Mitchell, Evan Parker, Jay McShann, Herbie Mann, Lew Tabackin, Randy Brecker, Sonny Fortune, Paolo Fresu, George Coleman, Diane Schuur, Ira Sullivan, Kenny Davern, Mike Stern, Patricia Barber, Tim Hagans, Niels Lan Doky, Joe Daley, Makanda Ken McIntyre, Charlie Haden, Tierney Sutton, Joshua Breakstone, Marcus Belgrave, Charles Gayle, Sheila Jordan and Ramsey Lewis.\nHe hosted his own radio show, \"Paul Wertico's Wild World of Jazz\", from 2010 to 2012. As Musical Director for the crowdsourced TV video series, \"Inventing the Future\", Wertico was nominated for a 2012\u20132013 Emmy Award in the \u201cOutstanding Achievement In Interactivity\u201d category by The National Academy of Television Arts &amp; Sciences, Midwest Chapter.\nHe's the inventor of TUBZ, made by Pro-Mark, which also made the \"Paul Wertico Signature Drum Stick\".\nIn November 2024, Dream Cymbals released two Paul Wertico signature flat ride cymbals, the 20\u201d &amp; 22\u201d https://.\nTeaching.\nWertico is very active in the field of education. In addition to teaching drums privately for 55 years, he is an Associate Professor of Jazz Studies at the Chicago College of Performing Arts of Roosevelt University in Chicago, and he also headed the school\u2019s Jazz &amp; Contemporary Music Studies program for five years. He served on the faculty of the percussion and jazz-studies programs at the Bienen School of Music at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois for 16 years, and taught at the Bloom School of Jazz in Chicago for several years.\nHe has written educational articles for \"Modern Drummer\", \"DRUM!\", \"Drums &amp; Drumming\", \"Drum Tracks\", and \"DownBeat\", and for Musician.com. He serves on the advisory board of \"Modern Drummer\", and is also one of their Pro-Panelists.\nWertico served five terms on the Board of Governors of The Recording Academy Chicago Chapter the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences (NARAS), as well as serving on both the Advisory Board and the Education Committee of The Jazz Institute of Chicago.\nWertico has performed numerous drum clinics and master classes at universities, high schools, and music stores in the U.S. and around the world, including Drummers Collective in NYC, Percussion Institute of Technology in LA, North Texas State University, and the University of Miami, as well as Musicians Institute in England, Drummers Institute in Germany, Escuela de M\u00fasica Creativa in Spain, Universit\u00e0 della Musica in Italy, Escuela de M\u00fasica de Buenos Aires in Argentina, and the Rimon School of Jazz in Israel.\nHe has been a featured clinician/soloist at numerous international drum festivals including Canada\u2019s Cape Breton International Drum Festival and the Montr\u00e9al Drum Fest, Uruguay\u2019s Montevideo Drum Festival, the CrossDrumming International Festival of Percussive Arts in Poland, the Mendoza International Drum Festival in Argentina, the Percussion Camp International Percussion Festival in Greece, and the First International Drummers Week in Venezuela, as well as at schools and festivals in New Zealand, Chile, Mexico, Russia, Hungary, France, Sweden, Ireland, and Spain.\nHe also performed at the 1994, 1999, 2002 &amp; 2018 Percussive Arts Society International Conventions, the 1997 Modern Drummer Drum Festival (and appeared in videos of two of those events), and the 2005, 2013, 2014, 2019 &amp; 2023 Chicago Drum Shows. Wertico is featured in the Drum Workshop videos, \"The American Dream II\", \"The American Dream III\" and \"Masters of Resonance\".\nHe has released two instructional videos: \"Fine Tuning Your Performance\" and https:// \u2014 the latter (available on DVD), was named \u201cOne of the best drum videos of the last 25 years\u201d by \"Modern Drummer\" magazine.\nWertico\u2019s drum instructional book https:// (A Drummer\u2019s Guide to Playing \u201cBackbeats\u201d on 1 &amp; 3) was published by Alfred Music on July 7, 2017.\nRecordings.\nWertico has also released numerous recordings as co-leader: a self-titled LP, \"Earwax Control\", and a live Earwax Control CD entitled, \"Number 2 Live\"; a self-titled LP, \"Spontaneous Composition\"; a drum/percussion duo CD (with Gregg Bendian) entitled \"BANG!\"; a double-guitar/double-drum three-CD set (with Derek Bailey, Pat Metheny and Bendian) entitled \"The Sign Of 4\"; and two piano/bass/drums trio CDs (with Laurence Hobgood and Brian Torff) entitled \"Union\" and \"State of the Union\".\nSome of his latest releases include a DVD &amp; CD by David Cain &amp; Paul Wertico entitled \"Feast for the Senses\"; a CD by Paul Wertico &amp; Frank Catalano entitled \"Topics of Conversation\"; a CD by Fabrizio Mocata, Gianmarco Scaglia &amp; Paul Wertico entitled \"Free the Opera!\"; a DVD &amp; CD by Wertico Cain &amp; Gray entitled \"Sound Portraits\" (winner of \"Best Live Performance Album\" in the 13th Annual Independent Music Awards (2014); Wertico Cain &amp; Gray\u2019s second CD entitled \"Out in SPACE\"; Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's second DVD &amp; third CD entitled \"Organic Architecture\"; Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's fourth CD &amp; video release entitled \"Realization\" (nominated for \"Best Live Performance Album\" and \"Best Long Form Video\" in the 15th Annual Independent Music Awards (2016); Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's fifth CD entitled \"Short Cuts \u2013 40 Improvisations\"; Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's sixth CD entitled \"AfterLive\"; Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's seventh CD &amp; downloadable video release entitled \"Without Compromise\"; and Wertico Cain &amp; Gray's eighth CD entitled \"Windows Of Time\"; a CD entitled \"Dynamics in Meditation\" by the Gianmarco Scaglia &amp; Paul Wertico\u00a0Quartet; The Paul Wertico/John Helliwell Project has two releases: a CD entitled \"The Bari Sessions\" and a 2-CD set entitled \"Live Under Italian Skies\"; and the Chicago-based Paul Wertico Trio (featuring guitarist John Moulder &amp; bassist Eric Hochberg) released a CD (celebrating the trio\u2019s 25th anniversary) entitled \"First Date\", and the Italy-based Paul Wertico Trio (featuring pianist Fabrizio Mocata &amp; bassist Gianmarco Scaglia) also released a CD entitled \"Letter from Rome\". Paul\u2019s latest two CDs are entitled \"Paul Wertico\u2019s Drums Without Boundaries\" (one of \"DownBeat\" magazine's Best Albums of 2023), and \"Tuxedo Man\" by David Becker &amp; Paul Wertico.\nDiscography.\nAs leader.\nPaul Wertico (featuring Bob Mintzer, Dave Liebman, David Mann, Howard Levy, Yu Gno Who (Pat Metheny), Brian Keane, Richie Beirach, Michael Bearden, Nik John Bariluk, Barbara Unger-Wertico, Dave Holland, Victor Bailey, Mino Cinelu, Paul Wertico &amp; Malinke People of Mali)\nPaul Wertico Trio (featuring John Moulder, Eric Hochberg &amp; Paul Wertico)\nWERTICO (featuring John Moulder, Brian Peters, Eric Hochberg, Barbara Wertico &amp; Paul Wertico)\nPaul Wertico Trio (featuring John Moulder, Brian Peters &amp; Paul Wertico)\nPaul Wertico Trio (featuring John Moulder, Larry Gray &amp; Paul Wertico)\nPaul Wertico\u2019s Mid-East/Mid-West Alliance (Danny Markovitch, Dani Rabin, John Moulder, Brian Peters &amp; Paul Wertico)\nPaul Wertico Trio (featuring Fabrizio Mocata, Gianmarco Scaglia &amp; Paul Wertico)\nPaul Wertico (featuring Mirko Pedrotti, Alex Munk, Gianmarco Scaglia, Paul Wertico &amp; Ichos Percussion)\nAs co-leader.\nWith Spontaneous Composition (Rich Corpolongo, Doug Lofstrom &amp; Paul Wertico)\nWith Earwax Control (Gordon James, Jeff Czech &amp; Paul Wertico)\nWith Trio New (Laurence Hobgood, Eric Hochberg &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith Paul Wertico &amp; Gregg Bendian\nWith Derek Bailey, Pat Metheny, Gregg Bendian &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith Union (Laurence Hobgood, Brian Torff &amp; Paul Wertico)\nWith Brian Peters &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith Silvano Monasterios, Mark Egan &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith David Cain &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith Paul Wertico &amp; Frank Catalano\nWith Fabrizio Mocata, Gianmarco Scaglia &amp; Paul Wertico\nWith Wertico Cain &amp; Gray (Paul Wertico, David Cain &amp; Larry Gray)\nWith Gianmarco Scaglia &amp; Paul Wertico Quartet\nWith Paul Wertico / John Helliwell Project\nWith Marbin (Danny Markovitch, Dani Rabin &amp; Paul Wertico)\nWith David Becker &amp; Paul Wertico\nAs member.\nWith Pat Metheny Group\nWith SBB\nWith Simon &amp; Bard Group\nAs sideman.\nWith Larry Coryell\nWith Kurt Elling\nWith Ken Nordine\nWith Terry Callier\nWith John Moulder\nWith Howard Levy\nWith Marbin\nWith Scott Earl Holman\nWith Vangelis Katsoulis\nWith Niels Lan Doky\nWith Apostolis Anthimos\nWith Bobby Lewis\nWith Paul Winter\nWith others.\nWith Eric Hochberg\nWith Kol B\u2019Seder\nWith Fareed Haque\nWith Alina Skrzek\nWith Roman Miroshnichenko\nWith Paloma San Basilio\nWith Fabrizio Mocata\nWith Andrea Miller\nWith Fabio Armiliato\nWith Isabelle Olivier\nWith Mario Parmisano\nWith Bob Mamet\nWith Carrie McDowell\nWith Willa Moore\nWith Lisa McClowry\nWith Steve Behr And The Behrkats\nWith Frank Quintero\nWith Patxi Pascual\nWith Dimension\nWith Liam O'Connor\nWith Alberto Mizrahi\nWith Julio Awad\nWith Jim Trompeter\nWith Matt Geraghty Project\nWith Piotr Wojtasik\nWith Ronit Ben-Arie\nWith Synergy\nWith Jill Jensen &amp; Jack Grassel\nWith Mike Phillips\nWith Walt Cunningham Jr.\nWith Insout\nWith Frontera Cero\nWith Anthony Plessas\nWith Lefteris Christofis\nWith The Beth Emet Youth Choir 2004-2005\nWith Tom Mac\nWith Allegra Rosenberg &amp; Talia Wertico\nWith Barbara Sfraga\nWith Kindred The Family Soul\nWith David Bowie\nWith Frank Kvinge\nWith Frank Catalano\nWith Gillespi\nWith John Williams\nWith Rob Ryndak\nWith Shakshuka\nWith Hanako Takami\nWith Tom Gullion\nWith Cheryl&amp;Co.\nWith Willy Schwarz\nWith Jackie Allen\nWith Pat Belliveau\nWith Eddie Marshall\nWith The Rich Corpolongo Quartet Plus Two\nWith Frank Gregory\nWith The Chicago Hitmen\nWith Watermelon Sugar\nWith Pat Metheny\nWith Paul Halley\nWith Don Bennett\nWith Eugene Friesen\nWith Fred Simon\nWith Brad Goode\nWith Andrew Calhoun\nWith Miss Jackie Weissman\nWith Jerry Goodman\nWith Guy Fricano\nWith Dave Gordon\nWith Andre Caporaso\nWith Fred Koch\nWith Rich Fudoli\nWith David Cloud &amp; Jeffrey Thomas\nWith Peggy Pascal &amp; Jill Hearn\nWith Ellen McIlwaine\nWith Mike Smith\nWith Amy Levin\nWith Paul Berliner and KUDU\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24626", "revid": "41526883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24626", "title": "Porsche 356", "text": "1948\u20131965 sports car\nThe Porsche 356 is a rear-engine sports car, and the first-ever production Porsche model.\nThe 356 is a lightweight and nimble-handling, rear-engine, rear-wheel drive, two-door available both in hardtop coup\u00e9 and open configurations. Engineering innovations continued during the years of manufacture, contributing to its motorsports success and popularity. Production started in 1948 at Gm\u00fcnd, Austria, where Porsche built approximately 50 cars. In 1950, the factory relocated to Zuffenhausen, Germany, and general production of the 356 continued until April 1965, well after the replacement model 911 made its September 1964 debut. Of the 76,000 originally produced, approximately half survive. The 356 was first produced by Austrian company Porsche Konstruktionen GesmbH (1948\u20131949), and then by German company Dr. Ing. h. c. F. Porsche GmbH (1950\u20131965). It was Porsche's first production automobile. Earlier cars designed by the Austrian company include Cisitalia Grand Prix race car, the Volkswagen Beetle, and Auto Union Grand Prix cars.\nThe original price in 1948 for the 356 coupe was US$ (official general USD inflation). The 356 cabriolet cost US$.\nHistory.\nIn 1948, the mid-engine, tubular chassis prototype Porsche 356/1 was completed. Although the prototype had a rear-mid engine placement, the production rear-engined 356 is considered by Porsche to be its first car.\nThe 356 was created by Ferdinand \"Ferry\" Porsche (son of Ferdinand Porsche, founder of the German company), who founded the Austrian company with his sister, Louise. Like its cousin, the Volkswagen Beetle (which Ferdinand Porsche Sr. had designed), the 356 is a four-cylinder, air-cooled, rear-engine, rear-wheel-drive car with unitized pan and body construction. The chassis was a completely new design, as was the 356's body, designed by Porsche employee Erwin Komenda. At the same time, certain mechanical components, including the engine case and some suspension components, were based on and initially sourced from Volkswagen. Ferry Porsche described the thinking behind the development of the 356 in an interview with the editor of \"Panorama\", the PCA magazine, in September 1972. \"...I had always driven very speedy cars. I had an Alfa Romeo, also a BMW, and others. \u2026.By the end of the war, I had a Volkswagen Cabriolet with a supercharged engine, and that was the basic idea. I saw that if you had enough power in a small car, it is nicer to drive than if you have a big car which is also overpowered. And it is more fun. On this basic idea, we started the first Porsche prototype. To make the car lighter, to have an engine with more horsepower\u2026that was the first two-seater that we built in Carinthia (Gm\u00fcnd)\".\nThe first 356 was road certified in Austria on June 8, 1948, and was entered in a race in Innsbruck, where it won its class. Porsche re-engineered and refined the car with a focus on performance. Volkswagen and Porsche shared fewer parts as the 1950s progressed. Porsche handcrafted the early 356 automobile bodies at Gm\u00fcnd in aluminum, but when production moved to Zuffenhausen, Germany, in 1950, models produced there were steel-bodied. The aluminum-bodied cars from that very small company are what are now referred to as \"prototypes\". Porsche contracted Reutter to build the steel bodies and eventually bought the Reutter company in 1963. The Reutter company retained the seat manufacturing part of the business and changed its name to \"Recaro\".\nLittle noticed at its inception, mostly by a small number of auto racing enthusiasts, the first 356s sold primarily in Austria and Germany. It took Porsche two years, starting with the first prototype in 1948, to manufacture the first 50 automobiles. By the early 1950s, the 356 had gained some renown among enthusiasts on both sides of the Atlantic for its aerodynamics, handling, and excellent build quality. The class win at Le Mans in 1951 was a factor. It was common for owners to race the car as well as drive them on the streets. They introduced the four-cam racing \"Carrera\" engine, a totally new design and unique to Porsche sports cars, in late 1954. Increasing success with its racing and road cars brought Porsche orders for over 10,000 units in 1964, and, by the time 356 production ended in 1965, approximately 76,000 had been produced.\nThe 356 was built in four distinct series, the original (\"pre-A\"), followed by the 356\u00a0A, 356\u00a0B, and finally the 356\u00a0C. To distinguish among the major revisions of the model, 356s are generally classified into a few major groups. The 356 coup\u00e9s and \"cabriolets\" (soft-tops) built through 1955 are readily identifiable by their split (1948 to 1952) or bent (centre-creased, 1953 to 1955) windscreens. In late 1955, the 356\u00a0A appeared, with a curved windshield. The A was the first road going Porsche to offer the Carrera four-cam engine as an option. In late 1959, the T5 356\u00a0B appeared; followed by the redesigned T6 series 356\u00a0B in 1962. The final version was the 356\u00a0C, little changed from the late T6 B cars but disc brakes replaced the drums.\nPrior to the completion of 356 production, Porsche had developed a higher-revving 616/36 version of the 356's four-cylinder pushrod engine for installation in a new 912 model that commenced production in April 1965. Although the 912 used numerous 356 components, Porsche did not intend for the 912 to replace the 356.\nWhen the decision was made to replace the 356, the 901 (later 911) was the road car designed to carry the Porsche name forward. The 912 was developed as the \"standard version\" of the 911 at the price of a 356 1600 SC, while the complex but faster and heavier six-cylinder 911 was priced more than fifty percent higher. Customers purchased nearly 33,000 912 coup\u00e9s and Targas powered by the Type 616 engine that had served Porsche so well during the 356 era.\nModels.\n356 \"pre-A\".\nFrom the earliest, 1,100\u00a0cc Gm\u00fcnd beginnings, the overall shape of the 356 remained more or less set. In 1951, 1,300 and 1,500\u00a0cc engines with considerably more power were introduced. In April 1952, the split windscreen was replaced by a slightly V-shaped, single windshield, which fit into the same shape opening. In 1953, the 1300 S or \"Super\" was introduced, and the 1,100\u00a0cc engine was dropped. \nIn late 1954, Max Hoffman, the sole US importer of Porsches, convinced Porsche to build a stripped down roadster version with minimal equipment and a cut-down windscreen.\nTowards the end of the original 356's time (in 1955, when the 356\u00a0A was about to be introduced), Hoffman, wanting a model name rather than just a number, got the factory to use the name \"Continental\" which was applied mostly to cars sold in the United States. Ford, makers of the Lincoln Continental, sued. This name was used only in 1955 and today this version is especially valued. For 1956, the equivalent version was briefly sold as the \"European\". Today, all of the earliest Porsches are highly coveted by collectors and enthusiasts worldwide, based on their design, reliability and sporting performance.\nThe M422 Mighty Mite, a military light utility vehicle built for the United States Marine Corps, originally used the engine from the 1300 S, but the production M422 had to use a different engine due to regulations requiring US-built equipment in US military vehicles.\n356 A.\nIn late 1955, with numerous small but significant changes, the 356\u00a0A was introduced. Its internal factory designation, \"Type 1\", gave rise to its nickname \"T1\" among enthusiasts. In the US, 1,200 early 356s had been badged as the \"Continental\" and then a further 156 from autumn 1955 to January 1956 as an even rarer T1 \"European\" variant after which it reverted to its numerical 356 designation. In early 1957, a second revision of the 356\u00a0A was produced, known as Type 2 (or T2). Production of the Speedster peaked at 1,171 cars in 1957 and then started to decline. The four-cam \"Carrera\" engine, initially available only in the spyder race cars, became an available option starting with the 356\u00a0A.\nWithin the last 25 years, replicas of the 356 A have become very popular.\nThe most typical engine was a 4-cylinder boxer, which was air-cooled, naturally aspirated with dual downdraft Zenith carburetors, had a 2 valve per cylinder OHV valvetrain, and produced at 4,500\u00a0rpm and a maximum torque of at 2,800\u00a0rpm.\n356 B.\nIn late 1959, significant styling and technical refinements gave rise to the 356\u00a0B (a T5 body type). The mid-1962 356\u00a0B model was changed to the T6 body type (twin grilles on the engine compartment cover, an external fuel filler in the right front wing/fender and a larger rear window in the coup\u00e9). Porsche did not draw attention to these (quite visible) changes, initially keeping the same model designation. However, when the T6 got disc brakes, with no other visible alterations, they called it the model C, or the SC when it had the optional, more powerful engine. A unique \"Karmann hardtop\" or \"notchback\" 356\u00a0B model was produced in 1961 and 1962. The 1961 production run (T5) was essentially a cabriolet body with the optional steel cabriolet hardtop welded in place. The 1962 line (T6 production) was a very different design in that the new T6 notchback coup\u00e9 body did not start life as a cabriolet, but with its own production design. In essence, it had the cabriolet rear end design, the T6 coup\u00e9 windshield frame and a unique hard top. Both years of these models have taken the name \"Karmann notchback\".\n356 C.\nThe last revision of the 356 was the 356\u00a0C introduced for the 1964 model year. It featured disc brakes all around, radial Pirelli Cinturato tyres, as well as an option for the most powerful pushrod engine Porsche had ever produced, the \"SC\". Production of the 356 peaked at 14,151 cars in 1964, the year that its successor, the new Porsche 911, was introduced to the US market (it was introduced slightly earlier in Europe). The company continued to sell the 356\u00a0C in North America through 1965 as demand for the model remained quite strong in the early days of the heavier and more \"civilized\" 911.\nThe last ten 356s (cabriolets) were assembled for the Dutch Rijkspolitie, the highway patrolling predecessor of the Netherlands police force, in March 1966 as 1965 models. Using Porsches to control traffic and speeders was so successful on Holland's express-ways, that the Dutch national police branch kept using Porsche 911s into the watercooled era that began in 1998.\n530.\nIn 1953, Studebaker contacted Porsche to develop a new engine, but they developed an entire car that was a four-seat version of the 356. The prototype called Porsche 530 was rejected as Studebaker wanted a larger car, with larger engine and with the engine in the front. The new prototype was called Porsche 542 or Studebaker Z-87.\nBody styles.\nThe 356 originated as a coup\u00e9 only 1948\u20131955. Over time, a variety of other styles appeared, including roadster, convertible, cabriolet, and a very rare split-roof.\nThe basic design of the 356 remained the same until production ended in 1965, with evolutionary, functional improvements rather than annual superficial styling changes.\nThe car used unibody construction, making restoration difficult for cars that were kept in rust-prone climates. Cabriolet models (convertibles with a full windshield and padded top) were offered from the start, and, in the early 1950s, sometimes comprised over 50% of total production. \nOne of the most desirable collector models is the 356 \"Speedster\", introduced in late 1954 after Max Hoffman advised the company that a lower-cost, somewhat spartan open-top version could sell well in the American market. With its low, raked windscreen (which could be removed for weekend racing), bucket seats and minimal folding top, the Speedster was an instant hit, especially in Southern California. A total of 4,854 speedsters were built (all years combined). It was replaced in late 1958 by the \"convertible D\" model. It featured a taller, more practical windshield (allowing improved headroom with the top erected), roll-up glass side-windows and more comfortable seats. The following year the 356\u00a0B \"roadster\" convertible replaced the D model but the sports car market's love affair with top-down motoring was fading; soft-top 356 model sales declined significantly in the early 1960s.\nA unique \"Karmann hardtop\" or \"notchback\" 356\u00a0B model was produced in 1961 and 1962, essentially a cabriolet-style body with a permanent metal roof.\nEngine.\nPorsche designers designed the 356's air-cooled pushrod OHV flat-four around the engine case originally designed for the Volkswagen Beetle, adding new cylinder heads, camshaft, crankshaft, intake and exhaust manifolds and dual carburetors, making \u2013 more than double the Beetle's horsepower. While the first prototype 356 had a mid-engine layout, all subsequent 356 engines were rear-mounted. The four-cam \"Carrera\" engine appeared in late 1955 as an extra cost option on the 356\u00a0A, and remained available through the 356 model run.\nLegacy.\nIn 2004, \"Sports Car International\" ranked the 356\u00a0C tenth on their list of top sports cars of the 1960s. It remains a highly regarded collector car, regularly bringing between US$20,000 and well over US$100,000 at auction. The limited production Carrera Speedster (with its special DOHC racing engine), SC, Super 90, and Speedster models are among the most desirable. Multiple restored Carrera variants (of which only about 140 were made) have sold for values in excess of US$800,000, with the vast majority sold for more than US$300,000 at auction. As of \u00a02015[ [update]], the most expensive 356 to sell was the daily driver of rocker Janis Joplin that was sold in New York by RM Sotheby's for $1,760,000 (\u00a31,163,630) in 2015.\nMotorsport.\nThe Porsche 356, close to stock or highly modified, has enjoyed much success in rallying and car racing events.\nAt the 1951 Le Mans 24 Hours, Porsche was the first and only German manufacturer to compete. Porsche fielded the 356 SL (, super light) \"Gm\u00fcnd-Coupe\" with its streamlined aluminum body and covered wheels. The debut was a huge success: Auguste Veuillet and his friend Edmond Mouche won the class 751 to 1100 cc and received the flag as 20th overall. \nSeveral Porsche 356s were stripped down in weight, and were modified in order to have better performance and handling for these races. A few notable examples include the Porsche 356 SL, and the Porsche 356\u00a0A Carrera GT.\nIn the early 1960s Porsche collaborated with Abarth and built the Porsche 356\u00a0B Carrera GTL Abarth coup\u00e9, which enjoyed some success in motorsports.\nFirst Carrera car.\nNumber 53456, the first 356 Carrera ever produced (a modified May 3, 1955 exemplar owned by Porsche engineer Reinhard Schmidt as first owner), was analyzed in February 2018 by \"Quattroruote\"'s subsidiary \"Ruoteclassiche\". It was estimated that its price was about \u20ac.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24628", "revid": "13549925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24628", "title": "Phospholipase", "text": "Class of enzymes that cleave phospholipids\nA phospholipase is an enzyme that hydrolyzes phospholipids into fatty acids and other lipophilic substances. There are four major classes, termed A, B, C, and D, which are distinguished by the type of reaction which they catalyze:\nTypes C and D are considered phosphodiesterases.\nEndothelial lipase is primarily a phospholipase.\nPhospholipase A2 acts on the intact lecithin molecule and hydrolyzes the fatty acid esterified to the second carbon atom. The resulting products are lysolecithin and a fatty acid. Phospholipase A2 is an enzyme present in the venom of bees, blennies and viper snakes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24629", "revid": "38706409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24629", "title": "Petrograd", "text": ""}
{"id": "24630", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24630", "title": "Pedro Mart\u00ednez", "text": "Dominican-American baseball pitcher (born 1971)\nPedro Jaime Mart\u00ednez (born October 25, 1971) is a Dominican-American former professional baseball starting pitcher who played in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1992 to 2009 for five teams\u2014most notably the Boston Red Sox from 1998 to 2004.\nAs of 2023, Mart\u00ednez's record of 219 wins and 100 losses places him tenth-highest in winning percentage in major league history and fifth-highest among pitchers with more than 2,000 career innings pitched. Mart\u00ednez ended his career with an earned run average (ERA) of 2.93, among the lowest ever by a pitcher with at least 2,500 innings pitched since 1920. He reached the 3,000 strikeout mark in fewer innings than any pitcher except Randy Johnson and Max Scherzer; Mart\u00ednez is the only pitcher other than Scherzer to compile over 3,000 career strikeouts with fewer than 3,000 innings pitched in his career. As of 2023, Mart\u00ednez's career strikeout rate of 10.04 per nine innings ranks sixth all-time among pitchers with over 1,500 innings.\nAn eight-time All-Star, Mart\u00ednez was at his peak from 1997 to 2003, establishing himself as one of the most dominant pitchers in baseball history. He won three Cy Young Awards (1997, 1999, 2000) and was runner-up twice (1998, 2002), posting a cumulative record of 118\u201336 (.766) with a 2.20 ERA, while leading his league in ERA five times and in winning percentage and strikeouts three times each. In 1999, Mart\u00ednez was runner-up for the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player Award, after winning the pitching Triple Crown with a 23\u20134 record, 2.07 ERA, and 313 strikeouts, and\u2014along with Johnson\u2014joined Gaylord Perry in the rare feat of winning the Cy Young Award in both the American and National Leagues (a feat since accomplished by Randy Johnson, Roger Clemens, Roy Halladay, Max Scherzer, and Blake Snell). He recorded the second-lowest single-season Fielding Independent Pitching (FIP) in the live ball era (1.39 in 1999), the second-lowest single-season WHIP total in major league history (0.737 in 2000), and the highest single-season Adjusted ERA+ in major league history (291, also in 2000). Although his performance suffered a steep decline in 2004, Mart\u00ednez ended the season memorably by helping the Red Sox end a long drought in winning their first World Series title in 86 years.\nOfficially listed at and , Mart\u00ednez was unusually small for a modern-day power pitcher, and is believed to have been somewhat smaller than his officially listed height and weight. In his early 30s, injuries began to keep him off the field to an increasing extent, with his appearances and success dropping off sharply in his final seasons. Modern sabermetric analysis has strongly highlighted Mart\u00ednez's achievements. As of 2023, his career strikeout-to-walk ratio, WHIP, and adjusted ERA+ are among the highest in major league history. Mart\u00ednez dominated while pitching most often in a hitter-friendly ballpark and facing some of the toughest competition during the steroid era, which is generally thought to have favored batters. Many consider Mart\u00ednez to be one of the greatest pitchers in major league history. He was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 2015 in his first year of eligibility, joining Juan Marichal as the second Dominican to be enshrined; his number (45) was retired by the Red Sox in a ceremony held two days after his Hall induction.\nEarly life.\nPedro Jaime Mart\u00ednez was born on October 25, 1971, in the Dominican Republic in the Santo Domingo suburb of Manoguayabo. He was the fifth of six siblings living in a palm wood house with a tin roof and dirt floors. His father, Pablo Jaime Abreu, worked odd jobs. His mother, Leopoldina Mart\u00ednez, worked for traditionally wealthy families, washing their clothes. When Mart\u00ednez was old enough to work, he held a job as a mechanic.\nMart\u00ednez did not have enough money to afford baseballs, so he improvised with oranges. His older brother Ram\u00f3n, was pitching at a Los Angeles Dodgers baseball camp in the Dominican Republic. As a young teenager, Mart\u00ednez carried his brother's bags at the camp. One day at the camp, Ram\u00f3n Mart\u00ednez clocked his 14-year-old brother's pitches at between 78 and 80 miles per hour.\nMart\u00ednez debuted professionally with the Tigres del Licey of the Dominican Winter League during the 1989\u201390 season. He then pitched briefly for the Azucareros del Este, before rejoining Licey in 1991\u201392 in a nine-player transaction that included George Bell, Jos\u00e9 Offerman and Julio Solano, among others.\nProfessional career.\nMinor leagues.\nMart\u00ednez was originally signed by the Dodgers as an amateur free agent in 1988. In his first season in the minors he was assigned to the Great Falls Dodgers where he worked with coach Guy Conti to develop a circle changeup which Conti had learned from Johnny Podres. Conti also worked with the young pitcher on his English and helped him assimilate to the United States; Mart\u00ednez later described Conti as his \"white daddy.\" As a minor leaguer in the Dodgers farm system, he was a highly touted prospect although some talent evaluators took issue with his \"poise\" despite his having a \"great fastball and circle-changeup.\"\nLos Angeles Dodgers (1992\u20131993).\nMart\u00ednez made his MLB debut on September 24, 1992, for the Dodgers against the Cincinnati Reds, working two scoreless innings of relief. He made his first start for the Dodgers on September 30, taking the loss while giving up two runs in a 3\u20131 loss to the Reds.\nAlthough Mart\u00ednez's brother Ram\u00f3n, then a star pitcher for the Dodgers, declared that his brother was an even better pitcher than he, the younger Mart\u00ednez was thought by manager Tommy Lasorda too small to be an effective starting pitcher at the MLB level; Lasorda used Pedro Mart\u00ednez almost exclusively as a relief pitcher. Lasorda was not the first to question Mart\u00ednez's stature and durability; in the minor leagues, the then-135-pound pitcher was threatened with a $500 fine if he was caught running. Mart\u00ednez turned in a strong 1993 season as the Dodgers' setup man, going 10\u20135 with a 2.61 ERA and 119 strikeouts, in 65 games; his 107 innings led all NL relievers.\nMontreal Expos (1994\u20131997).\nWith the Dodgers in need of a second baseman after a contract dispute with Jody Reed, Mart\u00ednez was traded to the Montreal Expos for Delino DeShields before the 1994 season. It was with the Expos that Mart\u00ednez developed into one of the top pitchers in baseball. Despite possessing a live fastball, he had difficulty maintaining control. It was during a bullpen session that manager Felipe Alou encouraged him to modify his primary grip on the fastball from two-seam to four-seam. The transformation was dramatic: the fastball \u2212 already among the fastest in the game \u2212 now was thrown with near-impeccable control and break that routinely overwhelmed hitters. On April 13, 1994, Mart\u00ednez took a perfect game through &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20443 innings until throwing a brushback pitch at Reggie Sanders that led Sanders to immediately charge the mound, starting a bench-clearing brawl. Mart\u00ednez ended up with a no-decision in the game, which the Expos eventually won 3\u20132.\nOn June 3, 1995, Mart\u00ednez pitched nine perfect innings in a game against the San Diego Padres, before giving up a hit in the bottom of the 10th inning. He was immediately removed from the game, and was the winning pitcher in Montreal's 1\u20130 victory. [See \"Memorable Games\"]\nIn 1996, during a game against the Philadelphia Phillies, Mike Williams attempted to hit Mart\u00ednez with retaliatory pitches for an earlier hit batter but failed with two consecutive attempts. After the second attempt, Mart\u00ednez charged the mound, and started a bench-clearing fight.\nIn 1997, Mart\u00ednez posted a 17\u20138 record for the Expos, and led the league in half a dozen pitching categories, including a 1.90 ERA, 305 strikeouts and 13 complete games pitched, while becoming the only Expo ever to win the National League Cy Young Award. The 13 complete games were tied for the second-highest single-season total in the modern era of baseball since Mart\u00ednez's career began (Curt Schilling had 15 in 1998; Chuck Finley and Jack McDowell also reached 13 in a year). However, this 1997 total is by far the highest in Mart\u00ednez's career, as he only completed more than five games in one other season (seven, in 2000). Mart\u00ednez was the first right-handed pitcher to reach 300 strikeouts with an ERA under 2.00 since Walter Johnson in 1912.\nBoston Red Sox (1998\u20132004).\nApproaching free agency, Mart\u00ednez was traded to the Boston Red Sox in November 1997 for Carl Pavano and Tony Armas Jr. Mart\u00ednez was subsequently signed to a six-year, $75 million contract (with an option for a seventh year at $17 million) by Red Sox general manager Dan Duquette, at the time the largest ever awarded to a pitcher. Mart\u00ednez paid immediate dividends in 1998, compiling a 19\u20137 record and finishing second in the American League in ERA, WHIP, strikeouts, and Cy Young Award voting.\nIn 1999, Mart\u00ednez finished 23\u20134 with a 2.07 ERA and 313 strikeouts (earning the Pitching Triple Crown) in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;213+1\u20443 innings across 31 games (29 starts). He led the entire major leagues with strikeouts per nine innings and strikeout-to-walk ratios of 13.20 and 8.46, respectively. His Fielding Independent Pitching (FIP) (a defense independent pitching statistic measuring a pitcher's effectiveness at limiting walks, home runs, and hits while accumulating strikeouts) of 1.39 was the lowest single-season total in the major leagues since 1910 among pitchers who threw more than 35 innings. The second best FIP in baseball in 1999 was Randy Johnson's 2.76, and that year, no one else in the American League had a FIP below 3.25. Mart\u00ednez also became just the ninth modern pitcher to record a second 300-strikeout season, along with Randy Johnson (6 times), Nolan Ryan (6 times), Sandy Koufax (3 times), Curt Schilling (3 times), Walter Johnson, Sam McDowell, J. R. Richard, and Rube Waddell. An anomaly among power pitchers, Mart\u00ednez is the only 20th-century pitcher to notch 300 strikeouts in a season without being at least six feet tall.\nMart\u00ednez unanimously won his second Cy Young Award and finished second in the AL Most Valuable Player (MVP) ballot. The MVP result was controversial, as Mart\u00ednez received the most first-place votes of any player (8 of 28), but was omitted from the ballots of two sportswriters, New York's George King and Minneapolis' LaVelle Neal. Buster Olney, writing for \"The New York Times\", mused that the sentiment that pitchers should not be considered MVP candidates due to the existence of the pitcher-specific Cy Young Award may have cost Mart\u00ednez the victory. King later wrote in The \"New York Post\" that he left Mart\u00ednez off of his ballot because he believed that, since they only appear in a fraction of their team's games, starting pitchers should only be considered for the Cy Young Award. \"It really made us all look very dumb\", Olney later said. \"People were operating under different rules. The question of eligibility is a very basic thing. People were determining eligibility for themselves.\" Texas Rangers catcher Iv\u00e1n Rodr\u00edguez narrowly won the award over Mart\u00ednez, by a margin of 252 points to 239. Rodr\u00edguez had been included on all 28 ballots. When asked about the result by WEEI-FM radio in January 2012, Mart\u00ednez said, \"I'm not afraid to say that the way that George King and Mr. LaVelle Neal III went about it was unprofessional.\"\nBetween April and May 1999, Mart\u00ednez struck out 10 or more batters in seven consecutive starts. Between August 1999 and April 2000, Mart\u00ednez achieved the same feat in 10 consecutive starts, averaging more than 15 strikeouts per nine innings during the latter streak. In 1999, Mart\u00ednez recorded a strikeout in 40 consecutive innings, which at the time was a major league record. For his career, Mart\u00ednez compiled 15 or more strikeouts in a game 10 times, which is tied with Roger Clemens for the third-most such games in history behind Nolan Ryan's 27 and Randy Johnson's 29.\nMart\u00ednez was named the AL Pitcher of the Month in April, May, June, and September 1999\u2014four times in a single season. Mart\u00ednez punctuated his dominance in the 1999 All-Star Game at Fenway Park. He struck out National League players Barry Larkin, Larry Walker, Sammy Sosa, Mark McGwire, and Jeff Bagwell in two innings pitched, earning All-Star Game MVP for his performance. It was the first time that a pitcher had struck out the first four batters to start an All-Star Game. Mart\u00ednez later said that the 1999 All-Star break was especially memorable for him because he was able to meet the members of the MLB All-Century Team and get an autograph from Ted Williams.\nMart\u00ednez was a focal point of Boston's 1999 playoff series against the Cleveland Indians. Starting the series opener, he was forced out of the game after four shutout innings due to a strained back with the Red Sox up 2\u20130. The Red Sox, however, lost the game 3\u20132. With the series tied at two games apiece, Mart\u00ednez was too injured to start the fifth and final game. However, neither team's starter was effective, and by the middle of the fourth inning, the game was tied 8\u20138. At this point, Mart\u00ednez entered the game as an emergency relief option. He pitched six no-hit innings, striking out eight and walking three, as the Red Sox won the deciding game of the series 12\u20138. In the American League Championship Series, Mart\u00ednez pitched seven shutout innings to beat the New York Yankees in Game 3, handing the soon-to-be World Series champions their only loss of the 1999 postseason.\nMart\u00ednez followed up 1999 with another excellent season in 2000 en route to his third Cy Young Award. His ERA of 1.74 was the lowest American League total since 1978. The total was about a third of that year's park-adjusted league ERA (4.97), resulting in an adjusted ERA+ of 291, the second highest single-season total in major league history among pitchers who threw more than 200 innings. Roger Clemens' 2000 ERA of 3.70 was the second lowest in the AL, but it was still more than double that of Mart\u00ednez's.\nMart\u00ednez's record was 18\u20136. In his six losses, he recorded 60 strikeouts, eight walks, and 30 hits allowed in 48 innings, with a 2.44 ERA and a 0.79 WHIP, while averaging eight innings per start. Mart\u00ednez's ERA in his losing games was lower than the best ERA in the National League (Kevin Brown's 2.58) across all games. Mart\u00ednez's first loss of the year was a 1\u20130 complete game in which he had 17 strikeouts and one walk. All of Mart\u00ednez's losses were quality starts, and he pitched eight or more innings in all but one of his losses. Mart\u00ednez received two runs or fewer of run support in 10 of his starts (over one-third of his starts); in such games, his ERA was a minuscule 1.25 with 4 complete games and 2 shutouts, but his win\u2013loss record was 4\u20135.\nMart\u00ednez's WHIP in 2000 was 0.74, the second lowest total in major league history behind George Walker in 1940. However, Walker's record came in a season in which he only pitched 49 innings, whereas Mart\u00ednez pitched 217 innings in 2000. Mart\u00ednez struck out an American League-leading 284 batters while only walking 32, thereby breaking his own record for the highest single-season strikeout-to-walk ratio (8.88) in American League history. Mart\u00ednez held opposing hitters to a slash line of .167/.213/.259 and recorded more than twice as many strikeouts (284) as hits allowed (128). When opposing teams had runners in scoring position, hitters' production against Mart\u00ednez was reduced to a slash line of .133/.188/.219.\nAcross 1999 and 2000, Mart\u00ednez allowed 288 hits and 69 walks in 430 innings, with 597 strikeouts, a 0.83 WHIP, and a 1.90 ERA. Some baseball pundits believe that given the era in which Mart\u00ednez pitched\u2014during the peak of the Steroid Era, in a league with a designated hitter, with hitter-friendly Fenway Park as his home field\u2014his performance represents the peak for any pitcher in baseball history.\nThough he continued his dominance when healthy, carrying a sub-2.00 ERA to the midpoint of the following season, Mart\u00ednez spent much of 2001 on the disabled list with a rotator cuff injury as the Red Sox slumped to a poor finish. Mart\u00ednez finished with a 7\u20133 record, a 2.39 ERA, and 163 strikeouts in 116 innings. Healthy in 2002, he rebounded to lead the league with a 2.26 ERA, 0.923 WHIP and 239 strikeouts, while going 20\u20134. However, that season's American League Cy Young Award narrowly went to 23-game winner Barry Zito of the Oakland Athletics, despite Zito's higher ERA, higher WHIP, fewer strikeouts, and lower winning percentage. Mart\u00ednez became the first pitcher since the introduction of the Cy Young Award to lead his league in each of those four statistics without winning the award. Mart\u00ednez's record was 14\u20134 in 2003. He led the league in ERA (2.22), ERA+ (211), and WHIP (1.04) for the fifth time each and finished second to league leader Esteban Loaiza by a single strikeout. Mart\u00ednez came in third for the 2003 Cy Young Award, which went to Toronto's Roy Halladay.\nDespite an uncharacteristically high 3.90 ERA in 2004, Mart\u00ednez went 16\u20139, ranked second in the AL in strikeouts and finished fourth in Cy Young voting. The Red Sox won the American League's wild-card berth, and Mart\u00ednez pitched effectively in the playoffs. He earned the win in Game 2 of the ALDS, and in the ALCS, he recorded his only loss of the postseason as well as a no-decision. In Game 3 of the World Series, he pitched seven shutout innings and retired the last 14 batters he faced. The Red Sox won the World Series in four games, securing their first championship in 86 years.\nMart\u00ednez finished his Red Sox career with a 117\u201337 record (a .760 winning percentage), a 2.52 ERA, a 190 ERA+, and 1683 strikeouts in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1383+2\u20443 innings. He finished in the top four in Cy Young Award balloting in six of his seven years in Boston, winning twice.\nNew York Mets (2005\u20132008).\nAfter Boston's World Series triumph in 2004, Mart\u00ednez became a free agent and signed a four-year, $53 million contract with the New York Mets. In 2005, his first season as a Met, Mart\u00ednez posted a 15\u20138 record with a 2.82 ERA, 208 strikeouts, and a league-leading 0.95 WHIP. It was his sixth league WHIP title, and the fifth time that he led the Major Leagues in the category. Opponents batted .204 against him.\nMart\u00ednez started the 2006 season at the top of his game. At the end of May, he was 5\u20131 with a 2.50 ERA, with 88 strikeouts and 17 walks and 44 hits allowed in 76 innings; Mart\u00ednez's record was worse than it could have been, with the Mets bullpen costing him two victories. However, during his May 26 start against the Florida Marlins, Mart\u00ednez was instructed by the umpires to change his undershirt. He slipped in the corridor, injuring his hip, and his promising season curdled. The effect was not immediately apparent; although Mart\u00ednez lost the Marlins game, his following start was a scintillating 0\u20130 duel with Arizona's Brandon Webb. But after that, beginning on June 6, Mart\u00ednez went 4\u20137 with a 7.10 ERA in a series of spotty starts interrupted twice by stays on the disabled list. A right calf injury plagued him for the last two months of the season. After Mart\u00ednez was removed from an ineffective September 15 outing, television cameras found him in the Mets dugout, apparently crying. Subsequent MRI exams revealed a torn muscle in Mart\u00ednez's left calf and a torn rotator cuff. Mart\u00ednez underwent surgery which sidelined him for most of the 2007 season.\nOn November 3, 2006, Mart\u00ednez stated that if he could not return to full strength, he might end up retiring after the 2007 season. \"It's getting better, and progress is above all what is hoped for\", Mart\u00ednez told the Associated Press. \"To go back, I have to recover, I have to be healthy. But if God doesn't want that, then I would have to think about giving it all up.\" Mart\u00ednez added, \"It's going to be a bitter winter because I am going to have to do a lot of work. The pain I feel was one of the worst I have felt with any injury in my career.\" But by December 30, 2006, Mart\u00ednez was more optimistic: \"The progress has been excellent. I don't have problems anymore with my reach or flexibility, and so far everything is going very well. The problem has to do with the calcification of the bone that was broken with the tear, and that had to be operated on. You have to let it run its course.\" Mart\u00ednez also reported bulking up as part of his recuperative regimen: \"I've put on about 10 pounds of muscle, because that's one of our strategies.\"\nOn September 3, 2007, Mart\u00ednez returned from the disabled list with his 207th career win, allowing two earned runs in five efficient innings and collecting his 3,000th career strikeout, becoming the 15th pitcher to do so. \"I thought I was going to have butterflies and like that\", said Mart\u00ednez, \"but I guess I'm too old.\" Mart\u00ednez's comeback was considered a great success, as the right-hander went 3\u20131 in five starts with a 2.57 ERA. But his last start was a crucial 3\u20130 loss to St. Louis in the final week of the 2007 Mets' historic collapse; Mart\u00ednez provided a good pitching performance (7 IP, 2 ER, 7 H, 1 BB, 8 K) but his teammates failed to score.\nMart\u00ednez became just the fourth pitcher to reach 3,000 strikeouts with fewer than 1,000 walks (in Mart\u00ednez's case, 701). Ferguson Jenkins, Greg Maddux and Curt Schilling had previously done likewise. Mart\u00ednez also joined Nolan Ryan and Randy Johnson to become the third 3,000-strikeout pitcher to have more strikeouts than innings pitched, and is also the first Latin American pitcher to have 3,000 strikeouts.\nHis unexpectedly strong finish in 2007 raised hopes, but 2008 was a lost season for Mart\u00ednez. He was injured just four innings into his first game of the season, an April 1 no-decision against the Florida Marlins. He later told reporters he'd felt a \"pop\" in his left leg. Mart\u00ednez was diagnosed with a strained hamstring and did not return to action for more than two months. Following his return, his fastball typically topped out in the 90\u201391\u00a0mph range, a lower velocity than he'd had during his prime but slightly higher than in recent seasons. Mart\u00ednez finished the season on a low note, losing all three of his decisions in September en route to a 5\u20136 record, the first losing record of his career. (Mart\u00ednez was 0\u20131 in two appearances in 1992.) His 5.61 ERA and 1.57 WHIP were also Mart\u00ednez's worst ever, and for the first time in his career, he failed to strike out at least twice as many batters as he walked (87\u201344).\nDuring his four-year Met contract, Mart\u00ednez was 32\u201323 in 79 starts, with a 3.88 ERA and a 1.16 WHIP.\nPhiladelphia Phillies (2009).\nA free agent, Mart\u00ednez did not sign with a major league team during the winter. In March, he joined the Dominican Republic's squad for the 2009 World Baseball Classic, in an attempt to showcase his arm. Mart\u00ednez pitched six scoreless innings with 6 strikeouts and no walks, but the team was quickly eliminated from the tournament and no MLB contract was forthcoming. In July 2009, Phillies scouts evaluated Mart\u00ednez in two simulated games against the Phillies DSL team, leading to a one-year, $1-million contract. Mart\u00ednez told reporters, \"I would just like to be the backup. If I could be the backup, that would be a great thing to have\u2014a healthy Pedro behind everybody else, in case something happens. That would be a great feeling to have on a team, eh?\"\nReplacing Jamie Moyer as a starter in the Phillies rotation on August 12, Mart\u00ednez won his 2009 debut. In his return to New York on August 23, Mart\u00ednez's win against the Mets was preserved by a rare unassisted triple play by second baseman Eric Bruntlett in the bottom of the ninth inning. With his win on September 3\u2014his third as a Philadelphia Phillie and his 100th as a National Leaguer\u2014Mart\u00ednez became the 10th pitcher in history to win at least 100 games in each league. On September 13, Mart\u00ednez pitched eight innings to beat the Mets again, by a final score of 1\u20130. His 130 pitches were the most he had thrown in a game since the ALDS in October 2003. Philadelphia won each of Mart\u00ednez's first seven starts, the first time in franchise history that this had occurred with any debuting Phillies pitcher. In the NLCS against the Los Angeles Dodgers, he pitched seven shutout innings while allowing just two hits, but the Philadelphia bullpen faltered in the following inning, costing Mart\u00ednez the win.\nIntense media interest preceded Mart\u00ednez's \"return to Yankee Stadium\" in Game 2 of the World Series. At the pre-game press conference, he seemed to relish the attention, telling reporters, \"When you have 60,000 people chanting your name, waiting for you to throw the ball, you have to consider yourself someone special, someone that really has a purpose out there.\" Mart\u00ednez pitched effectively in his second-ever World Series start, but left the game in the 7th inning trailing, 2\u20131, and wound up taking the loss. Before his second start of the Series, Mart\u00ednez called himself and opposing pitcher Andy Pettitte \"old goats\", and acknowledged that Red Sox fans were rooting for him: \"I know that they don't like the Yankees to win, not even in Nintendo games.\" However, Mart\u00ednez allowed four runs in four innings, falling to 0\u20132 as the Phillies lost the sixth game and the 2009 World Series to the New York Yankees.\nFollowing the Series, Mart\u00ednez announced that he had no intention of retiring, but the 2010 season came and went without his signing with a team. Media reports surfaced that the Phillies had been discussing a deal to bring Mart\u00ednez back for another half-season, but Mart\u00ednez's agent announced in July that he would not be pitching at all in 2010, while remaining interested in a 2011 return. In December 2010, Mart\u00ednez told a reporter for \"El D\u00eda\" \"I'm realizing what it is to be a normal person. ... It's most likely that I don't return to active baseball ... but honestly I don't know if I'll definitively announce my retirement.\" The pitcher received some initial inquiries during the winter, but did not sign with any team for 2011. On December 4, 2011, he officially announced his retirement.\nIn December 2009, \"Sports Illustrated\" named Mart\u00ednez as one of the five pitchers in the starting rotation of its MLB All-Decade Team. In February 2011, the Smithsonian's National Portrait Gallery announced that it had acquired an oil painting of Mart\u00ednez for its collection.\nPost-playing career.\nOn January 24, 2013, Mart\u00ednez joined the Boston Red Sox as a special assistant to general manager Ben Cherington.\nMart\u00ednez was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in January 2015 with 91.1% of the vote. His Hall of Fame plaque has him wearing a Boston Red Sox cap. \"I cannot be any prouder to take Red Sox Nation to the Hall of Fame with the logo on my plaque\", Mart\u00ednez said in a statement. \"I am extremely proud to represent Boston and all of New England with my Hall of Fame career. I'm grateful to all of the teams for which I played, and especially fans, for making this amazing honor come true.\"\nMart\u00ednez has worked on MLB on TBS since 2013 as a studio analyst for postseason coverage. He has also worked on the MLB Network since 2015 as a studio analyst. Also in 2015, he released an autobiography, \"Pedro\", which he co-authored with Michael Silverman of the \"Boston Herald\". Reflecting on his career, he named Barry Bonds, Edgar Mart\u00ednez, Derek Jeter, Kenny Lofton and Ichiro Suzuki as the most difficult hitters he had to face. All-Stars Sandy Alomar Jr., Mois\u00e9s Alou, Carlos Beltr\u00e1n, Carlos Delgado, David Ortiz, Dean Palmer, Alex Rodriguez and Alfonso Soriano have named Mart\u00ednez as the toughest pitcher they ever had to face.\nOn June 22, 2015, it was announced that Mart\u00ednez's number 45 would be retired by the Red Sox on July 28, two days after his Hall of Fame induction. Red Sox principal owner John Henry stated, \"to be elected into the Baseball Hall of Fame upon his first year of eligibility speaks volumes regarding Pedro's outstanding career, and is a testament to the respect and admiration so many in baseball have for him.\"\nOn February 1, 2018, Mart\u00ednez was announced as part of the 2018 induction class for the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame.\nMemorable games.\nImperfect hit-by-pitch.\nOn April 13, 1994, in his second start as a Montreal Expo, Mart\u00ednez lost a perfect game with one out in the eighth inning when he hit Cincinnati's Reggie Sanders with a pitch. An angered Sanders charged the mound, and threw Mart\u00ednez to the ground, before both teams cleared the benches and broke up the fight. Sanders was later ridiculed in the press for assuming that a pitcher would abandon a perfect game in order to hit a batter intentionally. Mart\u00ednez allowed a leadoff single in the ninth inning, breaking up his no-hitter, and was removed for reliever John Wetteland (who loaded the bases, then allowed two sacrifice flies, thus saddling Mart\u00ednez with a no-decision). Three years later, in 1997, Mart\u00ednez had a one-hitter against the Reds; the one hit came in the fifth inning.\nNine perfect innings.\nOn June 3, 1995, while pitching for Montreal, he retired the first 27 Padres hitters he faced. However, the score was still tied 0\u20130 at that point and the game went into extra innings. The Expos scored a run in the top of the 10th, but Mart\u00ednez surrendered a double to the 28th batter he faced, Bip Roberts. Expos manager Felipe Alou then removed Mart\u00ednez from the game, bringing in reliever Mel Rojas, who retired the next three batters. Mart\u00ednez officially recorded neither a perfect game nor a no-hitter. Until 1991, the rules would have judged it differently; however, a rule clarification specified that perfect games, even beyond nine innings, must remain perfect until the game is completed for them to be considered perfect. This retroactively decertified many no-hit games, including Ernie Shore's perfect relief stint in 1917 and Harvey Haddix's legendary 12 perfect innings in 1959 (lost in the 13th).\nAll-Star strikeout streak.\nMart\u00ednez was selected as the starting pitcher for the American League All-Star team in 1999. The game, on July 13, was at Fenway Park, Mart\u00ednez' home field. Mart\u00ednez struck out Barry Larkin, Larry Walker, and Sammy Sosa consecutively in the first inning. He then struck out Mark McGwire leading off the second, becoming the first pitcher to begin an All-Star game by striking out the first four batters. (The National League's Brad Penny matched the feat in 2006.) The next batter, Matt Williams, managed to reach first base from an error by Roberto Alomar. Mart\u00ednez then proceeded to strike out Jeff Bagwell while Williams was caught stealing.\nYankee Stadium one-hitter.\nMart\u00ednez again came close to a perfect game on September 10, 1999, when he beat the New York Yankees, 3\u20131. He faced just 28 batters while striking out 17 and walking none (Mart\u00ednez hit the Yankees' first batter, Chuck Knoblauch, but he was then caught stealing). Only a solo home run by Chili Davis separated Mart\u00ednez from a no-hitter. The Davis home run came in the second inning, eliminating any suspense, but sportswriter Thomas Boswell called it the best game ever pitched at Yankee Stadium. Mart\u00ednez retired the last 22 batters he faced in a row during this game. Over the last &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+2\u20443 innings, (11 batters), Mart\u00ednez threw 53 consecutive pitches without allowing a base runner, and without a single ball being put in play. (Nine strikeouts, two foul-ball fly outs.) The Yankees managed only one fair ball out of his last 70 pitches after the fourth inning.\nHitless clincher.\nOn October 11, 1999, in Game 5 of the ALDS, Charles Nagy started for Cleveland and Bret Saberhagen started for Boston, both on only three days' rest. Boston jumped out to a quick two-run lead in the top of the first inning, but Cleveland responded with three runs of their own in the bottom half of the inning. The hitting continued, knocking Saberhagen out of the game in the second inning having allowed five runs, and then Nagy out of the game after only finishing only three innings and allowing eight runs. Going into the fourth inning, manager Jimy Williams opted to replace Derek Lowe with the ailing Mart\u00ednez, who had left Game 1 with a back injury. This decision would prove to be wise, as Mart\u00ednez threw six hitless innings in relief to win and clinch the ALDS.\n1999 ALCS.\nGame 3 of the American League Championship Series was the long-anticipated matchup between Mart\u00ednez and Roger Clemens. The Red Sox scored first. After a leadoff triple by Offerman, Valentin homered to put the Red Sox ahead 2\u20130. The onslaught continued as the Red Sox scored in all but two innings. Clemens was done in the third inning and the Red Sox would go on to win 13\u20131 and make the series two games to one. When Clemens was knocked out, Red Sox fans chanted \"Where is Roger?\" and then a response chant of \"In the Shower\". Mart\u00ednez struck out 12 Yankees in seven scoreless innings and allowing just two hits, to beat Red Sox nemesis Roger Clemens and the New York Yankees in Game 3, handing the World Champions their only loss of the 1999 postseason. Mart\u00ednez finished 1999 with a streak of 17 scoreless innings in the playoffs.\nFaceoff vs. Roger Clemens on ESPN.\nOn May 28, 2000, Mart\u00ednez and Roger Clemens had a dramatic duel on ESPN's \"Sunday Night Baseball\" telecast. Both pitchers excelled, combining to allow only nine hits and one walk while striking out 22. A scoreless game was finally broken up in the ninth inning by Trot Nixon's home run off Clemens. In the bottom of the ninth, the Yankees loaded the bases against a tiring Mart\u00ednez, but New York could not score, as Mart\u00ednez completed the shutout.\nAnother close call.\nOn August 29, 2000, Mart\u00ednez took a no-hitter into the 9th against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, losing it on a leadoff single by John Flaherty. Mart\u00ednez had begun the night by hitting the leadoff batter, Gerald Williams, in the hand. Williams started towards first base before charging the mound and knocking down Mart\u00ednez; in the scrum, Williams was tackled by Boston catcher Jason Varitek. Mart\u00ednez then retired the next 24 hitters in a row until allowing Flaherty's single, and finished with a one-hitter. He had 13 strikeouts and no walks in the game; the Flaherty single would have broken up a perfect game, if not for the leadoff hit batsman. Mart\u00ednez never threw an official no-hitter. However, he has professed a lack of interest in the matter: \"I think my career is more interesting than one game.\"\nMart\u00ednez vs. Zimmer.\nIn the testy Game 3 of the 2003 ALCS, after allowing single runs in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th innings, Mart\u00ednez hit Yankees right fielder Karim Garc\u00eda near the shoulders with a pitch, sparking a shouting match between Mart\u00ednez and the New York bench. Directing his attention at Yankees catcher Jorge Posada, Mart\u00ednez jabbed a finger into the side of his own head, which some, including an enraged Yankee bench coach Don Zimmer, interpreted as a threatened beanball. Emotions remained high in the bottom of the inning, which was led off by Boston slugger Manny Ram\u00edrez. Ram\u00edrez became irate over a high pitch from Roger Clemens, and both benches cleared. During the ensuing commotion, the 72-year-old Zimmer ran onto the field and started straight for Mart\u00ednez; as he charged, Mart\u00ednez grabbed Zimmer by the head and threw him to the ground. Later, Mart\u00ednez claimed that he was not indicating that he would hit Posada in the head, but that he would remember what Posada was saying to him. In 2009, Mart\u00ednez stated that he regretted the incident but denied being at fault. Zimmer did not give much credence to Mart\u00ednez's statements. Mart\u00ednez wrote in 2015 that the altercation with Zimmer was his only regret in his entire career.\nGrady Little's visit.\nMart\u00ednez was also on the mound for Game 7 of the 2003 ALCS versus the Yankees. With the Red Sox ahead 5\u20132 at the start of the 8th inning, a tiring Mart\u00ednez pitched his way into trouble. He was visited on the mound by manager Grady Little, but was left in to pitch, in a controversial non-move. The Yankees tied the score against Mart\u00ednez in that inning on four successive hits, leading to a dramatic extra-inning, series-ending victory for New York, costing Grady Little his job with the Red Sox as his contract was not renewed.\nWorld Series debut.\nAfter a comparatively lackluster season in 2004 (though still a solid season by general standards), Mart\u00ednez got the win in Game 3 of the World Series. He shut out the St. Louis Cardinals through seven innings, recording his final 14 outs consecutively in what would turn out to be his last game for Boston.\nMets.\nWith the Mets, on April 10, 2005, at Turner Field, Mart\u00ednez outdueled John Smoltz, pitching a two-hit, one-run, complete game en route to his first Mets victory. On August 14, 2005, against the Dodgers, he pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+1\u20443 hitless innings, but ended up losing the no-hitter and the game.\nReturn to Fenway.\nIn June 2006, the Mets played an interleague series against the Red Sox, which was Mart\u00ednez's first appearance at Fenway Park since leaving the team. The Red Sox gave their former ace a two-minute video tribute on June 27, but showed no courtesies to Mart\u00ednez the following night. In his June 28, 2006 start, Mart\u00ednez lasted only three innings, and was rocked for eight runs (six earned) on seven hits, losing his worst game as a Met just before going onto the disabled list. It was Mart\u00ednez's only career appearance against the Red Sox, the only Major League team against which he did not record a victory.\nWho's Your Daddy?\nIn both the 2004 ALCS and the 2009 World Series, Mart\u00ednez was greeted with the chant \"Who's your daddy?\" from New York Yankees fans whenever Mart\u00ednez was pitching due to his statement on September 24, 2004, saying, \"I mean what can I say? Just tip my hat and call the Yankees my daddy.\"\nPitching style.\nMart\u00ednez's four-seam fastball, power curveball, cutter, sinker, and circle changeup were all well above average; combined with his historically excellent control, they proved to be an overpowering package. Mart\u00ednez threw from a low three-quarters position (nearly sidearm) that hid the ball very well from batters, who have remarked on the difficulty of picking up Mart\u00ednez's delivery. Additionally, Mart\u00ednez threw three different types of fastballs - a straight high-velocity four-seam fastball he used to overpower hitters, a two-seamer that ran to his throwing arm side, and a cut fastball that ran away from his throwing arm side - each with the pinpoint control that defined him.\nEarly in his career, Mart\u00ednez's fastball was consistently clocked in the 95\u201398\u00a0mph range. Using it in combination with his devastating changeup and occasionally mixing in his curveball, he was as dominant a pitcher as the game has ever seen. \"Sports Illustrated\"'s Joe Posnanski wrote, \"There has never been a pitcher in baseball history\u2014not Walter Johnson, not Lefty Grove, not Sandy Koufax, not Tom Seaver, not Roger Clemens\u2014who was more overwhelming than the young Pedro.\"\nAs injuries and the aging process took their toll, Mart\u00ednez made the adjustment to rely more on finesse than power. His fastball settled into the 85\u201388\u00a0mph range, although he was occasionally able to reach 90\u201391\u00a0mph when the need arose. Mart\u00ednez continued to use a curveball, a circle changeup, and an occasional slider. With his command of the strike zone, he remained an effective strikeout pitcher despite the drop in velocity. Baseball historian Bill James described Mart\u00ednez as being substantially more effective than his pitching peers due to his variety of pitches, pitch speeds, pinpoint control, and numerous modes of deception.\nPersonal life.\nPedro is married to former ESPN Deportes sideline reporter Carolina Cruz de Mart\u00ednez, who now runs his charitable organization, Pedro Mart\u00ednez and Brothers Foundation. He has four children. One of his sons, Pedro Mart\u00ednez Jr., signed with the Detroit Tigers as an international free agent in September 2017. Another son, Pedro Isa\u00edas Mart\u00ednez, signed at Nova Southeastern University in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. Pedro Jr. now plays for the Malone Border Hounds of the Empire Professional Baseball League in Northern New York. He also has another son, Enyol Mart\u00ednez, and a daughter, Nayla Mart\u00ednez. Pedro has been a naturalized American citizen since 2006.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24632", "revid": "6982000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24632", "title": "Picts", "text": "Medieval tribal confederation in northern Britain\nThe Picts were a group of peoples in what is now Scotland north of the Firth of Forth, in the Early Middle Ages. Where they lived and details of their culture can be gleaned from early medieval texts and Pictish stones. The name appears in written records as an exonym from the late third century AD. They are assumed to have been descendants of the Caledonii and other northern Iron Age tribes. Their territory is referred to as \"Pictland\" by modern historians. Initially made up of several chiefdoms, it came to be dominated by the Pictish kingdom of Fortriu from the seventh century. During this Verturian hegemony, \"Picti\" was adopted as an endonym. This lasted around 160 years until the Pictish kingdom merged with that of D\u00e1l Riata to form the Kingdom of Alba, ruled by the House of Alpin. The concept of \"Pictish kingship\" continued for a few decades until it was abandoned during the reign of Caustant\u00edn mac \u00c1eda.\nPictish society was typical of many early medieval societies in northern Europe and had parallels with neighbouring groups. Archaeology gives some impression of their culture. Medieval sources report the existence of a Pictish language, and evidence shows that it was an Insular Celtic language related to the Brittonic spoken by the Celtic Britons to the south. Pictish was gradually displaced by Middle Gaelic as part of the wider Gaelicisation from the late ninth century. Much of their history is known from outside sources, including Bede, hagiographies of saints such as that of Columba by Adomn\u00e1n, and the Irish annals.\nDefinitions.\nThere has been substantial critical reappraisal of the concept of \"Pictishness\" over recent decades. The popular view at the beginning of the twentieth century was that they were exotic \"lost people\". It was noted in the highly influential work of 1955, \"The Problem of the Picts\", that the subject area was difficult, with the archaeological and historical records frequently being at odds with the conventional essentialist expectations about historical peoples. Since then, the culture-historical paradigm of archaeology dominant since the late nineteenth century gave way to the processual archaeology (formerly known as the \"New Archaeology\") theory. Moreover, there has been significant reappraisal of textual sources written, for example by Bede and Adomn\u00e1n in the seventh and eighth centuries. These works relate events of previous centuries, but current scholarship recognises their often allegorical, pseudo-historical nature, and their true value often lies in an appraisal of the time period in which they were written.\nThe difficulties with Pictish history and archaeology arise from the fact that the people who were called Picts were a fundamentally heterogeneous group with little cultural uniformity. Care is needed to avoid viewing them through the lens of what the cultural historian Gilbert M\u00e1rkus calls the \"Ethnic Fallacy\". The people known as \"Picts\" by outsiders in late antiquity were very different from those who later adopted the name, in terms of language, culture, religion and politics.\nThe term \"Pict\" is found in Roman sources from the end of the third century AD, when it was used to describe unromanised people in northern Britain. The term is most likely to have been pejorative, emphasising their supposed barbarism in contrast to the Britons under Roman rule. It has been argued, most notably by James Fraser, that the term \"Pict\" would have had little meaning to the people to whom it was being applied. Fraser posits that it was adopted as an endonym only in the late seventh century, as an inclusive term for people under rule of the Verturian hegemony, centered in Fortriu (the area around modern-day Inverness and Moray), particularly following the Battle of Dun Nechtain. This view is, however, not universal. Gordon Noble and Nicholas Evans consider it plausible, if not provable, that \"Picts\" may have been used as an endonym by those northern Britons in closest contact with Rome as early as the fourth century. \nThe bulk of written history dates from the seventh century onwards. The Irish annalists and contemporary scholars, like Bede, use \"Picts\" to describe the peoples under the Verturian hegemony. This encompassed most of Scotland north of the Forth-Clyde isthmus and to the exclusion of territory occupied by D\u00e1l Riata in the west. To the south lay the Brittonic kingdom of Strathclyde, with Lothian occupied by Northumbrian Angles. The use of \"Picts\" as a descriptive term continued to the formation of the Alp\u00ednid dynasty in the ninth century, and the merging of the Pictish Kingdom with that of D\u00e1l Riata.\nEtymology.\nThe Latin word first occurs in a panegyric, a formal eulogising speech from 297 and is most commonly explained as meaning 'painted' (from Latin 'to paint'; , 'painted', cf. Greek , 'picture'). This is generally understood to be a reference to the practice of tattooing. Claudian, in his account of the Roman commander Stilicho, written around 404, speaks of designs on the bodies of dying Picts, presumably referring to tattoos or body paint. Isidore of Seville reports in the early seventh century that the practice was continued by the Picts. An alternative suggestion is that the Latin \"Picti\" was derived from a native form, perhaps related etymologically to the Gallic Pictones. \nThe Picts were called \"Cruithni\" in Old Irish and \"Prydyn\" in Old Welsh. These are lexical cognates, from the proto-Celtic *\"kwritu\" 'form', from which *\"Pretania\" (Britain) also derives. \"Pretani\" (and with it \"Cruithni\" and \"Prydyn\") is likely to have originated as a generalised term for any native inhabitant of Britain. This is similar to the situation with the Gaelic name of Scotland, \"Alba\", which originally seems to have been a generalised term for Britain. It has been proposed that the Picts may have called themselves \"Albidosi\", a name found in the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba during the reign of M\u00e1el Coluim mac Domnaill.\nOrigins.\nThe origin myth presented in Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" describes the Picts as settlers from Scythia who arrived on the northern coast of Ireland by chance. Local Scoti leaders redirected them to northern Britain where they settled, taking Scoti wives. The \"Pictish Chronicle\", repeating this story, further names the mythical founding leader \"Cruithne\" (the Gaelic word for \"Pict\"), followed by his sons, whose names correspond with the seven provinces of Pictland: \"Circin\", \"Fidach\", \"Fortriu\", \"Fotla\" (\"Atholl\"), \"Cat\", \"Ce\" and \"Fib\". Bede's account has long been recognised as pseudohistorical literary invention, and is thought to be of Pictish origin, composed around 700. Its structure is similar to the origin myths of other peoples and its main purpose appears to have been to legitimise the annexation of Pictish territories by Fortriu and the creation of a wider Pictland. \nA study published in 2023 sequenced the whole genomes from eight individuals associated with the Pictish period, excavated from cemeteries at Lundin Links in Fife and Balintore, Easter Ross. The study observed \"broad affinities\" between the mainland Pictish genomes, Iron Age Britons and the present-day people living in western Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Northumbria, but less with the rest of England, supporting the current archaeological theories of a \"local origin\" of the Pictish people.\nHistory.\nThe area occupied by the Picts had previously been described by Roman writers and geographers as the home of the \"Caledonii\". These Romans also used other names to refer to Britannic tribes living in the area, including \"Verturiones\", \"Taexali\" and \"Venicones\".\nWritten history relating to the Picts as a people emerges in the Early Middle Ages. At that time, the Gaels of D\u00e1l Riata controlled what is now Argyll, as part of a kingdom straddling the sea between Britain and Ireland. The Angles of Bernicia, which merged with Deira to form Northumbria, overwhelmed the adjacent British kingdoms, and for much of the 7th century Northumbria was the most powerful kingdom in Britain. The Picts were probably tributary to Northumbria until the reign of Bridei mac Beli, when, in 685, the Anglians suffered a defeat at the Battle of Dun Nechtain that halted their northward expansion. The Northumbrians continued to dominate southern Scotland for the remainder of the Pictish period.\nD\u00e1l Riata was subject to the Pictish king \u00d3engus mac Fergusa (reigned 729\u2013761), and although it had its own kings beginning in the 760s, does not appear to have recovered its political independence from the Picts. A later Pictish king, Caustant\u00edn mac Fergusa (793\u2013820), placed his son Domnall on the throne of D\u00e1l Riata (811\u2013835). Pictish attempts to achieve a similar dominance over the Britons of Alt Clut (Strathclyde) were not successful.\nThe Viking Age brought significant change to Britain and Ireland, no less in Scotland than elsewhere, with the Vikings conquering and settling the islands and various mainland areas, including Caithness, Sutherland and Galloway. In the middle of the 9th century Ketil Flatnose is said to have founded the Kingdom of the Isles, governing many of these territories, and by the end of that century the Vikings had destroyed the Kingdom of Northumbria, greatly weakened the Kingdom of Strathclyde, and founded the Kingdom of York. In a major battle in 839, the Vikings killed the King of Fortriu, E\u00f3gan mac \u00d3engusa, the King of D\u00e1l Riata \u00c1ed mac Boanta, and many others. In the aftermath, in the 840s, Kenneth MacAlpin () became king of the Picts.\nDuring the reign of C\u00ednaed's grandson, Caustant\u00edn mac \u00c1eda (900\u2013943), outsiders began to refer to the region as the Kingdom of Alba rather than the Kingdom of the Picts, but it is not known whether this was because a new kingdom was established or Alba was simply a closer approximation of the Pictish name for the Picts. However, though the Pictish language did not disappear suddenly, a process of Gaelicisation (which may have begun generations earlier) was clearly underway during the reigns of Caustant\u00edn and his successors. \nBy a certain point, probably during the 11th century, all the inhabitants of northern Alba had become fully Gaelicised Scots, and Pictish identity was forgotten. Henry of Huntingdon was one of the first (surviving) historians to note this disappearance in the mid-12th century \"Historia Anglorum\". Later, the idea of Picts as a tribe was revived in myth and legend.\nKings and kingdoms.\nThe early history of Pictland is unclear. In later periods, multiple kings ruled over separate kingdoms, with one king, sometimes two, more or less dominating their lesser neighbours. \"De Situ Albanie\", a 13th century document, the Pictish Chronicle, the 11th century \"Duan Albanach\", along with Irish legends, have been used to argue the existence of seven Pictish kingdoms. These are: Cait, or Cat, situated in modern Caithness and Sutherland; Ce, situated in modern Mar and Buchan; Circin, perhaps situated in modern Angus and the Mearns; Fib, the modern Fife; Fidach, location unknown, but possibly near Inverness; Fotla, modern Atholl (\"Ath-Fotla\"); and Fortriu, cognate with the \"Verturiones\" of the Romans, recently shown to be centred on Moray.\nMore small kingdoms may have existed. Some evidence suggests that a Pictish kingdom also existed in Orkney. \"De Situ Albanie\" is not the most reliable of sources, and the number of kingdoms, one for each of the seven sons of \"Cruithne\", the eponymous founder of the Picts, may well be grounds enough for disbelief. Regardless of the exact number of kingdoms and their names, the Pictish nation was not a united one.\nFor most of Pictish recorded history, the kingdom of Fortriu appears dominant, so much so that \"king of Fortriu\" and \"king of the Picts\" may mean one and the same thing in the annals. This was previously thought to lie in the area around Perth and southern Strathearn; however, recent work has convinced those working in the field that Moray (a name referring to a very much larger area in the High Middle Ages than the county of Moray) was the core of Fortriu.\nThe Picts are often thought to have practised matrilineal kingship succession on the basis of Irish legends and a statement in Bede's history. The kings of the Picts when Bede was writing were Bridei and Nechtan, sons of Der Ilei, who indeed claimed the throne through their mother Der Ilei, daughter of an earlier Pictish king.\nIn Ireland, kings were expected to come from among those who had a great-grandfather who had been king. Kingly fathers were not frequently succeeded by their sons, not because the Picts practised matrilineal succession, but because they were usually followed by their own brothers or cousins (agnatic seniority), more likely to be experienced men with the authority and the support necessary to be king. This was similar to tanistry.\nThe only woman ruler, mentioned in early Scottish history, is the Pictish Queen in 617, who summoned pirates to massacre Donn\u00e1n and his companions on the island of Eigg.\nThe nature of kingship changed considerably during the centuries of Pictish history. While earlier kings had to be successful war leaders to maintain their authority, kingship became rather less personalised and more institutionalised during this time. Bureaucratic kingship was still far in the future when Pictland became Alba, but the support of the church, and the apparent ability of a small number of families to control the kingship for much of the period from the later 7th century onwards, provided a considerable degree of continuity. In much the same period, the Picts' neighbours in D\u00e1l Riata and Northumbria faced considerable difficulties, as the stability of succession and rule that previously benefited them ended.\nThe later Mormaers are thought to have originated in Pictish times, and to have been copied from, or inspired by, Northumbrian usages. It is unclear whether the Mormaers were originally former kings, royal officials, or local nobles, or some combination of these. Likewise, the Pictish shires and thanages, traces of which are found in later times, are thought to have been adopted from their southern neighbours.\nSociety.\nThe archaeological record gives insight into the Picts' material culture, and suggest a society not readily distinguishable from its \nBritish, Gaelic, or Anglo-Saxon neighbours. Although analogy and knowledge of other Celtic societies may be a useful guide, these extend across a very large area. Relying on knowledge of pre-Roman Gaul, or 13th-century Ireland, as a guide to the Picts of the 6th century may be misleading if the analogy is pursued too far.\nLike most northern European people in Late Antiquity, the Picts were farmers living in small communities. Cattle and horses were an obvious sign of wealth and prestige. Sheep and pigs were kept in large numbers, and place names suggest that transhumance was common. Animals were small by later standards, although horses from Britain were imported into Ireland as breeding stock to enlarge native horses. From Irish sources, it appears that the elite engaged in competitive cattle breeding for size, and this may have been the case in Pictland also. Carvings show hunting with dogs, and also, unlike in Ireland, with falcons. Cereal crops included wheat, barley, oats and rye. Vegetables included kale, cabbage, onions and leeks, peas and beans and turnips, and some types no longer common, such as skirret. Plants such as wild garlic, nettles and watercress may have been gathered in the wild. The pastoral economy meant that hides and leather were readily available. Wool was the main source of fibres for clothing, and flax was also common, although it is not clear if they grew it for fibres, for oil, or as a foodstuff. Fish, shellfish, seals, and whales were exploited along coasts and rivers. The importance of domesticated animals suggests that meat and milk products were a major part of the diet of ordinary people, while the elite would have eaten a diet rich in meat from farming and hunting.\nNo Pictish counterparts to the areas of denser settlement around important fortresses in Gaul and southern Britain, or any other significant urban settlements, are known. Larger, but not large, settlements existed around royal forts, such as at Burghead Fort, or associated with religious foundations. No towns are known in Scotland until the 12th century.\nThe technology of everyday life is not well recorded, but archaeological evidence shows it to have been similar to that in Ireland and Anglo-Saxon England. Recently evidence has been found of watermills in Pictland. Kilns were used for drying kernels of wheat or barley, not otherwise easy in the changeable, temperate climate.\nThe early Picts are associated with piracy and raiding along the coasts of Roman Britain. Even in the Late Middle Ages, the line between traders and pirates was unclear, so that Pictish pirates were probably merchants on other occasions. It is generally assumed that trade collapsed with the Roman Empire, but this is to overstate the case. There is only limited evidence of long-distance trade with Pictland, but tableware and storage vessels from Gaul, probably transported up the Irish Sea, have been found. This trade may have been controlled from Dunadd in D\u00e1l Riata, where such goods appear to have been common. While long-distance travel was unusual in Pictish times, it was far from unknown as stories of missionaries, travelling clerics and exiles show.\nBrochs are popularly associated with the Picts. Although built earlier in the Iron Age, with construction ending around 100 AD, they remained in use beyond the Pictish period. Crannogs, which may originate in Neolithic Scotland, may have been rebuilt, and some were still in use in the time of the Picts. The most common sort of buildings would have been roundhouses and rectangular timbered halls. While many churches were built in wood, from the early 8th century, if not earlier, some were built in stone.\nThe Picts are often said to have tattooed themselves, but evidence for this is limited. Naturalistic depictions of Pictish nobles, hunters and warriors, male and female, without obvious tattoos, are found on monumental stones. These include inscriptions in Latin and ogham script, not all of which have been deciphered. The well-known Pictish symbols found on standing stones and other artefacts have defied attempts at translation over the centuries. Pictish art can be classed as \"Celtic\" and later as Insular. Irish poets portrayed their Pictish counterparts as very much like themselves.\nReligion.\nEarly Pictish religion is presumed to have resembled Celtic polytheism in general, although only place names remain from the pre-Christian era. When the Pictish elite converted to Christianity is uncertain, but traditions place Saint Palladius in Pictland after he left Ireland, and link Abernethy with Saint Brigid of Kildare. Saint Patrick refers to \"apostate Picts\", while the poem \"Y Gododdin\" does not remark on the Picts as pagans. Bede wrote that Saint Ninian (confused by some with Saint Finnian of Moville, who died c.\u2009589), had converted the southern Picts. Recent archaeological work at Portmahomack places the foundation of the monastery there, an area once assumed to be among the last converted, in the late 6th century. This is contemporary with Bridei mac Maelchon and Columba, but the process of establishing Christianity throughout Pictland will have extended over a much longer period.\nPictland was not solely influenced by Iona and Ireland. It also had ties to churches in Northumbria, as seen in the reign of Nechtan mac Der Ilei. The reported expulsion of Ionan monks and clergy by Nechtan in 717 may have been related to the controversy over the dating of Easter, and the manner of tonsure, where Nechtan appears to have supported the Roman usages, but may equally have been intended to increase royal power over the church. Nonetheless, the evidence of place names suggests a wide area of Ionan influence in Pictland. Likewise, the \"C\u00e1in Adomn\u00e1in\" (Law of Adomn\u00e1n, \"Lex Innocentium\") counts Nechtan's brother Bridei among its guarantors.\nThe importance of monastic centres in Pictland was not as great as in Ireland. In areas that have been studied, such as Strathspey and Perthshire, it appears that the parochial structure of the High Middle Ages existed in early medieval times. Among the major religious sites of eastern Pictland were Portmahomack, Cennr\u00edgmonaid (later St Andrews), Dunkeld, Abernethy and Rosemarkie. It appears that these are associated with Pictish kings, which argue for a considerable degree of royal patronage and control of the church. Portmahomack in particular has been the subject of recent excavation and research, published by Martin Carver.\nThe cult of saints was, as throughout Christian lands, of great importance in later Pictland. While kings might venerate great saints, such as Saint Peter in the case of Nechtan, and perhaps Saint Andrew in the case of the second \u00d3engus mac Fergusa, many lesser saints, some now obscure, were important. The Pictish Saint Drostan appears to have had a wide following in the north in earlier times, although he was all but forgotten by the 12th century. Saint Serf of Culross was associated with Nechtan's brother Bridei. It appears, as is well known in later times, that noble kin groups had their own patron saints, and their own churches or abbeys.\nArt.\nPictish art is primarily associated with monumental stones, but also includes smaller objects of stone and bone, and metalwork such as brooches. It uses a distinctive form of the general Celtic early medieval development of La T\u00e8ne style with increasing influences from the Insular art of 7th and 8th century Ireland and Northumbria, and then Anglo-Saxon and Irish art as the early medieval period continues. The most well-known surviving examples are the many Pictish stones located across Pictland. \nThe symbols and patterns consist of animals including the Pictish Beast, the \"rectangle\", the \"mirror and comb\", \"double-disc and Z-rod\" and the \"crescent and V-rod\", among many others. There are also bosses and lenses with pelta and spiral designs. The patterns are curvilinear with hatchings. The cross-slabs are carved with Pictish symbols, Insular-derived interlace and Christian imagery, though interpretation is often difficult due to wear and obscurity. Several of the Christian images carved on various stones, such as David the harpist, Daniel and the lion, or scenes of St Paul and St Anthony meeting in the desert, have been influenced by the Insular manuscript tradition.\nPictish metalwork is found throughout Pictland (modern-day Scotland) and also further south; the Picts appeared to have a considerable amount of silver available, probably from raiding further south, or the payment of subsidies to keep them from doing so. The very large hoard of late Roman hacksilver found at Traprain Law may have originated in either way. The largest hoard of early Pictish metalwork was found in 1819 at Norrie's Law in Fife, but unfortunately much was dispersed and melted down (Scots law on treasure finds has always been unhelpful to preservation). A famous 7th century silver and enamel plaque from the hoard has a \"Z-rod\", one of the Pictish symbols, in a particularly well-preserved and elegant form; unfortunately few comparable pieces have survived. \nOver ten heavy silver chains, some over 0.5m long, have been found from this period; the double-linked Whitecleuch Chain is one of only two that have a penannular linking piece for the ends, with symbol decoration including enamel, which shows how these were probably used as \"choker\" necklaces.\nIn the 8th and 9th centuries, after Christianization, the Pictish elite adopted a particular form of the Irish Celtic brooch, preferring true penannular brooches with lobed terminals. Some older Irish brooches were adapted to the Pictish style, for example, the c. 8th century Breadalbane Brooch now in the British Museum. The St Ninian's Isle Treasure (c. 750\u2013825 AD) contains the best collection of Pictish forms. Other characteristics of Pictish metalwork are dotted backgrounds or designs and animal forms influenced by Insular art. The 8th century Monymusk Reliquary has elements of Pictish and Irish styles.\nLanguage.\nThe Pictish language is extinct. Evidence is limited to place-names, personal names, and contemporary records in other languages. The evidence of place and personal names appears to indicate that the Picts spoke an Insular Celtic language related to the Brittonic languages of the south. It is possible that Pictish diverged significantly from the Southern Neo-Brittonic dialects due to the lack of influence of Latin. The absence of surviving written material in Pictish, discounting the enigmatic Ogham inscriptions, does not indicate a pre-literate society. The church certainly required literacy in Latin, and could not function without copyists to produce liturgical documents. Pictish iconography shows books being read and carried, and its naturalistic style gives every reason to suppose that such images were of real life. Literacy was not widespread, but among the senior clergy, and in monasteries, it would have been common enough. It is likely that the Pictish language influenced the development, grammar and vocabulary of Scottish Gaelic, which has some characteristics unique among the Goidelic languages and which, in certain cases, are more reminiscent of Brittonic languages.\nToponymic evidence indicates the advance of Gaelic into Pictland; Atholl, meaning \"New Ireland\", is attested in the early 8th century. This may be an indication of the advance of Gaelic. Fortriu also contains place names suggesting Gaelic settlement, or Gaelic influences. A pre-Gaelic interpretation of the name as \"Athfocla\" meaning 'north pass' or 'north way', as in gateway to Moray, suggests that the Gaelic \"Athfotla\" may be a Gaelic misreading of the minuscule c for t.\nOgham inscriptions on Pictish stones and other Pictish archaeological objects survive. These were argued by influential linguist Kenneth Jackson to be unintelligible as Celtic and evidence for the coexistence of a non-Celtic language in Pictish times. Celtic interpretations have since been advanced for some of these inscriptions, but the nature of the inscriptions continues to be a matter of debate.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral and cited bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24634", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24634", "title": "Permutation group", "text": "Group whose operation is composition of permutations\nIn mathematics, a permutation group is a group \"G\" whose elements are permutations of a given set \"M\" and whose group operation is the composition of permutations in \"G\" (which are thought of as bijective functions from the set \"M\" to itself). The group of \"all\" permutations of a set \"M\" is the symmetric group of \"M\", often written as Sym(\"M\"). The term \"permutation group\" thus means a subgroup of the symmetric group. If \"M\" = {1, 2, ..., \"n\"} then Sym(\"M\") is usually denoted by S\"n\", and may be called the \"symmetric group on n letters\".\nBy Cayley's theorem, every group is isomorphic to some permutation group.\nThe way in which the elements of a permutation group permute the elements of the set is called its group action. Group actions have applications in the study of symmetries, combinatorics and many other branches of mathematics, physics and chemistry.\nBasic properties and terminology.\nA \"permutation group\" is a subgroup of a symmetric group; that is, its elements are permutations of a given set. It is thus a subset of a symmetric group that is closed under composition of permutations, contains the identity permutation, and contains the inverse permutation of each of its elements. A general property of finite groups implies that a finite nonempty subset of a symmetric group is a permutation group if and only if it is closed under permutation composition.\nThe degree of a group of permutations of a finite set is the number of elements in the set. The order of a group (of any type) is the number of elements (cardinality) in the group. By Lagrange's theorem, the order of any finite permutation group of degree \"n\" must divide \"n\"! since \"n\"-factorial is the order of the symmetric group \"S\"\"n\".\nNotation.\nSince permutations are bijections of a set, they can be represented by Cauchy's \"two-line notation\". This notation lists each of the elements of \"M\" in the first row, and for each element, its image under the permutation below it in the second row. If formula_1 is a permutation of the set formula_2 then,\n formula_3\nFor instance, a particular permutation of the set {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} can be written as\n formula_4\nthis means that \"\u03c3\" satisfies \"\u03c3\"(1) = 2, \"\u03c3\"(2) = 5, \"\u03c3\"(3) = 4, \"\u03c3\"(4) = 3, and \"\u03c3\"(5) = 1. The elements of \"M\" need not appear in any special order in the first row, so the same permutation could also be written as\n formula_5\nPermutations are also often written in cycle notation (\"cyclic form\") so that given the set \"M\" = {1, 2, 3, 4}, a permutation \"g\" of \"M\" with \"g\"(1) = 2, \"g\"(2) = 4, \"g\"(4) = 1 and \"g\"(3) = 3 will be written as (1, 2, 4)(3), or more commonly, (1, 2, 4) since 3 is left unchanged; if the objects are denoted by single letters or digits, commas and spaces can also be dispensed with, and we have a notation such as (124). The permutation written above in 2-line notation would be written in cycle notation as formula_6\nComposition of permutations\u2013the group product.\nThe product of two permutations is defined as their composition as functions, so formula_7 is the function that maps any element \"x\" of the set to formula_8. Note that the rightmost permutation is applied to the argument first, because of the way function composition is written. Some authors prefer the leftmost factor acting first, but to that end permutations must be written to the \"right\" of their argument, often as a superscript, so the permutation formula_1 acting on the element formula_10 results in the image formula_11. With this convention, the product is given by formula_12.\n However, this gives a \"different\" rule for multiplying permutations. This convention is commonly used in the permutation group literature, but this article uses the convention where the rightmost permutation is applied first.\nSince the composition of two bijections always gives another bijection, the product of two permutations is again a permutation. In two-line notation, the product of two permutations is obtained by rearranging the columns of the second (leftmost) permutation so that its first row is identical with the second row of the first (rightmost) permutation. The product can then be written as the first row of the first permutation over the second row of the modified second permutation. For example, given the permutations,\nformula_13\nthe product \"QP\" is:\nformula_14\nThe composition of permutations, when they are written in cycle notation, is obtained by juxtaposing the two permutations (with the second one written on the left) and then simplifying to a disjoint cycle form if desired. Thus, the above product would be given by:\nformula_15\nSince function composition is associative, so is the product operation on permutations: formula_16. Therefore, products of two or more permutations are usually written without adding parentheses to express grouping; they are also usually written without a dot or other sign to indicate multiplication (the dots of the previous example were added for emphasis, so would simply be written as formula_17).\nNeutral element and inverses.\nThe identity permutation, which maps every element of the set to itself, is the neutral element for this product. In two-line notation, the identity is\nformula_18\nIn cycle notation, \"e\" = (1)(2)(3)...(\"n\") which by convention is also denoted by just (1) or even ().\nSince bijections have inverses, so do permutations, and the inverse \"\u03c3\"\u22121 of \"\u03c3\" is again a permutation. Explicitly, whenever \"\u03c3\"(\"x\")=\"y\" one also has \"\u03c3\"\u22121(\"y\")=\"x\". In two-line notation the inverse can be obtained by interchanging the two lines (and sorting the columns if one wishes the first line to be in a given order). For instance\nformula_19\nTo obtain the inverse of a single cycle, we reverse the order of its elements. Thus,\nformula_20\nTo obtain the inverse of a product of cycles, we first reverse the order of the cycles, and then we take the inverse of each as above. Thus,\nformula_21\nHaving an associative product, an identity element, and inverses for all its elements, makes the set of all permutations of \"M\" into a group, Sym(\"M\"); a permutation group.\nExamples.\nConsider the following set \"G\"1 of permutations of the set \"M\" = {1, 2, 3, 4}:\n\"G\"1 forms a group, since \"aa\" = \"bb\" = \"e\", \"ba\" = \"ab\", and \"abab\" = \"e\". This permutation group is, as an abstract group, the Klein group \"V\"4.\nAs another example consider the . Let the vertices of a square be labeled 1, 2, 3 and 4 (counterclockwise around the square starting with 1 in the top left corner). The symmetries are determined by the images of the vertices, that can, in turn, be described by permutations. The rotation by 90\u00b0 (counterclockwise) about the center of the square is described by the permutation (1234). The 180\u00b0 and 270\u00b0 rotations are given by (13)(24) and (1432), respectively. The reflection about the horizontal line through the center is given by (12)(34) and the corresponding vertical line reflection is (14)(23). The reflection about the 1,3\u2212diagonal line is (24) and reflection about the 2,4\u2212diagonal is (13). The only remaining symmetry is the identity (1)(2)(3)(4). This permutation group is known, as an abstract group, as the dihedral group of order 8.\nGroup actions.\nIn the above example of the symmetry group of a square, the permutations \"describe\" the movement of the vertices of the square induced by the group of symmetries. It is common to say that these group elements are \"acting\" on the set of vertices of the square. This idea can be made precise by formally defining a group action.\nLet \"G\" be a group and \"M\" a nonempty set. An action of \"G\" on \"M\" is a function \"f\": \"G\" \u00d7 \"M\" \u2192 \"M\" such that\nThis pair of conditions can also be expressed as saying that the action induces a group homomorphism from \"G\" into \"Sym\"(\"M\"). Any such homomorphism is called a \"(permutation) representation\" of \"G\" on \"M\".\nFor any permutation group, the action that sends (\"g\", \"x\") \u2192 \"g\"(\"x\") is called the natural action of \"G\" on \"M\". This is the action that is assumed unless otherwise indicated. In the example of the symmetry group of the square, the group's action on the set of vertices is the natural action. However, this group also induces an action on the set of four triangles in the square, which are: \"t\"1 = 234, \"t\"2 = 134, \"t\"3 = 124 and \"t\"4 = 123. It also acts on the two diagonals: \"d\"1 = 13 and \"d\"2 = 24.\nTransitive actions.\nThe action of a group \"G\" on a set \"M\" is said to be \"transitive\" if, for every two elements \"s\", \"t\" of \"M\", there is some group element \"g\" such that \"g\"(\"s\") = \"t\". Equivalently, the set \"M\" forms a single orbit under the action of \"G\". Of the examples above, the group {e, (1 2), (3 4), (1 2)(3 4)} of permutations of {1, 2, 3, 4} is not transitive (no group element takes 1 to 3) but the group of symmetries of a square is transitive on the vertices.\nPrimitive actions.\nA permutation group \"G\" acting transitively on a non-empty finite set \"M\" is \"imprimitive\" if there is some nontrivial set partition of \"M\" that is preserved by the action of \"G\", where \"nontrivial\" means that the partition isn't the partition into singleton sets nor the partition with only one part. Otherwise, if \"G\" is transitive but does not preserve any nontrivial partition of \"M\", the group \"G\" is \"primitive\".\nFor example, the group of symmetries of a square is imprimitive on the vertices: if they are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4 in cyclic order, then the partition into opposite pairs is preserved by every group element. On the other hand, the full symmetric group on a set \"M\" is always primitive.\nCayley's theorem.\nAny group \"G\" can act on itself (the elements of the group being thought of as the set \"M\") in many ways. In particular, there is a regular action given by (left) multiplication in the group. That is, \"f\"(\"g\", \"x\") = \"gx\" for all \"g\" and \"x\" in \"G\". For each fixed \"g\", the function \"f\"\"g\"(\"x\") = \"gx\" is a bijection on \"G\" and therefore a permutation of the set of elements of \"G\". Each element of \"G\" can be thought of as a permutation in this way and so \"G\" is isomorphic to a permutation group; this is the content of Cayley's theorem.\nFor example, consider the group \"G\"1 acting on the set {1, 2, 3, 4} given above. Let the elements of this group be denoted by \"e\", \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" = \"ab\" = \"ba\". The action of \"G\"1 on itself described in Cayley's theorem gives the following permutation representation:\n\"f\"\"e\" \u21a6 (\"e\")(\"a\")(\"b\")(\"c\")\n\"f\"\"a\" \u21a6 (\"ea\")(\"bc\")\n\"f\"\"b\" \u21a6 (\"eb\")(\"ac\")\n\"f\"\"c\" \u21a6 (\"ec\")(\"ab\").\nIsomorphisms of permutation groups.\nIf \"G\" and \"H\" are two permutation groups on sets \"X\" and \"Y\" with actions \"f\"1 and \"f\"2 respectively, then we say that \"G\" and \"H\" are \"permutation isomorphic\" (or \"isomorphic as permutation groups\") if there exists a bijective map \"\u03bb\" : \"X\" \u2192 \"Y\" and a group isomorphism \"\u03c8\" : \"G\" \u2192 \"H\" such that\n \"\u03bb\"(\"f\"1(\"g\", \"x\")) = \"f\"2(\"\u03c8\"(\"g\"), \"\u03bb\"(\"x\")) for all \"g\" in \"G\" and \"x\" in \"X\".\nIf \"X\" = \"Y\" this is equivalent to \"G\" and \"H\" being conjugate as subgroups of Sym(\"X\"). The special case where \"G\" = \"H\" and \"\u03c8\" is the identity map gives rise to the concept of \"equivalent actions\" of a group.\nIn the example of the symmetries of a square given above, the natural action on the set {1,2,3,4} is equivalent to the action on the triangles. The bijection \"\u03bb\" between the sets is given by \"i\" \u21a6 \"t\"\"i\". The natural action of group \"G\"1 above and its action on itself (via left multiplication) are not equivalent as the natural action has fixed points and the second action does not.\nOligomorphic groups.\nWhen a group \"G\" acts on a set \"S\", the action may be extended naturally to the Cartesian product \"Sn\" of \"S\", consisting of \"n\"-tuples of elements of \"S\": the action of an element \"g\" on the \"n\"-tuple (\"s\"1, ..., \"s\"\"n\") is given by\n \"g\"(\"s\"1, ..., \"s\"\"n\") = (\"g\"(\"s\"1), ..., \"g\"(\"s\"\"n\")).\nThe group \"G\" is said to be \"oligomorphic\" if the action on \"Sn\" has only finitely many orbits for every positive integer \"n\". (This is automatic if \"S\" is finite, so the term is typically of interest when \"S\" is infinite.)\nThe interest in oligomorphic groups is partly based on their application to model theory, for example when considering automorphisms in countably categorical theories.\nHistory.\nThe study of groups originally grew out of an understanding of permutation groups. Permutations had themselves been intensively studied by Lagrange in 1770 in his work on the algebraic solutions of polynomial equations. This subject flourished and by the mid 19th century a well-developed theory of permutation groups existed, codified by Camille Jordan in his book \"Trait\u00e9 des Substitutions et des \u00c9quations Alg\u00e9briques\" of 1870. Jordan's book was, in turn, based on the papers that were left by \u00c9variste Galois in 1832.\nWhen Cayley introduced the concept of an abstract group, it was not immediately clear whether or not this was a larger collection of objects than the known permutation groups (which had a definition different from the modern one). Cayley went on to prove that the two concepts were equivalent in Cayley's theorem.\nAnother classical text containing several chapters on permutation groups is Burnside's \"Theory of Groups of Finite Order\" of 1911. The first half of the twentieth century was a fallow period in the study of group theory in general, but interest in permutation groups was revived in the 1950s by H. Wielandt whose German lecture notes were reprinted as \"Finite Permutation Groups\" in 1964."}
{"id": "24635", "revid": "90173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24635", "title": "Protein kinase", "text": "Enzyme that adds phosphate groups to other proteins\nA protein kinase is a kinase which selectively modifies other proteins by covalently adding phosphates to them (phosphorylation) as opposed to kinases which modify lipids, carbohydrates, or other molecules. Phosphorylation usually results in a functional change of the target protein (substrate) by changing enzyme activity, cellular location, or association with other proteins. The human genome contains about 500 protein kinase genes and they constitute about 2% of all human genes. There are two main types of protein kinase. The great majority are serine/threonine kinases, which phosphorylate the hydroxyl groups of serines and threonines in their targets. Most of the others are tyrosine kinases, although additional types exist. Protein kinases are also found in bacteria and plants. Up to 30% of all human proteins may be modified by kinase activity, and kinases are known to regulate the majority of cellular pathways, especially those involved in signal transduction.\nChemical activity.\nThe chemical activity of a protein kinase involves removing a phosphate group from ATP and covalently attaching it to one of three amino acids that have a free hydroxyl group. Most kinases act on both serine and threonine, others act on tyrosine, and a number (dual-specificity kinases) act on all three. There are also protein kinases that phosphorylate other amino acids, including histidine kinases that phosphorylate histidine residues.\nStructure.\nEukaryotic protein kinases are enzymes that belong to a very extensive family of proteins that share a conserved catalytic core. The structures of over 280 human protein kinases have been determined.\nThere are a number of conserved regions in the catalytic domain of protein kinases. In the N-terminal extremity of the catalytic domain there is a glycine-rich stretch of residues in the vicinity of a lysine amino acid, which has been shown to be involved in ATP binding. In the central part of the catalytic domain, there is a conserved aspartic acid, which is important for the catalytic activity of the enzyme.\nSerine/threonine-specific protein kinases.\nSerine/threonine protein kinases (EC https://) phosphorylate the OH group of serine or threonine (which have similar side chains). Activity of these protein kinases can be regulated by specific events (e.g., DNA damage), as well as numerous chemical signals, including cAMP/cGMP, diacylglycerol, and Ca2+/calmodulin.\nOne very important group of protein kinases are the MAP kinases (acronym from: \"mitogen-activated protein kinases\"). Important subgroups are the kinases of the ERK subfamily, typically activated by mitogenic signals, and the stress-activated protein kinases JNK and p38. While MAP kinases are serine/threonine-specific, they are activated by combined phosphorylation on serine/threonine and tyrosine residues. Activity of MAP kinases is restricted by a number of protein phosphatases, which remove the phosphate groups that are added to specific serine or threonine residues of the kinase and are required to maintain the kinase in an active conformation.\nTyrosine-specific protein kinases.\nTyrosine-specific protein kinases (EC https:// and EC https://) phosphorylate tyrosine amino acid residues, and like serine/threonine-specific kinases are used in signal transduction. They act primarily as growth factor receptors and in downstream signaling from growth factors. Some examples include:\nReceptor tyrosine kinases.\nThese kinases consist of extracellular domains, a transmembrane spanning alpha helix, and an intracellular tyrosine kinase domain protruding into the cytoplasm. They play important roles in regulating cell division, cellular differentiation, and morphogenesis. More than 50 receptor tyrosine kinases are known in mammals.\nStructure.\nThe extracellular domains serve as the ligand-binding part of the molecule, often inducing the domains to form homo- or heterodimers. The transmembrane element is a single \u03b1 helix. The intracellular or cytoplasmic Protein kinase domain is responsible for the (highly conserved) kinase activity, as well as several regulatory functions.\nRegulation.\nLigand binding causes two reactions:\nAutophosphorylation stabilizes the active conformation of the kinase domain. When several amino acids suitable for phosphorylation are present in the kinase domain (e.g., the insulin-like growth factor receptor), the activity of the kinase can increase with the number of phosphorylated amino acids; in this case, the first phosphorylation switches the kinase from \"off\" to \"standby\".\nSignal transduction.\nThe active tyrosine kinase phosphorylates specific target proteins, which are often enzymes themselves. An important target is the ras protein signal-transduction chain.\nReceptor-associated tyrosine kinases.\nTyrosine kinases recruited to a receptor following hormone binding are receptor-associated tyrosine kinases and are involved in a number of signaling cascades, in particular those involved in cytokine signaling (but also others, including growth hormone). One such receptor-associated tyrosine kinase is Janus kinase (JAK), many of whose effects are mediated by STAT proteins. (\"See JAK-STAT pathway.\")\nDual-specificity protein kinases.\nSome kinases have dual-specificity kinase activities. For example, MEK (MAPKK), which is involved in the MAP kinase cascade, is a both a serine/threonine and tyrosine kinase.\nHistidine-specific protein kinases.\nHistidine kinases are structurally distinct from most other protein kinases and are found mostly in prokaryotes as part of two-component signal transduction mechanisms. A phosphate group from ATP is first added to a histidine residue within the kinase, and later transferred to an aspartate residue on a 'receiver domain' on a different protein, or sometimes on the kinase itself. The aspartyl phosphate residue is then active in signaling.\nHistidine kinases are found widely in prokaryotes, as well as in plants, fungi and eukaryotes. The pyruvate dehydrogenase family of kinases in animals is structurally related to histidine kinases, but instead phosphorylate serine residues, and probably do not use a phospho-histidine intermediate.\nInhibitors.\nDeregulated kinase activity is a frequent cause of disease, in particular cancer, wherein kinases regulate many aspects that control cell growth, movement and death. Drugs that inhibit specific kinases are being developed to treat several diseases, and some are currently in clinical use, including Gleevec (imatinib) and Iressa (gefitinib).\nKinase assays and profiling.\nDrug developments for kinase inhibitors are started from http:// , the lead compounds are usually profiled for specificity before moving into further tests. Many profiling services are available from fluorescent-based assays to https://, and http://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24636", "revid": "1628949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24636", "title": "Pisa", "text": "Pisa ( ; ) is a city and \"comune\" (municipality) in Tuscany, Central Italy, straddling the Arno just before it empties into the Ligurian Sea. It is the capital city of the Province of Pisa. Although Pisa is known worldwide for the Leaning Tower of Pisa, the city contains more than twenty other historic churches, and several medieval and Renaissance palaces, mostly facing each other on the avenues along the Arno (\"Lungarno\"). Much of the city's architecture was financed from its history as one of the Italian maritime republics.\nThe city is also home to the University of Pisa, which has a history going back to the 12th century, the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, founded by Napoleon in 1810, and its offshoot, the Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies.&lt;ref name=\"gradscuola/\"&gt;http:// Information statistics&lt;/ref&gt;\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nMost believe the hypothesis that the origin of the name Pisa comes from Etruscan and means 'mouth', as Pisa is at the mouth of the Arno river.\nAlthough throughout history there have been several uncertainties about the origin of the city of Pisa, excavations made in the 1980s and 1990s found numerous archaeological remains, including the fifth century BC tomb of an Etruscan prince, proving the Etruscan origin of the city, and its role as a maritime city, showing that it also maintained trade relations with other Mediterranean civilizations.\nAncient Roman authors referred to Pisa as an old city. Virgil, in his \"Aeneid\", states that Pisa was already a great center by the times described; and gives the epithet of \"Alph\u0113ae\" to the city because it was said to have been founded by colonists from Pisa in Elis, near which the Alpheius river flowed. The Virgilian commentator Servius wrote that the Teuti founded the town 13 centuries before the start of the common era.\nThe maritime role of Pisa should have been already prominent if the ancient authorities ascribed to it the invention of the naval ram. Pisa took advantage of being the only port along the western coast between Genoa (then a small village) and Ostia. Pisa served as a base for Roman naval expeditions against Ligurians and Gauls. In 180 BC, it became a Roman colony under Roman law, as . In 89 BC, became a \"municipium\". Emperor Augustus fortified the colony into an important port and changed the name to .\nPisa supposedly was founded on the shore, but due to the alluvial sediments from the Arno and the Serchio, whose mouth lies about north of the Arno's, the shore moved west. Strabo states that the city was away from the coast. Currently, it is located from the coast. However, it was a maritime city, with ships sailing up the Arno. In the 90s AD, a baths complex was built in the city.\nLate Antiquity and Early Middle Ages.\nDuring the last years of the Western Roman Empire, Pisa did not decline as much as the other cities of Italy, probably due to the complexity of its river system and its consequent ease of defence. In the seventh century, Pisa helped Pope Gregory\u00a0I by supplying numerous ships in his military expedition against the Byzantines of Ravenna (what \"military expedition by Pope Gregory against the Byzantine Empire\"): Pisa was the sole Byzantine centre of Tuscia to fall peacefully in Lombard hands, through assimilation with the neighbouring region where their trading interests were prevalent. Pisa began in this way its rise to the role of main port of the Upper Tyrrhenian Sea and became the main trading centre between Tuscany and Corsica, Sardinia, and the southern coasts of France and Spain.\nAfter Charlemagne had defeated the Lombards under the command of Desiderius in\u00a0774, Pisa went through a crisis, but soon recovered. Politically, it became part of the duchy of Lucca. In 860, Pisa was captured by vikings led by Bj\u00f6rn Ironside. In 930, Pisa became the county centre (status it maintained until the arrival of Otto I) within the mark of Tuscia. Lucca was the capital but Pisa was the most important city, as in the middle of tenth century Liutprand of Cremona, bishop of Cremona, called Pisa (\"capital of the province of Tuscia\"), and a century later, the marquis of Tuscia was commonly referred to as \"marquis of Pisa\". In 1003, Pisa was the protagonist of the first communal war in Italy, against Lucca. From the naval point of view, since the ninth century, the emergence of the Saracen pirates prompted the city to expand its fleet. In the following years, this fleet gave the town an opportunity for more expansion. In 828, Pisan ships assaulted the coast of North Africa. In 871, they took part in the defence of Salerno from the Saracens. In 970, they gave also strong support to Otto\u00a0I's expedition, defeating a Byzantine fleet in front of Calabrese coasts.\n11th century.\nThe power of Pisa as a maritime nation began to grow and reached its apex in the 11th century, when it acquired traditional fame as one of the four main historical maritime republics of Italy ().\nAt that time, the city was a very important commercial centre and controlled a significant Mediterranean merchant fleet and navy. It expanded its powers in 1005 through the sack of in the south of Italy. Pisa, which was attacked in 1011, was in continuous conflict with some 'Saracens' - a medieval term to refer to Arab Muslims - who had their bases in Corsica. In 1017, Sardinian Giudicati were militarily supported by Pisa, in alliance with Genoa, to defeat the Saracen King Mugahid, who had settled a logistic base in the north of Sardinia the year before. This victory gave Pisa supremacy in the Tyrrhenian Sea. When the Pisans subsequently ousted the Genoese from Sardinia, a new conflict and rivalry was born between these major marine republics. Between 1030 and 1035, Pisa went on to defeat several rival towns in Sicily and conquer Carthage in North Africa. In 1051\u20131052, the admiral Jacopo Ciurini conquered Corsica, provoking more resentment from the Genoese. In 1063, Admiral Giovanni Orlandi, coming to the aid of the Norman Roger I, took Palermo from the Saracen pirates. The gold treasure taken from the Saracens in Palermo allowed the Pisans to start the building of their cathedral and the other monuments which constitute the famous .\nIn 1060, Pisa engaged in its first battle with Genoa. The Pisan victory helped to consolidate its position in the Mediterranean. Pope Gregory VII recognised in 1077 the new \"Laws and customs of the sea\" instituted by the Pisans, and in 1081 Emperor Henry IV recognized their communal government. This was simply a confirmation of the present situation, because in those years, the marquis had already been excluded from power. In 1092, Pope Urban II awarded Pisa the supremacy over Corsica and Sardinia, and at the same time raising the town to the rank of archbishopric.\nThe Pisan fleet captured the Zirid city of Mahdia in 1087, securing a ransom from its ruler. Four years later, Pisan and Genoese ships helped Alfonso VI of Castilla to push El Cid out of Valencia. A Pisan fleet of 120 ships also took part in the First Crusade, and the Pisans were instrumental in the taking of Jerusalem in 1099. On their way to the Holy Land, the ships did not miss the occasion to sack some Byzantine islands; the Pisan crusaders were led by their archbishop Daibert, the future patriarch of Jerusalem. Pisa and the other took advantage of the crusade to establish trading posts and colonies in the Eastern coastal cities of the Levant. In particular, the Pisans founded colonies in Antiochia, Acre, Jaffa, Tripoli, Tyre, Latakia, and Accone. They also had other possessions in Jerusalem and Caesarea, plus smaller colonies (with lesser autonomy) in Cairo, Alexandria, and of course Constantinople, where the Byzantine Emperor Alexius I Comnenus granted them special mooring and trading rights. In all these cities, the Pisans were granted privileges and immunity from taxation, but had to contribute to the defence in case of attack. In the 12th century, the Pisan quarter in the eastern part of Constantinople had grown to 1,000 people. For some years of that century, Pisa was the most prominent commercial and military ally of the Byzantine Empire, overcoming Venice itself.\n12th century.\nIn 1113, Pisa and Pope Paschal II set up, together with the count of Barcelona and other contingents from Provence and Italy (Genoese excluded), a war to free the Balearic Islands from the Moors; the queen and the king of Mallorca were brought in chains to Tuscany. Though the Almoravides soon reconquered the island, the booty taken helped the Pisans in their magnificent programme of buildings, especially the cathedral, and Pisa gained a role of pre-eminence in the Western Mediterranean.\nIn the following years, the powerful Pisan fleet, led by archbishop Pietro Moriconi, drove away the Saracens after ferocious battles. Though short-lived, this Pisan success in Spain increased the rivalry with Genoa. Pisa's trade with Languedoc, Provence (Noli, Savona, Fr\u00e9jus, and Montpellier) were an obstacle to Genoese interests in cities such as Hy\u00e8res, Fos, Antibes, and Marseille.\nThe war began in 1119 when the Genoese attacked several galleys on their way home to the motherland, and lasted until 1133. The two cities fought each other on land and at sea, but hostilities were limited to raids and pirate-like assaults.\nIn June 1135, Bernard of Clairvaux took a leading part in the Council of Pisa, asserting the claims of Pope Innocent II against those of Pope Anacletus II, who had been elected pope in 1130 with Norman support, but was not recognised outside Rome. Innocent II resolved the conflict with Genoa, establishing Pisan and Genoese spheres of influence. Pisa could then, unhindered by Genoa, participate in the conflict of Innocent II against king Roger II of Sicily. Amalfi, one of the maritime republics (though already declining under Norman rule), was conquered on August 6, 1136; the Pisans destroyed the ships in the port, assaulted the castles in the surrounding areas, and drove back an army sent by Roger from Aversa. This victory brought Pisa to the peak of its power and to a standing equal to Venice. Two years later, its soldiers sacked Salerno.\nIn the following years, Pisa was one of the staunchest supporters of the Ghibelline party. This was much appreciated by Frederick I. He issued in 1162 and 1165 two important documents, with these grants: Apart from the jurisdiction over the Pisan countryside, the Pisans were granted freedom of trade in the whole empire, the coast from Civitavecchia to Portovenere, a half of Palermo, Messina, Salerno and Naples, the whole of Gaeta, Mazara, and Trapani, and a street with houses for its merchants in every city of the Kingdom of Sicily. Some of these grants were later confirmed by Henry VI, Otto IV, and Frederick II. They marked the apex of Pisa's power, but also spurred the resentment of other cities such as Lucca, Massa, Volterra, and Florence, thwarting their aim to expand towards the sea. The clash with Lucca also concerned the possession of the castle of Montignoso and mainly the control of the , the main trade route between Rome and France. Last, but not least, such a sudden and large increase of power by Pisa could only lead to another war with Genoa.\nGenoa had acquired a dominant position in the markets of southern France. The war began in 1165 on the Rh\u00f4ne, when an attack on a convoy, directed to some Pisan trade centres on the river, by the Genoese and their ally, the count of Toulouse, failed. Pisa, though, was allied to Provence. The war continued until 1175 without significant victories. Another point of attrition was Sicily, where both the cities had privileges granted by Henry VI. In 1192, Pisa managed to conquer Messina. This episode was followed by a series of battles culminating in the Genoese conquest of Syracuse in 1204. Later, the trading posts in Sicily were lost when the new Pope Innocent III, though removing the excommunication cast over Pisa by his predecessor Celestine III, allied himself with the Guelph League of Tuscany, led by Florence. Soon, he stipulated a pact with Genoa, too, further weakening the Pisan presence in southern Italy.\nTo counter the Genoese predominance in the southern Tyrrhenian Sea, Pisa strengthened its relationship with its traditional Spanish and French bases (Marseille, Narbonne, Barcelona, etc.) and tried to defy the Venetian rule of the Adriatic Sea. In 1180, the two cities agreed to a nonaggression treaty in the Tyrrhenian and the Adriatic, but the death of Emperor Manuel Comnenus in Constantinople changed the situation. Soon, attacks on Venetian convoys were made. Pisa signed trade and political pacts with Ancona, Pula, Zara, Split, and Brindisi; in 1195, a Pisan fleet reached Pola to defend its independence from Venice, but the Serenissima soon reconquered the rebel sea town.\nOne year later, the two cities signed a peace treaty, which resulted in favourable conditions for Pisa, but in 1199, the Pisans violated it by blockading the port of Brindisi in Apulia. In the following naval battle, they were defeated by the Venetians. The war that followed ended in 1206 with a treaty in which Pisa gave up all its hopes to expand in the Adriatic, though it maintained the trading posts it had established in the area. From that point on, the two cities were united against the rising power of Genoa and sometimes collaborated to increase the trading benefits in Constantinople.\n13th century.\nIn 1209 in Lerici, two councils for a final resolution of the rivalry with Genoa were held. A 20-year peace treaty was signed, but when in 1220, the emperor Frederick II confirmed his supremacy over the Tyrrhenian coast from Civitavecchia to Portovenere, the Genoese and Tuscan resentment against Pisa grew again. In the following years, Pisa clashed with Lucca in Garfagnana and was defeated by the Florentines at Castel del Bosco. The strong Ghibelline position of Pisa brought this town diametrically against the Pope, who was in a dispute with the Holy Roman Empire, and indeed the pope tried to deprive Pisa of its dominions in northern Sardinia.\nIn 1238, Pope Gregory IX formed an alliance between Genoa and Venice against the empire, and consequently against Pisa, too. One year later, he excommunicated Frederick II and called for an anti-Empire council to be held in Rome in 1241. On May 3, 1241, a combined fleet of Pisan and Sicilian ships, led by the emperor's son Enzo, attacked a Genoese convoy carrying prelates from northern Italy and France, next to the isle of Giglio (Battle of Giglio), in front of Tuscany; the Genoese lost 25 ships, while about a thousand sailors, two cardinals, and one bishop were taken prisoner. After this major victory, the council in Rome failed, but Pisa was excommunicated. This extreme measure was only removed in 1257. Anyway, the Tuscan city tried to take advantage of the favourable situation to conquer the Corsican city of Aleria and even lay siege to Genoa itself in 1243.\nThe Ligurian republic of Genoa, however, recovered fast from this blow and won back Lerici, conquered by the Pisans some years earlier, in 1256.\nThe great expansion in the Mediterranean and the prominence of the merchant class urged a modification in the city's institutes. The system with consuls was abandoned, and in 1230, the new city rulers named a \"capitano del popolo\" (\"people's chieftain\") as civil and military leader. Despite these reforms, the conquered lands and the city itself were harassed by the rivalry between the two families of Della Gherardesca and Visconti. In 1237 the archbishop and the Emperor Frederick II intervened to reconcile the two rivals, but the strains continued. In 1254, the people rebelled and imposed 12 (\"People's Elders\") as their political representatives in the commune. They also supplemented the legislative councils, formed of noblemen, with new People's Councils, composed by the main guilds and by the chiefs of the People's Companies. These had the power to ratify the laws of the Major General Council and the Senate.\nDecline.\nThe decline is said to have begun on August 6, 1284, when the numerically superior fleet of Pisa, under the command of Albertino Morosini, was defeated by the brilliant tactics of the Genoese fleet, under the command of Benedetto Zaccaria and Oberto Doria, in the dramatic naval Battle of Meloria. This defeat ended the maritime power of Pisa and the town never fully recovered; in 1290, the Genoese destroyed forever the Porto Pisano (Pisa's port), and covered the land with salt. The region around Pisa did not permit the city to recover from the loss of thousands of sailors from the Meloria, while Liguria guaranteed enough sailors to Genoa. Goods, however, continued to be traded, albeit in reduced quantity, but the end came when the Arno started to change course, preventing the galleys from reaching the city's port up the river. The nearby area also likely became infested with malaria. The true end came in 1324, when Sardinia was entirely lost to the Aragonese.\nAlways Ghibelline, Pisa tried to build up its power in the course of the 14th century, and even managed to defeat Florence in the Battle of Montecatini (1315), under the command of Uguccione della Faggiuola. Eventually, however, after a long siege, Pisa was occupied by Florentines in 1405. Florentines corrupted the \"capitano del popolo\" (\"people's chieftain\"), Giovanni Gambacorta, who at night opened the city gate of San Marco. Pisa was never conquered by an army. In 1409, Pisa was the seat of a council trying to set the question of the Great Schism. In the 15th century, access to the sea became more difficult, as the port was silting up and was cut off from the sea. When in 1494, Charles VIII of France invaded the Italian states to claim the Kingdom of Naples, Pisa reclaimed its independence as the Second Pisan Republic.\nThe new freedom did not last long; 15 years of battles and sieges by the Florentine troops led by Antonio da Filicaja, Averardo Salviati and Niccol\u00f2 Capponi were made, but they failed to conquer the city. Vitellozzo Vitelli with his brother Paolo were the only ones who actually managed to break the strong defences of Pisa and make a breach in the Stampace bastion in the southern west part of the walls, but he did not enter the city. For that, they were suspected of treachery and Paolo was put to death. However, the resources of Pisa were getting low, and at the end, the city was sold to the Visconti family from Milan and eventually to Florence again. Livorno took over the role of the main port of Tuscany. Pisa acquired a mainly cultural role spurred by the presence of the University of Pisa, created in 1343, later reinforced by the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, founded in 1810 with a decree by Napoleon, and more recently by Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies (1987).\nFor fourteen years between 1801 and 1815, Tuscany came under French and Spanish domination. In 1801, the region became the Kingdom of Etruria, created from the Grand Duchy of Tuscany under the Treaty of Aranjuez, ruled by King Louis I of Etruria, a cousin of the King of Spain, as part of a larger agreement between Napoleonic France and Spain. However, after only six years, in 1807, Napoleon dissolved the kingdom and integrated it into France, with Pisa being within the new French department of M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e. But only eight years later, after the final total defeat of Napoleon in 1814, the department was disbanded in 1815, under the terms of the Congress of Vienna, and the Grand Duchy of Tuscany was restored to its previous Habsburg-Lorraine prince, Ferdinand III.\nPisa was the birthplace of the important early physicist Galileo Galilei. It is still the seat of an archbishopric. Besides its educational institutions, it has become a light industrial centre and a railway hub. It suffered repeated destruction during World War II.\nSince the early 1950s, the US Army has maintained Camp Darby just outside Pisa, which is used by many US military personnel as a base for vacations in the area.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nPisa has a borderline humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfa\") and Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"). The city is characterized by cool to mild winters and hot summers. This transitional climate allows Pisa to have summers with moderate rainfall. Rainfall peaks in autumn. Snow is rare. The highest officially recorded temperature was on 22 August 2011 and the lowest was on 12 January 1985.\nCulture.\n\"Gioco del Ponte\".\nIn Pisa there was a festival and game \"Gioco del Ponte\u200a\" (Game of the Bridge) which was celebrated (in some form) in Pisa from perhaps the 1200s down to 1807. From the end of the 1400s the game took the form of a mock battle fought upon Pisa's central bridge (\"Ponte di Mezzo\"). The participants wore quilted armor and the only offensive weapon allowed was the \"targone\", a shield-shaped, stout board with precisely specified dimensions. Hitting below the belt was not allowed. Two opposing teams started at opposite ends of the bridge. The object of the two opposing teams was to penetrate, drive back, and disperse the opponents' ranks and to thereby drive them backwards off the bridge. The struggle was limited to forty-five minutes. Victory or defeat was immensely important to the team players and their partisans, but sometimes the game was fought to a draw and both sides celebrated.\nIn 1677 the battle was witnessed by Dutch travelling artist Cornelis de Bruijn. He wrote:\n\"While I stayed in Livorno, I went to Pisa to witness the bridge fight there. The fighters arrived fully armored, wearing helmets, each carrying their banner, which was planted at both ends of the bridge, which is quite wide and long. The battle is fought with certain wooden implements made for this purpose, which they wear over their arms and are attached to them, with which they pummel each other so intensely that I saw several of them carried away with bloody and crushed heads. Victory consists of capturing the bridge, in the same way as the fistfights in Venice between the .\"\nIn 1927 the tradition was revived by college students as an elaborate costume parade. In 1935 Vittorio Emanuele III with the royal family witnessed the first revival of a modern version of the game, which has been pursued in the 20th and 21st centuries with some interruptions and varying degrees of enthusiasm by Pisans and their civic institutions.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain sights.\nWhile the bell tower of the cathedral, known as \"the leaning Tower of Pisa\", is the most famous image of the city, it is one of many works of art and architecture in the city's , also known, since the 20th century, as (Square of Miracles), to the north of the old town center. The also houses the (the Cathedral), the Baptistry and the (the monumental cemetery). The medieval complex includes the above-mentioned four sacred buildings, the old hospital (now \"Museo delle Sinopie\") and few palaces. All the complex is kept by the \"Opera (fabrica ecclesiae) della Primaziale Pisana\", an old non profit foundation that has operated since the building of the Cathedral in 1063 to maintain the sacred buildings. The area is framed by medieval walls kept by the municipal administration.\nOther sights include:\nSan Pietro in Vinculis. Known as \"San Pierino\", it is an 11th-century church with a crypt and a cosmatesque mosaic on the floor of the main nave. \nSports.\nFootball.\nFootball is the main sport in Pisa; the local team, Pisa SC, currently plays in the Serie A (the highest football division in Italy), and has had a top flight history throughout the 1980s and the 1990s, featuring several world-class players such as Diego Simeone, Christian Vieri and Dunga during this time. The club play at the Arena Garibaldi, which opened in 1919 and has a capacity of 25,000.\nShooting.\nShooting was one of the first sports to have their own association in Pisa. The \"Societ\u00e0 del Tiro a Segno\" di Pisa was founded on July 9, 1862. In 1885, they acquired their own training field. The shooting range was almost completely destroyed during World War II.\nTransport.\nAirport.\nPisa has an international airport known as Pisa International Airport or normally Galileo Galilei located in San Giusto neighbourhood in Pisa. It is served by several airlines which connect it to various domestic and international destinations. Many low-cost airlines operate there.\nPisamover.\nThe airport is connected to Pisa Centrale railway station by a people mover system long, called Pisamover inaugurated in March 2017. It is based on a driverless \"horizontal funicular\" that travels the distance in 5 minutes, with a 5-minute frequency, having an intermediate stop at parking station San Giusto/Aurelia.\nBuses.\nConsorzio Pisano Trasporti, also known as CPT, was a Societ\u00e0 consortile a responsabilit\u00e0 limitata (Scarl) that operated since 2005 the local public transport in Pisa and in the province. Became subsidiary of Compagnia Toscana Trasporti Nord in 2012 and was one the companies of the consortium ONE Scarl to accomplish the contract stipulated with the Regione Toscana for the public transport in the 2018-2019 period. The fleet consisted of 70 urban, 15 suburban and 260 intercity buses.\nSince 1 November 2021 the public local transport is managed by Autolinee Toscane.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrains.\nThe city is served by two railway stations available for passengers: Pisa Centrale and Pisa San Rossore.\n\"Pisa Centrale\" is the main railway station and is located along the Tyrrhenic railway line. It connects Pisa directly with several other important Italian cities such as Rome, Florence, Genoa, Turin, Naples, Livorno, and Grosseto.\n\"Pisa San Rossore\" links the city with Lucca (20 minutes north-east of Pisa) and Viareggio and is also reachable from \"Pisa Centrale\". It is a minor railway station located near the Leaning Tower zone.\nThere was another station called Pisa Aeroporto situated next to the Airport with services to Pisa Centrale and Florence. It was closed on December 15, 2013, for the realization of a people mover.\nMotorway.\nPisa is connected to Autostrada A11 from Florence and to Autostrada A12 linking Genoa-Rosignano with exit Pisa Nord and Pisa Centro \u2013 Airport.\nEducation.\nPisa hosts the University of Pisa, especially renowned in the fields of Physics, Mathematics, Engineering and Computer Science. The and the , the Italian academic \u00e9lite institutions are noted mostly for research and the education of graduate students.\nConstruction of a new leaning tower of glass and steel 57 meters tall, containing offices and apartments was scheduled to start in summer 2004 and take 4 years. It was designed by Dante Oscar Benini and raised criticism.\nLocated at: Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa \u2013 Piazza dei Cavalieri, 7 \u2013 56126 Pisa (Italia)\nLocated at: Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, P.zza Martiri della Libert\u00e0, 33 \u2013 56127 \u2013 Pisa (Italia)\nLocated at: Universit\u00e0 di Pisa \u2013 Lungarno Pacinotti, 43 \u2013 56126 Pisa (Italia)\nNotable people.\nFor people born in Pisa, see ; among notable non-natives long resident in the city:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSister cities.\nPisa is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24637", "revid": "26210542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24637", "title": "Pentium FDIV bug", "text": "Bug in the Intel P5 Pentium floating-point unit\nThe Pentium FDIV bug is a hardware bug affecting the floating-point unit (FPU) of the early Intel Pentium processors. Because of the bug, the processor would return incorrect binary floating point results when dividing certain pairs of high-precision numbers. The bug was discovered in 1994 by Thomas R. Nicely, a professor of mathematics at Lynchburg College. Missing values in a lookup table used by the FPU's floating-point division algorithm led to calculations acquiring small errors. In certain circumstances the errors can occur frequently and lead to significant deviations.\nThe severity of the FDIV bug is debated. Though rarely encountered by most users (\"Byte\" magazine estimated that 1 in 9 billion floating point divides with random parameters would produce inaccurate results), both the flaw and Intel's initial handling of the matter were heavily criticized by the tech community.\nIn December 1994, Intel recalled the defective processors in what was the first full recall of a computer chip. In its 1994 annual report, Intel said it incurred \"a $475 million pre-tax charge\u00a0... to recover replacement and write-off of these microprocessors.\"\nDescription.\nIn order to improve the speed of floating-point division calculations on the Pentium chip over the 486DX, Intel opted to replace the shift-and-subtract division algorithm with the Sweeney, Robertson, and Tocher (SRT) algorithm. The SRT algorithm can generate two bits of the division result per clock cycle, whereas the 486's algorithm could only generate one. The lookup table implemented was using a programmable logic array (PLA) with 2,048 cells, of which 1,066 cells should have been populated with one of five values: \u22122, \u22121, 0, +1, +2. When the Pentium's original array was compiled into the mask pattern used for fabrication, five values of +2 were not received by the lithography equipment. As a result, five array cells in the actual chips' etched PLAs that were supposed to contain +2 actually contained zero.\nAs a result, calculations that rely on these five cells introduce errors, which can accumulate due to the SRT algorithm's recursive nature. In worst-case scenarios, the error can rise as high as the fifth significant digit of the result, though this is rare and the errors usually appear at the ninth or tenth significant digit.\nOnly certain combinations of numerator and denominator trigger the bug, with one commonly-reported example being dividing 4,195,835 by 3,145,727. Performing this calculation in any software that used the floating-point coprocessor, such as Windows Calculator, would allow users to discover whether their Pentium chip was affected.\nThe correct value of the calculation is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWhen converted to the hexadecimal value used by the processor, 4,195,835 = 0x4005FB and 3,145,727 = 0x2FFFFF. The \"5\" in 0x4005FB triggers the access to the \"empty\" array cells. As a result, the value returned by a flawed Pentium processor is incorrect at or beyond four digits:\nwhich is actually the value of formula_1.\nDiscovery and response.\nThomas Nicely, a professor of mathematics at Lynchburg College, had written code to enumerate primes, twin primes, prime triplets, and prime quadruplets. Nicely noticed some inconsistencies in the calculations on June 13, 1994, shortly after adding a Pentium system to his group of computers, but was unable to eliminate other factors (such as programming errors, motherboard chipsets, etc.) until October 19, 1994. On October 24, 1994, he reported the issue to Intel. Intel had reportedly become aware of the issue independently by June 1994, and had begun fixing it at this point, but chose not to publicly disclose any details or recall affected CPUs.\nOn October 30, 1994, Nicely sent an email describing the bug to various academic contacts, requesting reports of testing for the flaw on 486-DX4s, Pentiums and Pentium clones. The bug was quickly verified by others, and news of it spread quickly on the Internet. The bug acquired the name \"Pentium FDIV bug\" from the x86 assembly language mnemonic for floating-point division, the most frequently used instruction affected.\nThe story first appeared in the press on November 7, 1994, in an article in \"Electronic Engineering Times\", \"Intel fixes a Pentium FPU glitch\" by Alexander Wolfe, and was subsequently picked up by CNN in a segment aired on November 22, 1994. It was also reported on by the \"New York Times\" and the \"Boston Globe\", making the front page in the latter.\nAt this point, Intel acknowledged the floating-point flaw, but claimed that it was not serious and would not affect most users. Intel offered to replace processors to users who could prove that they were affected. However, although most independent estimates found that the bug would have a very limited impact on most users, it caused significant negative press for the company. During a 2019 talk, while reflecting on development of \"Quake\", John Romero described how frequently and persistently this bug could be reproduced by Michael Abrash. Abrash spent hours tracking down exact conditions needed to produce the bug, which would result in parts of a game level appearing unexpectedly when viewed from certain camera angles. IBM paused the sale of PCs containing Intel CPUs, and Intel's stock price decreased significantly. The motive behind IBM's decision was questioned by some in the industry; IBM produced the PowerPC CPUs at the time, and potentially stood to benefit from any reputational damage to the Pentium or Intel as a company. However, the decision led to corporate buyers of PC equipment demanding replacements of existing Pentium CPUs, and soon afterward other PC manufacturers began offering \"no questions asked\" replacements of flawed Pentium chips.\nThe growing dissatisfaction with Intel's response led to the company offering to replace all flawed Pentium processors on request on December 20. On January 17, 1995, Intel announced a pre-tax charge of $475 million against earnings, ostensibly the total cost associated with replacement of the flawed processors. This is equivalent to $ in 2024. Intel was criticised for barring resellers and OEMs from participating in the recall program, requiring end-users to replace chips themselves. Intel's justification for this, posted on its support web page, was that \"it is the individual decision of the end user to determine if the flaw is affecting their application accuracy\".\nA 1995 article in \"Science\" describes the value of number theory problems in discovering computer bugs and gives the mathematical background and history of Brun's constant, the problem Nicely was working on when he discovered the bug.\nIntel's response to the FDIV bug has been cited as a case of the public relations impact of a problem eclipsing the practical impact of said problem on customers. While most users were unlikely to encounter the flaw in their day-to-day computing, the company's initial reaction to not replace chips unless customers could show that they were affected caused pushback from a vocal minority of industry experts. The subsequent publicity generated shook consumer confidence in the CPUs, and led to a demand for action even from people unlikely to be affected by the issue. Andy Grove, Intel's CEO at the time was quoted in \"The Wall Street Journal\" as saying \"I think the kernel of the issue we missed ... was that we presumed to tell somebody what they should or shouldn't worry about, or should or shouldn't do\".\nIn the aftermath of the bug and subsequent recall, there was a marked increase in the use of formal verification of hardware floating point operations across the semiconductor industry. Prompted by the discovery of the bug, a technique applicable to the SRT algorithm called \"word-level model checking\" was developed in 1996. Intel went on to use formal verification extensively in the development of later CPU architectures. In the development of the Pentium 4, symbolic trajectory evaluation and theorem proving were used to find a number of bugs that could have led to a similar recall incident had they gone undetected. The first Intel microarchitecture to use formal verification as the primary method of validation was Nehalem, developed in 2008.\nAffected models.\nThe FDIV bug affects the 60 and 66\u00a0MHz Pentium P5 800 in stepping levels prior to D1, and the 75, 90, and 100\u00a0MHz Pentium P54C 600 in steppings prior to B5. The 120\u00a0MHz P54C and P54CQS CPUs are unaffected.\nSoftware patches.\nVarious software patches were produced by manufacturers to work around the bug. One specific algorithm, outlined in a paper in \"IEEE Computational Science &amp; Engineering\", is to multiply both the numerator and denominator by 15/16 if a divisor attempts to access a PLA cell that erroneously contains zero. This fix does carry a measurable speed penalty; the worst-case penalty for a program doing only FDIV operations with bad divisors the running time would double since each FDIV would take about 80 clock cycles instead of the usual 40 cycles. With more random divisors the average time per FDIV was approximately 50 clock cycles, i.e. 10 cycles added to check the divisor: Only 5 out of 1024 random divisors would trigger the scaling fixup. Since FDIV is a rare operation in most programs, the normal slowdown with the fix installed was typically 1% or less.\nThe main challenge faced by software companies was implementing the fix in pre-existing software, much of which relied on libraries outside their control. Some companies, such as Wolfram Research, opted to directly patch the machine code of existing executables to replace the FDIV opcode with an illegal instruction. This would then trigger an exception that an exception handler (also patched in) would catch. From here, arbitrary code could be executed to work around the bug.\nMicrosoft offered operating system level workarounds in versions of Windows up to Windows XP. Utilities were included with the operating system to check for the presence of the bug and disable the FPU if found.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24638", "revid": "39138398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24638", "title": "Percussion instrument", "text": "Type of musical instrument that produces a sound by being hit\nA percussion instrument is a musical instrument that is sounded by being struck or scraped by a beater including attached or enclosed beaters or rattles struck, scraped or rubbed by hand or struck against another similar instrument. Excluding zoomusicological instruments and the human voice, the percussion family is believed to include the oldest musical instruments. In spite of being a very common term to designate instruments, and to relate them to their players, the percussionists, percussion is not a systematic classificatory category of instruments, as described by the scientific field of organology. It is shown below that percussion instruments may belong to the organological classes of idiophone, membranophone, aerophone and chordophone.\nThe percussion section of an orchestra most commonly contains instruments such as the timpani, snare drum, bass drum, tambourine, belonging to the membranophones, and cymbals and triangle, which are idiophones. However, the section can \"also\" contain aerophones, such as whistles and sirens, or a blown conch shell. Percussive techniques can even be applied to the human body itself, as in body percussion. On the other hand, keyboard instruments, such as the celesta, are not normally part of the percussion section, but keyboard percussion instruments such as the glockenspiel and xylophone (which do not have piano keyboards) are included.\nFunction.\nPercussion instruments may play not only rhythm, but also melody and harmony.\nPercussion is commonly referred to as \"the backbone\" or \"the heartbeat\" of a musical ensemble, often working in close collaboration with bass instruments, when present. In jazz and other popular music ensembles, the pianist, bassist, drummer and sometimes the guitarist are referred to as the rhythm section. Most classical pieces written for full orchestra since the time of Haydn and Mozart are orchestrated to place emphasis on the strings, woodwinds, and brass. However, often at least one pair of timpani is included, though they rarely play continuously. Rather, they serve to provide additional accents when needed. In the 18th and 19th centuries, other percussion instruments (like the triangle or cymbals) have been used, again generally sparingly. The use of percussion instruments became more frequent in the 20th century classical music.\nIn almost every style of music, percussion plays a pivotal role. In military marching bands and pipes and drums, it is the beat of the bass drum that keeps the soldiers in step and at a regular speed, and it is the snare that provides that crisp, decisive air to the tune of a regiment. In classic jazz, one almost immediately thinks of the distinctive rhythm of the hi-hats or the ride cymbal when the word-swing is spoken. In more recent popular-music culture, it is almost impossible to name three or four rock, hip-hop, rap, funk or even soul charts or songs that do not have some sort of percussive beat keeping the tune in time.\nBecause of the diversity of percussive instruments, it is not uncommon to find large musical ensembles composed entirely of percussion. Rhythm, melody, and harmony are all represented in these ensembles.\nPercussion notation.\nMusic for pitched percussion instruments can be notated on a staff with the same treble and bass clefs used by many non-percussive instruments. Music for percussive instruments without a definite pitch can be notated with a specialist rhythm or percussion-clef. The guitar also has a special \"tab\" staff. More often a bass clef is substituted for rhythm clef.\nClassification.\nPercussion instruments are classified by various criteria sometimes depending on their construction, ethnic origin, function within musical theory and orchestration, or their relative prevalence in common knowledge.\nThe word percussion derives from the Latin verb \"percussio\" to beat, strike in the musical sense, and the noun \"percussus\", a beating. As a noun in contemporary English, Wiktionary describes it as the collision of two bodies to produce a sound. The term is not unique to music, but has application in medicine and weaponry, as in percussion cap. However, all known uses of \"percussion\" appear to share a similar lineage beginning with the original Latin percussus. In a musical context then, the \"percussion instruments\" may have been originally coined to describe a family of musical instruments including drums, rattles, metal plates, or blocks that musicians beat or struck to produce sound.\nThe Hornbostel\u2013Sachs system has no high-level section for \"percussion\". Most percussion instruments as the term is normally understood are classified as idiophones and membranophones. However the term \"percussion\" is instead used at lower-levels of the Hornbostel\u2013Sachs hierarchy, including to identify instruments struck with either a non sonorous object hand, stick, striker or against a non-sonorous object human body, the ground. This is opposed to \"concussion\", which refers to instruments with two or more complementary sonorous parts that strike against each other and other meanings. For example:\n111.1 \"Concussion idiophones or clappers\", played in pairs and beaten against each other, such as zills and clapsticks.\n111.2 \"Percussion idiophones\", includes many percussion instruments played with the hand or by a percussion mallet, such as the hang, gongs and the xylophone, but not drums and only some cymbals.\n21 \"Struck drums\", includes most types of drum, such as the timpani, snare drum, and tom-tom.\n412.12 \"Percussion reeds\", a class of wind instrument unrelated to \"percussion\" in the more common sense \nThere are many instruments that have some claim to being percussion, but are classified otherwise:\nPercussion instruments are sometimes classified as pitched or unpitched. While valid, this classification is widely seen as inadequate. Rather, it may be more informative to describe percussion instruments in regards to one or more of the following four paradigms:\nBy methods of sound production.\nMany texts, including \"Teaching Percussion\" by Gary Cook of the University of Arizona, begin by studying the physical characteristics of instruments and the methods by which they can produce sound. This is perhaps the most scientifically pleasing assignment of nomenclature whereas the other paradigms are more dependent on historical or social circumstances. Based on observation and experimentation, one can determine how an instrument produces sound and then assign the instrument to one of the following four categories:\nIdiophone.\n\"Idiophones produce sounds through the vibration of their entire body.\" Examples of idiophones:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMembranophone.\nMost objects commonly known as drums are membranophones. Membranophones produce sound when the membrane or head is struck with a hand, mallet, stick, beater, or improvised tool.\nExamples of membranophones:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChordophone.\nMost instruments known as chordophones are defined as string instruments, wherein their sound is derived from the vibration of a string, but some such as these examples \"also\" fall under percussion instruments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAerophone.\n \nMost instruments known as aerophones are defined as wind instruments whereby sound is produced by a stream of air being blown through the object. However, plosive aerophones, such as the udu, are percussion instruments and may also overlap with the idiophone family. In certain situations, such as in an orchestra or wind ensemble, wind instruments, such as the Acme siren or various whistles, are played by percussionists, owing to their unconventional and simple nature. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBy musical function or orchestration.\nWhen classifying instruments by function it is useful to note if a percussion instrument makes a definite pitch or indefinite pitch.\nFor example, some percussion instruments such as the marimba and timpani produce an obvious fundamental pitch and can therefore play melody and serve harmonic functions in music. Other instruments such as crash cymbals and snare drums produce sounds with such complex overtones and a wide range of prominent frequencies that no pitch is discernible.\nDefinite pitch.\nPercussion instruments in this group are sometimes referred to as pitched or tuned.\nExamples of percussion instruments with definite pitch:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndefinite pitch.\nInstruments in this group are sometimes referred to as non-pitched, unpitched, or untuned. Traditionally these instruments are thought of as making a sound that contains such complex frequencies that no discernible pitch can be heard.\nIn fact many traditionally unpitched instruments, such as triangles and even cymbals, have also been produced as tuned sets.\nExamples of percussion instruments with indefinite pitch:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBy prevalence in common knowledge.\nIt is difficult to define what is common knowledge but there are instruments percussionists and composers use in contemporary music that most people would not consider musical instruments. It is worthwhile to \"try\" to distinguish between instruments based on their acceptance or consideration by a general audience.\nFor example, most people would not consider an anvil, a brake drum (on a vehicle with drum brakes, the circular hub the brake shoes press against), or a fifty-five gallon oil barrel musical instruments yet composers and percussionists use these objects.\nPercussion instruments generally fall into the following categories:\nConventional or popular.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnconventional.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOne pre-20th century example of found percussion is the use of cannon usually loaded with blank charges in Tchaikovsky's \"1812 Overture\". John Cage, Harry Partch, Edgard Var\u00e8se, and Peter Schickele, all noted composers, created entire pieces of music using unconventional instruments. Beginning in the early 20th century perhaps with \"Ionisation\" by Edgard Var\u00e8se which used air-raid sirens among other things, composers began to require that percussionists invent or find objects to produce desired sounds and textures. Another example the use of a hammer and saw in Penderecki's \"De Natura Sonoris No. 2\". By the late 20th century, such instruments were common in modern percussion ensemble music and popular productions, such as the off-Broadway show, Stomp. Rock band Aerosmith used a number of unconventional instruments in their song Sweet Emotion, including shotguns, brooms, and a sugar bag. The metal band Slipknot is well known for playing unusual percussion items, having two percussionists in the band. Along with deep sounding drums, their sound includes hitting baseball bats and other objects on beer kegs to create a distinctive sound.\nBy cultural significance or tradition.\nIt is not uncommon to discuss percussion instruments in relation to their cultural origin. This led to a division between instruments considered common or modern, and folk instruments with significant history or purpose within a geographic region or culture.\nFolk percussion instruments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Common\" drums.\nThis category includes instruments that are widely available and popular throughout the world:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBy percussive beater.\nThe percussionist uses various objects to strike a percussion instrument to produce sound.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNames for percussionists.\nThe general term for a musician who plays percussion instruments is \"percussionist\" but the terms listed below often describe specialties:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWithin rock music, the term \"percussionist\" is often used to refer to someone who plays percussion instruments but is not primarily a drummer. The term is especially found in bands where one person plays drums and another plays other hit instruments.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24639", "revid": "41363991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24639", "title": "Press Gang", "text": "British children's television series (1989\u20131993)\nPress Gang is a British children's television comedy-drama consisting of 43 episodes across five series that were broadcast from 1989 to 1993. Produced by Richmond Film &amp; Television for Central, it screened on the ITV network in its regular weekday afternoon children's strand, CITV, typically in a 4:45 pm slot (days varied over the course of the run).\nAimed at older children and teenagers, the programme was based on the activities of a children's newspaper, the \"Junior Gazette\", produced by pupils from the local comprehensive school. In later series, it was depicted as a commercial venture. The show interspersed comedic elements with the dramatic. As well as addressing interpersonal relationships (particularly in the Lynda-Spike story arc), the show tackled issues such as solvent abuse, child abuse and firearms control.\nWritten by ex-teacher Steven Moffat, more than half the episodes were directed by Bob Spiers, a British comedy director who also worked on programmes such as \"Absolutely Fabulous\" and \"Fawlty Towers\". Critical reception was very positive, particularly for the quality of the writing, and the series has attracted a cult following with a wide age range.\nStoryline.\nFamous journalist Matt Kerr arrives from Fleet Street to edit the local newspaper. He sets up a junior version of the paper, \"The Junior Gazette\", to be produced by pupils from the local comprehensive school before and after school hours.\nSome of the team are \"star pupils\", but others have reputations for delinquency. One such pupil, Spike Thomson, is forced to work on the paper rather than be expelled from school. He is immediately attracted to editor Lynda Day, but they bicker, throwing one-liners at each other. Their relationship develops and they have an on-off relationship. They regularly discuss their feelings, especially in the concluding episodes of each series. In the final episode of the third series, \"Holding On\", Spike unwittingly expresses his strong feelings to Lynda while being taped. Jealous of his American girlfriend, Zoe, Lynda puts the cassette on Zoe's personal stereo, ruining their relationship. The on-screen chemistry between the two leads was reflected off-screen as they became an item for several years.\nAlthough the Lynda and Spike story arc runs throughout the series, most episodes feature self-contained stories and sub-plots. Amongst lighter stories, such as one about Colin accidentally attending a funeral dressed as a pink rabbit, the show tackled many serious issues. Jeff Evans, writing in the \"Guinness Television Encyclopedia\", writes that the series adopts a \"far more adult approach\" than \"previous efforts in the same vein\" such as \"A Bunch of Fives.\" Some critics also compared it with \"Hill Street Blues\", \"Lou Grant\" \"and other thoughtful US dramas, thanks to its realism and its level-headed treatment of touchy subjects.\"\nThe first series approached solvent abuse in \"How To Make A Killing\", and the NSPCC assisted in the production of the \"Something Terrible\" episodes about child abuse. The team were held hostage by a gun enthusiast in series three's \"The Last Word\", while the final episode approaches drug abuse. The issue-led episodes served to develop the main characters, so that \"Something Terrible\" is more \"about Colin's redemption [from selfish capitalist], rather than Cindy's abuse.\"\nAccording to the British Film Institute, \"\"Press Gang\" managed to be perhaps the funniest children's series ever made and at the same time the most painfully raw and emotionally honest. The tone could change effortlessly and sensitively from farce to tragedy in the space of an episode.\" Although the series is sometimes referred to as a comedy, Moffat insists that it is a drama with jokes in it. The writer recalls \"a long running argument with Geoff Hogg (film editor on \"Press Gang\") about whether \"Press Gang\" was comedy. He insisted that it was and I said it wasn't \u2013 it was just funny.\" Some innuendo leads Moffat to claim that it \"had the dirtiest jokes in history; we got away with tons of stuff ... We nearly got away with a joke about anal sex, but they spotted it at the last minute.\" In one episode Lynda says she's going to \"butter him up\", and, when asked (while on a date in a hotel's restaurant) if he was staying at the hotel, Colin replies \"I shouldn't think so: it's only the first date.\"\nJeff Evans also comments that the series was filmed cinematically, dabbling in \"dream sequences, flashbacks, fantasies and, on one occasion, a \"Moonlighting\"-esque parody of the film \"It's a Wonderful Life\".\" The show had a strong awareness of continuity, with some stories, incidents and minor characters referred to throughout the series. Actors who played short-term characters in the first two series were invited back to reprise their roles in future episodes. David Jefford (Alex Crockett) was resurrected from 1989's \"Monday \u2013 Tuesday\" to appear in the final episode \"There Are Crocodiles\", while the same actress (Aisling Flitton) who played a wrong number in \"Love and the Junior Gazette\" was invited to reprise her character for the third series episode \"Chance is a Fine Thing.\" \"Attention to detail\" such as this is, according to Paul Cornell, \"one of the numerous ways that the series respects the intelligence of its viewers.\"\nAfter the team leaves school, the paper gains financial independence and runs commercially. Assistant editor Kenny leaves at the end of series three to be replaced by Julie, who was the head of the graphics team in series one.\nLook, I'm sorry you're dead, okay? I \"do\" care. But to be perfectly honest with you, I don't care a lot. You had a choice, you took the drugs, you died. Are you seriously claiming no one warned you it was dangerous? ... I mean, have you had a look at the world lately? ... There's plenty of stuff going on that kills you and you don't get warned at all. So sticking your head in a crocodile you were told about is not calculated to get my sympathy.\n The character was originally written as English, until producer Hastie felt that an American character would enhance the chance of overseas sales. This meant that English-born Fletcher had to act in an American accent for all five years. Moffat says that he isn't \"sure [that] lumbering Dexter with that accent was a smart move.\" The American accent had some fans surprised to learn that Fletcher is actually English.\nCharacters.\nRecurring.\nThe main adults are deputy headmaster Bill Sullivan (Nick Stringer), maverick editor Matt Kerr (Clive Wood) and experienced \"Gazette\" reporter Chrissie Stewart (Angela Bruce).\nProduction.\nInception.\nBill Moffat, a headmaster from Glasgow, had an idea for a children's television programme called \"The Norbridge Files\". He showed it to a producer who visited his school, Thorn Primary School in Johnstone, Renfrewshire, when it was used as the location for an episode of Harry Secombe's \"Highway\". Producer Sandra C. Hastie liked the idea and showed it to her future husband Bill Ward, co-owner of her company Richmond Films and Television. When she requested a script, Moffat suggested that his 25-year-old son Steven, an English teacher, should write it. Hastie said that it was \"the best ever first script\" that she had read.\nAll 43 episodes were written by Steven Moffat. During production of series two, he was having an unhappy personal life after the break-up of his first marriage. His wife's new lover was represented in the episode \"The Big Finish?\" by the character Brian Magboy (Simon Schatzberger), a name inspired by Brian: Maggie's boy. Moffat brought in the character so that all sorts of unfortunate things would happen to him, such as having a typewriter dropped on his foot. This period in Moffat's life would also be reflected in his sitcom \"Joking Apart\".\nCentral Independent Television had confidence in the project, so rather than the show being shot at their studios in Nottingham as planned, they granted Richmond a \u00a32 million budget. This enabled it to be shot on 16 mm film, rather than the regular, less expensive videotape, and on location, making it very expensive compared with most children's television. These high production costs almost led to its cancellation at the end of the second series, by which time Central executive Lewis Rudd was unable to commission programmes by himself.\nDirectors.\nMore than half of the episodes were directed by Bob Spiers, a noted British comedy director who had previously worked on \"Fawlty Towers\" amongst many other programmes. He would work again with Moffat on his sitcom \"Joking Apart\" and \"Murder Most Horrid\", and with Sawalha on \"Absolutely Fabulous\". According to Moffat, Spiers was the \"principal director\" taking an interest in the other episodes and setting the visual style of the show. Spiers particularly used tracking shots, sometimes requiring more dialogue to be written to accommodate the length of the shot. The other directors would come in and \"do a Spiers\". All of the directors were encouraged to attend the others' shoots so that the visual style would be consistent.\nThe first two episodes were directed by Colin Nutley. However, he was unhappy with the final edit and requested that his name be removed from the credits. Lorne Magory directed many episodes, notably the two-part stories \"How To Make A Killing\" and \"The Last Word.\" One of the founders of Richmond Films and Television, Bill Ward, directed three episodes, and Bren Simson directed some of series two. The show's cinematographer James Devis took the directorial reins for \"Windfall\", the penultimate episode.\nLocation.\nWhilst the show was set in the fictional town of Norbridge, it was mostly filmed in Uxbridge, in the west of Greater London. Many of the scenes were shot at Haydon School in Pinner. The first series was filmed entirely on location, but after the demolition of the building used as the original newspaper office, interior shots were filmed in Pinewood Studios for the second series, and the exterior of the building was not seen beyond that series. Subsequent series were filmed at Lee International Studios at Shepperton (series three and four) and Twickenham Studios (series five).\nMusic and title sequences.\nThe theme music was composed by Peter Davis (who after the second series composed the rest of the series alone as principal composer), John Mealing and John G. Perry. The opening titles show the main characters striking a pose, with the name of the respective actor in a typewriter style typeface. Steven Moffat and Julia Sawalha were not very impressed with the opening titles when discussing them for a DVD commentary in 2004. They were re-recorded for series three, in the same style, to address the actors' ages and alterations to the set.\nMany of the closing titles in the first two series were accompanied by dialogue from two characters. Episodes that ended on a particularly sombre tone, such as \"Monday-Tuesday\" and \"Yesterday's News\", used only appropriately sombre music to accompany the end credits. After an emphatic climax, \"At Last a Dragon\" used an enhanced version of the main theme with more extravagant use of electric guitar. Moffat felt that the voiceovers worked well in the first series, but that they were not as good in the second. Hastie recalls that Moffat was \"extremely angry\" that \"Drop the Dead Donkey\" had adopted the style. They were dropped after the second series. The cast, according to Moffat, were \"grumpy with having to turn up to a recording studio to record them.\"\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nCritical reaction was good, the show being particularly praised for the high quality and sophistication of the writing. The first episode was highly rated by \"The Daily Telegraph\", \"The Guardian\" and the \"Times Educational Supplement\". In his emphatic review, Paul Cornell writes that:\n\"Press Gang\" has proved to be a series that can transport you back to how you felt as a teenager, sharper that the world but with as much angst as acute wit ... Never again can a show get away with talking down to children or writing sloppily for them. \"Press Gang\", possibly the best show in the world.\n\"Time Out\" said that \"this is quality entertainment: the kids are sharp, the scripts are clever and the jokes are good.\" The BBC's William Gallagher called it \"pretty flawless\", with \"The Guardian\" retrospectively commending the series. Others, such as Popmatters, have also commented upon how \"the show is renowned ... for doing something kid television at the time didn't do (and, arguably, still doesn't): it refused to treat its audience like children.\" Comedian Richard Herring recalls watching the show as a recent graduate, commenting that it \"was subtle, sophisticated and much too good for kids.\" According to Moffat, \"\"Press Gang\" had gone over very, very well in the industry and I was being touted and romanced all the time.\" \"Press Gang\"'s complicated plots and structure would become a hallmark of Moffat's work, such as \"Joking Apart\" and \"Coupling\".\nThe series received a Royal Television Society award and a BAFTA in 1991 for \"Best Children's Programme (Entertainment/Drama)\". It was also nominated for two Writers' Guild of Great Britain awards, one \"Prix Jeunesse\" and the 1992 BAFTA for \"Best Children's Programme (Fiction)\". Julia Sawalha won the Royal Television Society Television Award for \"Best Actor \u2013 Female\" in 1993.\nRepeat showings.\nThe show gained an even wider adult audience in an early evening slot when repeated on Sundays on Channel 4 in 1991. This crossover is reflected in the BBC's review for one of the DVDs when they say that \"\"Press Gang\" is one of the best series ever made for kids. Or adults.\"\nNickelodeon showed nearly all of the episodes in a weekday slot in 1997. The final three episodes of the third series, however, were not repeated on the children's channel because of their content: \"The Last Word\" double episode with the gun siege, and \"Holding On\" with the repetition of the phrase \"divorce the bitch\". On the first transmission of the latter on 11 June 1991, continuity announcer Tommy Boyd warned viewers that it contained stronger than usual language. In 2007, itv.com made the first series, with the exception of \"Page One\", available to be viewed on its website free of charge.\nTwo episodes were broadcast on the CITV Channel on 5 &amp; 6 January 2013, as part of a weekend of archive programmes to celebrate CITV's 30th anniversary. Since 2022, the full series is available online on the ITV streaming service ITVX.\nFan following.\n\"Press Gang\" has attracted a cult following. A fanzine, \"Breakfast at Czars\", was produced in the 1990s. Edited by Stephen O'Brien, it contained a range of interviews with the cast and crew (notably with producer Hastie), theatre reviews and fanfiction. The first edition was included as a PDF file on the series two DVD, while the next three were on the series five disc. An email discussion list has been operational since February 1997. Scholar Miles Booy observes that as Steven Moffat was himself a fan of \"Doctor Who\", he was able to ingrate the elements that TV fans appreciated, such as:\nseries finales with big cliff-hangers, rigorous continuity and a slew of running jokes and references which paid those who watched and rewatched the text to pull out its minutia. At the end of the second series, it is remarked that the news team have been following the Spike/Lynda romance 'since page one', and only the fans remembered \u2013 or discovered on reviewing \u2013 that \"Page One\" was the title of the first episode.\nBooy points out that Chris Carter and Joss Whedon would be acclaimed for these elements in the 1990s (in the shows \"The X-Files\" and \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\"), but \"Moffat got there first, and ... in a children's TV slot. His was the first show to arrive with a Britain's fan's sensibility to formal possibilities.\"\nTwo conventions were held in the mid-1990s in Liverpool. The events, in aid of the NSPCC, were each titled \"Both Sides of the Paper\" and were attended by Steven Moffat, Sandra Hastie, Dexter Fletcher, Paul Reynolds, Kelda Holmes and Nick Stringer. There were screenings of extended rough cuts of \"A Quarter to Midnight\" and \"There Are Crocodiles\", along with auctions of wardrobe and props. When Virgin Publishing prevented Paul Cornell from writing an episode guide, the \"Press Gang Programme Guide\", edited by Jim Sangster, was published by Leomac Publishing in 1995. Sangster, O'Brien and Adrian Petford collaborated with Network DVD on the extra features for the DVD releases.\nBig Finish Productions, which produces audio plays based on sci-fi properties, particularly \"Doctor Who\", was named after the title of the final episode of the second series. Moffat himself is an ardent \"Doctor Who\" fan, and became the programme's lead writer and executive producer in 2009.\nMoffat has integrated many references to secondary characters and locations in \"Press Gang\" in his later work. His 1997 sitcom \"Chalk\" refers to a neighbouring school as Norbridge High, run by Mr Sullivan, and to the characters Dr Clipstone (\"UneXpected\"), Malcolm Bullivant (\"Something Terrible\") and David Jefford (\"Monday-Tuesday\"/\"There are Crocodiles\"), a pupil who Mr Slatt (David Bamber) reprimands for masturbating. The name \"Talwinning\" appears as the name of streets in \"A Quarter to Midnight\" and \"Joking Apart\", and as the surname of the protagonist in \"Dying Live\", an episode of \"Murder Most Horrid\" written by Moffat, as well as the name of a librarian in his \"Doctor Who\" prose short story, \"Continuity Errors\", which was published in the 1996 Virgin Books anthology \"Decalog 3: Consequences\". The name \"Inspector Hibbert\", from \"The Last Word\", is given to the character played by Nick Stringer in \"Elvis, Jesus and Jack\", Moffat's final \"Murder Most Horrid\" contribution. Most recently, in the first episode of Moffat's \"Jekyll\", Mr Hyde (James Nesbitt) whistled the same tune as Lynda in \"Going Back to Jasper Street\".\nProposed television movie.\nA television film called \"Deadline\" was planned. It was set a few years after the series and aimed at a more adult audience. At one stage in 1992, series 4 was intended to be the last, and the movie was proposed as a follow-up. However, making of the film fell through when a fifth series was commissioned instead. The idea of the follow-up film was reconsidered several times during the 1990s, but every time fell through for various reasons.\nIn June 2007, \"The Stage\" reported that Moffat and Sawalha are interested in reviving \"Press Gang\". He said: \"I would revive that like a shot. I would love to do a reunion episode\u2014a grown-up version. I know Julia Sawalha is interested\u2014every time I see her she asks me when we are going to do it. Maybe it will happen\u2014I would like it to.\" \"The Guardian\" advocated the show's revival, arguing that \"a revamped \"Press Gang\" with Moffat at the helm could turn the show from a cult into a national institution - a petri dish for young acting and writing talent to thrive. It's part of our TV heritage and definitely worthy of resuscitation.\"\nAt the Edinburgh International Television Festival in August 2008, Moffat told how he got drunk after the wrap party for \"Jekyll\" and pitched the idea of a \"Press Gang\" reunion special to the Head of Drama at the BBC, John Yorke. Despite Yorke's approval, the writer said that he was too busy with his work on \"Doctor Who\" to pursue the idea.\nMerchandise.\nSeveral products have been released, specifically four novelisations, a video and the complete collection on DVD.\nFour novelisations were written by Bill Moffat and published by Hippo Books/Scholastic in 1989 and 1990 based on the first two series. \"First Edition\" was based on the first three episodes, with \"Public Exposure\" covering \"Interface\" and \"How to Make a Killing.\" The third book, \"Checkmate\", covered \"Breakfast at Czar's\", \"Picking Up the Pieces\" and \"Going Back to Jasper Street\", and reveals that Julie left the graphics department to go to art college. The fourth and final book, \"The Date\", is a novelisation of \"Money, Love and Birdseed\", \"Love and the Junior Gazette\" and \"At Last a Dragon.\" Each book featured an eight-page photographic insert.\nVCI Home Video, with Central Video, released one volume on VHS in 1990 featuring the first four episodes: \"Page One\", \"Photo Finish\", \"One Easy Lesson\" and \"Deadline.\" The complete series of \"Press Gang\" is available on DVD (Region 2, UK) from Network DVD and in Australia (Region 4) from Force Entertainment. Four episodes of the second series DVD features an audio commentary by Julia Sawalha and Steven Moffat, in which the actress claims to remember very little about the show. Shooting scripts and extracts from Jim Sangster's programme guide (published by Leomac Publishing) are included in PDF format from series two onwards. The second series DVD set also contains the only existing copy, in offline edit form, of an unaired documentary filmed during production of series two.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24640", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24640", "title": "Persia (disambiguation)", "text": "Persia, or Iran, is a country in Western Asia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPersia or Persias, may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24642", "revid": "49869292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24642", "title": "Pope Innocent VII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1404 to 1406\nPope Innocent VII (; ; 1339 \u2013 6 November 1406), born Cosimo de' Migliorati, was head of the Catholic Church from 17 October 1404 to his death, in November 1406. He was pope during the period of the Western Schism (1378\u20131417), and was opposed by the Avignon claimant Benedict XIII. Despite good intentions, he did little to end the schism, owing to the troubled state of affairs in Rome, and his distrust of the sincerity of Benedict XIII, and King Ladislaus of Naples.\nEarly life.\nCosimo de' Migliorati was born to a noble family of Sulmona in the Abruzzi, son of Gentile Migliorati and wife Mascia Oderisi and uncle of cardinal Giovanni Migliorati. He distinguished himself by his learning in both civil and Canon Law, which he taught for a time at Perugia and Padua. His teacher Giovanni da Legnano sponsored him at Rome, where Pope Urban VI (1378\u201389) took him into the Curia, sent him for ten years as papal collector to England, made him Bishop of Bologna in 1386 at a time of strife in that city, and Archbishop of Ravenna in 1387.\nPope Boniface IX made him cardinal-priest of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme (1389) and sent him as legate to Lombardy and Tuscany in 1390. When Boniface IX died, there were present in Rome delegates from the rival pope at Avignon, Benedict XIII. The Roman cardinals asked these delegates whether their master would abdicate if the cardinals refrained from holding an election. When they were bluntly told that Benedict XIII would never abdicate (indeed he never did), the cardinals proceeded to an election. First, however, they each undertook a solemn oath to leave nothing undone, and, if need be, lay down the tiara to end the schism.\nPapacy.\nMigliorati was unanimously chosen \u2013 by eight cardinals \u2013 on 17 October 1404 and took the name of Innocent VII. There was a general riot by the Ghibelline party in Rome when news of his election got out, but peace was maintained by the aid of King Ladislaus of Naples, who hastened to Rome with a band of soldiers to assist the Pope in suppressing the insurrection. For his services the king extorted various concessions from Innocent VII, among them the promise that Ladislaus' claim to Naples would not be compromised, which claim had been challenged until very recently by Louis II of Anjou. That suited Innocent VII, who had no intention of reaching an agreement with Avignon that would compromise his claims to the Papal States. Thus Innocent VII was laid under embarrassing obligations, from which he freed himself.\nInnocent VII had made the great mistake of elevating his highly unsuitable nephew Ludovico Migliorati \u2013 a colorful condottiero formerly in the pay of Giangaleazzo Visconti of Milan \u2013 to be Captain of the Papal Militia, an act of nepotism that cost him dearly. Innocent further named him the rector of Todi in April 1405. In August 1405, Ludovico Migliorati, using his power as head of the militia, seized eleven members of the obstreperous Roman partisans on their return from a conference with the Pope, had them murdered in his own house, and had their bodies thrown from the windows of the hospital of Santo Spirito into the street. There was an uproar. Pope, court and cardinals, with the Migliorati faction, fled towards Viterbo. Ludovico took the occasion of driving off cattle that were grazing outside the walls, and the Papal party were pursued by furious Romans, losing thirty members, whose bodies were abandoned in the flight, including the Abbot of Perugia, struck down under the eyes of the Pope.\nInnocent's protector Ladislaus sent a squad of troops to quell the riots, and by January 1406 the Romans again acknowledged Papal temporal authority, and Innocent VII felt able to return. But Ladislaus, not content with the former concessions, desired to extend his authority in Rome and the Papal States. To attain his end he aided the Ghibelline faction in Rome in their revolutionary attempts in 1405. A squad of troops which King Ladislaus had sent to the aid of the Colonna faction was still occupying the Castle of Sant' Angelo, ostensibly protecting the Vatican, but making frequent sorties upon Rome and the neighbouring territory. Only after Ladislaus was excommunicated did he yield to the demands of the Pope and withdraw his troops.\nShortly after his accession in 1404 Innocent VII had taken steps to keep his oath by proclaiming a council to resolve the Western Schism. King Charles VI of France, theologians at the University of Paris, such as Pierre d'Ailly and Jean Gerson, and King Rupert of Germany, were all urging such a meeting. However, the troubles of 1405 furnished him with a pretext for postponing the meeting, claiming that he could not guarantee safe passage to his rival Benedict XIII if he came to the council in Rome. Benedict, however, made it appear that the only obstacle to the end of the Schism was the unwillingness of Innocent VII. Innocent VII was unreceptive to the proposal that he as well as Benedict XIII should resign in the interests of peace.\nDeath.\nInnocent died in Rome on 6 November 1406. It is said that Innocent VII planned the restoration of the Roman University, but his death brought an end to such talk.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24643", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24643", "title": "Pope Innocent VIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1484 to 1492\nPope Innocent VIII (; ; 1432 \u2013 25 July 1492), born Giovanni Battista Cybo (or Cibo), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 29 August 1484 to his death, in July 1492. Son of the viceroy of Naples, Cybo spent his early years at the Neapolitan court. He became a priest in the retinue of Cardinal Calandrini, half-brother to Pope Nicholas V (1447\u201355); Bishop of Savona under Pope Paul II; and with the support of Cardinal Giuliano Della Rovere he was made a cardinal by Pope Sixtus IV. After intense politicking by Della Rovere, Cybo was elected pope in 1484. King Ferdinand I of Naples had supported Cybo's competitor, Rodrigo Borgia. The following year, Pope Innocent supported the barons in their failed revolt.\nDuring his papacy, Pope Innocent issued a papal bull on witchcraft named Summis desiderantes affectibus. In March 1489, Cem, the captive brother of Bayezid II, the sultan of the Ottoman Empire, came into Innocent's custody. Viewing his brother as a rival, the Sultan paid Pope Innocent not to set him free. The amount he paid to Pope Innocent was 120,000 crowns (an amount equal to all of the annual revenue to the Vatican) in addition to some holy relics and another sum of money to be paid annually. Any time the Sultan threatened war against the Christian Balkans, Innocent threatened to release his brother. On 28 January 1495, Cem was released by Innocent's successor, Pope Alexander VI, into the custody of the army of King Charles VIII of France.\nEarly years.\nIn 1432, Giovanni Battista Cybo was born in Genoa, the son of Arano Cybo and wife Teodorina de Mari. His father was from an old Genoese family of Greek ancestry, a viceroy of Naples and then a senator in Rome under Pope Calixtus III. Giovanni Battista's early years were spent at the Neapolitan court. While in Naples he was appointed a Canon of the Cathedral of Capua, and was given the Priory of Santa Maria d'Arba in Genoa. After the death of King Alfonso (1458), friction between Giovanni Battista and the Archbishop of Genoa induced him to resign his canonry, and to go to Padua and then to Rome for his education.\nEarly career.\nIn Rome he became a priest in the retinue of Cardinal Calandrini, half-brother to Pope Nicholas V (1447\u201355). In 1467, he was made Bishop of Savona by Pope Paul II, but exchanged this see in 1472 for that of Molfetta in south-eastern Italy. In 1473, with the support of Giuliano Della Rovere, later Pope Julius II, he was made cardinal by Pope Sixtus IV, whom he succeeded on 29 August 1484 as Pope Innocent VIII.\nPapal election.\nThe papal conclave of 1484 was rife with factions, while gangs rioted in the streets. In order to prevent the election of the Venetian Cardinal Barbo, Camerlengo of the Sacred College of Cardinals, on the evening before the election, after the cardinals had retired for the night, the Dean of the College of Cardinals, Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere, nephew of the late Pope, and Cardinal Borgia, the Vice-Chancellor, visited a number of cardinals and secured their votes with the promise of various benefices.\nIt was claimed that Cardinal della Rovere met secretly with Cardinal Marco Barbo in order to secure him more votes to become pope if he was promised a residence, though Barbo refused in fear it would make the conclave invalid due to simony. Cardinal della Rovere then met with Borgia, who disliked Barbo and wished to block his election, with an offer to turn their votes over to Cybo, promising them benefits for doing so.\nPapacy.\nShortly after his investiture, Innocent VIII addressed a fruitless summons to Christendom to unite in a crusade against the Turks. A protracted conflict with King Ferdinand I of Naples was the principal obstacle. Ferdinand's oppressive government led in 1485 to a rebellion of the aristocracy, known as the Conspiracy of the Barons, which included Francesco Coppola and Antonello Sanseverino of Salerno and was supported by Pope Innocent VIII. Innocent excommunicated Ferdinand in 1489 and invited King Charles VIII of France to come to Italy with an army and take possession of the Kingdom of Naples, a disastrous political event for the Italian peninsula as a whole. The immediate conflict was not ended until 1494, after Innocent VIII's death.\nRelations with the Ottoman Empire.\nBayezid II ruled as Sultan of the Ottoman Empire from 1481 to 1512. His rule was contested by his brother Cem, who sought the support of the Mamluks of Egypt. Defeated by his brother's armies, Cem sought protection from the Knights of St. John in Rhodes. Prince Cem offered perpetual peace between the Ottoman Empire and Christendom. However, the sultan paid the Knights a large amount to keep Cem captive. Cem was later sent to the castle of Pierre d'Aubusson in France. Sultan Bayezid sent a messenger to France and requested Cem to be kept there; he agreed to make an annual payment in gold for his brother's expenses.\nIn March 1489, Cem was transferred to the custody of Innocent VIII. Cem's presence in Rome was useful because whenever Bayezid intended to launch a military campaign against the Christian nations of the Balkans, the Pope would threaten to release his brother. In exchange for maintaining the custody of Cem, Bayezid paid Innocent VIII 120,000 crowns, a relic of the Holy Lance and an annual fee of 45,000 ducats. Cem died in Capua on 25 February 1495 on a military expedition under the command of King Charles VIII of France to conquer Naples.\nRelations with witchcraft.\nOn the request of German inquisitor Heinrich Kramer, Innocent VIII issued the papal bull \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\" (5 December 1484), which supported Kramer's investigations against magicians and witches:\n\"It has recently come to our ears, not without great pain to us, that in some parts of upper Germany, [...] Mainz, K\u00f6ln, Trier, Salzburg, and Bremen, many persons of both sexes, heedless of their own salvation and forsaking the catholic faith, give themselves over to devils male and female, and by their incantations, charms, and conjurings, and by other abominable superstitions and sortileges, offences, crimes, and misdeeds, ruin and cause to perish the offspring of women, the foal of animals, the products of the earth, the grapes of vines, and the fruits of trees, as well as men and women, cattle and flocks and herds and animals of every kind, vineyards also and orchards, meadows, pastures, harvests, grains and other fruits of the earth; [...]\"\nThe bull was written in response to the request of Dominican Heinrich Kramer for explicit authority to prosecute witchcraft in Germany, after he was refused assistance by the local ecclesiastical authorities, who disputed his authority to work in their dioceses. Some scholars view the bull as \"clearly political\", motivated by jurisdictional disputes between the local German Catholic priests and clerics from the Office of the Inquisition who answered more directly to the pope.\nNonetheless, the bull failed to ensure that Kramer obtained the support he had hoped for, causing him to retire and to compile his views on witchcraft into his book \"Malleus Maleficarum\", which was published in 1487. Kramer would later claim that witchcraft was to blame for bad weather. Both the papal letter appended to the work and the supposed endorsement of Cologne University for it are problematic. The letter of Innocent VIII is not an approval of the book to which it was appended, but rather a charge to inquisitors to investigate diabolical sorcery and a warning to those who might impede them in their duty, that is, a papal letter in the by then conventional tradition established by John XXII and other popes through Eugenius IV and Nicholas V (1447\u201355).\nOther events.\nIn 1487, Innocent confirmed Tomas de Torquemada as Grand Inquisitor of Spain. Also in 1487, Innocent issued a bull Id Nostri Cordis denouncing the views of the Waldensians (Vaudois), offering plenary indulgence to all who should engage in a Crusade against them. Alberto de' Capitanei, archdeacon of Cremona, responded to the bull by organizing a crusade to fulfill its order and launched an offensive in the provinces of Dauphin\u00e9 and Piedmont. Charles I, Duke of Savoy eventually interfered to save his territories from further confusion and promised the Vaudois peace, but not before the offensive had devastated the area and many of the Vaudois fled to Provence and south to Italy.\nThe noted Franciscan theologian Angelo Carletti di Chivasso, whom Innocent in 1491 appointed as Apostolic Nuncio and Commissary, conjointly with the Bishop of Mauriana, was involved in reaching the peaceful agreement between Catholics and Waldensians.\nIn 1486, Innocent VIII was persuaded that at least thirteen of the 900 theses of Giovanni Pico della Mirandola were heretical, and the book containing the theses was interdicted.\nIn Rome, he ordered the Belvedere of the Vatican to be built, intended for summer use, on an unarticulated slope above the Vatican Palace. His successor would later turn the building into the Cortile del Belvedere. In season, he hunted at Castello della Magliana, which he enlarged. Constantly confronted with a depleted treasury, he resorted to the objectionable expedient of creating new offices and granting them to the highest bidders. The fall of Granada in January 1492, was celebrated in the Vatican and Innocent granted Ferdinand II of Aragon the epithet \"Catholic Majesty.\"\nSlavery.\nIt was noted that the attitude of Renaissance popes towards slavery, a common institution worldwide in contemporary cultures, varied. Minnich states that those who allowed the slave trade did so in the hope of gaining converts to Christianity. In the case of Innocent he permitted trade with Barbary merchants in which foodstuffs would be given in exchange for slaves who could then be converted to Christianity.\nKing Ferdinand of Aragon gave Innocent 100 Moorish slaves, who were shared out with favoured Cardinals. The slaves of Innocent were called \"mori\", meaning \"dark-skinned men\", in contrast to negro slaves who were called \"mori neri\", meaning \"black moors\".\nCanonizations.\nIn 1484, Innocent granted formal approval for the local veneration of Catherine of Vadstena, recognizing her cult and affirming her status within the traditions of regional religious devotion\u2014a significant step toward legitimizing her sanctity within the broader framework of the Catholic Church. In 1485, at Emperor Frederick III's request, Innocent canonized Leopold III.\nConsistories.\nInnocent VIII named eight cardinals in one consistory which was held on 9 March 1489; the pope named three of those cardinals \"in pectore\" (one of whom being a successor in Giovanni de' Medici who became Pope Leo X) with two of them having their names released after the pope died to ensure that they could vote in the 1492 conclave.\nDeath.\nBy July 1492, Innocent had become very skinny. To Filippo Valori, he had become 'an inert mass of flesh, incapable of assimilating any nourishment but a few drops of milk from a young woman's breast'. \nHe then soon developed a fever and died.\nTomb.\nInnocent was first buried in the Oratory of Our Lady in Old St. Peter's Basilica. The tomb was crafted by Antonio del Pollaiuolo, who completed the work shortly before his own death in February 1498.\nAround 1507 it was moved to the \"Shroud\" aisle adjacent to the Chapel of the Holy Lance.\nThe inscription below his tomb in Saint Peter's states: \"Nel tempo del suo Pontificato, la gloria della scoperta di un nuovo mondo\" (transl. \"During his Pontificate, the glory of the discovery of a new world.\"). Writer Ruggero Marino, in his book \"Cristoforo Colombo e il Papa tradito\" (transl. \"Christopher Columbus and the betrayed Pope\") argues that since Innocent died shortly before the departure of Christopher Columbus on his presumedly first voyage over the Atlantic, this suggests that Columbus actually traveled before the known date and re-discovered the Americas for the Europeans before the supposed date of 12 October 1492.\nAt some point the pope's coat of arms was replaced with an inscription, and the position of the two images of Innocent switched. After completion of the nave of the new basilica, in 1621 the monument was dismantled and relocated courtesy of Innocent's great nephew, Alberico Cybo Malaspina, prince of Massa, duke of Ferentillo, and marquis of Carrara.\n\"The monument does have some historical inaccuracies, as already widely noted by the critics...\": \"Ciibo\" instead of \"Cibo\", \"vixit\" instead of \"sedit\", the date of death as \"1497\" instead of \"1492\", a reference to the \"Crucis Ssancro Santi; in addition, a reference to Bayezid as Imper(atore) scratched out and replaced with \"Tyrant\", any of which could have taken place during the reconstruction.\nFamily.\nInnocent had at least seven illegitimate children born before he entered the clergy. Only two of them, a son and a daughter, were recognized and legitimized, \"towards whom his nepotism had been as lavish as it was shameless\". In 1487, he married his elder son Franceschetto Cybo (d. 1519) to Maddalena de' Medici (1473\u20131528), the daughter of Lorenzo de' Medici, who in return obtained the cardinal's hat for his 13-year-old son Giovanni, later Pope Leo X. His daughter Teodorina Cybo married Gerardo Usodimare and had a son, Aranino Cybo (father of Gherardo Cybo), and two daughters: Battistina Usodimare, who married Luigi d'Aragona, and Peretta Usodimare (Rome, 1478-Genoa, 3 December 1550), who married firstly Alfonso I del Carretto, and secondly Andrea Doria. Savonarola chastised him for his worldly ambitions.\nHis grandnephew Bindo Altoviti was one of the most influential bankers of his time and a notable patron of the arts, being friends with Raphael and Michelangelo.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24644", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24644", "title": "Pope Innocent IX", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 1591\nPope Innocent IX (; ; 20 July 1519\u00a0\u2013 30 December 1591), born Giovanni Antonio Facchinetti, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 29 October to 30 December 1591.\nPrior to his short papacy, he had been a canon lawyer, diplomat, and chief administrator during the reign of Pope Gregory XIV (r. 1590\u20131591).\nHe entered the service of the influential Cardinal Alessandro Farnese. As papal legate to Venice, he helped negotiate the formation of the Holy League, an alliance of Spanish and Italian maritime powers to challenge the Ottoman Empire\u2019s control of the eastern Mediterranean, and which resulted in victory at the Battle of Lepanto.\nBiography.\nEarly life and priesthood.\nGiovanni Antonio Facchinetti was born in Bologna on 22 July 1519, son of Antonio della Noce, called \"il Facchinetto\", and Francesca Cini. His father's family was originally from Cravegna, in the Val d'Ossola (where his birthplace still stands). The surname of his family seems to have actually been Nocetti (or de Nuce), but in fact the future pontiff was called Facchinetti after the humble job carried out by his father, who was a porter.\nGiovanni studied at the University of Bologna - which was pre-eminent in jurisprudence\u00a0\u2014 where he obtained a doctorate in both civil and canon law in 1544. He was later ordained to the priesthood on 11 March 1544 and was appointed a canon of the church of Saints Gervasio and Protasio of Domodossola in 1547.\nGiovanni traveled to Rome and he became the secretary to Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Ardinghelli. He entered the service of Cardinal Alessandro Farnese, the Archbishop of Avignon, who sent Facchinetti to Avignon as his ecclesiastical representative and subsequently recalled him to the management of his affairs at Parma. He was also made the Referendary of the Apostolic Signatura in 1559 and held that post for a year.\nEpiscopate and cardinalate.\nIn 1560, Facchinetti was named as the Bishop of Nicastro, in Calabria, and in 1562 was present at the Council of Trent. He was the first bishop to actually reside in the diocese in three decades. Pope Pius V (1566\u20131572) sent him as papal nuncio to Venice in 1566 to further the papal alliance with Spain and Venice against the Turks, which ultimately resulted in the victory of Lepanto in 1571. He was recalled from Venice in 1572 and was made the Prior Commendatario of Sant'Andrea di Carmignano in the diocese of Padua from 1576 to 1587.\nRelinquishing his see to pursue his career in Rome in 1575 and also because of health reasons, he was named the Titular Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem in 1572. He occupied that post until he was made a cardinal. Pope Gregory XIII made him a cardinal on 12 December 1583 as the Cardinal-Priest of Santi Quattro Coronati and he was to receive the red hat and title on 9 January 1584. Pope Gregory XIV made him the Prefect of the Apostolic Signatura in 1591.\nPapacy.\nEven before Pope Gregory XIV died, Spanish and anti-Spanish factions were electioneering for the next pope. Philip II of Spain's (r. 1556\u20131598) high-handed interference at the previous conclave was not forgotten: he had barred all but seven cardinals. This time the Spanish party in the College of Cardinals did not go so far, but they still controlled a majority, and after a quick conclave they raised Facchinetti to the papal chair as Pope Innocent IX. It took three ballots to elect him as pope. Facchinetti received 24 votes on 28 October but was not successful. He received 28 votes on 29 October in the second ballot while the third saw him prevail. Facchinetti took his papal name to honor Pope Innocent III.\nThe cardinal protodeacon Andreas von Austria crowned Innocent IX as pontiff on 3 November 1591. He elevated two cardinals to the cardinalate in the only papal consistory of his papacy on 18 December 1591.\nMindful of the origin of his success, Innocent IX supported, during his two months' pontificate, the cause of Philip II and the Catholic League against Henry IV of France (r. 1589\u20131610) in the French Wars of Religion (1562\u20131598), where a Papal army was in the field.\nHis grandnephew Giovanni Antonio Cardinal Facchinetti de Nuce Jr., was one of two cardinals appointed during the weeks of Innocent IX's pontificate. A later member of the cardinalate was his great-grandnephew Cesare Facchinetti (made a cardinal in 1643).\nDeath.\nOn 18 December, despite being ill, the pope made a pilgrimage of Rome's seven pilgrimage churches and caught a cold as a result. This became a heavy cough combined with a fever that led to his death shortly after he received Extreme Unction.\nInnocent IX died in the early morning of 30 December 1591. He was buried in the Vatican Grottoes in a simple tomb.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "24645", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24645", "title": "Pope Innocent X", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1644 to 1655\nPope Innocent X (6 May 1574\u00a0\u2013 7 January 1655), born Giovanni Battista Pamphilj (or Pamphili), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 15 September 1644 to his death, in January 1655.\nBorn in Rome of a family from Gubbio in Umbria who had come to Rome during the pontificate of Pope Innocent IX, Pamphili was trained as a lawyer and graduated from the Collegio Romano. He followed a conventional \"cursus honorum\", following his uncle Girolamo Pamphili as auditor of the Rota, and like him, attaining the position of cardinal-priest of Sant'Eusebio. Before becoming pope, Pamphili served as a papal diplomat to Naples, France, and Spain.\nPamphili succeeded Pope Urban VIII (1623\u201344) on 15 September 1644 as Pope Innocent X, after a contentious papal conclave that featured a rivalry between French and Spanish factions.\nInnocent X was one of the most politically shrewd pontiffs of the era, greatly increasing the temporal power of the Holy See. Major political events in which he was involved included the English Civil War, conflicts with French church officials over financial fraud issues, and hostilities with the Duchy of Parma related to the First War of Castro.\nIn theology, Innocent X issued a papal bull condemning the beliefs of Jansenism.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nGiovanni Battista Pamphili was born in Rome on 5\u00a0May 1574, the son of Camillo Pamphili, of the Roman Pamphili family. The family, originally from Gubbio, was directly descended from Pope Alexander VI.\nIn 1594 he graduated from the Roman College and followed a conventional path through the ranks of the Catholic Church. He served as a consistorial lawyer in 1601, and in 1604 succeeded his uncle, Cardinal Girolamo Pamphili, as auditor of the Roman Rota, the ecclesiastical appellate tribunal. He was also a canonist of the Sacred Apostolic Penitentiary, a second tribunal.\nIn 1623 Pope Gregory XV sent him as apostolic nuncio (ecclesiastical diplomat) to the court of the Kingdom of Naples. In 1625 Pope Urban VIII sent him to accompany his nephew, Francesco Barberini, whom he had accredited as nuncio, first to France and then Spain. In January 1626, Pamphili was appointed titular Latin Patriarch of Antioch.\nIn reward for his labors, in May 1626 Giovanni Battista was made nuncio to the court of Philip IV of Spain. The position led to a lifelong association with the Spaniards which was of great use during the papal conclave of 1644. He was created Cardinal \"in pectore\" in 1627 and published in 1629.\nPapacy.\nElection.\nThe 1644 conclave for the election of a successor to Pope Urban VIII was long and contentious, lasting from 9 August to 15 September. A large French faction led by Urban VIII's nephews objected to the Spanish candidate, as an enemy of Cardinal Mazarin, who guided French policy. They put up their own candidate (Giulio Cesare Sacchetti) but could not establish enough support for him and agreed to Cardinal Pamphili as an acceptable compromise, though he had served as legate to Spain. Mazarin, bearing the French veto of Pamphili, arrived too late, and the election was accomplished.\nRelations with France.\nPamphili chose to be called Innocent X. Soon after his accession he initiated legal action against the Barberini family for misappropriation of public funds. The brothers Francesco Barberini, Antonio Barberini and Taddeo Barberini fled to Paris, where they found a powerful protector in Cardinal Mazarin. Innocent X confiscated their property, and on 19 February 1646, issued a papal bull decreeing that all cardinals who might leave the Papal States for six months without express papal permission would be deprived of their benefices and eventually of their cardinalate itself. The French Parlement of Paris declared the papal ordinance void in France, but Innocent X did not yield until Mazarin prepared to send troops to Italy. Henceforth the papal policy towards France became more friendly, and somewhat later the Barberini were rehabilitated when the son of Taddeo Barberini, Maffeo Barberini, married Olimpia Giustiniani, a niece of Innocent X.\nIn 1653, Innocent X, with the \"Cum occasione\" papal bull, condemned five propositions of Jansenius's \"Augustinus\", as heretical and close to Lutheranism. This led to the formulary controversy, Blaise Pascal's writing of the \"Lettres Provinciales\", and finally to the razing of the Jansenist convent of Port-Royal and the subsequent dissolving of its community.\nRelations with Parma.\nThe death of Pope Urban VIII is said to have been hastened by his chagrin at the result of the First War of Castro, a war he had undertaken against Odoardo Farnese, Duke of Parma. Hostilities between the papacy and the Duchy of Parma resumed in 1649, and forces loyal to Pope Innocent X destroyed the city of Castro on 2 September 1649.\nInnocent X objected to the conclusion of the Peace of Westphalia, which his nuncio, Fabio Chigi, protested in vain. In 1650 Innocent X issued the papal brief \"Zelo Domus Dei\" against the Peace of Westphalia, and backdated it to 1648 in order to preserve potential claims for confiscated land and property. The protests were ignored by the European powers.\nWars of the Three Kingdoms.\nDuring the Irish Confederate Wars (1641\u201353) (the Irish component of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms), Innocent X strongly supported the independent Confederate Ireland, over the objections of Mazarin and the English Queen and then queen mother, Henrietta Maria, exiled in Paris. The pope sent Giovanni Battista Rinuccini, archbishop of Fermo, as a special nuncio to Ireland. He arrived at Kilkenny with a large quantity of arms including 20,000 pounds of gunpowder, and a very large sum of money. Rinuccini hoped he could discourage the Confederates from allying with Charles I and the Royalists in the English Civil War and instead encourage them towards the foundation of an independent Catholic \u2013 ruled Ireland.\nAt Kilkenny, Rinuccini was received with great honours, asserting in his Latin declaration that the object of his mission was to sustain the king but, above all, to rescue from pains and penalties the Catholic people of Ireland in securing the free and public exercise of the Catholic religion, and the restoration of the churches and church property. In the end, Oliver Cromwell restored Ireland to the Parliamentarian side and Rinuccini returned to Rome in 1649, after four fruitless years.\nOther activities.\nDuring the papacy of Pope Urban VIII, the future Innocent X was the pope's most significant rival among the College of Cardinals. Antonio Barberini, Urban VIII's brother, was a cardinal who had begun his career with the Capuchin brothers. About 1635, at the height of the Thirty Years' War in Germany, in which the papacy was intricately involved, Cardinal Antonio commissioned Guido Reni's painting of the Archangel Michael, trampling Satan, who bears the recognizable features of Innocent X. This bold political artwork still hangs in a side chapel of the Capuchin friars' Church of the Conception (Santa Maria della Concezione dei Cappuccini) in Rome. A legend related to the painting is that the dashing and high-living artist, Guido Reni, had been insulted by rumours he thought were circulated by Cardinal Pamphili.\nWhen, a few years later, Pamphili was raised to the papacy, other Barberini relatives fled to France on embezzlement accusations. Despite this, the Capuchins held fast to their chapel altarpiece.\nInnocent was responsible for raising the Colegio de Santo Tom\u00e1s de Nuestra Se\u00f1ora del Sant\u00edsimo Rosario into the rank of a university. It is now the University of Santo Tom\u00e1s in Manila, the oldest existing in Asia.\nIn 1650, Innocent X celebrated a Jubilee. He embellished Rome with inlaid floors and bas-relief in Saint Peter's, erected Gian Lorenzo Bernini's \"Fontana dei Quattro Fiumi\" in Piazza Navona, the Pamphili stronghold in Rome, and ordered the construction of Palazzo Nuovo at the Campidoglio.\nInnocent X is also the subject of \"Portrait of Innocent X\", a famous painting by Diego Vel\u00e1zquez housed in the family gallery of Palazzo Doria (Doria Pamphilj Gallery). This portrait inspired the \"Screaming Pope\" paintings by 20th-century painter Francis Bacon, the most famous of which is Bacon's \"Study after Vel\u00e1zquez's Portrait of Pope Innocent X\".\nInnocent X has been described as irritable in his later years. In March 1654, Innocent X suddenly expelled his personal physician of eight years, Gabriel da Fonseca, after Fonseca defended a barber who had bled the Pope. Fonseca claims he had been in service to the Pamphili family for over two decades, and that the Pope had regarded him not only as his physician but also as a private advisor.\nOlimpia Maidalchini.\nOlimpia Maidalchini was married to Innocent X's late brother, and was believed to be his mistress because of her influence over him in matters of promotion and politics. This state of affairs was alluded to in the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" 9th edition (1880):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Throughout his reign the influence exercised over him by Maidalchini, his deceased brother's wife, was very great, and such as to give rise to gross scandal, for which, however, there appears to have been no adequate ground... The avarice of his female counsellor gave to his reign a tone of oppression and sordid greed which probably it would not otherwise have shown, for personally he was not without noble and reforming impulses.\"\nGerman historian Leopold von Ranke concluded that she was not Innocent X's lover.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn his later years, Innocent X suffered from gout, causing him intense pain and severely restricting his movements. The eighty-year-old pontiff's health began to decline in August 1654. By the evening of 26 December his condition had deteriorated to the extent that the family was summoned.\nOn 27 December, he blessed his nephew, niece, and their children, and then had a brief meeting with Cardinals Flavio Chigi and Decio Azzolino. That night he had a little rest, though his condition did not improve.\nOn 28 December, Innocent X received the Last rites and expressed his desire to take leave of the cardinals. In anticipation of the Pope's expected death many of the cardinals had already gathered in Rome in advance of a subsequent conclave. Thirty-nine gathered at his bedside at the Quirinal Palace.\nOn 1 January 1655, Mass was celebrated at the pope's bedside, and the same was done on 6 January, when Innocent X also received the Viaticum for the last time. Secretary of State Chigi, who had been in attendance during the last twelve days, Prefect of the Sacred Palace Bishop Scotti, and Sacristan Monsignor Altini, as well as, various attendants were present when the Pope died on the night of 6 January 1655.\nThe Swiss Guard escorted Papal Camerlengo Cardinal Antonio Barberini to the Quirinal to perform the requisite rituals and Cardinal de' Medici visited with the Pope's three nephews, who were in another room. After an autopsy, the body was embalmed and the next day taken to the Vatican where it was placed on a catafalque in the Sistine Chapel. On 8 January it was transferred to St. Peter's Basilica, where the sealing of the coffin was witnessed by Cardinals Niccol\u00f2 Albergati-Ludovisi, Fabio Chigi, Luigi Omodei, Pietro Vito Ottoboni, Marcello Santacroce, Baccio Aldobrandini, Cristoforo Vidman, Lorenzo Raggi, Carlo Pio di Savoia and Gualtieri, Princes Pamphili, Ludovisi and Giustiniani, and the Master of Ceremonies Fulvio Servantio. A funeral was held on 17 January. Innocent's tomb is located in the Church of Sant'Agnese in Agone which he had built in 1652 adjacent to the family palace, the Palazzo Pamphili, in Rome.\nInnocent X was succeeded by Pope Alexander VII who had promised Innocent X that he would build more schools in Europe.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24646", "revid": "359256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24646", "title": "Postal organisations", "text": ""}
{"id": "24647", "revid": "43296785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24647", "title": "Property law", "text": "Area of laws governing ownership of real and personal property\nProperty law is the area of law that governs the various forms of ownership in real property (land) and personal property. Property refers to legally protected claims to resources, such as land and personal property, including intellectual property. Property can be exchanged through contract law, and if property is violated, one could sue under tort law to protect it.\nThe concept, idea or philosophy of property underlies all property law. In some jurisdictions, historically all property was owned by the monarch and it devolved through feudal land tenure or other feudal systems of loyalty and fealty.\nTheory.\nThe word \"property\", in everyday usage, refers to an object (or objects) owned by a person\u2014a car, a book, or a cellphone\u2014and the relationship the person has to it. In law, the concept acquires a more nuanced rendering. Factors to consider include the nature of the object, the relationship between the person and the object, the relationship between a number of people in relation to the object, and how the object is regarded within the prevailing political system. Most broadly and concisely, property in the legal sense refers to the rights of people in or over certain objects or things.\nNon-legally recognized or documented property rights are known as informal property rights. These informal property rights are non-codified or documented, but recognized among local residents to varying degrees.\nJustifications and drawbacks of property rights.\nIn capitalist societies with market economies, much of property is owned privately by persons or associations and not the government. Five general justifications have been given on private property rights:\nArguments in favor of limiting private property rights have also been raised:\nNatural rights and property.\nIn his \"Second Treatise on Government\", English philosopher John Locke asserted the right of an individual to own one part of the world, when, according to the Bible, God gave the world to all humanity in common. He claimed that although persons belong to God, they own the fruits of their labor. When a person works, that labor enters into the object. Thus, the object becomes the property of that person. However, Locke conditioned property on the Lockean proviso, that is, \"there is enough, and as good, left in common for others\".\nU.S. Supreme Court Justice James Wilson undertook a survey of the philosophical grounds of American property law in 1790 and 1791. He proceeds from two premises: \"Every crime includes an injury: every injury includes a violation of a right.\" (Lectures III, ii.) The government's role in protecting property depends upon an idea of right. Wilson believes that \"man has a natural right to his property, to his character, to liberty, and to safety.\" He also indicates that \"the primary and principal object in the institution of government... was... to acquire a new security for the possession or the recovery of those rights\".\nWilson states that: \"Property is the right or lawful power, which a person has to a thing.\" He then divides the right into three degrees: possession, the lowest; possession and use; and, possession, use, and disposition \u2013 the highest. Further, he states: \"Useful and skillful industry is the soul of an active life. But industry should have her just reward. That reward is property, for of useful and active industry, property is the natural result.\" From this simple reasoning he is able to present the conclusion that exclusive, as opposed to communal property, is to be preferred. Wilson does, however, give a survey of communal property arrangements in history, not only in colonial Virginia but also ancient Sparta.\nProperty rights.\nThere are two main views on the right to property, the traditional view and the bundle of rights view. The traditionalists believe that there is a core, inherent meaning in the concept of property, while the bundle of rights view states that the property owner only has bundle of permissible uses over the property. The two views exist on a spectrum and the difference may be a matter of focus and emphasis.\nWilliam Blackstone, in his \"Commentaries on the Laws of England,\" wrote that the essential core of property is the right to exclude. That is, the owner of property must be able to exclude others from the thing in question, even though the right to exclude is subject to limitations. By implication, the owner can use the thing, unless another restriction, such as zoning law, prevents it. Other traditionalists argue that three main rights define property: the right to exclusion, use and transfer.\nAn alternative view of property, favored by legal realists, is that property simply denotes a bundle of rights defined by law and social policy. Which rights are included in the bundle known as property rights, and which bundles are preferred to which others, is simply a matter of policy. Therefore, a government can prevent the building of a factory on a piece of land, through zoning law or criminal law, without damaging the concept of property. The \"bundle of rights\" view was prominent in academia in the 20th century and remains influential today in American law.\nPriority.\nDifferent parties may claim a competing interest in the same property by mistake or by fraud, with the claims being inconsistent of each other. For example, the party creating or transferring an interest may have a valid title, but may intentionally or negligently create several interests wholly or partially inconsistent with each other. A court resolves the dispute by adjudicating the priorities of the interests.\nProperty rights and rights to people.\nProperty rights are rights over things enforceable against all other persons. By contrast, contractual rights are rights enforceable against particular persons. Property rights may, however, arise from a contract; the two systems of rights overlap. In relation to the sale of land, for example, two sets of legal relationships exist alongside one another: the contractual right to sue for damages, and the property right exercisable over the land. More minor property rights may be created by contract, as in the case of easements, covenants, and equitable servitudes.\nA separate distinction is evident where the rights granted are insufficiently substantial to confer on the nonowner a definable interest or right in the thing. The clearest example of these rights is the license. In general, even if licenses are created by a binding contract, they do not give rise to property interests.\nProperty rights and personal rights.\nProperty rights are also distinguished from personal rights. Practically all contemporary societies acknowledge this basic ontological and ethical distinction. In the past, groups lacking political power have often been disqualified from the benefits of property. In an extreme form, this has meant that people have become \"objects\" of property\u2014legally \"things\" or chattels (see slavery.) More commonly, marginalized groups have been denied legal rights to own property. These include Jews in England and married women in Western societies until the late 19th century.\nThe dividing line between personal rights and property rights is not always easy to draw. For instance, is one's reputation property that can be commercially exploited by affording property rights to it? The question of the proprietary character of personal rights is particularly relevant in the case of rights over human tissue, organs and other body parts.\nIn the United States, a \"quasi-property\" interest has been explicitly declared in the dead body. Also in the United States, it has been recognised that people have an alienable proprietary \"right of publicity\" over their \"persona\". The patent/patenting of biotechnological processes and products based on human genetic material may be characterised as creating property in human life.\nA particularly difficult question is whether people have rights to intellectual property developed by others from their body parts. In the pioneering case on this issue, the Supreme Court of California held in \"Moore v. Regents of the University of California\" (1990) that individuals do not have such a property right.\nClassification.\nProperty law is characterised by a great deal of historical continuity and technical terminology. The basic distinction in common law systems is between real property (land) and personal property (chattels).\nBefore the mid-19th century, the principles governing the transfer of real property and personal property on an intestacy were quite different. Though this dichotomy does not have the same significance anymore, the distinction is still fundamental because of the essential differences between the two categories. An obvious example is the fact that land is immovable, and thus the rules that govern its use must differ. A further reason for the distinction is that legislation is often drafted employing the traditional terminology.\nThe division of land and chattels has been criticised as being not satisfactory as a basis for categorising the principles of property law since it concentrates attention not on the proprietary interests themselves but on the objects of those interests. Moreover, in the case of fixtures, chattels which are affixed to or placed on land may become part of the land.\nReal property is generally sub-classified into:\nAlthough a tenancy involves rights to real property, a leasehold estate is typically considered personal property, being derived from contract law. In the civil law system, the distinction is between movable and immovable property, with movable property roughly corresponding to personal property, while immovable property corresponding to real estate or real property, and the associated rights, and obligations thereon.\nPossession.\nThe concept of possession developed from a legal system whose principal concern was to avoid civil disorder. The general principle is that a person in possession of land or goods, even as a wrongdoer, is entitled to take action against anyone interfering with the possession unless the person interfering is able to demonstrate a superior right to do so.\nIn England, the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977 has significantly amended the law relating to wrongful interference with goods and abolished some longstanding remedies and doctrines.\nTransfer of property.\nThe term \"transfer of property\" means an act by which a living person, company, or state conveys property, in present or in future, to one or more other living persons, to himself and one or more other living persons, to the state, or to a private company. The transfer of property can be consensual or non-consensual, and to transfer property is to perform such an act.\nConsensual transfers.\nThe most common method of acquiring an interest in property is as the result of a consensual transaction with the previous owner, for example, a sale, a gift, or through inheritance. In law, an inheritor is a person who is entitled to receive a share of the heritor's (the person who died) property, subject to the rules of inheritance in the jurisdiction of which the heritor was a citizen or where the heritor died or owned property at the time of death. Dispositions by will may also be regarded as consensual transactions, since the effect of a will is to provide for the distribution of the deceased person's property to nominated beneficiaries. A person may also obtain an interest in property under a trust established for his or her benefit by the owner of the property.\nNon-consensual transfers.\nIt is also possible for property to pass from one person to another independently of the consent of the property owner. For example, this occurs when a person dies intestate, goes bankrupt, or has the property taken in execution of a court judgment.\nThere are cases when a person is legally capable of owning property, but is not capable of maintaining and dealing with it (such as paying property taxes). This is the case for young children and mentally handicapped individuals. The state deems them incompetent in their capacity to deal with property. Thus, they must be appointed a legal guardian to deal with the property on the incompetent individual's behalf. In cases where the individual cannot find a legal guardian to deal with the property, the property is put up for sale and the incompetent individual is involuntarily deprived of such property.\nTax sales are another process by which individuals can be forcibly deprived of their private property. A tax sale is the forced sale of property by the state due to unpaid taxes on that property. The property is typically auctioned off as a tax sale by the local government to payoff the delinquent taxes on that property. One could make the argument that, given the presence of property taxes, an individual never truly owns a piece of property; they rent it from the government.\nProperty can also pass from one person to the state independently of the consent of the property owner through the state's power of eminent domain. Eminent domain refers to the ability of the state to buyout private property from individuals at their will in order to use the property for public use. Eminent domain requires the state to \"justly compensate\" the property owner for the acquisition of their land. The practice dates back to at least the 17th century. Common examples include buying land from individuals in order for the state to build public roads, transportation systems, governmental buildings, and to construct certain public goods. The state also uses its eminent domain power for large urban renewal projects by which it will buy out large portions of typically poor housing areas in order to rebuild it.\nEminent domain also consists of enabling the state to condemn certain real estate construction and development rights for various reasons. One must meet location specific regulatory standards and building codes in order to construct on property. The general rule for stairs (in the US) is 7-11 (a 7-inch rise and 11 inch run). More exactly, no more than 7 3/4 inches for the riser (vertical) and a minimum of 10 inches for the tread (horizontal or step). Failure to meet these regulatory standards can result in an inability to receive state building permits, state destruction of property, legal fines, and increased liability.\nKELO V. NEW LONDON (04-108) 545 U.S. 469 (2005) was a pivotal case that increased the scope of the eminent domain power of the state. The U.S. supreme court ruled that private property could be condemned by the state \"and\" transferred to a private company.\nLegal successor.\nIn property law, economics and finance, the term \"legal successor\" may refer to a legally established successor of property rights (inheritance, interest) or in terms of liabilities (debt).\nIn the case of bankruptcy of a lender, the legal successor in interest has the right to collect the debt.\nLease.\nHistorically, leases served many purposes, and the regulation varied according to intended purposes and the economic conditions of the time. Leaseholds, for example, were mainly granted for agriculture until the late eighteenth century and early nineteenth century, when the growth of cities made the leasehold an important form of landholding in urban areas.\nThe modern law of landlord and tenant in common law jurisdictions retains the influence of the common law and, particularly, the \"laissez-faire\" philosophy that dominated the law of contract and the law of property in the 19th century. With the growth of consumerism, the law of consumer protection recognised that common law principles assuming equal bargaining power between parties may cause unfairness. Consequently, reformers have emphasised the need to assess residential tenancy laws in terms of protection they provide to tenants. Legislation to protect tenants is now common.\nOwnership.\nSingle individuals.\nProperty can mostly be owned by any single human. However, many jurisdictions have some stipulations that limit property-owning capacity. The two main limiting factors include citizenship and competency of maintaining property.\nIn many countries, non-citizens cannot own property or are limited greatly in their capacity to own property. The United States allows foreign entities to buy and own property. But the United States does have stipulations surrounding tribal land owned by the indigenous Native Americans.\nIncompetent individuals also cannot own property, at least without a legal guardian. Incompetent individuals consist largely of children and the cognitively impaired. They are legally recognized and allowed to own property, but they cannot deal with it without the consent of their legal guardians. Children do not have the capacity to pay property taxes.\nGroups.\nAll western legal systems allow for a number of different forms of group ownership of property. Group ownership in property law is referred to as co-tenancy, or concurrent ownership. Two or more owners of a property are referred to as co-owners.\nConcurrent owners.\nIn U.S. common law, property can be owned by many different people and parties. Property can be shared by an infinitely divisible number of people. There are three types of concurrent estates, or ways people can jointly own property: joint tenancy, tenancy in common, or tenancy by entirety.\nJoint Tenancy.\nIn joint tenancy, each owner of the property has an undivided interest in it along with full and complete ownership. Each owner in joint tenancy has the full right to occupy and use all of it. If one owner dies in joint tenancy, then the other owner takes control of the deceased owner's interest.\nTenancy in Common.\nIn tenancy in common, the shares of ownership can be equal or unequal in size. One person may own a larger share of the property than another. Even if owners own an unequal amount of shares, all owners still have the right to use all of the property. If one owner dies, their share of the property is transferred to the designated individual in their will contract.\nTenancy by the Entirety.\nIn tenancy by the entirety, each owner of the property has an undivided interest in it along with full and complete ownership. Each spouse has the full right to occupy and use all of the property. It is only available to married couples. A spouse cannot transfer their interest in the property without the consent of the other spouse. If the couple divorces and goes to court, a judge is granted wide discretion on how to divide the share interests of the property in common-law jurisdictions.\nCorporate owners.\nCorporations are legal non-human entities that are entitled to property rights just as an individual human is. A corporation has legal power to use and possess property just as a fictitious legal human would. However, a corporation is not a single human, it is the collective will of a group of people who provide a service or build a good. With many agent in play, there are many different and opposing interests in play with respect to ownership. The majority of property is now owned by corporations. They were created under general incorporation statutes that allow such fictitious legal persons to have property rights.\nState owners.\nThe community, or the state, can have many different roles concerning property: facilitator, protector, and owner. In capitalist market economies, the state largely serves as a mediator that facilitates and enforces private property laws.\nCommunist ideals oppose private property laws. Communism / Marxism advocates for full state / public ownership of property. \"Private property has made us so stupid and one-sided that an object is only \"ours\" when we have it \u2013 when it exists for us as capital, or when it is directly possessed, eaten, drunk, worn, inhabited, etc., \u2013 in short, when it is \"used\" by us\" (Marx). However, it is important to note that many Marxist\u2013Leninist societies such as China and the dissolved Soviet Union have forms of private property laws.\nIn the United States, \"the federal government owns roughly 640 million acres, about 28% of the 2.27 billion acres of land in the United States. Four major federal land management agencies administer 606.5 million acres of this land (as of September 30, 2018). They are the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS), and National Park Service (NPS) in the Department of the Interior (DOI) and the Forest Service (FS) in the Department of Agriculture. A fifth agency, the Department of Defense (excluding the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers), administers 8.8 million acres in the United States (as of September 30, 2017), consisting of military bases, training ranges, and more. Together, the five agencies manage about 615.3 million acres, or 27% of the U.S. land base. Many other agencies administer the remaining federal acreage.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24649", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24649", "title": "Plea", "text": "Answer to a claim made by someone in a common law criminal case\nIn law, a plea is a defendant's response to a criminal charge. A defendant may plead guilty or not guilty. Depending on jurisdiction, additional pleas may be available, including \"nolo contendere\" (no contest), no case to answer (in the United Kingdom), or an Alford plea (in the United States).\nUnder common law systems, a defendant who pleads guilty will be convicted if the court accepts the plea. The court will then determine and impose a sentence. Plea bargaining involves discussions between the prosecutor and defendants to reach an agreement for a guilty plea in exchange for a more lenient punishment. \nIn civil law jurisdictions, a confession by the defendant is treated like any other piece of evidence. A full confession does not prevent a full trial or relieve the prosecutor from presenting a case to the court.\nTypes of plea.\nThe most common types of plea are \"guilty\" and \"not guilty\".\nIn some legal systems pleading guilty can result in a more lenient punishment for the defendant; it is thus a type of mitigating factor in sentencing. While in some other legal systems pleading guilty instead can result in a harsher punishment. In a plea bargain, a defendant makes a deal with the prosecution or court to plead guilty in exchange for a more lenient punishment, or for related charges against them to be dropped. A \"blind plea\" is a guilty plea entered with no plea agreement in place. Plea bargains are particularly common in the United States. Other countries use a more limited form of plea bargaining. In the United Kingdom and Germany, guidelines state that only the timing of the guilty plea can affect the reduction in the punishment, with an earlier plea resulting in a greater reduction.\nIn the United States, a \"nolo contendere\" (no contest) plea is when the defendant submits a plea that neither admits nor denies the offense. It has the same immediate effect as a guilty plea because the trial avoids determining the defendant's guilt.\nPeremptory pleas.\nThese pleas claim that a case cannot proceed for some reason. They are so-called because, rather than being an answer to the question of guilt or innocence, they are a claim that the matter of guilt or innocence should not be considered.\nThey are:\nStanding mute.\nCommon law.\nWhen a defendant refuses to plead to an indictment it is called \"standing mute\", and it has been left to juries to decide the reason for the muteness, whether maliciousness or mental impairment. Historically, during an arraignment an accused person would enter a plea, guilty or not, and after pleading not guilty would be asked how he was to be tried, being expected to answer \"By God and my country\". There were various penalties for refusing to do this if one was of sound mind. In cases of piracy or felony the accused was tortured by pressing until he entered a plea; Edward Coke reported details of such during a murder trial in the reign of James I. In 1692 Giles Corey, charged with Witchcraft in New England, was pressed until he died for refusing to answer \"By God and my country\" after pleading not guilty to the charges. Obtaining pleas by torture was abolished by statute in 1772.\nUS criminal procedure.\nA defendant who refuses to enter a plea is usually interpreted as giving a plea of not guilty; the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, for instance, state, \"If a defendant refuses to enter a plea or if a defendant organization fails to appear, the court must enter a plea of not guilty.\" Similarly, if a defendant attempts to enter an unorthodox plea (a \"creative plea\"), this will usually be interpreted as a plea of not guilty. One example of this was a defendant accused of a crime committed while protesting a nuclear power plant, who gave his plea as \"I plead for the beauty that surrounds us\".\nUnited States.\n\"Voluntary and intelligent\".\nA defendant who enters a plea of guilty must do so, in the phraseology of a 1938 United States Supreme Court case, \"Johnson v. Zerbst\", \"knowingly, voluntarily and intelligently\". The burden is on the prosecution to prove that all waivers of the defendant's rights complied with due process standards. Accordingly, in cases of all but the most minor offenses, the court or the prosecution (depending upon local custom and the presiding judge's preference) will engage in a plea colloquy wherein they ask the defendant a series of rote questions about the defendant's knowledge of his rights and the voluntariness of the plea. Typically the hearing on the guilty plea is transcribed by a court reporter, and the transcript is made a part of the permanent record of the case to preserve the conviction's validity from being challenged at some future time. \"Intelligent\" has been described as \"an elusive term, meaning that the defendant knows his rights, the nature of the charge to which he is pleading, and the consequences of his plea.\" \"Voluntary\" has been described as also \"an elusive term which has come to mean not induced by 'improper' inducements, such as bribing or physical violence, but not including the inducements normally associated with charge and sentence bargaining (except for inducements involving 'overcharging' by prosecutors).\" Empirical research has demonstrated that violent conditions in jails during pretrial detention of people who are legally innocent do improperly induce or coerce guilty pleas, but this has not constitutionally invalidated the pleas under current Supreme Court precedent.\nVirtually all jurisdictions hold that defense counsel need not discuss with defendants the collateral consequences of pleading guilty, such as consecutive sentencing or even treatment as an aggravating circumstance in an ongoing capital prosecution. However, the Supreme Court recognized an important exception in \"Padilla v. Kentucky\" (2010), in which the Court held that defense counsel is obligated to inform defendants of the potential immigration consequences of a guilty plea. Thus a defendant who is not advised of immigration consequences may have an ineffective assistance of counsel argument.\nIn the U.S. federal system, the court must also satisfy itself that there is a factual basis for the guilty plea. However, this safeguard may not be very effective because the parties, having reached a plea agreement, may be reluctant to reveal any information that could disturb the agreement. When a plea agreement has been made, the judge's factual basis inquiry is usually perfunctory, and the standard for finding that the plea is factually based is very low.\nSpecial pleas.\nOther special pleas used in criminal cases include the plea of mental incompetence, challenging the jurisdiction of the court over the defendant's person, the plea in bar, attacking the jurisdiction of the court over the crime charged, and the plea in abatement, which is used to address procedural errors in bringing the charges against the defendant, not apparent on the \"face\" of the indictment or other charging instrument. Special pleas in federal criminal cases have been abolished, and defenses formerly raised by special pleas are now raised by motion to dismiss.\nA conditional plea is one where the defendant pleads guilty to the offense but expressly reserves the right to appeal certain aspects of the charges (for example, that the evidence was illegally obtained).\nIn \"United States v. Binion\", malingering or feigning illness during a competency evaluation was held to be obstruction of justice and led to an enhanced sentence. Although the defendant had pleaded guilty, he was not awarded a reduction in sentence because the feigned illness was considered to mean that he was not accepting responsibility for his illegal behavior.\nUnited Kingdom.\n\"Unambiguous plea\".\nA defendant who enters a plea of guilty must do so unequivocally. A guilty plea which is \"imperfect, unfinished or otherwise ambiguous\" will not legitimate and should the court proceed to sentence on such a plea, there exist grounds for ordering a retrial or quashing the conviction.\nIn \"R v Atkinson\", the Court of Appeal held that, where a defendant entered a plea of 'Guilty, but I intended to defend myself' this could be held to be an unequivocal plea where the judge had clarified any ambiguity before accepting the plea.\nSpecial pleas.\nThree special pleas (though not in the strictest sense of the word) exist in the criminal courts of England and Wales:\nDemurrer: Which is an \"objection to the form or substance of the indictment\". It is essentially no different than a motion to quash the indictment, however, it continues to exist in law. Unlike standard pleas, this must be entered in writing in advance of the arraignment.\nPlea to jurisdiction: Can be entered where the defendant believes the Crown Court does not have the power to hear the case before it, such a plea is usually entered where the offence being charged is summary only. Similarly to Demurrer, this plea must be entered in writing in advance.\nPardon: \"It may be relied on where a pardon has been granted by the Crown on the advice of the Home Secretary in exercise of the royal prerogative of mercy. It must be pleaded at the first opportunity (i.e. before arraignment if the pardon has by then been granted). In modern times, the plea has become obsolete.\"\nPlea in mitigation.\nA plea in mitigation is used during criminal law proceedings in many Commonwealth countries. It typically involves a lawyer telling a judge of extenuating circumstances that could result in a lesser sentence for an offender.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24650", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24650", "title": "Pope Innocent XI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1676 to 1689\nPope Innocent XI (; ; 16 May 1611\u00a0\u2013 12 August 1689), born Benedetto Odescalchi, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 21 September 1676 until his death on 12 August 1689.\nPolitical and religious tensions with Louis XIV of France were a constant preoccupation for Innocent XI. Within the Papal States, he lowered taxes, produced a surplus in the papal budget and repudiated nepotism within the Church. Innocent XI was frugal in his governance of the Papal States, his methods evident in matters ranging from his manner of dress to a wide range of standards of personal behaviour consistent with his conception of Christian values. Once he was elected to the papacy, he applied himself to moral and administrative reform of the Roman Curia. He abolished sinecures and pushed for greater simplicity in preaching as well as greater reverence in worship, requesting this of both the clergy and faithful. In consideration of his diplomatic and financial support for efforts to free Hungary from Turkish domination, he is still widely referred to in the country as the \"Saviour of Hungary\".\nAfter a difficult cause for canonization, starting in 1791, which caused considerable controversy over the years and which was stopped on several occasions, he was beatified in 1956 by Pope Pius XII.\nEarly life.\nBenedetto Odescalchi was born in Como on 16 May 1611, the son of a nobleman of Como, Livio Odescalchi, who died in 1626, and his wife Paola Castelli-Giovanelli from Gandino, who died of the plague in 1630. The child's siblings were Carlo Odescalchi (1609 - 1673), married to Beatrice Cusani of the Marquesses of Chignolo (parents of Giovanna Odescalchi (1651 - 14 July 1679), married in Milan on 27 May 1677 as his first wife to , 6th Marquess of Angera, 11th Count of Arona, with issue), Lucrezia Odescalchi (9 October 1605 - ?), married on 4 February 1621 to Alessandro Erba (6 November 1599 - 31 August 1670), son of Gerolamo Erba and wife Vittoria Olgiati, ancestors of the Erba-Odescalchi, Giulio Maria Odescalchi, Costantino Odescalchi, Nicola Odescalchi and Paolo Odescalchi. He also had several collateral descendants of note through his sister: her grandson Cardinal Benedetto Erba Odescalchi and Cardinal Carlo Odescalchi - Servant of God.\nThe Odescalchi, a family of minor nobility, were determined entrepreneurs. In 1619, Benedetto's brother founded in Genoa with his three uncles a bank which quickly grew into a successful money-lending business. After completing his studies in grammar and letters, the 15-year-old Benedetto moved to Genoa to take part in the family business as an apprentice. Lucrative economic transactions were established with clients in the major Italian and European cities, such as Nuremberg, Milan, Krak\u00f3w, and Rome.\nIn 1626, Benedetto's father died, and he began schooling in the humanities taught by the Jesuits at his local college, before transferring to Genoa. In 1630, he narrowly survived an outbreak of plague, which killed his mother.\nSome time between 1632 and 1636, Benedetto decided to move to Rome and then Naples in order to study civil law. This led to his securing the offices of protonotary apostolic, president of the Apostolic Camera, commissary of the Marco di Roma, and governor of Macerata; on 6 March 1645, Pope Innocent X (1644\u201355) made him Cardinal-Deacon with the deaconry of \"Santi Cosma e Damiano\". He subsequently became legate to Ferrara. When he was sent to Ferrara in order to assist the people stricken with a severe famine, the Pope introduced him to the people of Ferrara as the \"father of the poor\".\nIn 1650, Odescalchi became bishop of Novara, in which capacity he spent all the revenues of his see to relieve the poor and sick in his diocese. He participated in the 1655 conclave. In 1656, with the pope's permission, he resigned as bishop of Novara in favour of his brother Giulio and moved to Rome. While there, he took a prominent part in the consultations of the various congregations of which he was a member. He participated in the 1669\u201370 conclave.\nPapacy.\nElection.\nOdescalchi was a strong papal candidate after the death of Pope Clement IX (1667\u201369) in 1669, but the French government rejected him (using the now-abolished veto). After Pope Clement X (1670\u201376) died, Louis XIV of France (1643\u20131715) again intended to use his royal influence against Odescalchi's election. Instead, believing that the cardinals as well as the Roman people were of one mind in their desire to have Odescalchi as their Pope, Louis reluctantly instructed the French party cardinals to acquiesce in his candidacy.\nOn 21 September 1676, Odescalchi was chosen to be Clement X's successor and took the name of Innocent XI. He chose this name in honour of Pope Innocent X, who made him a cardinal in 1645. He was formally crowned as pontiff on 4 October 1676 by the protodeacon, Cardinal Francesco Maidalchini.\nReforming the administration of the papacy.\nImmediately upon his accession, Innocent XI turned all his efforts towards reducing the expenses of the Curia. He passed strict ordinances against nepotism among the cardinals. He lived frugally and exhorted the cardinals to do the same. In this manner, he not only squared the annual deficit, which at his accession had reached the sum of 170,000 scudi, but within a few years the papal income was even in excess of the expenditures. He lost no time in declaring and practically manifesting his zeal as a reformer of manners and a corrector of administrative abuses. Beginning with the clergy, he sought to raise the laity also to a higher moral standard of living. He closed all of the theatres in Rome (considered to be centres of vice and immorality) and famously brought a temporary halt to the flourishing traditions of Roman opera. In 1679 he publicly condemned sixty-five propositions, taken chiefly from the writings of Escobar, Suarez and other casuists (mostly Jesuit casuists, who had been heavily attacked by Pascal in his \"Provincial Letters\") as \"propositiones laxorum moralistarum\" and forbade anyone to teach them under penalty of excommunication. He condemned in particular the most radical form of mental reservation (\"stricte mentalis\") which authorised deception without an outright lie.\nPersonally not unfriendly to Miguel de Molinos, Innocent XI nevertheless yielded to the enormous pressure brought to bear upon him to confirm in 1687 the judgement of the inquisitors by which sixty-eight quietist propositions of Molinos were condemned as blasphemous and heretical.\nJewish relations.\nInnocent XI showed a degree of sensitivity in his dealings with the Jews within the Italian states. He compelled the Republic of Venice to release the Jewish prisoners taken by Francesco Morosini in 1685. He also discouraged compulsory baptisms, which accordingly became less frequent under his pontificate, but he could not abolish the old practice altogether.\nMore controversially, on 30 October 1682, he issued an edict by which all the money-lending activities carried out by the Roman Jews were to cease. Such a move would incidentally have financially benefited his own brothers, who played a dominant role in European money-lending. However, ultimately convinced that such a measure would cause much misery in destroying livelihoods, the enforcement of the edict was twice delayed.\nForeign relations.\nThe Battle of Vienna.\nInnocent XI was an enthusiastic initiator of the Holy League which brought together the states of the Holy Roman Empire and King John III Sobieski of Poland-Lithuania who in 1683 hastened to the relief of Vienna which was being besieged by the Turks. After the siege was raised, Innocent XI again spared no efforts to induce the Christian princes to lend a helping hand for the expulsion of the Turks from Ottoman Hungary. He contributed millions of scudi to the Turkish war fund in Austria and Hungary and had the satisfaction of hearing of the capture of Belgrade on 6 September 1688.\nPope-burning in London.\nDuring England's Exclusion Crisis (1679\u20131681), when Parliament sought to exclude the Catholic Duke of York from gaining the throne, the radical Protestants of London's Green Ribbon Club regularly held mass processions culminating with burning \"The Pope\" in effigy. Evidently, the organisers of these events were unaware that the actual Pope in Rome was involved in a deep conflict with the King of France\u00a0\u2013 and therefore, far from supporting the drive to get the Duke of York crowned, which served Louis XIV's political ambitions.\nRelations with France.\nThe pontificate of Innocent XI was marked by the struggle between the absolutism and hegemonic intentions of Louis XIV, and the primacy of the Catholic Church. As early as 1673, Louis had by his own power extended the right of the \"r\u00e9gale\" over the provinces of Languedoc, Guyenne, Provence, and Dauphin\u00e9, where it had previously not been exercised.\nAll the efforts of Innocent XI to induce Louis XIV to respect the rights and primacy of the Church proved useless. In 1682, the King convoked an assembly of the French clergy which adopted the four articles that became known as the Gallican Liberties. Innocent XI annulled the four articles on 11 April 1682 and refused his approbation to all future episcopal candidates who had taken part in the assembly.\nTo appease the Pope, Louis XIV began to act as a zealot of Catholicism. In 1685, he revoked the Edict of Nantes and inaugurated a persecution of French Huguenots. Innocent expressed displeasure at these drastic measures and continued to withhold his approbation from the episcopal candidates.\nInnocent XI irritated the King still more that same year by abolishing the much-abused right of asylum, by which foreign ambassadors in Rome had been able to harbour in embassies any criminal wanted by the papal court of justice. He notified the new French ambassador, Marquis de Lavardin, that he would not be recognised as ambassador in Rome unless he renounced this right, but Louis XIV would not give it up. At the head of an armed force of about 800 men, Lavardin entered Rome in November 1687 and took forcible possession of his palace. Innocent XI treated him as excommunicated and on 24 December 1687 placed under interdict the Church of St. Louis at Rome, where Lavardin attended services.\nIn January 1688, Innocent XI received the diplomatic mission which had been dispatched to France and the Holy See by Narai, the King of Siam, under Guy Tachard and Ok-khun Chamnan in order to establish relations.\nCologne controversy.\nThe tension between the Pope and the King of France was increased by Innocent's procedure in filling the vacant archepiscopal see of Cologne. The two candidates for the see were Cardinal Wilhelm Egon von F\u00fcrstenberg, then Bishop of Strasbourg, and Joseph Clemens, a brother of Max Emanuel, Elector of Bavaria. The former was a willing tool in the hands of Louis XIV, and his appointment as Archbishop and Prince-elector of Cologne would have implied French preponderance in north-western Germany.\nJoseph Clement was not only the candidate of Emperor Leopold I (1658\u20131705) but of all European rulers, with the exception of the King of France and his supporter and cousin, King James II of England (1685\u201388). At the election, which took place on 19 July 1688, neither of the candidates received the required number of votes. The decision, therefore, fell to Innocent XI, who designated Joseph Clemens as Archbishop and Elector of Cologne.\nLouis XIV retaliated by taking possession of the papal territory of Avignon, imprisoning the papal nuncio and appealing to a general council. Nor did he conceal his intention to separate the French Church entirely from Rome. The Pope remained firm. The subsequent fall of James II in England destroyed French preponderance in Europe, and soon after Innocent XI's death, the struggle between Louis XIV and the papacy was settled in favour of the Church.\nInnocent XI and William of Orange.\nInnocent XI dispatched Ferdinando d'Adda as nuncio to the Kingdom of England, the first representative of the Papacy to go to England for over a century. Even so, the Pope did not approve the imprudent manner in which James II attempted to restore Catholicism in England. He also repeatedly expressed his displeasure at the support which James II gave to the autocratic King Louis XIV in his measures against the Church. It is not surprising, therefore, that Innocent XI had less sympathy for James than for William of Orange and that he did not afford James help in his hour of trial. Innocent refused to appoint James II's choice as a Cardinal, Sir Edward Petre, 3rd Baronet.\nMoral theology.\nAbortion.\nInnocent XI issued the papal bull \"Sanctissimus Dominus\" in 1679 to condemn 65 propositions that favoured a liberal approach to doctrine, which included two that related to abortion. He first condemned Proposition 34 and countered that it was unlawful to procure an abortion. He also condemned proposition 35, which stated: \"It seems probable that the fetus (as long as it is in the uterus) lacks a rational soul and begins first to have one when it is born; and consequently it must be said that no abortion is a homicide.\"\nOther activities.\nInnocent XI was no less intent on preserving the purity of faith and morals among all people. He insisted on thorough education and an exemplary lifestyle for all people, and he passed strict rules in relation to the modesty of dress among Roman women. Furthermore, he put an end to the ever-increasing passion for gambling by suppressing the gambling houses in Rome. By a decree of 12 February 1679 he encouraged frequent and even daily reception of Holy Communion. On 4 March 1679, he condemned the proposition that \"the precept of keeping Holy Days is not obligatory under pain of mortal sin, aside from scandal, if contempt is absent\". In 1688, he reiterated a decree of Pope Sixtus V that banned women from singing on stage in all public theatres or opera houses.\nInnocent XI was hostile towards the book \"Varia Opuscula Theologica\" (Various Theological Brochures) that the Spanish Jesuit Francisco Su\u00e1rez published. He ordered all copies to be burnt in 1679, but his orders were ignored. One of the books was discovered in 2015.\nConsistories.\nHe elevated 43 new cardinals into the cardinalate in two consistories. In 1681, he named Antonio Pignatelli a cardinal, who would later become Pope Innocent XII (taking his name in honour of the pope who elevated him). Innocent XI also intended to nominate his confessor Ludovico Marracci as a cardinal, but he declined the invitation.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nHe also canonized two saints: Bernard of Menthon in 1681 and Pedro Armengol on 8 April 1687. He beatified six individuals.\nDeath and beatification.\nFinal days and death.\nInnocent XI is known to have suffered from kidney stones since 1682, and in 1689, his health declined notably. In June that year, he was confined to his bed. For reasons of ill health, he cancelled a consistory of cardinals convoked for 19 June for the examination of bishops, and he also cancelled meetings on 21 June. The pope was suddenly assailed by a strong fever on 25 June, and on 29 June, he was unable to celebrate the solemn Mass for the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul, deputing Cardinal Flavio Chigi to celebrate it in his place. The Pope's condition worsened on 2 July, and his doctors were led to lance his left leg, which caused fluid release, and eventually to undertake an operation on his right leg on 31 July, and two more in the following two days.\nOn 9 August, he received the Viaticum since doctors were of the opinion that he had little time left to live. On 11 August, he received in audience Cardinal Leandro Colloredo, who came to remind him that the pope had been set to raise ten men to the cardinalate, but the pope refused to do so despite the cardinal's insistence. On the morning of 12 August, he lost the ability to speak and suffered from breathing difficulties.\nInnocent XI died on 12 August 1689 at 22:00 (Rome time). Following his death, he was buried in St Peter's Basilica beneath his funeral monument near the Clementine Chapel, which his nephew, Prince Livio Odescalchi, commissioned. The monument, which was designed and sculpted by Pierre-\u00c9tienne Monnot, features the pope seated upon the throne above a sarcophagus with a base-relief showing the liberation of Vienna from the Turks by John III Sobieski, flanked by two allegorical figures representing Faith and Fortitude.\nIn April 2011, the remains of Innocent XI were moved to make way for the remains of the beatified John Paul II.\nBeatification.\nThe process of Innocent XI's beatification was introduced in 1691 by Pope Innocent XII. His cause was formally opened on 23 June 1714 under Clement XI, granting him the title of Servant of God, and continued under Clement XII, but French influence and the accusation of Jansenism caused it to be suspended in 1744 by Pope Benedict XIV. In the 20th century, it was reintroduced; his writings were approved by theologians on 24 March 1945, and Pope Pius XII proclaimed him venerable on 15 November 1955 and blessed on 7 October 1956.\nFollowing his beatification, his sarcophagus was placed under the Altar of St. Sebastian in the basilica's Chapel of St. Sebastian, where it remained until 8 April 2011 when it was moved to make way for the remains of Pope John Paul II to be relocated to the basilica from the grotto beneath St. Peter's in honor of his beatification and in order to make his resting place more accessible to the public. Innocent's body was transferred to the basilica's Altar of Transfiguration, which is located near the Clementine Chapel and the entombed remains of Pope Gregory the Great (590\u2013604). The altar is also across from Innocent XI's monument, which was his original site of burial before his beatification.\nThe feast day assigned to Innocent XI is 12 August, the date of his death. In the Hungarian calendar, it is commemorated on August 13.\nIt was believed that the canonization would have taken place in 2003, but the book's publication halted all plans to canonize Innocent XI.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24651", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24651", "title": "Pantograph", "text": "Mechanical linkage used for copying drawings\nA pantograph (from el \" \u03c0\u03b1\u03bd\u03c4-\"\u00a0'all, every' and \" \u03b3\u03c1\u03b1\u03c6-\"\u00a0'to write', from their original use for copying writing) is a mechanical linkage connected in a manner based on parallelograms so that the movement of one pen, in tracing an image, produces identical movements in a second pen. If a line drawing is traced by the first point, an identical, enlarged, or miniaturized copy will be drawn by a pen fixed to the other. Using the same principle, different kinds of pantographs are used for other forms of duplication in areas such as sculpting, minting, engraving, and milling.\nHistory.\nThe ancient Greek engineer Hero of Alexandria described pantographs in his work \"Mechanics\".\nIn 1603, Christoph Scheiner used a pantograph to copy and scale diagrams, and wrote about the invention over 27 years later, in \"Pantographice seu Ars delineandi res quaslibet per parallelogrammum lineare seu cavum\" (Rome 1631). One arm of the pantograph contained a small pointer, while the other held a drawing implement, and by moving the pointer over a diagram, a copy of the diagram was drawn on another piece of paper. By changing the positions of the arms in the linkage between the pointer arm and drawing arm, the scale of the image produced can be changed.\nIn 1821, Professor William Wallace (1768\u20131843) invented the eidograph to improve upon the practical utility of the pantograph. The eidograph relocates the fixed point to the center of the parallelogram and uses a narrow parallelogram to provide improved mechanical advantages.\nUses.\nDrafting.\nThe original use of the pantograph was for copying and scaling line drawings. Modern versions are sold as technical toys.\nSculpture and minting.\nSculptors use a three-dimensional version of the pantograph, usually a large boom connected to a fixed point at one end, bearing two rotating pointing needles at arbitrary points along this boom. By adjusting the needles different enlargement or reduction ratios can be achieved. This device was invented by inventor and steam pioneer James Watt and perfected by Benjamin Cheverton in 1836. Cheverton's machine was fitted with a rotating cutting bit to carve reduced versions of well-known sculptures. Though now, it is largely overtaken by computer guided router systems that scan a model and can produce it in a variety of materials and in any desired size, A three-dimensional pantograph can also be used to enlarge sculpture by interchanging the position of the model and the copy.\nAnother version is still very much in use to reduce the size of large relief designs for coins down to the required size of the coin.\nAcoustic cylinder duplication.\nOne advantage of phonograph and gramophone discs over cylinders in the 1890s\u2014before electronic amplification was available\u2014was that large numbers of discs could be stamped quickly and cheaply. In 1890, the only ways of manufacturing copies of a master cylinder were to mold the cylinders (which was slow and, early on, produced very poor copies), or to acoustically copy the sound by placing the horns of two phonographs together or to hook the two together with a rubber tube (one phonograph recording and the other playing the cylinder back). Instead of copying a master cylinder, the other alternative was to record a performance to multiple gramophones simultaneously, over and over again, making each cylinder a master copy. Edison, Bettini, Leon Douglass and others solved this problem (partly) by mechanically linking a cutting stylus and a playback stylus together and copying the \"hill-and-dale\" grooves of the cylinder mechanically. When molding improved somewhat, molded cylinders were used as pantograph masters. This was employed by Edison and Columbia in 1898, and was used until about January 1902 (Columbia brown waxes after this were molded). Some companies like the United States Phonograph Company of Newark, New Jersey, supplied cylinder masters for smaller companies so that they could duplicate them, sometimes pantographically. Pantographs could turn out about 30 records per day and produce up to about 150 records per master. In theory, pantograph masters could be used for 200 or 300 duplicates if the master and the duplicate were running in reverse and the record would be duplicated in reverse. This, in theory, could extend the usability of a pantograph master by using the unworn/lesser worn part of the recording for duplication. Path\u00e9 employed this system with mastering their vertically cut records until 1923; a , master cylinder, rotating at a high speed, would be recorded on. This was done as the resulting cylinder was considerably loud and of very high fidelity. Then, the cylinder would be placed on the mandrel of a duplicating pantograph that would be played with a stylus on the end of a lever, which would transfer the sound to a wax disc master, which would be electroplated and be used to stamp copies out. This system resulted in some fidelity reduction and rumble, but relatively high quality sound. Edison Diamond Disc Records were made by recording \"directly\" onto the wax master disc.\nMilling machines.\nBefore the advent of control technologies such as numerical control (NC and CNC) and programmable logic control (PLC), duplicate parts being milled on a milling machine could not have their contours mapped out by moving the milling cutter in a \"connect-the-dots\" (\"by-the-numbers\") fashion. The only ways to control the movement of the cutting tool were to dial the positions by hand using dexterous skill (with natural limits on a human's accuracy and precision) or to trace a cam, template, or model in some way, and have the cutter mimic the movement of the tracing stylus. If the milling head was mounted on a pantograph, a duplicate part could be cut (and at various scales of magnification besides 1:1) simply by tracing a template. (The template itself was usually made by a tool and die maker using toolroom methods, including milling via dialing followed by hand sculpting with files and/or die grinder points.) This was essentially the same concept as reproducing documents with a pen-equipped pantograph, but applied to the machining of hard materials such as metal, wood, or plastic. Pantograph routing, which is conceptually identical to pantograph milling, also exists (as does CNC routing). The Blanchard lathe, a copying lathe developed by Thomas Blanchard, used the same essential concept.\nThe development and dissemination throughout industry of NC, CNC, PLC, and other control technologies provided a new way to control the movement of the milling cutter: via feeding information from a program to actuators (servos, selsyns, leadscrews, machine slides, spindles, and so on) that would move the cutter as the information directed. Today most commercial machining is done via such programmable, computerized methods. Home machinists are likely to work via manual control, but computerized control has reached the home-shop level as well (it is just not yet as pervasive as its commercial counterparts). Thus pantograph milling machines are largely a thing of the past. They are still in commercial use, but at a greatly reduced and ever-dwindling level. They are no longer built new by machine tool builders, but a small market for used machines still exists. As for the magnification-and-reduction feature of a pantograph (with the scale determined by the adjustable arm lengths), it is achieved in CNC via mathematic calculations that the computer applies to the program information practically instantaneously. Scaling functions (as well as mirroring functions) are built into languages such as G-code.\nOther uses.\nIn another application similar to drafting, the pantograph is incorporated into a pantograph engraving machine with a revolving cutter instead of a pen, and a tray at the pointer end to fix precut lettered plates (referred to as 'copy'), which the pointer follows and thus the cutter, via the pantograph, reproduces the 'copy' at a ratio to which the pantograph arms have been set. The typical range of ratio is Maximum 1:1 Minimum 50:1 (reduction) In this way machinists can neatly and accurately engrave numbers and letters onto a part. Pantographs are no longer commonly used in modern engraving, with computerized laser and rotary engraving taking favor.\nThe device which maintains electrical contact with the contact wire and transfers power from the wire to the traction unit, used in electric locomotives and trams, is also called a \"pantograph\".\nHerman Hollerith's \"Keyboard punch\" used for the 1890 U.S. Census was a pantograph design and sometimes referred to as \"The Pantograph Punch\".\nAn early 19th-century device employing this mechanism is the polygraph, which produces a duplicate of a letter as the original is written.\nIn 1886, Eduard Selling patented a prize-winning calculating machine based on the pantograph, although it was not commercially successful.\nLongarm quilting machine operators may trace a pantograph, paper pattern, with a laser pointer to stitch a custom pattern onto the quilt. Digitized pantographs are followed by computerized machines.\nLinn Boyd Benton invented a pantographic engraving machine for type design, which was capable not only of scaling a single font design pattern to a variety of sizes, but could also condense, extend, and slant the design (mathematically, these are cases of affine transformation, which is the fundamental geometric operation of most systems of digital typography today, including PostScript).\nRichard Feynman used the analogy of a pantograph as a way of scaling down tools to the nanometer scale in his talk \"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
