{"id": "25936", "revid": "50779574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25936", "title": "Rio de Janeiro", "text": "Second-largest city in Brazil\nRio de Janeiro, and also known as Rio, is the capital of the state of Rio de Janeiro. It is the second-most-populous city in Brazil after S\u00e3o Paulo and the sixth-most-populous city in the Americas.\nFounded in 1565, the city was initially the seat of the Captaincy of Rio de Janeiro, a domain of the Portuguese Empire. In 1763, it became the capital of the State of Brazil. In 1808, when the Portuguese Royal Court moved to Brazil, Rio de Janeiro became the seat of the court of Queen Maria I of Portugal. Under the leadership of her son, prince regent John of Braganza, Maria raised Brazil to the dignity of a kingdom, within the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil, and Algarves. Rio remained as the capital of the pluricontinental monarchy until 1822, when the Brazilian War of Independence began. This is one of the few instances in history that the capital of a colonizing country officially shifted to a city in one of its colonies. Rio de Janeiro subsequently served as the capital of the Empire of Brazil, until 1889, and then the capital of republican Brazil until 1960 when the capital was transferred to Bras\u00edlia.\nRio de Janeiro has the second largest municipal GDP in the country, and 30th-largest in the world in 2008. This is estimated at R$343\u00a0billion. In the city are the headquarters of Brazilian oil, mining, and telecommunications companies, including two of the country's major corporations, Petrobras and Vale, and Latin America's largest telemedia conglomerate, Grupo Globo. The home of many universities and institutes, it is the second-largest center of research and development in Brazil, accounting for 17 percent of national scientific output according to 2005 data. Despite the high perception of crime, the city actually has a lower incidence of crime than most state capitals in Brazil.\nRio de Janeiro is one of the most visited cities in the Southern Hemisphere and is known for its natural settings, carnival, samba, bossa nova, and beaches such as Barra da Tijuca, Copacabana, Ipanema, and Leblon. In addition to the beaches, landmarks include the statue of \"Christ the Redeemer\" atop Corcovado mountain, named one of the New Seven Wonders of the World; Sugarloaf Mountain with its cable car; the \"Samb\u00f3dromo\", a permanent grandstand-lined parade avenue which is used during Carnival; and Maracan\u00e3 Stadium, one of the world's largest football stadiums. Rio de Janeiro was the host of the 2016 Summer Olympics and the Paralympics, making the city the first South American and Portuguese-speaking city to ever host the events, and the third time the Olympics were held in a Southern Hemisphere city. The Maracan\u00e3 Stadium held the finals of the 1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cups, the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, and the XV Pan American Games. The city hosted the G20 summit in 2024, and will host the FIFA Women's World Cup in 2027.\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Portuguese Empire 1565\u20131815 United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves 1815\u20131822 Empire of Brazil 1822\u20131889 Republic of Brazil 1889\u2013present\nPre-Cabraline period.\nThe region of Rio was inhabited by the Tupi, Puri, Botocudo and Maxakal\u00ed peoples.\nColonial period.\nEuropeans first encountered Guanabara Bay on 1 January 1502 (hence Rio de Janeiro, \"January River\"), during a Portuguese expedition under explorer Gaspar de Lemos, captain of a ship in Pedro \u00c1lvares Cabral's fleet, or under Gon\u00e7alo Coelho. Allegedly the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci participated as an observer at the invitation of King Manuel I in the same expedition.\nIn 1555, one of the islands of Guanabara Bay, now called Villegagnon Island, was occupied by 500 French colonists under the French admiral Nicolas Durand de Villegaignon. Consequently, Villegagnon built Fort Coligny on the island when attempting to establish the France Antarctique colony. Eventually this French settlement became too much of a threat to the established Portuguese colony and in 1560 the order was made to get rid of them. A years-long military aggression was then initiated by the new Governor General of Brazil Mem de S\u00e1, and later continued by his nephew Est\u00e1cio de S\u00e1. On 20 January 1567, a final defeat was imposed on the French forces and they were decisively expelled from Brazil for good.\nThe city of Rio de Janeiro proper was founded on 1 March 1565 by the Portuguese, led by Est\u00e1cio de S\u00e1, including Ant\u00f4nio de Mariz. It was named \"S\u00e3o Sebasti\u00e3o do Rio de Janeiro\", in honor of St. Sebastian, the saint who was the namesake and patron of the Portuguese then-monarch Sebasti\u00e3o. \"Rio de Janeiro\" was the name of Guanabara Bay. Until early in the 18th century, the city was threatened or invaded by several mostly French pirates and buccaneers, such as Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Duclerc and Ren\u00e9 Duguay-Trouin.\nIn the late 17th century, Bandeirantes discovered gold and diamonds in the neighboring captaincy of Minas Gerais, thus Rio de Janeiro became a much more practical port for exporting diversified sources of wealth (gold, precious stones, besides the sugar) than Salvador, Bahia, much farther northeast. On 27 January 1763, the colonial administration in Portuguese America was moved from Salvador to Rio de Janeiro. The city remained primarily a colonial capital until 1808, when the Portuguese royal family and most of the associated Lisbon nobles, fleeing from Napoleon's invasion of Portugal, moved to Rio de Janeiro.\nPortuguese royal period.\nThe kingdom's capital was transferred to the city, which, thus, became the only European capital outside of Europe. As there was no physical space or urban structure to accommodate hundreds of noblemen who arrived suddenly, many inhabitants were simply evicted from their homes. In the first decade, several educational establishments were created, such as the Military Academy, the Royal School of Sciences, Arts and Crafts and the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, as well as the National Library of Brazil \u2013 with the largest collection in Latin America \u2013 and The Botanical Garden. The first printed newspaper in Brazil, the , came into circulation during this period. When Brazil was elevated to Kingdom in 1815, it became the capital of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves until the return of the Portuguese Royal Family to Lisbon in 1821, but remained as capital of the Kingdom of Brazil.\nFrom the colonial period until the first independent era, Rio de Janeiro was a city of slaves. There was a large influx of African slaves to Rio de Janeiro: in 1819, there were 145,000 slaves in the captaincy. In 1840, the number of slaves reached 220,000 people. Between 1811 and 1831, 500,000 to a million slaves arrived in Rio de Janeiro through Valongo Wharf, which is now a World Heritage Site. The Port of Rio de Janeiro was the largest port of slaves in America.\nImperial period.\nWhen Prince Pedro proclaimed the independence of Brazil in 1822, he decided to keep Rio de Janeiro as the capital of his new empire while the place was enriched with sugar cane agriculture in the Campos region and, especially, with the new coffee cultivation in the Para\u00edba Valley. In order to separate the province from the capital of the Empire, the city was converted in Neutral Municipality in 1834, passing the province of Rio de Janeiro to have Niter\u00f3i as capital.\nAs a political center of the country, Rio concentrated the political-partisan life of the Empire. It was the main stage of the abolitionist and republican movements in the last half of the 19th century. At that time the number of slaves was drastically reduced and the city was developed, with modern drains, animal trams, train stations crossing the city, gas and electric lighting, telephone and telegraph wiring, water and river plumbing. Rio continued as the capital of Brazil after 1889, when the monarchy was replaced by a republic.\nOn 6 February 1889 the Bangu Textile Factory was founded, with the name of Industrial Progress Company of Brazil (Companhia Progresso Industrial do Brasil). The factory was officially opened on 8 March 1893, in a complex with varying architectural styles like Italianate, Neo-Gothic and a tower in Mansard Roof style. After the opening in 1893, workers from Great Britain arrived in Bangu to work in the textile factory. The old farms became worker villages with red-bricks houses, and a neo-gothic church was created, which still exists as the Saint Sebastian and Saint Cecilia Parish Church. Street cinemas and cultural buildings also appeared. In May 1894, Thomas Donohoe, a British worker from Busby, Scotland, arrived in Bangu.\nDonohoe was amazed to discover that there was absolutely no knowledge of football among Brazilians. So he wrote to his wife, Elizabeth, asking her to bring a football when she joined him. And shortly after her arrival, in September 1894, the first football match in Brazil took place in the field beside the textile factory. It was a five-a-side match between British workers, and took place six months before the first game organized by Charles Miller in S\u00e3o Paulo. However, the Bangu Football Club was not formally created until 1904.\nRepublican period.\nAt the time Brazil's Old Republic was established, the city lacked urban planning and sanitation, which helped spread several diseases, such as yellow fever, dysentery, variola, tuberculosis and even black death. Pereira Passos, who was named mayor in 1902, imposed reforms to modernize the city, demolishing the corti\u00e7os where most of the poor population lived. These people then moved to live in the city's hills, creating the first favelas. Inspired by the city of Paris, Passos built the Municipal Theater, the National Museum of Fine Arts and the National Library in the city's center; brought electric power to Rio and created larger avenues to adapt the city to automobiles. Passos also named Oswaldo Cruz as Director General of Public Health. Cruz's plans to clean the city of diseases included compulsory vaccination of the entire population and forced entry into houses to kill mosquitoes and rats. The people of the city rebelled against Cruz's policy, in what would be known as the Vaccine Revolt.\nIn 1910, Rio saw the Revolt of the Lash, where Afro-Brazilian crew members in the Brazilian Navy mutinied against the heavy use of corporal punishment, which was similar to the punishment slaves received. The mutineers took control of the battleship \"Minas Geraes\" and threatened to fire on the city. Another military revolt occurred in 1922, the Copacabana Fort revolt, a march against the Old Republic's coronelism and caf\u00e9 com leite politics. This revolt marked the beginning of Tenentism, a movement that resulted in the Brazilian Revolution of 1930 that started the Vargas Era.\nUntil the early years of the 20th century, the city was largely limited to the neighborhood now known as the historic city center (see below), on the mouth of Guanabara Bay. The city's center of gravity began to shift south and west to the so-called Zona Sul (South Zone) in the early part of the 20th century, when the first tunnel was built under the mountains between Botafogo and the neighborhood that is now known as Copacabana. Expansion of the city to the north and south was facilitated by the consolidation and electrification of Rio's streetcar transit system after 1905. Botafogos natural environment, combined with the fame of the Copacabana Palace Hotel, \"the\" luxury hotel of the Americas in the 1930s, helped Rio to gain the reputation it still holds today as a beach party town. This reputation has been somewhat tarnished in recent years by favela violence resulting from the narcotics trade and militias.\nPlans for moving the nation's capital city from Rio de Janeiro to the center of Brazil had been occasionally discussed, and when Juscelino Kubitschek was elected president in 1955, it was partially on the strength of promises to build a new capital. Though many thought that it was just campaign rhetoric, Kubitschek managed to have Bras\u00edlia and a new Federal District built, at great cost, by 1960. On 21 April of that year, the capital of Brazil was officially moved to Bras\u00edlia. The territory of the former Federal District became its own state, Guanabara, after the bay that borders it to the east, encompassing just the city of Rio de Janeiro. After the 1964 coup d'\u00e9tat that installed a military dictatorship, the city-state was the only state left in Brazil to oppose the military. Then, in 1975, a presidential decree known as \"The Fusion\" removed the city's federative status and merged it with the State of Rio de Janeiro, with the city of Rio de Janeiro replacing Niter\u00f3i as the state's capital, and establishing the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region.\nIn 1992, Rio hosted the Earth Summit, a United Nations conference to fight environmental degradation. Twenty years later, in 2012, the city hosted another conference on sustainable development, named United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. The city hosted the World Youth Day in 2013, the second World Youth Day in South America and first in Brazil. In the sports field, Rio de Janeiro was the host of the 2007 Pan American Games and the 2014 FIFA World Cup Final. On 2 October 2009, the International Olympic Committee announced that Rio de Janeiro would host the 2016 Olympic Games and the 2016 Paralympic Games, beating competitors Chicago, Tokyo, and Madrid. The city became the first South American city to host the event and the second Latin American city (after Mexico City in 1968) to host the Games. Since the early 2010s, Rio de Janeiro has been inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site for its arts, urban culture and designed landscapes set around a natural environment.\nGeography.\nRio de Janeiro is near the west end of a strip (from Cabo Frio to just east of Ilha Grande) of Brazil's Atlantic coast close to the Tropic of Capricorn where the shoreline is oriented east and west; the city thus faces largely south. It was founded at the entrance to an inlet, Guanabara Bay (Ba\u00eda de Guanabara), which is marked by a point of land called Sugar Loaf (P\u00e3o de A\u00e7\u00facar) \u2013 a \"calling card\" of the city.\nThe population of the city of Rio de Janeiro, occupying an area of , is about 6,000,000. The population of the greater metropolitan area is estimated at 11\u201313.5\u00a0million. Residents of the city are known as \"cariocas\". The official song of Rio is \"Cidade Maravilhosa\", by composer Andr\u00e9 Filho.\nParks.\nThe city has parks and ecological reserves such as the Tijuca National Park, the world's first urban forest and UNESCO Environmental Heritage and Biosphere Reserve; Pedra Branca State Park, which houses the highest point of Rio de Janeiro, the peak of Pedra Branca; the Quinta da Boa Vista complex; the Botanical Garden; Rio's Zoo; Parque Lage; and the Passeio P\u00fablico, the first public park in the Americas. In addition the Flamengo Park is the largest landfill in the city, extending from the center to the south zone, and containing museums and monuments, in addition to much vegetation.\nSince 1961, the Tijuca National Park (Parque Nacional da Tijuca), the largest city-surrounded urban forest and the second largest urban forest in the world, has been a National Park. The largest urban forest in the world is the Floresta da Pedra Branca (White Rock Forest), which is located in the West Zone of Rio de Janeiro.\nEnvironment.\nDue to the high concentration of industries in the metropolitan region, the city has faced serious problems of environmental pollution. The Guanabara Bay has lost mangrove areas and suffers from residues from domestic and industrial sewage, oils and heavy metals. Although its waters renew when they reach the sea, the bay is the final receiver of all the tributaries generated along its banks and in the basins of the many rivers and streams that flow into it. The levels of particulate matter in the air are twice as high as that recommended by the World Health Organization, in part because of the large numbers of vehicles in circulation.\nThe waters of Sepetiba Bay are slowly following the path traced by Guanabara Bay, with sewage generated by a population of the order of 1.29 million inhabitants being released without treatment in streams or rivers. With regard to industrial pollution, highly toxic wastes, with high concentrations of heavy metals \u2013 mainly zinc and cadmium \u2013 have been dumped over the years by factories in the industrial districts of Santa Cruz, Itagua\u00ed and Nova Igua\u00e7u, constructed under the supervision of State policies.\nThe Marapendi lagoon and the Rodrigo de Freitas Lagoon have suffered with the leniency of the authorities and the growth in the number of apartment buildings close by. The illegal discharge of sewage and the consequent deaths of algae diminished the oxygenation of the waters, causing fish mortality.\nThere are, on the other hand, signs of decontamination in the lagoon made through a public-private partnership established in 2008 to ensure that the lagoon waters will eventually be suitable for bathing. The decontamination actions involve the transfer of sludge to large craters present in the lagoon itself, and the creation of a new direct and underground connection with the sea, which will contribute to increase the daily water exchange between the two environments. However, during the Olympics the lagoon hosted the rowing competitions and there were numerous concerns about potential infection resulting from human sewage.\nClimate.\nRio has a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Aw\", Trewartha: \"Awab\"), and is often characterized by long periods of heavy rain between December and March. The city experiences hot, humid summers, and warm, sunny winters. In inland areas of the city, temperatures above are common during the summer, though rarely for long periods, while maximum temperatures above can occur on a monthly basis.\nAlong the coast, the breeze, blowing onshore and offshore, moderates the temperature. Because of its geographic situation, the city is often reached by cold fronts advancing from Antarctica, especially during autumn and winter, causing frequent weather changes. In summer there can be strong rains, which have, on some occasions, provoked catastrophic floods and landslides. The mountainous areas register greater rainfall since they constitute a barrier to the humid wind that comes from the Atlantic. The city has had rare frosts in the past. Some areas within Rio de Janeiro state occasionally have falls of snow grains and ice pellets (popularly called ) and hail.\nDrought is very rare, albeit bound to happen occasionally given the city's strongly seasonal tropical climate. The Brazilian drought of 2014\u20132015, most severe in the Southeast Region and the worst in decades, affected the entire metropolitan region's water supply (a diversion from the Para\u00edba do Sul River to the Guandu River is a major source for the state's most populous mesoregion). There were plans to divert the Para\u00edba do Sul to the Sistema Cantareira (Cantareira system) during the water crisis of 2014 in order to help the critically drought-stricken Greater S\u00e3o Paulo area. However, availability of sufficient rainfall to supply tap water to both metropolitan areas in the future is merely speculative.\nRoughly in the same suburbs (Nova Igua\u00e7u and surrounding areas, including parts of Campo Grande and Bangu) that correspond to the location of the March 2012, February\u2013March 2013 and January 2015 pseudo-hail (\"granizo\") falls, there was a tornado-like phenomenon in January 2011, for the first time in the region's recorded history, causing structural damage and long-lasting blackouts, but no fatalities. The World Meteorological Organization has advised that Brazil, especially its southeastern region, must be prepared for increasingly severe weather occurrences in the near future, since events such as the catastrophic January 2011 Rio de Janeiro floods and mudslides are not an isolated phenomenon. In early May 2013, winds registering above caused blackouts in 15 neighborhoods of the city and three surrounding municipalities, and killed one person. Rio saw similarly high winds (about ) in January 2015.\nTemperature also varies according to elevation, distance from the coast, and type of vegetation or land use. During the winter, cold fronts and dawn/morning sea breezes bring mild temperatures; cold fronts, the Intertropical Convergence Zone (in the form of winds from the Amazon Forest), the strongest sea-borne winds (often from an extratropical cyclone) and summer evapotranspiration bring showers or storms. Thus the monsoon-like climate has dry and mild winters and springs, and very wet and warm summers and autumns. As a result, temperatures over , that may happen about year-round but are much more common during the summer, often mean the actual \"feels-like\" temperature is over , when there is little wind and the relative humidity percentage is high.\nAccording to data from the Brazilian National Institute of Meteorology (INMET), since 1931, the absolute minimum temperature recorded in Rio de Janeiro was 6.4\u00a0\u00b0C on August 18, 1933, at the meteorological station in the Bangu neighborhood (deactivated in March 2004). This same station, located in the city's hottest neighborhood, recorded a maximum temperature of 43.1\u00a0\u00b0C on January 14, 1984, which held the record for the highest temperature in the city until December 26, 2012, when 43.2\u00a0\u00b0C was recorded at the Santa Cruz station. The record for rainfall within 24 hours is 349.4\u00a0mm, recorded on February 26, 1971, at the former station in the Engenho de Dentro neighborhood.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2010 IBGE Census, there were 5,940,224 people residing in the city of Rio de Janeiro. Since 1960, when it was surpassed by S\u00e3o Paulo, the city of Rio de Janeiro has been the second-most populous city in Brazil.\nEthnic groups.\nThe 2022 census revealed the following numbers: White Brazilian (45.4% or 2,821,619); Mixed (38.7% or 2,403,895); Black (15.6% or 968,428); Asian (10,514 or 0.2%); Indigenous (6,531 or 0.1%). The population of Rio de Janeiro was 53.2% female and 46.8% male.\nThe black community was formed by residents whose ancestors had been trafficked into slavery, mostly from Angola and Mozambique, as well by people of Angolan, Mozambican and West African descent who moved to Rio from other parts of Brazil. Nearly half of the city's population is by phenotype mixed or black. White in Brazil is defined more by having a European-looking phenotype rather than ancestry, and two full siblings can be of different \"racial\" categories in a skin color and phenotype continuum from \"p\u00e1lido\" (\"branco\") or fair-skinned, through \"branco moreno\" or swarthy Caucasian, \"mesti\u00e7o claro\" or lighter skinned multiracial, \"pardo\" (mixed race) to \"negro\" or black. Pardo, for example, in popular usage includes those who are \"caboclos\" (mestizos), \"mulatos\" (mulattoes), \"cafuzos\" (zambos), \"ju\u00e7aras\" (archaic term for tri-racials) and westernized Amerindians (which are called \"caboclos\" as well), being more of a skin color rather than a racial group in particular.\nImmigration and migration.\nDifferent ethnic groups contributed to the formation of the population of Rio de Janeiro. Before European colonization, there were at least seven different indigenous peoples speaking 20 languages in the region. A part of them joined the Portuguese and the other the French. Those who joined the French were then exterminated by the Portuguese, while the other part was assimilated.\nRio de Janeiro is home to the largest Portuguese population outside of Lisbon in Portugal. After independence from Portugal, Rio de Janeiro became a destination for hundreds of thousands of immigrants from Portugal, mainly in the early 20th century. The immigrants were mostly poor peasants who subsequently found prosperity in Rio as city workers and small traders.\nThe Portuguese cultural influence is still seen in many parts of the city (and many other parts of the state of Rio de Janeiro), including architecture and language. Most Brazilians with some cultural contact with Rio know how to easily differentiate between the local dialect, \"Carioca \", and other Brazilian dialects. People of Portuguese ancestry predominate in most of the state. The Brazilian census of 1920 showed that 39.7% of the Portuguese who lived in Brazil lived in Rio de Janeiro. Including all of the Rio de Janeiro, the proportion raised to 46.3% of the Portuguese who lived in Brazil. The numerical presence of the Portuguese was extremely high, accounting for 72% of the foreigners who lived in the capital. Portuguese born people accounted for 20.4% of the population of Rio, and those with a Portuguese father or a Portuguese mother accounted for 30.8%. In other words, native born Portuguese and their children accounted for 51.2% of the inhabitants of Rio, or a total of 267,664 people in 1890.\nAs a result of the influx of immigrants to Brazil from the late 19th to the early 20th century, also found in Rio de Janeiro and its metropolitan area are communities of Levantine Arabs who are mostly Christian or Irreligious, Spaniards, Italians, Germans, Japanese, \nAccording to an autosomal DNA study from 2009, conducted on a school in the poor suburb of Rio de Janeiro, the \"pardos\" there were found to be on average about 80% European, and the \"whites\" (who thought of themselves as \"very mixed\") were found to carry very little Amerindian and/or African admixtures. The results of the tests of genomic ancestry are quite different from the self made estimates of European ancestry. In general, the test results showed that European ancestry is far more important than the students thought it would be. The \"pardos\" for example thought of themselves as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 European, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 African and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 Amerindian before the tests, and yet their ancestry on average reached 80% European. Other studies showed similar results\nReligion.\nReligion in Rio de Janeiro is diverse, with Catholic Christianity being the majority religion. According to data from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), in 2010 the population of Rio de Janeiro had 3,229,192 Roman Catholics (51.1%), 1,477,021 Protestants (23.4%), 372.851 Spiritists (5.9%), 37,974 Jehovah's Witnesses (0.6%), 75,075 Buddhists (0.2%), 52,213 Umbanda (0.8%), 21,800 Jews (0.3%), 25,743 Brazilian Catholic Apostolic Church (0.4%), 16,776 new eastern religious (0.2%), 28,843 Candombl\u00e9 (0.4%), 3,853 Mormons (&lt;0.1%), 5,751 Eastern Orthodox Christians (&lt;0.1%), 7,394 spiritualists (0.1%), 964 Muslims (&lt;0.1%), 5,662 esoteric (&lt;0.1%) and 802 Hindus (&lt;0.1%). 858,704 had no religion (13.5%), and 113,530 followed other forms of Christianity (1.8%).\nRio de Janeiro has had a rich and influential Catholic tradition. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of S\u00e3o Sebasti\u00e3o do Rio de Janeiro is the second largest archdiocese in Brazil after S\u00e3o Paulo. The Rio de Janeiro Cathedral was inaugurated in 1979, in the central region of the city. Its installations have a collection of great historical and religious value: the Archdiocesan Museum of Sacred Art and the Archdiocesan Archive. In a Contemporary architecture, it has a conical shape, with 96 meters of internal diameter and capacity to receive up to 20 thousand faithful. The splendor of the building, with straight and sober lines, is due to the changing stained glass windows carved on the walls up to the dome. Its design and execution was coordinated by Monsignor Ivo Ant\u00f4nio Calliari (1918\u20132005). Saint Sebastian is recognized as the city's patron saint, which is why it received the canonical name of \"Saint Sebastian of Rio de Janeiro\".\nMany Protestant creeds coexist in the city, Presbyterian, Congregational, Lutheran and Anglican Churches. In addition to evangelical churches such as the Baptist, Methodist, Seventh-day Adventist and Pentecostal churches, such as the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assembly of God, Christian Congregation in Brazil and The Foursquare Church.\nAfro-Brazilian religions such as Umbanda and Candombl\u00e9 find support in various social segments, although professed by less than 2% of the population, many Cariocas simultaneously observe those practices with Roman Catholicism.\nChristianity.\nThe Roman Catholic Archdiocese of S\u00e3o Sebasti\u00e3o do Rio de Janeiro, the Metropolitan See of its respective Ecclesiastical Province, belongs to the Regional Episcopal Council Leste I of the National Conference of Bishops of Brazil (CNBB) (headquartered in Rio until 1977). Founded in 1676, it covers a territory of 1,721\u00a0km2.\nThe \"Cathedral of S\u00e3o Sebasti\u00e3o do Rio de Janeiro\", or \"Metropolitan Cathedral\", was inaugurated in 1979 in the central region of the city. Its facilities house a collection of great historical and religious value: the Archdiocesan Museum of Sacred Art and the Archdiocesan Archive. The Banco da Provid\u00eancia and the Archdiocesan Caritas are also based there. In a contemporary architectural style, it has a conical shape, with an internal diameter of 96 meters and a capacity to hold up to 20,000 worshippers. The splendor of the building, with its straight and sober lines, is due to the changing stained glass windows carved into the walls up to the dome. Its design and execution were coordinated by Monsignor Ivo Ant\u00f4nio Calliari (1918\u20132005).\nThe city is home to various Protestant or reformed denominations, exemplified by the Presbyterian, Congregational, Lutheran and Anglican churches. There are also evangelical churches such as the Baptist, Methodist, Seventh-day Adventist churches, and those of Pentecostal origin: Universal Church of the Kingdom of God, Assembly of God, Christian Congregation in Brazil, Foursquare Gospel, House of Blessing, God is Love Pentecostal Church, Christian Maranatha, and New Life.\nEducation.\nThe Portuguese language is the official and national language, and thus the primary language taught in schools. English and Spanish are also part of the official curriculum. There are also international schools, such as the American School of Rio de Janeiro, Our Lady of Mercy School, SIS Swiss International School, the Corcovado German School, the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais and the British School of Rio de Janeiro.\nThe city has several universities and research institutes. The Ministry of Education has certified approximately 99 upper-learning institutions in Rio. The most prestigious university is the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. It is the fifth-best in Latin America; the second-best in Brazil, second only to the University of S\u00e3o Paulo; and the best in Latin America, according to the QS World University Rankings.\nSome notable higher education institutions are Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ); Federal University of the State of Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO); Rio de Janeiro State University (UERJ); Federal Rural University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ, often nicknamed \"Rural\"); Fluminense Federal University (UFF); Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio); Get\u00falio Vargas Foundation (FGV); Military Institute of Engineering (IME); Superior Institute of Technology in Computer Science of Rio de Janeiro (IST-Rio); College of Publicity and Marketing (ESPM); The Brazilian Center for Research in Physics (CBPF); National Institute of Pure and Applied Mathematics (IMPA); Superior institute of Education of Rio de Janeiro (ISERJ) and Federal Center of Technological Education Celso Suckow da Fonseca (CEFET/RJ). There are more than 137 upper-learning institutions in whole Rio de Janeiro state.\nThe Rio de Janeiro State University (public), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (public), Brazilian Institute of Capital Markets (private) and Pontifical Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro (private) are among the country's top institutions of higher education. Other institutes of higher learning include the Col\u00e9gio Regina Coeli in Usina, notable for having its own narrow-gauge funicular railway on its grounds.\nPrimary schools are largely under municipal administration, while the state plays a more significant role in the extensive network of secondary schools. There are also a small number of schools under federal administration, such as Pedro II School, Col\u00e9gio de Aplica\u00e7\u00e3o da UFRJ, and the Centro Federal de Educa\u00e7\u00e3o Tecnol\u00f3gica of Rio de Janeiro (CEFET-RJ). In addition, Rio has an ample offering of private schools that provide education at all levels. Rio is home to many colleges and universities. The literacy rate for cariocas aged 10 and older is nearly 95 percent, well above the national average. In Rio, there were 1,033 primary schools with 25,594 teachers and 667,788 students in 1995. There are 370 secondary schools with 9,699 teachers and 227,892 students. There are 53 University-preparatory schools with 14,864 teachers and 154,447 students. The city has six major universities and 47 private schools of higher learning.\nSocial issues.\nThere are significant disparities between the rich and the poor in Rio de Janeiro, and different socioeconomic groups are largely segregated into different neighborhoods. Although the city clearly ranks among the world's major metropolises, large numbers live in slums known as favelas, where 95% of the population are poor, compared to 40% in the general population.\nThere have been a number of government initiatives to counter this problem, from the removal of the population from favelas to housing projects such as Cidade de Deus to the more recent approach of improving conditions in the favelas and bringing them up to par with the rest of the city, as was the focus of the \"Favela Bairro\" program and deployment of Pacifying Police Units.\nRio has more people living in slums than any other city in Brazil, according to the 2010 Census. More than 1,500,000 people live in its 763 favelas, 22% of Rio's total population. S\u00e3o Paulo, the largest city in Brazil, has more favelas (1,020), but proportionally has fewer people living in favelas than Rio.\nRio also has a large proportion of state-sanctioned violence, with about 20% of all killings committed by state security. In 2019, police killed an average of five people each day in the state of Rio de Janeiro, with a total of 1,810 killed in the year. This was more police killings than any year since official records started in 1998.\nPolitics.\nMunicipal government.\nIn Rio de Janeiro, the executive power is represented by the mayor and the cabinet of secretaries, in accordance with the model proposed by the Federal Constitution. The Organic Law of the Municipality and the current Master Plan, however, stipulate that the public administration must provide the population with effective tools for the exercise of participatory democracy. In this way, the city is divided into subprefectures, each of which is headed by a sub-mayor appointed directly by the mayor.\nLegislative power is constituted by the municipal council, composed of 51 councilors elected for four-year terms (in compliance with the provisions of article 29 of the Constitution, which disciplines a minimum number of 42 and a maximum of 55 for municipalities with more than five million inhabitants). It is up to the House to prepare and vote on fundamental laws for the administration and the Executive, especially the participatory budget (Lei de Diretrizes Or\u00e7ament\u00e1rias). Although the veto power is granted to the mayor, the process of voting on the laws that oppose him usually generates conflicts between the Executive and the Legislative.\nThere are also municipal councils, which complement the legislative process and the work engendered in the secretariats. Compulsorily formed by representatives of various sectors of organized civil society, they are on different fronts \u2014 although their effective representation is sometimes questioned. The following are currently in operation: Municipal Council for the Protection of Cultural Heritage (CMPC), Defense of the Environment (CONDEMAM), Health (CMS), the Rights of Children and Adolescents (CMDCA), Education (CME), Social Assistance (CMAS) and Anti-Drugs.\nState government.\nAs the capital of the homonymous state, the city is the seat of the state government. The Guanabara Palace (formerly known as Pa\u00e7o Isabel) is located in the Laranjeiras neighborhood, in the south zone, and is the official seat of the Rio de Janeiro executive power. Not to be confused with Pal\u00e1cio Laranjeiras, situated in the same neighborhood, which is the official residence of the governor of Rio de Janeiro.\nThe Legislative Assembly of Rio de Janeiro (ALERJ) is the state legislative body and is headquartered at Tiradentes Palace, where the Chamber of Deputies of Brazil previously functioned.\nThe Court of Justice of the State of Rio de Janeiro (TJRJ) is the highest body of the judiciary in the state. Its central court is located in downtown Rio de Janeiro, but, from 2013 to July 2018, some of the courts of this court were moved to Cidade Nova.\nFederal government.\nThe city of Rio de Janeiro was successively the capital of the Portuguese colony of the State of Brazil (1621\u20131815), after the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves (1815\u20131822), the Empire of Brazil (1822\u20131889) and from the Republic of the United States of Brazil (1889\u20131968) until 1960, when the seat of government was definitively transferred to the then newly built Bras\u00edlia.\nDespite the change in the federal capital, 59% of civil servants in the Executive Branch of federal agencies and public companies remained in the city. Rio de Janeiro is also the only Brazilian state where the number of federal employees exceeds the number of state employees. About a third of all federal public bodies and companies remain in the former capital, with 50 public offices, including agencies, autarchies, foundations and public companies, such as the National Library, the National Nuclear Energy Commission, Fiocruz, BNDES, Petrobras, Eletrobras, IBGE, Casa da Moeda, the National Archives, among others.\nSubdivisions.\nThe city is commonly divided into the historic center (Centro); the tourist-friendly wealthier South Zone (Zona Sul); the residential less wealthy North Zone (Zona Norte); peripheries in the West Zone (Zona Oeste), among them Santa Cruz, Campo Grande and the wealthy newer Barra da Tijuca district. Rio de Janeiro is administratively divided into 33 \"distritos\" (districts) named \"Regi\u00f5es Administrativas\" (\"Administrative Regions\") and 166 \"bairros\" (neighborhoods).\nSubprefectures are officially grouped into four regions (or \"zones\"), taking into account geographic position and occupation history; however these do not have any administrative or political power over the municipality. The official political division of the municipality takes into account historical-cultural characteristics to divide the neighborhoods. Most of its population is concentrated in the neighborhoods of Campo Grande, Santa Cruz, Bangu, Tijuca, Realengo, Jacarepagu\u00e1, Copacabana, Barra da Tijuca, Mar\u00e9, Guaratiba and Taquara together, these eleven neighborhoods concentrate a population of 1.5 million inhabitants, according to the 2010 census.\n\"Centro\" or Downtown is the historic core of the city, as well as its financial and commercial center. Sites of interest include the Pa\u00e7o Imperial, built during colonial times to serve as a residence for the Portuguese governors of Brazil; many historic churches, such as the Candel\u00e1ria Church (the former cathedral), S\u00e3o Jose, Santa Lucia, Nossa Senhora do Carmo, Santa Rita, S\u00e3o Francisco de Paula, and the monasteries of Santo Ant\u00f4nio and S\u00e3o Bento. The Centro also houses the modern concrete Rio de Janeiro Cathedral. Around the Cinel\u00e2ndia square, there are several landmarks of the \"Belle \u00c9poque\" of Rio, such as the Municipal Theater and the National Library building. Among its several museums, the Museu Nacional de Belas Artes (National Museum of Fine Arts) and the Museu Hist\u00f3rico Nacional (National Historical Museum) are the most important.\nThe Cultural Corridor in Rio's City Center is home to one of the most architecturally and historically preserved districts, known as the Sociedade de Amigos das Adjac\u00eancias da Rua da Alf\u00e2ndega (SAARA). This association was formed by merchants operating near Rua da Alf\u00e2ndega in the Historic Center of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. The area is renowned for its stores specializing in popular home goods and fabrics, housed withinveral historic buildings.\nThe name comes from the occupation of the region by Muslim, Jewish and Maronite Christian immigrants from the Ottoman Empire in the early 20th century, for commercial purposes. The region preserves examples of various architectural styles, from Portuguese colonial, through Neoclassical, Eclectic, Art Deco and Modernism, making the region a rich tapestry of historical architecture that refers to the city's colonial and imperial past.\nThe South Zone () is composed of several districts, among which are S\u00e3o Conrado, Leblon, Ipanema, Arpoador, Copacabana, and Leme, which compose Rio's Atlantic beach coastline. The neighborhood of Copacabana beach hosts one of the world's most spectacular New Year's Eve parties (\"Reveillon\"), as more than two million revelers crowd onto the sands to watch the fireworks display. From 2001, the fireworks have been launched from boats, to improve the safety of the event.\nThe North Zone () begins at Grande Tijuca (the middle class residential and commercial \"bairro\" of Tijuca), just west of the city center, and sprawls for miles inland until Baixada Fluminense and the city's Northwest. This region is home to the Maracan\u00e3 (located in Grande Tijuca), once the world's highest capacity football venue, able to hold nearly 199,854 people, as it did for the World Cup final of 1950. This region is also home to most of the samba schools of Rio de Janeiro such as Mangueira, Salgueiro, Imp\u00e9rio Serrano, Unidos da Tijuca, Imperatriz Leopoldinense, among others. Some of the main neighborhoods of Rio's North Zone are Alto da Boa Vista which shares the Tijuca Rainforest with the South and Southwest Zones; Tijuca, Vila Isabel, M\u00e9ier, S\u00e3o Cristov\u00e3o, Madureira, Penha, Manguinhos, Fund\u00e3o, Olaria among others. Many of Rio de Janeiro's slums (\"favelas\"), are located in the North Zone.\nWest Zone (\"Zona Oeste\") of Rio de Janeiro is a vaguely defined area that covers some 50% of the city's entire area, including Barra da Tijuca and Recreio dos Bandeirantes neighborhoods. The West Side of Rio has many historic sites because of the old \"Royal Road of Santa Cruz\" that crossed the territory in the regions of Realengo, Bangu, and Campo Grande, finishing at the Royal Palace of Santa Cruz in the Santa Cruz region. The highest peak of the city of Rio de Janeiro is the Pedra Branca Peak (Pico da Pedra Branca) inside the Pedra Branca State Park. It has an altitude of 1024m. The Pedra Branca State Park (Parque Estadual da Pedra Branca) is the biggest urban state park in the world comprising 17 neighborhoods in the west side, being a \"giant lung\" in the city with trails, waterfalls and historic constructions like an old aqueduct in the Col\u00f4nia Juliano Moreira in the neighborhood of Taquara and a dam in Camorim. Santa Cruz and Campo Grande Region have exhibited economic growth, mainly in the Campo Grande neighborhood. Industrial enterprises are being built in lower and lower middle class residential Santa Cruz, one of the largest and most populous of Rio de Janeiro's neighborhoods, most notably Ternium Brasil, a new steel mill with its own private docks on Sepetiba Bay, which is planned to be South America's largest steel works. A tunnel called \"T\u00fanel da Grota Funda\", opened in 2012, creating a public transit facility between Barra da Tijuca and Santa Cruz, lessening travel time to the region from other areas of Rio de Janeiro. \nOn 9 September 2025, many neighbourhoods that compound the former West Zone were set apart to create the Southwest Zone (\"Zona Sudoeste\"). The Southwest Zone is compound by Anil, Barra da Tijuca, Camorim, Cidade de Deus, Curicica, Freguesia, Gard\u00eania Azul, Grumari, Itanhang\u00e1, Jacarepagu\u00e1, Jo\u00e1, Pra\u00e7a Seca, Pechincha, Rio das Pedras, Recreio dos Bandeirantes, Tanque, Taquara, Vargem Grande, Vargem Pequena and Vila Valqueire.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRio de Janeiro is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartner cities.\nRio de Janeiro has the following partner/friendship cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnion of Ibero-American Capital Cities.\nRio de Janeiro is a part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities.\nEconomy.\nRio de Janeiro has the second-largest GDP of any city in Brazil, surpassed only by S\u00e3o Paulo. According to the IBGE, it was approximately US$201\u00a0billion in 2008, equivalent to 5.1% of the national total. Taking into consideration the network of influence exerted by the urban metropolis (which covers 11.3% of the population), this share in GDP rises to 14.4%, according to a study released in October 2008 by the IBGE.\nGreater Rio de Janeiro, as perceived by the IBGE, has a GDP of US$187\u00a0billion, constituting the second largest hub of national wealth. Per capita GDP is US$11,786. It concentrates 68% of the state's economic strength and 7.9% of all goods and services produced in the country. The services sector comprises the largest portion of GDP (65.5%), followed by commerce (23.4%), industrial activities (11.1%) and agriculture (0.1%).\nBenefiting from the federal capital position it had for a long period (1763\u20131960), the city became a dynamic administrative, financial, commercial and cultural center. Rio de Janeiro became an attractive place for companies to locate when it was the capital of Brazil, as important sectors of society and of the government were present in the city. The city was chosen as headquarters for state-owned companies such as Petrobras, Eletrobras, Caixa Econ\u00f4mica Federal, National Economic and Social Development Bank and Vale (which was privatized in the 1990s). The Rio de Janeiro Stock Exchange (BVRJ), which currently trades only government securities, was the first stock exchange founded in Brazil in 1845.\nThe off-shore oil exploration in the Campos Basin began in 1968 and became the main site for oil production of Brazil. This caused many oil and gas companies to be based in Rio de Janeiro, such as the Brazilian branches of Shell, EBX and Esso. For many years Rio was the second largest industrial hub of Brazil, with oil refineries, shipbuilding industries, steel, metallurgy, petrochemicals, cement, pharmaceutical, textile, processed foods and furniture industries.\nMajor international pharmaceutical companies have their Brazilian headquarters in Rio such as: Merck, Roche, Arrow, Darrow, Baxter, Mayne, and Mappel.\nRecent decades have seen a sharp transformation in its economic profile, which is becoming more and more one of a major national hub of services and businesses. The city is the headquarters of large telecom companies, such as Intelig, Oi and Embratel. Major Brazilian entertainment and media organizations are based in Rio de Janeiro like Organiza\u00e7\u00f5es Globo and also some of Brazil's major newspapers: \"Jornal do Brasil\", \"O Dia\", and \"Business Rio\".\nTourism and entertainment are other key aspects of the city's economic life. The city is the nation's top tourist attraction for both Brazilians and foreigners.\nIn Greater Rio, which has one of the highest per capita incomes in Brazil, retail trade is substantial. Many of the most important retail stores are located in the center, but others are scattered throughout the commercial areas of the other districts, where shopping centers, supermarkets, and other retail businesses handle a large volume of consumer trade.\nRio de Janeiro is (as of 2014[ [update]]) the second largest exporting municipality in Brazil. Annually, Rio exported a total of $7.49B (USD) worth of goods. The top three goods exported by the municipality were crude petroleum (40%), semi finished iron product (16%), and semi finished steel products (11%). Material categories of mineral products (42%) and metals (29%) make up 71% of all exports from Rio.\nCompared to other cities, Rio de Janeiro's economy is the second-largest in Brazil, behind S\u00e3o Paulo, and the 30th largest in the world with a GDP of R$ 201,9\u00a0billion in 2010. The per capita income for the city was R$22,903 in 2007 (around US$). Largely because of the strength of Brazil's currency at the time, Mercer's city rankings of cost of living for expatriate employees, reported that Rio de Janeiro ranked 12th among the most expensive cities in the world in 2011, up from the 29th position in 2010, just behind S\u00e3o Paulo (ranked 10th), and ahead of London, Paris, Milan, and New York. Rio also had the most expensive hotel rates in Brazil, and the daily rate of its five star hotels were the second most expensive in the world after only New York.\nHighlighted Sectors.\nRio de Janeiro is home to many of Brazil's largest business conglomerates. Among them are the three largest multinationals in the energy and mining sectors: Petrobras, Vale S.A., and the EBX Group; the largest media and communications group in Latin America, Grupo Globo; and major telecommunications companies like CorpCo (owner of Oi and Portugal Telecom), TIM, Embratel, Intelig, and Star One (the largest satellite management company in Latin America).\nIn the petrochemical sector, there are more than 700 companies, including Brazil's largest (Shell, Esso, Ipiranga, Chevron, PRIO, Repsol). Most maintain research centers throughout the state and together produce over four-fifths of the petroleum and fuels distributed at service stations nationwide. The Companhia Sider\u00fargica Nacional (CSN), Ternium Brasil (the largest steel mill in Latin America) and the Brazilian branch of BHP Billiton play significant roles in the mining sector. The city also hosts the main national and international groups of the shipbuilding industry and the largest shipyards in the state and throughout Brazil, which produce about 90% of the ships and offshore equipment in Brazil.\nAmericanas, Coca-Cola Brasil, Eletrobras, Michelin, Neoenergia, Xerox do Brasil, GE Oil &amp; Gas, Light, Chemtech, Transpetro, BAT Brasil, Grupo SulAm\u00e9rica and Vibra Energia are among the major companies headquartered in the city. The city has a significant number of pharmaceutical industries, including Schering-Plough, GlaxoSmithKline, Roche, and Merck.\nRio de Janeiro has inherited a strong cultural vocation from its past. It currently hosts the main production centers of Brazilian television: the Est\u00fadios Globo of TV Globo, the Casablanca Est\u00fadios of Record, and the \"Polo de Cinema de Jacarepagu\u00e1\" \u2014 responsible for creating about 10,000 direct jobs and 30,000 indirect jobs. In 2006, 65% of Brazilian cinema production was done exclusively by studios in Rio, generating 91 million reais in federal funds through tax incentive laws. A significant part of the Brazilian editorial graphic industry is also present. In the phonographic industry, companies such as EMI, Universal Music, Sony Music, Warner Music and Som Livre are present.\nMany state-owned companies, public foundations, and federal autarchies have their headquarters in the city, including the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES), the Casa da Moeda do Brasil, the Ind\u00fastrias Nucleares do Brasil (INB), the Financiadora de Estudos e Projetos (FINEP), the Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estat\u00edstica (IBGE), the Instituto Nacional de Metrologia, Normaliza\u00e7\u00e3o e Qualidade Industrial (Inmetro), the Instituto Nacional da Propriedade Industrial (INPI), the Comiss\u00e3o de Valores Mobili\u00e1rios (CVM), and the Comiss\u00e3o Nacional de Energia Nuclear (CNEN).\nTourism.\nRio de Janeiro is Brazil's primary tourist attraction and resort. It receives the most visitors per year of any city in South America with 2.82\u00a0million international tourists a year.\nAttractions in the city include approximately 80\u00a0kilometers of beaches, Corcovado and Sugarloaf mountains, and the Maracan\u00e3 Stadium. While the city had in past had a thriving tourism sector, the industry entered a decline in the last quarter of the 20th century. Annual international airport arrivals dropped from 621,000 to 378,000 and average hotel occupancy dropped to 50% between 1985 and 1993. The fact that Bras\u00edlia replaced Rio de Janeiro as the Brazilian capital in 1960 and that S\u00e3o Paulo replaced Rio as the country's commercial, financial and main cultural center during the mid-20th century, has also been cited as a leading cause of the decline.\nRio de Janeiro's government has since undertaken to modernize the city's economy, reduce its chronic social inequalities, and improve its commercial standing as part of an initiative for the regeneration of the tourism industry.\nRio de Janeiro is an international hub of highly active and diverse nightlife with bars, dance bars and nightclubs staying open well past midnight. The city is an important global LGBTQ destination, with 1 million LGBT tourists visiting each year.\nFarme de Amoedo Street (\"Rua Farme de Amoedo\") is located in Ipanema. The street and the nearby beach are popular in the LGBTQ community.\nInfrastructure.\nPublic transportation.\nRio de Janeiro's public transportation modes include city buses, coach buses, BRT, metro, suburban rail, light rail, ferries, inclined elevators, vans and a cable car. Collectively, they carry over 2.6 million passengers per day. The high fares on Rio's public transportation have significantly contributed to the high levels of social and economic inequality in the city and were the main motive of the 2013 protest movement. Although there is limited fare integration through the RioCard, Rio de Janeiro's fare systems are still disjointed and not fully accessible.\nIn 2022, the average amount of time people spent commuting with public transit in Rio de Janeiro on a weekday was 67 minutes. 12% of public transit riders had commutes that took more than two hours per day. The average amount of time people waited at a stop or station for public transit was 21 minutes, with 12% of riders waiting less than 5 minutes and 41% of riders waiting for over 20 minutes. The average distance people usually traveled in a single trip with public transit was . The average distance people walked on their commute was . 11% of people made exactly two transfers during their commute, and 2% of commuters made 3 or more transfers.\nBuses and vans.\nAs of 2023, there are 354 municipal bus lines serving over 1.75 million passengers per day, as well as intercity lines. The city has 20 bus lanes. Most conventional bus routes are operated by 28 private companies divided into 4 consortiums, though 3 routes are run by the city government. Although most buses are conventional city buses, there are also a handful of coach buses used for local intracity service with more expensive fares.\nThe Bus Rapid Transit system consists of 31 lines running along 4 corridors with a wide variety of service patterns: Transbrasil, Transcarioca, Transol\u00edmpica and Transoeste. The system is run by the municipal government through Mobi-Rio, which is a state-owned enterprise. It is long and has 153 stations as well as 731 buses that carry 535,000 passengers per day.\nIn addition to buses, Rio de Janeiro also has an extensive system of vans used for public transport. This mode can more effectively traverse the steep, narrow and winding roads common in many favelas than buses and is often a lifeline for them. However, most vans are run by criminal organizations, particularly police militias, which use their fares as a major source of revenue: Of the approximately 10,000 vans used for public transport in the city, only 2,000 are legal. The 2,000 legal vans carry approximately 310,000 passengers per day.\nRio de Janeiro also has intercity, interstate and international bus lines. Most long-distance bus lines run to Novo Rio Bus Terminal at the edge of the Zona Central. Long-distance buses also run to bus stations in Campo Grande and Barra da Tijuca.\nUrban rail.\nRio de Janeiro nominally has three metro lines, though two of them (Lines 1 and 4) are operationally run as a single line. The system runs on of track and has 41 stations. Line 1/4 runs from Uruguai/Tijuca station in Tijuca to Jardim Oce\u00e2nico/Barra da Tijuca station in Barra da Tijuca; Line 2 runs from Pavuna station in Pavuna to Botafogo station in Botafogo. Line 1/4 and Line 2 share tracks between Central do Brasil and Botafogo. The metro system carries 651,000 passengers per day.\nThe city also has a suburban rail system operated by SuperVia that connects the city of Rio with other locations in Greater Rio de Janeiro. It has 8 lines on of track with 103 stations in 12 municipalities; Rio de Janeiro municipality itself has of track with 59 stations on 5 lines. The Deodoro Line runs from Central do Brasil to Deodoro via Maracan\u00e3, M\u00e9ier and Madureira; the Santa Cruz Line runs from Central do Brasil to Santa Cruz, running parallel to the Deodoro line for its entire length and then via Realengo, Bangu and Campo Grande; the Japeri Line shares tracks with the Santa Cruz Line between Central do Brasil and Deodoro before continuing on to Japeri via Anchieta, Nil\u00f3polis, Mesquita, Nova Igua\u00e7u and Queimados; the Belford Roxo and Saracuruna Lines run parallel to the Deodoro, Santa Cruz and Japeri Lines between Central do Brasil and Maracan\u00e3, with the Belford Roxo Line continuing on to Belford Roxo via Madureira, Pavuna and S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o de Meriti and the Saracuruna Line continuing on to Duque de Caxias via Bonsucesso, Ramos and Penha. The suburban rail system carries around 320,000 passengers per day.\nThe Rio de Janeiro Light Rail is a modern light rail system that runs entirely within the Zona Central on of track with 30 stations distributed along 4 heavily interlined lines: Line 1 runs from Santos Dumont Airport to Gentileza Intermodal Terminal via Carioca, the Port of Rio de Janeiro and Novo Rio Bus Terminal; Line 2 runs from Pra\u00e7a XV to Praia Formosa via Pra\u00e7a Tiradentes, Central do Brasil and Novo Rio Bus Terminal; Line 3 runs from Santos Dumont Airport to Central do Brasil via Carioca and Pequena \u00c1frica; Line 4 shares track with Line 2 for almost its entire route, but stops at Gentileza Intermodal Terminal instead of Praia Formosa. The trams are the first in the world to use a combination of ground-level power supply (APS) and on-board supercapacitor energy storage (SRS), in order to eliminate overhead lines along the entire route. The network uses 32 Alstom Citadis 402 low-floor trams carrying 420 passengers each. They are bi-directional, air-conditioned, have seven sections, and eight doors per side. The light rail system carries 101,000 passengers per day.&lt;ref name=\"Transbrasil/Light Rail passenger numbers\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe Santa Teresa Tram runs from Carioca to Santa Teresa and is the oldest operating electric tramway in Latin America, having commenced electric operation in 1896, replacing horse-drawn trams and extending the route. At this time the gauge was altered to so that the trams would fit on top of Carioca Aqueduct. It was designated a national historic monument in 1985. After a derailment occurred on 27 August 2011, which left six dead, tram service was suspended to improve the system. The elderly tramcars, which dated from the 1950s, were retired and replaced with newly built replicas that have the appearance of the old fleet but with new mechanical equipment and additional safety features; delivery began in 2014. The line's track was also rebuilt, and after some delays, about one-third of the line reopened in July 2015. More sections reopened later in stages, following repair of additional sections of track. The main section of the line was restored to its full pre-2011 length of in January 2019. The Paula Mattos branch to Largo das Neves, which was also closed in 2011, was reopened in January 2025. Santa Teresa residents can ride the tram for free, but ticket prices are prohibitively expensive for other cariocas and, because of this, the line is primarily used by tourists. The tram gets an average of 1900 passengers per day.\nFerries.\nRio de Janeiro has ferry routes running radially out from Pra\u00e7a XV in the city center to Pra\u00e7a Ararib\u00f3ia (in Niter\u00f3i's city center), Charitas (in the South side of Niter\u00f3i), Cocot\u00e1 (on Governador Island) and Paquet\u00e1 Island. All four ferry routes run entirely through Guanabara Bay. The Pra\u00e7a XV-Pra\u00e7a Ararib\u00f3ia route is by far the busiest and carries commuters from Niter\u00f3i, S\u00e3o Gon\u00e7alo, Itabora\u00ed and Maric\u00e1. Each ferry carries up to 2000 passengers, with the ferry system as a whole carrying 35,000 passengers per day.\nCable car.\nThe Provid\u00eancia Cable Car is a long cable car line that runs from Central do Brasil to Gamboa via Provid\u00eancia Hill, serving the city's oldest favela. The cable car first opened in 2014, was abandoned in 2017 and reopened in 2024. The line uses 16 gondolas and carries 9000 passengers per day.\nInclined elevators.\nRio de Janeiro has 8 public inclined elevators climbing 5 hills, all of which are run by the municipal government through the Municipal Energy and Illumination Company (RioLuz). The Santa Marta Inclined Elevator runs up Dona Marta Hill in two sections with 5 total stations and carries 5000 passengers per day. The Pav\u00e3o-Pav\u00e3ozinho Inclined Elevator runs from General Os\u00f3rio/Ipanema station to Cantagalo-Pav\u00e3o-Pav\u00e3ozinho and consists of a single long line with 5 stations that carries 4000 passengers per day. The Penna Church Inclined Elevator is long and runs from Jacarepagu\u00e1 to Our Lady of Penna Church at the top of Penna Hill, carrying 180 passengers per day. The Father La\u00e9rcio Dias de Moura Inclined Elevator is a group of three inclined elevators that connect Penha station to Vila Cruzeiro and the Basilica of Our Lady of Penha; the inclined elevators have a total length of and carry 3000 passengers per day. The Outeiro da Gl\u00f3ria Inclined Elevator is long and runs from Gl\u00f3ria station to Our Lady of Gl\u00f3ria do Outeiro Church, carrying 200 passengers per day.\nRoads.\nRio de Janeiro has of limited-access roads, of arterial roads, of collector roads and of local roads with vehicular traffic. Despite representing 72% of roads with vehicular traffic, just 14% of traffic collisions and 14% of traffic fatalities are on local roads; 38% of traffic fatalities happen on 20 roads, with Avenida Brasil alone accounting for 14%. Rio de Janeiro had 694 traffic deaths in 2022, equivalent to 11 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants.\nRio de Janeiro's vehicle fleet includes 3.2 million motorized vehicles - equivalent to 482 per 1000 inhabitants - including 2.2 million cars, 500,000 motorcycles, 400,000 trucks and 37,000 buses and minibuses. 37% of vehicles use exclusively E27 fuel; 6% use E100; 4% use diesel fuel, and 59% use various combinations of ethanol, gasoline and natural gas. An average of 1.6 million motorized vehicles circulate per day in the city. Approximately 47% of all trips in Rio use public transport; 23% use private motorized vehicles and 28% use active mobility.\nDespite being in the Atlantic Forest, Rio de Janeiro has a severe lack of street trees, and the distribution of the trees that do exist is highly unequal: poorer neighbourhoods in the North side of the city are disproportionately likely to lack tree cover, as are neighbourhoods with higher populations of pardo and black people. Overall, 35% of cariocas live on streets without any trees at all, and another 26% live on streets with fewer than 5 trees. This environmental racism directly causes poorer neighbourhoods to suffer from more extreme weather, including more severe flooding and higher temperatures - for example, Lagoa has a mean income per capita nearly 10 times higher than that of Del Castilho and has a mean temperature of , as opposed to Del Castilho's .\nDespite Rio de Janeiro's ample sidewalk coverage, many sidewalks are narrow, inaccessible for disabled people, and filled with obstacles. Traffic lights frequently prioritize vehicular traffic on busy roads significantly more than pedestrian traffic, which can significantly increase pedestrian travel times. Portuguese pavement, which is common in Rio de Janeiro, is extremely slippery in the rain and gets easily damaged by tree roots, which further harms pedestrian accessibility. The city has pedestrian zones in the city center, Paquet\u00e1 Island and concentrated around the suburban rail stations in Bangu, Campo Grande and Penha, as well as in favelas. Part of the city has a wayfinding system similar to Legible London.\nRio de Janeiro has approximately 247 km of shared-use paths, 119 km of sharrows, 64 km of segregated cycle tracks, and 28 km of roadside bike lanes. 16% of cariocas live within 300 meters of bicycle infrastructure; the bicycle infrastructure network also reaches 30% of jobs, 16% of schools and 21% of health facilities. 127 of the city's 288 medium- and high-capacity public transport (BRT, ferry, light rail, metro and suburban rail) stations are served by bicycle infrastructure. Bicycle infrastructure in the city is frequently narrow, with 66% of it failing to reach the city government's minimum standards. The city also has a bicycle sharing system called Bike Rio with 430 stations and 6700 bicycles.\nMajor highways.\nAvenida Brasil (\"Brazil Avenue\") is the longest and busiest highway in Rio de Janeiro, stretching from the Port area in the city center through the North side to Santa Cruz in the West side and carrying 800,000 vehicles per day. Almost the entire highway is part of BR-101, which continues east along the Rio-Niter\u00f3i Bridge towards Vit\u00f3ria, Salvador and Recife and west through Itagua\u00ed towards Santos, Curitiba and Florian\u00f3polis. Shorter sections of Avenida Brasil are also part of BR-040 (which runs from the Rio de Janeiro Port area to Petr\u00f3polis, Belo Horizonte and Bras\u00edlia), BR-116 (which runs northeast from Rio de Janeiro to Teres\u00f3polis, Vit\u00f3ria da Conquista and Fortaleza and northwest to S\u00e3o Paulo, Curitiba and Porto Alegre) and BR-465 (which runs from the neighbourhood of Campo Grande to Serop\u00e9dica). Avenida Brasil is a critical freight corridor and bottleneck, particularly for the Port of Rio de Janeiro, with over 500 trucks per day using the highway in the morning peak. The long Transbrasil BRT runs in the middle of Avenida Brasil from Gentileza Intermodal Terminal to Deodoro station and carries 115,000 passengers per day. \nThe Rio-Niter\u00f3i Bridge is a long box girder bridge that runs between the Port of Rio de Janeiro and the Port of Niter\u00f3i via Mocangu\u00ea Island. The bridge, which is part of BR-101, is the only direct road connection between the east and west sides of Guanabara Bay and is therefore a critical traffic bottleneck, carrying 150,000 vehicles per day, including over 7000 trucks. Most of the bridge is above the water, with the central span rising to to allow for large ships to pass. There is a toll booth in the eastbound direction.\nThe Linha Amarela (\"Yellow Line\") highway, officially \"Avenida Governador Carlos Lacerda\", runs from Fund\u00e3o Island to Barra da Tijuca via Del Castilho, M\u00e9ier and Jacarepagu\u00e1. It is maintained by LAMSA (Linha Amarela S.A.), which is owned by Invepar, and is one of two tolled roads within city limits. The Yellow Line carries 120,000 vehicles per day. It runs entirely parallel to the Transcarioca BRT.\nThe Linha Vermelha (\"Red Line\"), officially \"Via Expressa Presidente Jo\u00e3o Goulart\" or \"RJ-071\", is a long highway that runs from Cidade Nova to S\u00e3o Jo\u00e3o de Meriti via Fund\u00e3o Island, Gale\u00e3o International Airport and Duque de Caxias, entirely parallel to Avenida Brasil. There is an barrier known as the Wall of Shame along the highway in Mar\u00e9; this was ostensibly built as a noise barrier during the leadup to the 2016 Summer Olympics but is widely considered by local residents to be a way for the city to hide the favela from Gale\u00e3o International Airport passengers. Trucks are banned from using the highway. The Red Line carries 90,000 vehicles per day.\nAirports.\nThe city of Rio de Janeiro is served by the following airports:\nMilitary airports include:\nPorts.\nThe Port of Rio de Janeiro is Brazil's tenth busiest publically-owned port in terms of cargo volume, and it is the main port for cruise vessels. Located in the Zona Central and on the west coast of Guanabara Bay, it primarily serves the Southeastern states of Rio de Janeiro, S\u00e3o Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Esp\u00edrito Santo. The port is managed overall by the Companhia Docas do Rio de Janeiro, though some parts of it are operated by private companies. The Port of Rio de Janeiro stretches from Mau\u00e1 Pier in the east to Caju Wharf in the north and includes three wharves with a total length of . Gamboa Wharf is long and includes 20 berths and 19 warehouses; this wharf is shallower than the others and therefore typically handles wheat on Handysize and Handymax ships. Since Gamboa Wharf includes the cruise ship terminal at Mau\u00e1 Pier, this also prevents the largest cruise ships from docking in the port. S\u00e3o Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o Wharf is long and has 12 berths and two warehouses; the eastern end of this wharf is also shallow enough to restrict shipping operations. Caju Wharf is long and includes 6 berths, 7 warehouses and 24 storage tanks, with of storage tank space reserved for sodium hydroxide and the remaining reserved for petroleum products. There is also a group of storage tanks just outside the port with a total capacity of 22,000 tonnes and pipelines that connect them to S\u00e3o Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o Wharf. The berths at Caju Wharf are large enough for ships of up to length overall.\nIn 2024, the Port of Rio de Janeiro handled 15.5 million tonnes of cargo, 11.8 million tonnes of which were containerized into 937,000 TEUs. In addition to container cargo, the port also handled 1.1 million tonnes of iron and steel products, 873,000 tonnes of petroleum products (not including crude oil), 444,000 tonnes of wheat, 370,000 tonnes of crude oil and 205,000 tonnes of motor vehicles. 10.2 million tonnes of cargo were moved internationally, 5.2 million tonnes were moved via short-sea shipping and 0.075 tonnes were moved through inland navigation. The Port of Rio de Janeiro also moved 327,000 passengers on 36 cruise ships making 107 calls during the 2024/25 cruise season.\nIn addition to the Port of Rio de Janeiro, the city also has ten private port facilities, nine of which are on Guanabara Bay and one of which is on Sepetiba Bay. The Guanabara Bay port facilities collectively handled 16.6 million tonnes of petroleum products in 2024 and no other cargo. 15.8 million tonnes of this cargo were shipped through the Ilha d'\u00c1gua Terminal, which is owned by Transpetro and has a pipeline connected to REDUC (Duque de Caxias Refinery). 14 million tonnes of cargo were moved through short-sea shipping and 2.6 million tonnes were moved internationally. The port on Sepetiba Bay, which is owned by Ternium, moved 7.3 million tonnes of cargo in 2024 to support its steel mill in Santa Cruz, almost all of it internationally. This port moved 3.2 million tonnes of iron and steel, 2.4 million tonnes of coal, 0.8 million tonnes of limestone, 0.4 million tonnes of mineral oils, 0.4 million tonnes of iron ore and 0.2 million tonnes of petroleum coke in 2024.\nWater and sewage.\nThe water supply of Rio de Janeiro and the Baixada Fluminense is sourced through the interconnected Guandu, Ribeir\u00e3o das Lajes and Acari water supply systems. The Guandu water supply system, which uses water diverted from the Para\u00edba do Sul and Pira\u00ed Rivers to the Guandu River, includes the largest water treatment plant in the world, with a throughput of per second. The Ribeir\u00e3o das Lajes system uses water diverted from the Pira\u00ed River (but not the Para\u00edba do Sul River) to the Ribeir\u00e3o das Lajes River and supplies of water per second. The Acari system uses five raw water collection points in the Tingu\u00e1 Biological Reserve and supplies of water per second. Rio de Janeiro's water security is threatened by its dependence on a single source, climate change and raw water pollution, particularly in the Guandu River.\nPaquet\u00e1 Island, unlike the rest of Rio de Janeiro City, has its water supplied from the Imunana-Laranjal water supply system, which uses water sourced from the Macacu and Guapia\u00e7\u00fa Rivers and also supplies the Leste Fluminense. This system treats of water per second.\nNational policy changes in 2020\u20132021 for the universalization of sanitation kept the 2007 policy defining the municipality as the provider of sanitation service, delegating the organization, supervision, and provision of services to third parties. The National Water and Basic Sanitation Agency (ANA) is responsible for the setting standards regulating basic public sanitation services. In 2021\u20132022, distribution and treatment of sewage of the Rio de Janeiro State Water and Sewage Company (CEDAE) was divided into four blocks and auctioned to Aegea (\u00c1guas do Rio) and Igu\u00e1; CEDAE remained in control of water collection and treatment of drinking water. The Rio de Janeiro State Environmental Institute (INEA) has primary responsibility for water pollution monitoring and enforcement.\nAs of 2021[ [update]] only 65% of sewage was properly treated, leaving 35% to be improperly discharged. As of 2022[ [update]] there were at least 400 illicit sewage disposal points in the drainage network.\nSolid waste.\nSolid waste management in Rio de Janeiro is done by the Companhia Municipal de Limpeza Urbana (\"Municipal Urban Cleaning Company\" or \"Comlurb\"), which is the largest municipal waste management company in Latin America. Rio de Janeiro produces over 3.2 million tonnes of solid waste per year. After being collected throughout the city, solid waste is sent through one of five waste transfer stations and then on to a sanitary landfill in Serop\u00e9dica, which produces 24,000 m\u00b3 of biogas and 5,000 m\u00b3 of biomethane per hour; leachate is also treated and used to produce over 60m\u00b3 of distilled water per hour. Despite 40% of the city's waste being made of recyclable materials, only 2% of it is actually recycled.\nCulture.\nRio de Janeiro is a main cultural hub in Brazil. Its architecture embraces churches and buildings dating from the 16th to the 19th centuries, blending with the world-renowned designs of the 20th century. Rio was home to the Portuguese Imperial family and capital of the country for many years, and was influenced by Portuguese, English, and French architecture.\nRio de Janeiro has inherited a strong cultural role from the past. In the late 19th century, there were sessions held of the first Brazilian film and since then, several production cycles have spread out, eventually placing Rio at the forefront of experimental and national cinema. The Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival has been held annually since 1999.\nRio currently brings together the main production centers of Brazilian television. Major international films set in Rio de Janeiro include \"Blame it on Rio\"; the James Bond film \"Moonraker\"; the Oscar award-winning, critically acclaimed \"Central Station\" by Walter Salles, who is also one of Brazil's best-known directors; and the Oscar award-winning historical drama, \"Black Orpheus\", which depicted the early days of Carnaval in Rio de Janeiro. Internationally distributed Brazilian-made movies illustrating a darker side of Rio de Janeiro include \"Elite Squad\" and \"City of God\".\nRio has many important cultural landmarks, such as the Biblioteca Nacional (National Library), one of the largest libraries in the world with collections totaling more than 9 million items; the Theatro Municipal; the National Museum of Fine Arts; the Carmen Miranda Museum; the Rio de Janeiro Botanical Garden; the Parque Lage; the Quinta da Boa Vista; the Imperial Square; the Brazilian Academy of Letters; the Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro; and the Natural History Museum.\nLiterature.\nAfter Brazilian independence from Portugal in 1822, Rio de Janeiro quickly developed a European-style bourgeois cultural life, including numerous newspapers, in which most 19th-century novels were initially published in serial. Joaquim Manuel de Macedo's \"A Moreninha\" (1844) was perhaps the first successful novel in Brazil and inaugurates a recurrent 19th-century theme: a romantic relationship between idealistic young people in spite of cruelties of social fortune.\nThe first notable work of realism focusing on the urban lower-middle class is Manuel Ant\u00f4nio de Almeida's \"Mem\u00f3rias de um sargento de mil\u00edcias\" (1854), which presents a series of picaresque scenes, and evokes the transformation of a town into a city with suggestive nostalgia. Romantic and realist modes both flourished through the late 19th century and often overlapped within works.\nMachado de Assis is from Rio de Janeiro, and is widely regarded as the greatest writer of Brazilian literature and considered the founder of Realism in Brazil, with the publication of \"The Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas\" (1881). He commented on and criticized the political and social events of the city and country such as the abolition of slavery in 1888 and the transition from Empire to Republic with his numerous chronicles published in newspapers of the time. Many of his short stories and novels, like \"Quincas Borba\" (1891) and \"Dom Casmurro\" (1899), are placed in Rio. The headquarters of the Brazilian Academy of Letters is based in Rio de Janeiro. It was satirized by the novelist Jorge Amado in \"Pen, Sword, Camisole\". Amado, himself, went on to be one of the 40 members of the academy.\nThe Biblioteca Nacional (National Library of Brazil) ranks as one of the largest libraries in the world. It is also the largest library in all of Latin America. Located in Cinel\u00e2ndia, the National Library was originally created by the King of Portugal, in 1810. As with many of Rio de Janeiro's cultural monuments, the library was originally off-limits to the general public. The most valuable collections in the library include: 4,300 items donated by Barbosa Machado including a precious collection of rare brochures detailing the History of Portugal and Brazil; 2,365 items from the 17th and 18th centuries that were previously owned by Ant\u00f4nio de Ara\u00fajo de Azevedo, the \"Count of Barca\", including the 125-volume set of prints \"Le Grand Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Univers;\" a collection of documents regarding the Jesu\u00edtica Province of Paraguay and the \"Region of Prata;\" and the Teresa Cristina Maria Collection, donated by Emperor Pedro II. The collection contains 48,236 items. Individual items of special interest include a rare first edition of \"Os Lus\u00edadas\" by Luis de Cam\u00f5es, published in 1584; two copies of the Mog\u00fancia Bible; and a first edition of Handel's Messiah.\nThe Real Gabinete Portugu\u00eas de Leitura (Portuguese Royal Reading Library) is located at Rua Lu\u00eds de Cam\u00f5es, in the Centro (Downtown). The institution was founded in 1837 by a group of forty-three Portuguese immigrants, political refugees, to promote culture among the Portuguese community in the then capital of the Empire. The history of the Brazilian Academy of Letters is linked to the Real Gabinete, since some of the early meetings of the academy were held there.\nMusic.\nThe official song of Rio de Janeiro is \"Cidade Maravilhosa\", which means \"marvelous city\". The song is considered the civic anthem of Rio, and is always the favorite song during Rio's Carnival in February. Rio de Janeiro and S\u00e3o Paulo, are considered the center of the urban music movement in Brazil.\n\"Rio was popularized by the hit song \"The Girl from Ipanema\", composed by Ant\u00f4nio Carlos Jobim and Vinicius de Moraes and recorded by Astrud Gilberto and Jo\u00e3o Gilberto, Frank Sinatra, and Ella Fitzgerald. It is also the main key song of the bossa nova, a music genre born in Rio. A genre unique to Rio and Brazil as a whole is Funk Carioca. While samba music continues to act as the national unifying agent in Rio, Funk Carioca found a strong community following in Brazil. With its genesis in the 1970s as the modern black pop music from the United States, it evolved in the 1990s to describe a variety of electronic music associated with the current US black music scene, including hip hop, modern soul, and house music.\"\nBrazil's return to democracy in 1985 allowed for a new music expression which promoted creativity and experimentation in expressive culture, in a wave of Rock'n'roll that swept the 80s. Lob\u00e3o emerged as the most legendary rocker in Brazil. Commercial and cultural imports from Europe and North America have often influenced Brazil's own cultural output. For example, the hip hop that has stemmed from New York is localized into forms of musical production such as Funk Carioca and Brazilian hip hop. Bands from Rio de Janeiro also had influence in the mid-to-late development of the Punk in Brazil, and that of Brazilian thrash metal. Democratic renewal also allowed for the recognition and acceptance of this diversification of Brazilian culture.\nSome of the best artists in the history of Brazilian popular music hail from Rio de Janeiro, including aforementioned Lob\u00e3o, Tim Maia, Agep\u00ea, Em\u00edlio Santiago, Carlos Lyra, Sandra de S\u00e1, Erasmo Carlos, Wilson Simonal, Cazuza, Ivan Lins, Marcos Valle, Jorge Ben Jor and Anitta.\nTheater.\nRio de Janeiro's Theatro Municipal is one of the most attractive buildings in the central area of the city. Home of one of the largest stages in Latin America and one of Brazil's best-known venues for opera, ballet, and classical music, the building was inspired by the Palais Garnier, home of the Paris Opera. Construction of the Theatro Municipal began in 1905 following designs of the architect Francisco Pereira Passos. The statues on the top, of two women representing Poetry and Music, are by Rodolfo Bernardelli, and the interior is rich with furnishings and fine paintings. Inaugurated in 1909, the Teatro Municipal has close to 1,700 seats. Its interior includes turn of the century stained glass from France, ceilings of rose-colored marble and a 1,000\u00a0pound crystal bead chandelier surrounded by a painting of the \"Dance of the Hours\". The exterior walls of the building are dotted with inscriptions bearing the names of famous Brazilians as well as many other international celebrities.\nCidade das Artes (City of Arts) is a cultural complex in Barra da Tijuca in the Southwest Zone of Rio de Janeiro, which was originally planned to open in 2004. Formally known as \"Cidade da M\u00fasica\" (City of Music), it was finally inaugurated at the beginning of 2013.\nThe project will host the Brazilian Symphony Orchestra becoming a main center for music as will be the largest modern concert hall in South America, with 1,780 seats. The complex spans approximately and also features a chamber music hall, three theaters, and 12 rehearsal rooms. From the terrace there is a panoramic view of the zone. The building was designed by the French architect Christian de Portzamparc and construction was funded by the city of Rio de Janeiro.\nA series of covered theaters collectively known as Lona Cultural, administered by the city's Municipal Secretary of Culture, serve throughout the city as venues for cultural activities such as concerts, plays, workshops, art and craft fairs, and courses.\nEvents.\nEvery 31 December, 2.5\u00a0million people gather at Copacabana Beach to celebrate New Year's in Rio de Janeiro. The crowd, mostly dressed in white, celebrates all night at the hundreds of different shows and events along the beach. It is the second-largest celebration only next to the Carnival. People celebrate the New Year by sharing chilled champagne. It is considered good luck to shake the champagne bottle and spray around at midnight. Chilled champagne adds to the spirit of the festivities.\nRio Carnival is an annual celebration in the Roman Catholic tradition that allows merry-making and red meat consumption before the more sober 40\u00a0days of Lent penance which culminates with Holy or Passion Week and Easter. The tradition of Carnaval parades was probably influenced by the French or German courts and the custom was brought by the Portuguese or Brazilian Imperial families who had French and Austrian German ancestors. Up until the time of the marchinhas, the revelry was more of a high class and Caucasian-led event. The influence of the African-Brazilian drums and music became more noticeable from the first half of the 20th century. Rio de Janeiro has many Carnaval choices, including the samba school (\"Escolas de Samba)\" parades in the sambadrome exhibition center and the popular \"blocos de carnaval\", street revelry, which parade in almost every corner of the city. In 1840, the first Carnival was celebrated with a masked ball. As years passed, adorned floats and costumed revelers became a tradition among the celebrants. Carnival is known as a historic root of Brazilian music.\nRock in Rio is a music festival conceived by entrepreneur Roberto Medina for the first time in 1985, and since its creation, recognized as the largest music festival in the Latin world and the largest in the world, with 1.5 million people attending the first event, 700,000 attending the second and fourth, about 1.2 million attending the third, and about 350,000 people attending each of the 3 Lisbon events. It was originally organized in Rio de Janeiro, from where the name comes from, has become a world level event and, in 2004, had its first edition abroad in Lisbon, Portugal, before Madrid, Spain and Las Vegas, United States. The festival is considered the eighth best in the world by the specialized site Fling Festival.\nSports.\nAs in the rest of Brazil, association football is the most popular sport. The city's major teams are Flamengo, Vasco da Gama, Fluminense and Botafogo. Madureira, Bangu, Portuguesa, America and Bonsucesso are small clubs. Players born in the city include Zico, Rom\u00e1rio and Ronaldo. Rio de Janeiro was one of the host cities of the 1950 and 2014 FIFA World Cups, for which on both occasions Brazil was the host nation. In 1950, the Maracan\u00e3 Stadium hosted 8 matches, including all but one of the host team's matches. The Maracan\u00e3 was also the location of the tournament-deciding match between Uruguay and Brazil, where Brazil only needed a draw to win the final group stage and the whole tournament. Brazil ended up losing 2\u20131 in front of a home crowd of more than 199,000. In 2014, the Maracan\u00e3 hosted seven matches, including the final, where Germany beat Argentina 1\u20130.\nOn 2 October 2009, the International Olympic Committee selected Rio de Janeiro to host the 2016 Summer Olympics. Rio made their first bid for the 1936 Summer Olympics, but lost to Berlin. They later made bids for the 2004 and 2012 Games, but failed to become a candidate city both times. Those games were awarded to Athens and London respectively. Rio is the first Brazilian and South American city to host the Summer Olympics. Rio de Janeiro also became the first city in the southern hemisphere outside of Australia to host the games \u2013 Melbourne in 1956 and Sydney in 2000. In July 2007, Rio successfully organized and hosted the XV Pan American Games. Rio de Janeiro also hosted the 2011 Military World Games from 15 to 24 July 2011. The 2011 Military World Games were the largest military sports event ever held in Brazil, with approximately 4,900 athletes from 108 countries competing in 20 sports. Rio de Janeiro hosted the 2016 Olympics and Paralympics. The Olympic Games were held from 5 to 21 August 2016. The Paralympics were held from 7 to 18 September 2016.\nThe city has a history as host of major international sports events. The Gin\u00e1sio do Maracan\u00e3zinho was the host arena for the official FIBA Basketball World Championship for its 1954 and 1963 editions. Later, the Jacarepagu\u00e1 circuit in Rio de Janeiro was the site for the Formula One Brazilian Grand Prix from 1978 to 1989. Rio de Janeiro also hosted the MotoGP Brazilian Grand Prix from 1995 to 2004 and the Champ Car event from 1996 to 1999. WCT/WQS surfing championships were contested on the beaches from 1985 to 2001. The Rio Champions Cup Tennis tournament is held in the spring. As part of its preparations to host the 2007 Pan American Games, Rio built a new stadium, Est\u00e1dio Ol\u00edmpico Jo\u00e3o Havelange, to hold 45,000 people. It was named after Brazilian ex-FIFA president Jo\u00e3o Havelange. The stadium is owned by the city of Rio de Janeiro, but it was rented to Botafogo de Futebol e Regatas for 20\u00a0years. Rio de Janeiro has also a multi-purpose arena, the HSBC Arena.\nThe Brazilian martial art capoeira is very popular. Other popular sports are basketball, beach football, beach volleyball, Beach American Football, footvolley, surfing, kite surfing, hang gliding, motor racing, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Luta Livre, sailing, and competitive rowing. Another sport that is highly popular in beaches of Rio is called (), a type of beach tennis. Rio de Janeiro is also a popular location for Rock climbing, with hundreds of routes all over the city, ranging from easy boulders to technical climbs. Sugarloaf Mountain is an example, with routes from the easy third grade (American 5.4, French 3) to the extremely difficult ninth grade (5.13/8b), up to .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25937", "revid": "2174319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25937", "title": "Rudolph Giuliani", "text": ""}
{"id": "25938", "revid": "596674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25938", "title": "Rudy Giuliani", "text": "American attorney and politician (born 1944)\nRudolph William Louis Giuliani (, ; born May 28, 1944) is an American politician and disbarred lawyer who served as the 107th mayor of New York City from 1994 to 2001. He previously served as the U.S. associate attorney general from 1981 to 1983 and the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York from 1983 to 1989. Giuliani led the 1980s federal prosecution of New York City mafia bosses as U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York. After a failed campaign for mayor of New York City in the 1989 election, he succeeded in 1993, and was reelected in 1997, campaigning on a \"tough on crime\" platform. He led New York's controversial \"civic cleanup\" from 1994 to 2001, and appointed William Bratton as New York City's new police commissioner. In 2000, he ran against First Lady Hillary Clinton for a U.S. Senate seat from New York, but left the race once diagnosed with prostate cancer. For his mayoral leadership following the September 11 attacks in 2001, he was called \"America's mayor\", and was named \"Time\" Person of the Year for 2001.\nIn 2002, Giuliani founded a security consulting business, Giuliani Partners, and acquired, but later sold, an investment banking firm, Giuliani Capital Advisors. In 2005, he joined a law firm, renamed Bracewell &amp; Giuliani. Vying for the Republican Party's 2008 presidential nomination, Giuliani was an early frontrunner, yet did poorly in the primary election; he later withdrew and endorsed the party's subsequent nominee, John McCain. After declining to run for New York governor in 2010 and for the Republican presidential nomination in 2012, Giuliani turned his focus to his business firms. After advising Donald Trump during his 2016 presidential campaign and early administration, Giuliani joined President Trump's personal legal team in April 2018, remaining on it during the 2020 presidential election. His activities as Trump's attorney led to allegations that he engaged in corruption and profiteering. In 2019, Giuliani was a central figure in the Trump\u2013Ukraine scandal.\nFollowing the 2020 election, Giuliani represented Trump in many lawsuits filed in attempts to overturn the election results, making false and debunked allegations about rigged voting machines, polling place fraud, and an international communist conspiracy. Giuliani spoke at the rally preceding the January 6 United States Capitol attack, where he made false claims of voter fraud and called for \"trial by combat\". He was later also listed as an unindicted co-conspirator in the federal prosecution of Trump's alleged attempts to overturn the election. In August 2023, he was indicted in the prosecution related to the 2020 election in Georgia. Later in 2023, Giuliani lost a $148-million defamation lawsuit for his false claims about two election workers in Georgia, and unsuccessfully attempted to declare bankruptcy; he later reached a settlement to pay damages awarded to the election workers. In April 2024, he was indicted on charges related to the 2020 election in Arizona. He was later disbarred in the state of New York in July, and in the District of Columbia in September.\nEarly life and education.\nGiuliani was born on May 28, 1944, in the East Flatbush section of Brooklyn, New York City, which at the time of his birth was a largely Italian American enclave of Brooklyn. He is the only child of working-class parents Helen (n\u00e9e D'Avanzo) and Harold Angelo Giuliani, both children of Italian immigrants. Harold Giuliani, a plumber and a bartender, had trouble holding a job, was convicted of felony assault and robbery, and served prison time in Sing Sing. Once released, his father worked as an enforcer for his brother-in-law Leo D'Avanzo, who operated an organized crime-affiliated loan sharking and gambling ring from a restaurant in Brooklyn.\nGiuliani was raised a Roman Catholic. When he was seven years old, his family moved from Brooklyn to Garden City South on Long Island, where he attended the local Catholic school, St. Anne's. Later, he commuted back to Brooklyn to attend Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School, where he graduated in 1961. Giuliani attended Manhattan College in Riverdale, Bronx, where he majored in political science with a minor in philosophy. Giuliani was elected president of his class in his sophomore year, but was not re-elected in his junior year. He joined the Phi Rho Pi college forensic fraternity and honor society. He graduated in 1965. Giuliani considered becoming a priest but decided to attend New York University School of Law in Manhattan, where he was a member of the \"New York University Law Review\", and graduated \"cum laude\" with a Juris Doctor degree in 1968.\nLegal career.\nGiuliani started his career and political life as a Democrat, working as a Democratic Party committeeman on Long Island in the mid-1960s. In 1968, he volunteered for Robert F. Kennedy's campaign in the 1968 U.S. presidential election, and voted for George McGovern in the 1972 U.S. presidential election. After graduating from law school, Giuliani clerked for Judge Lloyd Francis MacMahon, U.S. district judge for the Southern District of New York.\nGiuliani did not serve in the military during the Vietnam War. His conscription was deferred while he was enrolled at Manhattan College and NYU Law. Upon graduation from law school in 1968, he was classified 1-A (available for military service), but in 1969 he was reclassified 2-A (essential civilian) as Judge MacMahon's law clerk. In 1970, Giuliani was reclassified 1-A but received a high 308 draft lottery number and was not called up for service.\nU.S. associate deputy attorney general.\nGiuliani switched his party registration from Democratic to independent in 1975. This occurred during a period of time in which he was recruited for a position in Washington, D.C., with the Ford administration. Giuliani served as the associate deputy attorney general and chief of staff to Deputy Attorney General Harold \"Ace\" Tyler.\nHis first high-profile prosecution was of Democratic U.S. representative Bertram L. Podell (NY-13), who was convicted of corruption. Podell pleaded guilty to conspiracy and conflict of interest for accepting more than $41,000 in campaign contributions and legal fees from a Florida airline to obtain federal rights for a Bahama route. Podell, who maintained a legal practice while serving in Congress, said the payments were legitimate legal fees. \"The Washington Post\" later reported, \"The trial catapulted future New York mayor Rudolph Giuliani to front-page status when, as assistant U.S. attorney, he relentlessly cross-examined an initially calm Rep. Podell. The congressman reportedly grew more flustered and eventually decided to plead guilty.\"\nFrom 1977 to 1981, during the Carter administration, Giuliani practiced law at the Patterson, Belknap, Webb and Tyler law firm as chief of staff to his former boss Ace Tyler. In later years, Tyler became \"disillusioned\" by what Tyler described as Giuliani's time as U.S. attorney, criticizing several of his prosecutions as \"overkill\". On December 8, 1980, one month after the 1980 U.S. presidential election brought Republicans back to power in Washington, he switched his party affiliation from independent to Republican. Giuliani later said the switches were because he found Democratic policies \"na\u00efve\", and that \"by the time I moved to Washington, the Republicans had come to make more sense to me.\" Others suggested that the switches were made in order to get positions in the Justice Department. Giuliani's mother maintained in 1988 that he \"only became a Republican after he began to get all these jobs from them. He's definitely not a conservative Republican. He thinks he is, but he isn't. He still feels very sorry for the poor.\"\nU.S. associate attorney general.\nIn 1981, Giuliani was named U.S. associate attorney general in the Reagan administration, the third-highest position in the U.S. Department of Justice. As Associate Attorney General, Giuliani supervised the U.S. Attorney Offices' federal law enforcement agencies, the Department of Corrections, the Drug Enforcement Administration, and the U.S. Marshals Service. In a well-publicized 1982 case, Giuliani testified in defense of the U.S. federal government's \"detention posture\" regarding the internment of more than 2,000 Haitian asylum seekers who had entered the country illegally. The U.S. government disputed the assertion that most of the detainees had fled their country due to political persecution, alleging instead that they were \"economic migrants\". In defense of the government's position, Giuliani testified that \"political repression, at least in general, does not exist\" under Haitian president Jean-Claude Duvalier's regime.\nU.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York.\nIn 1983, Giuliani was appointed to be U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, which was technically a demotion but was sought by Giuliani because of his desire to personally litigate cases and because the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York is considered the highest-profile U.S. Attorney's Office in the country and as such is often used by those who have held the position as a springboard for running for public office. It was in this position that he first gained national prominence by prosecuting numerous high-profile cases, resulting in the convictions of Wall Street figures Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken. He also focused on prosecuting drug dealers, organized crime, and corruption in government. He amassed a record of 4,152 convictions and 25 reversals. As a federal prosecutor, Giuliani was credited with bringing the perp walk, parading of suspects in front of the previously alerted media, into common use as a prosecutorial tool. After Giuliani \"patented the perp walk\", the tool was used by increasing numbers of prosecutors nationwide.\nGiuliani's critics said that he arranged for people to be arrested but then dropped charges for lack of evidence on high-profile cases rather than going to trial. In a few cases, his arrests of alleged white-collar criminals at their workplaces with charges later dropped or lessened sparked controversy and damaged the reputations of the alleged \"perps\". He said veteran stock trader Richard Wigton, of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co., was guilty of insider trading. In February 1987, he had officers handcuff Wigton and march him through the company's trading floor, with Wigton in tears. Giuliani had his agents arrest Tim Tabor, a young arbitrageur and former colleague of Wigton, so late that he had to stay overnight in jail before posting bond.\nWithin three months, charges were dropped against both Wigton and Tabor. Giuliani said, \"We're not going to go to trial. We're just the tip of the iceberg\", but no further charges were forthcoming and the investigation did not end until Giuliani's successor was in place. Giuliani's high-profile raid of the Princeton/Newport firm ended with the defendants having their cases overturned on appeal on the grounds that what they had been convicted of were not crimes.\nMafia Commission trial.\nIn the Mafia Commission Trial, which ran from February 25, 1985, through November 19, 1986, Giuliani indicted eleven organized crime figures, including the heads of New York City's \"Five Families\", under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) on charges including extortion, labor racketeering, and murder for hire. In 2001, \"Time\" magazine called this \"case of cases\" possibly \"the most significant assault on the infrastructure of organized crime since the high command of the Chicago Mafia was swept away in 1943\", and quoted Giuliani's stated intention: \"Our approach is to wipe out the five families.\" Gambino crime family boss Paul Castellano evaded conviction when he and his underboss Thomas Bilotti were murdered on the streets of midtown Manhattan on December\u00a016, 1985; however, three heads of the Five Families were sentenced to 100 years in prison on January 13, 1987.\nGenovese and Colombo leaders, Tony Salerno and Carmine Persico, received additional sentences in separate trials, with 70-year and 39-year sentences to run consecutively. He was assisted by three assistant U.S. attorneys: Michael Chertoff, the eventual second U.S. secretary of homeland security and co-author of the Patriot Act; John Savarese, now a partner at Wachtell Lipton Rosen &amp; Katz; and Gil Childers, a later deputy chief of the criminal division for the Southern District of New York and now managing director in the legal department at Goldman Sachs. According to an FBI memo revealed in 2007, leaders of the Five Families voted in late 1986 on whether to issue a contract for Giuliani's death. Heads of the Lucchese, Bonanno, and Genovese families rejected the idea, although Colombo and Gambino leaders, Carmine Persico and John Gotti, encouraged assassination.\nIn 2014, it was revealed by former Sicilian Mafia member and informant Rosario Naimo that Salvatore Riina, a notorious Sicilian Mafia leader, had ordered a murder contract on Giuliani during the mid-1980s. Riina allegedly was suspicious of Giuliani's efforts prosecuting the American Mafia and was worried that he might have spoken with Italian anti-Mafia prosecutors and politicians, including Giovanni Falcone and Paolo Borsellino, who were both murdered in 1992 in separate car bombings. According to Giuliani, the Sicilian Mafia offered $800,000 for his death during his first year as mayor of New York in 1994.\nBoesky and Milken trials.\nIvan Boesky, a Wall Street arbitrageur who had amassed a fortune of about $200million by betting on corporate takeovers, was originally investigated by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for making investments based on tips received from corporate insiders, leading the way for the U.S. Attorney's Office of the Southern District of New York to investigate as well. These stock and options acquisitions were sometimes brazen, with massive purchases occurring only a few days before a corporation announced a takeover. Although insider trading of this kind was illegal, laws prohibiting it were rarely enforced until Boesky was prosecuted. Boesky cooperated with the SEC and informed on several others, including junk bond trader Michael Milken. Per agreement with Giuliani, Boesky received a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20442-year prison sentence along with a $100million fine. In 1989, Giuliani charged Milken under the RICO Act with 98 counts of racketeering and fraud. In a highly publicized case, Milken was indicted by a grand jury on these charges.\nDisbarment.\nIn June 2021, Giuliani had his license to practice law suspended in the state of New York, pending an investigation related to his efforts to overturn the results of the 2020 presidential election. On July 2, 2024, he was disbarred in the state of New York. On September 26, 2024, he was disbarred in the District of Columbia under reciprocal discipline.\nMayoral campaigns.\nGiuliani was U.S. attorney until January 1989, resigning as the Reagan administration ended. He garnered criticism until he left office for his handling of cases and was accused of prosecuting cases to further his political ambitions. He joined the law firm White &amp; Case in New York City as a partner. He remained with White &amp; Case until May 1990, when he joined the law firm Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, also in New York City.\n1989.\nGiuliani first ran for New York City mayor in 1989, when he attempted to unseat three-term incumbent Ed Koch. He won the September 1989 Republican Party primary election against business magnate Ronald Lauder in a campaign marked by claims that Giuliani was a not a true Republican (RINO) after an acrimonious debate between the two men.\nIn the Democratic primary, Koch was upset by David Dinkins, who was Manhattan Borough president. In the general election, Giuliani ran as the fusion candidate of both the Republican and the Liberal parties. The Conservative Party, which had often co-lined the Republican party candidate, withheld support from Giuliani and ran Lauder instead. Conservative Party leaders were unhappy with Giuliani on ideological grounds. They cited the Liberal Party's endorsement statement that Giuliani \"agreed with the Liberal Party's views on affirmative action, gay rights, gun control, school prayer, and tuition tax credits\".\nDuring two televised debates, Giuliani framed himself as an agent of change, saying, \"I'm the reformer\", that \"If we keep going merrily along, this city's going down\", and that electing Dinkins would represent \"more of the same, more of the rotten politics that have been dragging us down\". Giuliani pointed out that Dinkins had not filed a tax return for many years and several other ethical missteps, in particular a stock transfer to his son. Dinkins filed several years of returns and said the tax matter had been fully paid off. He denied other wrongdoing, saying that \"what we need is a mayor, not a prosecutor\" and that Giuliani refused to say \"the R-word\u00a0\u2013 he doesn't like to admit he's a Republican\". Dinkins won the endorsements of three of the four major daily New York newspapers, while Giuliani won approval from the \"New York Post\". In the end, Giuliani lost to Dinkins by a margin of 47,080 votes out of 1,899,845 votes cast, in what was the closest election in New York City's history. The closeness of the race was particularly noteworthy, considering the small percentage of New York City residents who were registered Republicans, and it resulted in Giuliani being the presumptive nominee for a rematch with Dinkins at the next election.\n1993.\nFour years after his defeat to Dinkins, Giuliani again ran for mayor. Once again, Giuliani also ran on the Liberal Party line but not the Conservative Party line, which ran activist George Marlin. Although crime had begun to fall during the Dinkins administration, Giuliani's campaign capitalized on the perception that crime was uncontrolled in the city following events such as the Crown Heights riot and the Family Red Apple boycott. The year prior to the election, Giuliani was a key speaker at a Patrolmen's Benevolent Association rally opposing Dinkins, in which Giuliani blamed the police department's low morale on Dinkins' leadership. The rally quickly devolved into a riot, with nearly 4,000 off-duty police officers storming the City Hall and blocking traffic on the Brooklyn Bridge.\nDinkins and Giuliani never debated during the campaign, because they were never able to agree on how to approach a debate. Dinkins was endorsed by \"The New York Times\" and \"Newsday\", while Giuliani was endorsed by the \"New York Post\" and the \"New York Daily News\" (a key switch from 1989). Giuliani went to visit the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, seeking his blessing and endorsement.\nOn election day, Giuliani's campaign hired off-duty cops, firefighters, and corrections officers to monitor polling places in Manhattan, Brooklyn, and the Bronx for cases of voter fraud. Despite objections from the Dinkins campaign, who said that the effort would intimidate Democratic voters, Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly assigned an additional 52 police captains and 3,500 officers to monitor the city's polling places. Giuliani won by a margin of 53,367 votes. He became the first Republican elected mayor of New York City since John Lindsay in 1965. Similar to the election four years prior, Giuliani performed particularly well in the white ethnic neighborhoods in Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island. Giuliani saw especially high returns in the borough of Staten Island, as a referendum to consider allowing the borough to secede from New York City was on the ballot.\n1997.\nGiuliani's opponent in 1997 was Democratic Manhattan borough president Ruth Messinger, who had beaten Al Sharpton in the September 9, 1997, Democratic primary. In the general election, Giuliani once again had the Liberal Party and not the Conservative Party listing. Giuliani ran an aggressive campaign, parlaying his image as a tough leader who had cleaned up the city. Giuliani's popularity was at its highest point to date, with a late October 1997 Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll showing him as having a 68 percent approval rating; 70 percent of New Yorkers were satisfied with life in the city and 64 percent said things were better in the city compared to four years previously.\nThroughout the campaign, Giuliani was well ahead in the polls and had a strong fund-raising advantage over Messinger. On her part, Messinger lost the support of several usually Democratic constituencies, including gay organizations and large labor unions. The major local daily newspapers (\"The New York Times\", \"Daily News\", \"New York Post\", and \"Newsday\") all endorsed Giuliani over Messinger. In the end, Giuliani won 58% of the vote to Messinger's 41%, becoming the first registered Republican to win a second term as mayor while on the Republican line since Fiorello H. La Guardia in 1941. Voter turnout was the lowest in twelve years, with 38% of registered voters casting ballots. The margin of victory included gains in his share of the African American vote (20% compared to 1993's 5%) and the Hispanic vote (43% from 37%) while maintaining his base of white ethnic and Catholic and Jewish voters from 1993.\nMayoralty.\nLaw enforcement.\nGiuliani served as mayor of New York City from 1994 to 2001. In his first term as mayor, the New York City Police Department (NYPD)\u00a0\u2013 at the instigation of Commissioner Bill Bratton\u00a0\u2013 adopted an aggressive enforcement/deterrent strategy based on James Q. Wilson's \"broken windows\" approach. This involved crackdowns on relatively minor offenses such as graffiti, turnstile jumping, cannabis possession, and aggressive panhandling by \"squeegee men\", on the theory that this would send a message that order would be maintained.\nThe legal underpinning for removing the \"squeegee men\" from the streets was developed under Giuliani's predecessor David Dinkins. Bratton, with Deputy Commissioner Jack Maple, also created and instituted CompStat, a computer-driven comparative statistical approach to mapping crime geographically and in terms of emerging criminal patterns, as well as charting officer performance by quantifying criminal apprehensions. Critics of the system assert that it creates an environment in which police officials are encouraged to underreport or otherwise manipulate crime data. An extensive study found a high correlation between crime rates reported by the police through CompStat and rates of crime available from other sources, suggesting there had been no manipulation. The CompStat initiative won the 1996 Innovations in Government Award from Harvard Kennedy School.\nDuring Giuliani's administration, crime rates dropped in New York City. The extent to which Giuliani deserves the credit is disputed. Crime rates in New York City had started to drop in 1991 under Dinkins, three years before Giuliani took office. A small nationwide drop in crime preceded Giuliani's election, and some critics say he may have been the beneficiary of a trend already in progress. Additional contributing factors to the overall decline in New York City crime during the 1990s were the addition of 7,000 officers to the NYPD, lobbied for and hired by the Dinkins administration, and an overall improvement in the national economy.\nChanging demographics were a key factor contributing to crime rate reductions, which were similar across the country during this time. Because the crime index is based on that of the FBI, which is self-reported by police departments, some have alleged that crimes were shifted into categories the FBI does not collect. In his 2006 book \"The Great American Crime Decline\", sociologist Frank Zimring stated that \"up to half of New York's crime drop in the 1990s, and virtually 100 percent of its continuing crime decline since 2000, has resulted from policing.\"\nBratton was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine in 1996. Giuliani reportedly forced Bratton out after two years, in what was seen as a battle of two large egos in which Giuliani was not tolerant of Bratton's celebrity. Bratton went on to become chief of the Los Angeles Police Department. Giuliani's term also saw allegations of civil rights abuses and other police misconduct under other commissioners after Bratton's departure. There were police shootings of unarmed suspects, and the scandals surrounding the torture of Abner Louima and the killings of Amadou Diallo, Gidone Busch, and Patrick Dorismond. Giuliani supported the NYPD, for example by releasing what he called Dorismond's \"extensive criminal record\" to the public, including a sealed juvenile file.\nCity services.\nThe Giuliani administration advocated the privatization of the city's public schools, which he called \"dysfunctional\", and the reduction of state funding for them. He advocated a voucher-based system to promote private schooling. Giuliani supported protection for illegal immigrants. He continued a policy of preventing city employees from contacting the Immigration and Naturalization Service about immigration violations, on the grounds that illegal aliens should be able to take actions such as sending their children to school or reporting crimes to the police without fear of deportation. During his mayoralty, gay and lesbian New Yorkers received domestic partnership rights. Giuliani induced the city's Democratic-controlled New York City Council, which had avoided the issue for years, to pass legislation providing broad protection for same-sex partners. In 1998, he codified local law by granting all city employees equal benefits for their domestic partners.\n2000 U.S. Senate campaign.\nWith term limits, Giuliani was ineligible to run in 2001 for a third term as mayor. In November 1998, four-term incumbent Democratic U.S. senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan announced his retirement and Giuliani immediately indicated an interest in running in the 2000 election for the now-open seat. Because of his high profile and visibility, Giuliani was supported by the state Republican Party. Giuliani's entrance led Democratic congressman Charles Rangel and others to recruit then-First Lady Hillary Clinton to run for Moynihan's seat, hoping she might combat his star power.\nIn April 1999, Giuliani formed an exploratory committee in connection with the Senate run. By January 2000, polling for the race showed Giuliani nine points ahead of Clinton, in part because his campaign was able to take advantage of several campaign stumbles by Clinton. In March 2000, the New York Police Department's fatal shooting of Patrick Dorismond inflamed Giuliani's strained relations with the city's minority communities, and Clinton seized on it as a major campaign issue. By April 2000, reports showed Clinton gaining upstate and generally outworking Giuliani, who said his duties as mayor prevented him from campaigning more. Clinton was now eight to ten points ahead of Giuliani in the polls.\nThen followed four tumultuous weeks in which Giuliani learned he had prostate cancer and needed treatment; his extramarital relationship with Judith Nathan became public and the subject of a media frenzy; and he announced a separation from his wife Donna Hanover. After much indecision, on May 19, Giuliani announced his withdrawal from the Senate race.\nSeptember 11 terrorist attacks.\nResponse.\nGiuliani received nationwide attention in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks. He made frequent appearances on radio and television on September11 and afterwards\u00a0\u2013 for example, to indicate that tunnels would be closed as a precautionary measure, and that there was no reason to believe the dispersion of chemical or biological weaponry into the air was a factor in the attack. In his public statements, Giuliani said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tomorrow New York is going to be here. And we're going to rebuild, and we're going to be stronger than we were before... I want the people of New York to be an example to the rest of the country, and the rest of the world, that terrorism can't stop us.\nThe 9/11 attacks occurred on the scheduled date of the mayoral primary to select the Democratic and Republican candidates to succeed Giuliani. The primary was immediately delayed two weeks to September 25. During this period, Giuliani sought an unprecedented three-month emergency extension of his term from January1 to April1 under the New York State Constitution (Article3, Section 25). In October 2000, he had considered supporting city council efforts to remove their own term limits, although he was not in favor of ending consecutive mayoral term limits.\nIn the end, leaders in the State Assembly and Senate indicated that they did not believe the extension was necessary. The election proceeded as scheduled, and the winning candidate, the Giuliani-endorsed Republican convert Michael Bloomberg, took office on January 1, 2002, per normal custom. Giuliani said he had been at the Ground Zero site \"as often, if not more, than most workers... I was there working with them. I was exposed to exactly the same things they were exposed to. So in that sense, I'm one of them.\" Some 9/11 workers have objected to those claims. While his appointment logs were unavailable for the six days immediately following the attacks, Giuliani logged 29 hours at the site over three months beginning September 17. This contrasted with recovery workers at the site who spent this much time at the site in two to three days.\nWhen Saudi prince Alwaleed bin Talal suggested the attacks were an indication that the United States \"should re-examine its policies in the Middle East and adopt a more balanced stand toward the Palestinian cause\", Giuliani asserted, \"There is no moral equivalent for this act. There is no justification for it... And one of the reasons I think this happened is because people were engaged in moral equivalency in not understanding the difference between liberal democracies like the United States, like Israel, and terrorist states and those who condone terrorism. So I think not only are those statements wrong, they're part of the problem.\" Giuliani subsequently rejected the prince's $10million donation to disaster relief in the aftermath of the attack.\nCriticism and communications problems.\nGiuliani was widely criticized for his decision to locate the New York City Office of Emergency Management headquarters on the 23rd floor inside the 7\u00a0World Trade Center building. Those opposing the decision perceived the office as a target for a terrorist attack in light of the World Trade Center bombing in 1993. The office was unable to coordinate efforts between police and firefighters properly while evacuating its headquarters. Large tanks of diesel fuel were placed in 7World Trade to power the command center. In May 1997, Giuliani put responsibility for selecting the location on Jerome M. Hauer, who had served under Giuliani from 1996 to 2000 before being appointed by him as New York City's first director of emergency management. Hauer has taken exception to that account in interviews and provided Fox News and \"New York Magazine\" with a memo demonstrating that he recommended a location in Brooklyn but was overruled by Giuliani. Television journalist Chris Wallace interviewed Giuliani on May 13, 2007, about his 1997 decision to locate the command center at the World Trade Center. Giuliani laughed during Wallace's questions and said that Hauer recommended the World Trade Center site and that Hauer said the WTC site was the best location. Wallace presented Giuliani a photocopy of Hauer's directive letter. The letter urged Giuliani to locate the command center in Brooklyn, instead of lower Manhattan. The February 1996 memo read, \"The [Brooklyn] building is secure and not as visible a target as buildings in Lower Manhattan.\"\nThe \"9/11 Commission Report\" noted that lack of preparedness could have led to the deaths of first responders at the scene of the attacks. The commission noted that the radios in use by the fire department were the same radios which had been criticized for their ineffectiveness following the 1993 World Trade Center bombings. Family members of 9/11 victims have said these radios were a complaint of emergency services responders for years. The radios were not working when Fire Department chiefs ordered the 343 firefighters inside the towers to evacuate, and they remained in the towers as the towers collapsed.\nWhen Giuliani testified before the 9/11 Commission, he said the firefighters ignored the evacuation order out of an effort to save lives. Giuliani testified to the commission, where some family members of responders who had died in the attacks appeared to protest his statements. A 1994 mayoral office study of the radios indicated that they were faulty. Replacement radios were purchased in a $33million no-bid contract with Motorola, and implemented in early 2001; however, the radios were recalled in March 2001 after a probationary firefighter's calls for help at a house fire could not be picked up by others at the scene, leaving firemen with the old analog radios from 1993. A book later published by commission members Thomas Kean and Lee H. Hamilton, \"Without Precedent: The Inside Story of the 9/11 Commission\", argued that the commission had not pursued a tough enough line of questioning with Giuliani.\nAn October 2001 study by the National Institute of Environmental Safety and Health said cleanup workers lacked adequate protective gear. In January 2008, an eight-page memo was revealed which detailed the New York City Police Department's opposition in 1998 to the location of the city's emergency command center at the Trade Center site. The Giuliani administration overrode these concerns.\nPublic reaction.\nGiuliani gained international attention after the attacks and was widely hailed for his leadership role. Polls taken just six weeks after the attack showed a 79 percent approval rating among New York City voters. This was a dramatic increase over the 36 percent rating he had received a year earlier, which was an average at the end of a two-term mayorship. Oprah Winfrey called him \"America's Mayor\" at a 9/11 memorial service held at Yankee Stadium on September 23, 2001.\nGiuliani was praised by some for his close involvement with the rescue and recovery efforts, but others argue that \"Giuliani has exaggerated the role he played after the terrorist attacks, casting himself as a hero for political gain.\" Giuliani has collected $11.4million from speaking fees in a single year (with increased demand after the attacks). Before September11, Giuliani's assets were estimated to be somewhat less than $2million, but his net worth could now be as high as 30 times that amount. He has made most of his money since leaving office.\n\"Time\" Person of the Year.\nOn December 24, 2001, \"Time\" magazine named Giuliani its Person of the Year for 2001. \"Time\" observed that, before 9/11, Giuliani's public image had been that of a rigid, self-righteous, ambitious politician. After 9/11, and perhaps owing also to his bout with prostate cancer, his public image became that of a man who could be counted on to unite a city in the midst of its greatest crisis. Historian Vincent J. Cannato concluded in September 2006:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;With time, Giuliani's legacy will be based on more than just 9/11. He left a city immeasurably better off\u00a0\u2013 safer, more prosperous, more confident\u00a0\u2013 than the one he had inherited eight years earlier, even with the smoldering ruins of the World Trade Center at its heart. Debates about his accomplishments will continue, but the significance of his mayoralty is hard to deny.\nAftermath.\nFor his leadership on and after September 11, Giuliani was given an honorary knighthood (KBE) by Queen Elizabeth II on February 13, 2002. Giuliani initially downplayed the health effects arising from the September\u00a011 attacks in the Financial District and lower Manhattan areas in the vicinity of the World Trade Center site. He moved quickly to reopen Wall Street, and it was reopened on September 17. In the first month after the attacks, he said \"The air quality is safe and acceptable.\"\nGiuliani took control away from agencies such as the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, leaving the \"largely unknown\" city Department of Design and Construction in charge of recovery and cleanup. Documents indicate that the Giuliani administration never enforced federal requirements requiring the wearing of respirators. Concurrently, the administration threatened companies with dismissal if cleanup work slowed.\nIn June 2007, Christie Todd Whitman, former Republican governor of New Jersey and director of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), reportedly said the EPA had pushed for workers at the WTC site to wear respirators but she had been blocked by Giuliani. She said she believed the subsequent lung disease and deaths suffered by WTC responders were a result of these actions; however, former deputy mayor Joe Lhota, then with the Giuliani campaign, replied, \"All workers at Ground Zero were instructed repeatedly to wear their respirators.\" Giuliani asked the city's Congressional delegation to limit the city's liability for Ground Zero illnesses to a total of $350million. Two years after Giuliani finished his term, FEMA appropriated $1billion to a special insurance fund, called the World Trade Center Captive Insurance Company, to protect the city against 9/11 lawsuits.\nIn February 2007, the International Association of Fire Fighters issued a letter asserting that Giuliani rushed to conclude the recovery effort once gold and silver had been recovered from World Trade Center vaults and thereby prevented the remains of many victims from being recovered. The letter stated \"Mayor Giuliani's actions meant that fire fighters and citizens who perished would either remain buried at Ground Zero forever, with no closure for families, or be removed like garbage and deposited at the Fresh Kills Landfill, before adding: \"Hundreds remained entombed in Ground Zero when Giuliani gave up on them.\" Lawyers for the International Association of Fire Fighters seek to interview Giuliani under oath as part of a federal legal action alleging that New York City negligently dumped body parts and other human remains in the Fresh Kills Landfill.\nPost-mayoralty political career.\nBefore 2008 election.\nSince leaving office as mayor, Giuliani has remained politically active by campaigning for Republican candidates for political offices. When George Pataki became governor in 1995, this represented the first time the positions of mayor and governor were held simultaneously by Republicans since John Lindsay and Nelson Rockefeller. Giuliani and Pataki were instrumental in bringing the 2004 Republican National Convention to New York City. He was a speaker at the convention, and endorsed President George W. Bush for re-election by recalling that immediately after the World Trade Center towers fell, stating: \"Without really thinking, based on just emotion, spontaneous, I grabbed the arm of then-Police Commissioner Bernard Kerik, and I said to him, 'Bernie, thank God George Bush is our president.'\"\nIn 2006, Giuliani started a website called Solutions America to help elect Republican candidates. After campaigning on Bush's behalf in the 2004 U.S. presidential election, he was reportedly the top choice for U.S. secretary of homeland security after Tom Ridge's resignation. When suggestions were made that Giuliani's confirmation hearings would be marred by details of his past affairs and scandals, he turned down the offer and instead recommended his friend and former New York police commissioner Bernard Kerik. After the announcement of Kerik's nomination, information about Kerik's past\u00a0\u2013 that he had: ties to organized crime, failed to properly report gifts he had received, been sued for sexual harassment and employed an undocumented alien as a domestic servant\u00a0\u2013 became known, and Kerik withdrew.\nIn March 2006, Congress formed the Iraq Study Group (ISG). This bipartisan ten-person panel, of which Giuliani was a member, was charged with assessing the Iraq War and making recommendations. They unanimously concluded that contrary to Bush administration assertions, \"The situation in Iraq is grave and deteriorating\" and called for \"changes in the primary mission\" that would allow \"the United States to begin to move its forces out of Iraq\".\nIn May 2006, after missing all ISG's meetings, including a briefing from General David Petraeus, former secretary of state Colin Powell and former Army chief of staff Eric Shinseki, Giuliani resigned, citing \"previous time commitments\". Giuliani's fundraising schedule had kept him from participating in the panel, a schedule which raised $11million in speaking fees over fourteen months, and that Giuliani had been forced to resign after being given \"an ultimatum to either show up...or leave\" by group leader James Baker. Giuliani subsequently said he had started thinking about running for president, and being on the panel might give it a political spin. Giuliani was described by \"Newsweek\" in January 2007 as \"one of the most consistent cheerleaders for the president's handling of the war in Iraq\". As of June 2007, he remained one of the few candidates for president to unequivocally support the basis for 2003 invasion of Iraq and the execution of the war.\nIn 2010, Giuliani spoke in support of the removal of the People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (MEK) from the U.S. State Department list of Foreign Terrorist Organizations; the MEK was removed from the list in 2012. As Giuliani and others reportedly received tens of thousands of dollars in speaking fees to advocate for the MEK, which at that time was still a designed terrorist organization, and thus their advocacy was illegal, some were subpoenaed during an inquiry about who was paying the prominent individuals' speaking fees. Several commentators wrote that under the PATRIOT Act these people could be potentially prosecuted for providing material support for terrorism, a claim Giuliani denied. In January 2011, Giuliani and others wrote an article for the conservative publication \"National Review\" stating their position that the group should not be classified as a terrorist organization. They supported their position by citing the fact that the United Kingdom and European Union had removed it from their terrorism lists. They further asserted that only the United States and Iran still listed it.\n2008 presidential campaign.\nIn November 2006, Giuliani announced the formation of an exploratory committee toward a run in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. In February 2007, he filed a \"statement of candidacy\" and confirmed on the television program \"Larry King Live\" that he was running.\nEarly polls showed Giuliani with one of the highest levels of name recognition ever recorded along with high levels of support among the Republican candidates. Throughout most of 2007, he was the leader in most nationwide opinion polling among Republicans. Senator John McCain, who ranked a close second behind the New York Mayor, had faded, and most polls showed Giuliani to have more support than any of the other declared Republican candidates, with only former senator Fred Thompson and former governor Mitt Romney showing greater support in some per-state Republican polls. On November 7, 2007, Giuliani's campaign received an endorsement from evangelist, Christian Broadcasting Network founder, and past presidential candidate Pat Robertson. This was viewed by political observers as a possibly key development in the race, as it gave credence that evangelicals and other social conservatives could support Giuliani despite some of his positions on social issues such as abortion and gay rights.\nGiuliani's campaign hit a difficult stretch during the last two months of 2007, when Bernard Kerik, whom Giuliani had recommended for the position of secretary of homeland security, was indicted on 16 counts of tax fraud and other federal charges. The media reported that when Giuliani was the mayor of New York, he billed several tens of thousands of dollars of mayoral security expenses to obscure city agencies. Those expenses were incurred while he visited Judith Nathan, with whom he was having an extramarital affair; later analysis showed the billing to likely be unrelated to hiding Nathan. Several stories were published in the press regarding clients of Giuliani Partners and Bracewell &amp; Giuliani who were in opposition to goals of American foreign policy. Giuliani's national poll numbers began steadily slipping and his unusual strategy of focusing more on later, multi-primary big states rather than the smaller, first-voting states was seen at risk.\nDespite his strategy, Giuliani competed in the January 8, 2008, New Hampshire primary to a substantial extent, but finished a distant fourth with 9percent of the vote. Similar poor results continued in other early contests, when Giuliani's staff went without pay in order to focus all efforts on the crucial late January Florida Republican primary. The shift of the electorate's focus from national security to the state of the economy also hurt Giuliani, as did the resurgence of McCain's similarly themed campaign. On January 29, 2008, Giuliani finished a distant third in the Florida result with 15percent of the vote, trailing McCain and Romney. Facing declining polls and lost leads in the upcoming large Super Tuesday states, including that of his home New York, Giuliani withdrew from the race on January 30, endorsing McCain.\nGiuliani's campaign ended up $3.6million in arrears, and in June 2008 Giuliani sought to retire the debt by proposing to appear at Republican fundraisers during the 2008 general election, and have part of the proceeds go towards his campaign. During the 2008 Republican National Convention, Giuliani gave a prime-time speech that praised McCain and his running mate, Sarah Palin, while criticizing Democratic nominee Barack Obama. He cited Palin's executive experience as a mayor and governor and belittled Obama's lack of same, and his remarks were met with wild applause from the delegates. Giuliani continued to be one of McCain's most active surrogates during the remainder of McCain's eventually unsuccessful campaign.\nAfter 2008 election.\nFollowing the end of his presidential campaign, Giuliani's \"high appearance fees dropped like a stone\". He returned to work at both Giuliani Partners and Bracewell &amp; Giuliani. His consultancy work included advising Keiko Fujimori with her presidential campaign during the 2011 Peruvian general election. Giuliani also explored hosting a syndicated radio show, and was reported to be in talks with Westwood One about replacing Bill O'Reilly before that position went to Fred Thompson (another unsuccessful 2008 GOP presidential primary candidate). In 2009, Giuliani said the Obama administration and U.S. Treasury secretary Timothy Geithner lacked executive competence in dealing with the 2008 financial crisis.\nGiuliani said his political career was not necessarily over, and did not rule out a 2010 New York gubernatorial or 2012 presidential bid. A November 2008 Siena College poll indicated that although Governor David Paterson\u00a0\u2013 promoted to the office via the Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal a year before\u00a0\u2013 was popular among New Yorkers, he would have just a slight lead over Giuliani in a hypothetical matchup. By February 2009, after the prolonged Senate appointment process, a Siena College poll indicated that Paterson was losing popularity among New Yorkers, and showed Giuliani with a fifteen-point lead in the hypothetical contest.\nIn January 2009, Giuliani said he would not decide on a gubernatorial run for another six to eight months, adding that he thought it would not be fair to the governor to start campaigning early while the governor tries to focus on his job. Giuliani worked to retire his presidential campaign debt, but by the end of March 2009 it was still $2.4million in arrears, the largest such remaining amount for any of the 2008 contenders. In April 2009, Giuliani strongly opposed Paterson's announced push for same-sex marriage in New York and said it would likely cause a backlash that could put Republicans in statewide office in 2010. By late August 2009, there were still conflicting reports about whether Giuliani was likely to run.\nOn December 23, 2009, Giuliani announced that he would not seek any office in 2010, saying \"The main reason has to do with my two enterprises: Bracewell &amp; Giuliani and Giuliani Partners. I'm very busy in both.\" The decisions signaled a possible end to Giuliani's political career. During the 2010 midterm elections, Giuliani endorsed and campaigned for Bob Ehrlich and Marco Rubio. On October 11, 2011, Giuliani announced that he was not running for president. According to Kevin Law, the director of the Long Island Association, Giuliani believed, \"As a moderate, he thought it was a pretty significant challenge. He said it's tough to be a moderate and succeed in GOP primaries\", and Giuliani himself said, \"If it's too late for (New Jersey Governor) Chris Christie, it's too late for me.\"\nAt a Republican fund-raising event in February 2015, Giuliani said, \"I do not believe, and I know this is a horrible thing to say, but I do not believe that the president Obama loves America ... He doesn't love you. And he doesn't love me. He wasn't brought up the way you were brought up and I was brought up, through love of this country.\" In response to criticism of the remarks, Giuliani said, \"Some people thought it was racist\u00a0\u2013 I thought that was a joke, since he was brought up by a white mother... This isn't racism. This is socialism or possibly anti-colonialism.\" White House deputy press secretary Eric Schultz said he agreed with Giuliani \"that it was a horrible thing to say\", but he would leave it up to the people who heard Giuliani directly to assess whether the remarks were appropriate for the event. Although he received some support for his controversial comments, Giuliani said he also received several death threats within 48 hours.\nRelationship with Donald Trump.\nPresidential campaign supporter.\nGiuliani supported Donald Trump in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. He gave a prime time speech during the first night of the 2016 Republican National Convention. Earlier in the day, Giuliani and former 2016 presidential candidate Ben Carson appeared at an event for the pro-Trump Great America PAC. Giuliani also appeared in a Great America PAC ad entitled \"Leadership\". Giuliani's and Jeff Sessions' appearances were staples at Trump campaign rallies. During the campaign, Giuliani praised Trump for his worldwide accomplishments and helping fellow New Yorkers in their time of need. He defended Trump against allegations of racism, sexual assault, and not paying any federal income taxes for as long as two decades.\nIn August 2016, Giuliani, while campaigning for Trump, said that in the \"eight years before Obama\" became president, \"we didn't have any successful radical Islamic terrorist attack in the United States\". It was noted that 9/11 happened during George W. Bush's first term. PolitiFact brought up four more counter-examples (the 2002 Los Angeles International Airport shooting, the 2002 D.C. sniper attacks, the 2006 Seattle Jewish Federation shooting and the 2006 UNC SUV attack) to Giuliani's claim. Giuliani later said he was using \"abbreviated language\". Giuliani was believed to be a likely pick for secretary of state in the Trump administration. On December 9, 2016, Trump announced that Giuliani had removed his name from consideration for any Cabinet post.\nAdvisor to the president.\nThe then president-elect Trump named Giuliani his informal cybersecurity adviser on January 12, 2017. The status of this informal role for Giuliani was unclear because Trump created in November 2018 the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), headed by Chris Krebs as director and Matthew Travis as deputy. In the weeks following his appointment, Giuliani was forced to consult an Apple Store Genius Bar when he \"was locked out of his iPhone because he had forgotten the passcode and entered the wrong one at least 10 times\", belying his putative expertise in the field.\nIn January 2017, Giuliani said he advised President Trump in matters relating to Executive Order 13769, which barred citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries from entering the United States for 90 days. The order also suspended the admission of all refugees for 120 days. Giuliani drew scrutiny over his ties to foreign nations, regarding not registering per the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA).\nPersonal lawyer.\nIn mid April 2018, Giuliani joined Trump's legal team, which dealt with the special counsel investigation by Robert Mueller into Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. elections. Giuliani said his goal was to negotiate a swift end to the investigation. In early May, Giuliani made public that Trump had reimbursed his personal attorney Michael Cohen $130,000 that Cohen had paid to adult-film actress Stormy Daniels for her agreement not to talk about her alleged affair with Trump. Cohen had earlier insisted he used his own money to pay Daniels, and he implied that he had not been reimbursed. Trump had previously said he knew nothing about the matter. Within a week, Giuliani said some of his own statements regarding this matter were \"more rumor than anything else\".\nLater in May 2018, Giuliani, who was asked on whether the promotion of the Spygate conspiracy theory is meant to discredit the special counsel investigation, said the investigators \"are giving us the material to do it. Of course, we have to do it in defending the president... it is for public opinion\" on whether to \"impeach or not impeach\" Trump. In June 2018, Giuliani said that a sitting president cannot be indicted: \"I don't know how you can indict while he's in office. No matter what it is. If President Trump shot [then-FBI director] James Comey, he'd be impeached the next day. Impeach him, and then you can do whatever you want to do to him.\"\nIn June 2018, Giuliani also said Trump should not testify to the special counsel investigation because \"our recollection keeps changing\". In early July, Giuliani characterized that Trump had previously asked Comey to \"give him [then-national security adviser Michael Flynn] a break\". In mid-August, Giuliani denied making this comment: \"What I said was, that is what Comey is saying Trump said.\" On August 19 on \"Meet the Press\", Giuliani argued that Trump should not testify to the special counsel investigation because Trump could be \"trapped into perjury\" just by telling \"somebody's version of the truth. Not the truth.\" Giuliani's argument continued: \"Truth isn't truth.\" Giuliani later clarified that he was \"referring to the situation where two people make precisely contradictory statements\".\nIn late July, Giuliani defended Trump by saying \"collusion is not a crime\" and that Trump had done nothing wrong because he \"didn't hack\" or \"pay for the hacking\". He later elaborated that his comments were a \"very, very familiar lawyer's argument\" to \"attack the legitimacy of the special counsel investigation\". He also described and denied several supposed allegations that have never been publicly raised, regarding two earlier meetings among Trump campaign officials to set up the June 9, 2016, Trump Tower meeting with Russian citizens. In late August, Giuliani said the June 9, 2016, Trump Tower \"meeting was originally for the purpose of getting information about Hillary Clinton\".\nAlso in late July, Giuliani attacked Trump's former personal lawyer Michael Cohen as an \"incredible liar\", two months after calling Cohen an \"honest, honorable lawyer\". In mid-August, Giuliani defended Trump by saying: \"The president's an honest man.\" It was reported in early September that Giuliani said the White House could and likely would prevent the special counsel investigation from making public certain information in its final report which would be covered by executive privilege. Also according to Giuliani, Trump's personal legal team is already preparing a \"counter-report\" to refute the potential special counsel investigation's report. Giuliani privately urged Trump in 2017 to extradite Fethullah G\u00fclen. In late 2019, Giuliani represented Venezuelan businessman Alejandro Betancourt L\u00f3pez, meeting with the Justice Department to ask not to bring charges against him.\nIn an interview with Olivia Nuzzi in \"New York\" magazine, Giuliani, who is a Roman Catholic of Italian descent, said: \"Don't tell me I'm anti-Semitic if I oppose George Soros... I'm more of a Jew than Soros is.\" George Soros is a Hungarian-born Jew who survived the Holocaust. The Anti-Defamation League replied, \"Mr. Giuliani should apologize and retract his comments immediately unless he seeks to dog whistle to hardcore anti-Semites and white supremacists who believe this garbage.\" In the last days of the Trump administration, when White House aides were soliciting fees to lobby for presidential pardons, Giuliani said that while he'd heard that large fees were being offered, he did not work on clemency cases, saying \"I have enough money. I'm not starving.\" As of February 16, 2021, Giuliani was reportedly not actively involved in any of Trump's pending legal cases.\nBy 2023, Giuliani had reportedly incurred seven-figure legal fees in cases related to Donald Trump and the attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election. In April 2023, Giuliani and his lawyer Robert Costello met twice with Trump at Mar-a-Lago to ask him for money. In response, a Trump PAC paid $340,000 toward Giuliani's data storage bill. On February 7, 2024, when Giuliani appeared in court to discuss his bankruptcy case, he told a U.S. trustee attorney that he was owed about $2 million by the Trump campaign and the RNC. He said the Trump campaign \"just paid the expenses. Not all, but most. They never paid the legal fees.\" He said he did not wish to hold Donald Trump personally responsible for this bill. On July 12, 2024, his bankruptcy case was dismissed, and he was not allowed to file for bankruptcy again for one year.\nAttempts to get Ukraine to carry out investigations.\nSince at least May 2019, Giuliani urged Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, to investigate oil company Burisma, whose board once included Joe Biden's son Hunter Biden, and check for irregularities in Ukraine's investigation of Paul Manafort. He said such investigations would benefit his client's defense, and that his efforts had Trump's support. Toward this end, Giuliani met with Ukrainian officials throughout 2019. In July 2019, \"BuzzFeed News\" reported that Soviet-born Americans, and Igor Fruman and Lev Parnas, were liaisons between Giuliani and Ukrainian government officials in this effort. Parnas and Fruman, prolific Republican donors, neither registered as foreign agents in the United States nor were approved by the State Department. Giuliani responded that the report was \"a pathetic effort to cover up what are enormous allegations of criminality by the Biden family\". By September 2019, there had been no evidence of wrongdoing by the Bidens.\nIn October 2019, Giuliani hired former Watergate prosecutor Jon Sale to represent him in the House Intelligence Committee's impeachment investigation. The committee issued a subpoena to Giuliani asking him to release documents related to the Ukraine scandal. \"The New York Times\" reported on October 11, 2019, that the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York, was investigating him for violating lobbying laws related to his activities in Ukraine. Bloomberg News reported that the investigation could extend to bribery of foreign officials or conspiracy, and \"The Wall Street Journal\" reported Giuliani was being investigated for a possible profit motive in a Ukrainian gas venture. Giuliani denied having any interest in the venture. Federal prosecutors issued subpoenas to associates of Giuliani to investigate individuals, apparently including Giuliani, on potential charges, including money laundering, obstruction of justice, conspiracy to defraud the US, and mail/wire fraud.\nGiuliani was paid $500,000 to consult for Parnas' company named \"Fraud Guarantee\". Trump supporter attorney Charles Gucciardo paid Giuliani on behalf of Fraud Guarantee in two $250,000 payments, in 2018. In May 2019, Giuliani described Ukraine's chief prosecutor Yuriy Lutsenko as a \"much more honest guy\" than his predecessor, Viktor Shokin. After Lutsenko was removed from office, he said in September 2019 that he found no evidence of wrongdoing by the Bidens, and had met Giuliani about ten times. Giuliani reversed his stance, saying that Shokin is the one people \"should have spoken to\", while Lutsenko acted \"corruptly\" and \"is exactly the prosecutor that Joe Biden put inin order to tank the case\".\nIn September 2019, as reports surfaced that a whistleblower was alleging high-level misconduct related to Ukraine, Giuliani went on CNN. When asked if he had tried to get Ukrainian officials to investigate Biden, he replied \"No, actually I didn't\", but thirty seconds later said, \"Of course I did\". In a tweet, he seemed to confirm reports Trump had withheld military assistance scheduled for Ukraine unless they carried out the investigation. He said, \"The reality is that the president of the United States, whoever he is, has every right to tell the president of another country you better straighten out the corruption in your country if you want me to give you a lot of money. If you're so damn corrupt that you can't investigate allegations\u00a0\u2013 our money is going to get squandered.\" Tom Bossert, a former homeland security advisor in the Trump administration, described Giuliani's theory that Ukraine was involved in 2016 U.S. election interference as \"debunked\"; Giuliani responded that Bossert \"doesn't know what the hell he's talking about\".\nOn October 2, 2019, Steve Linick, the State Department's inspector general, delivered a packet of apparent disinformation regarding President Biden and former ambassador to Ukraine, Marie Yovanovitch, to Capitol Hill. Linick told congressional aides his office questioned Ulrich Brechbuhl, Mike Pompeo's advisor about the origins of the packet. Giuliani acknowledged he passed the packet to Pompeo. In a November 2019 interview, he confirmed he had \"needed Yovanovitch out of the way\" because she was going to make his investigations difficult. Giuliani added, \"They (the State Department) told me they would investigate it.\" Giuliani persuaded Trump to remove Yovanovitch from office in spring 2019. By April 2021, the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan was investigating the role of Giuliani in Yovanovitch's removal.\nU.S. ambassador to the European Union Gordon Sondland testified that Trump delegated policy on Ukraine to Giuliani. The late 2019 impeachment inquiry into Donald Trump centered around Giuliani's actions involving Ukraine. In testimony and reports of the House Intelligence Committee, Giuliani's name was mentioned more than any but Trump's. Experts suggested Giuliani may have violated the Logan Act. On November 22, 2019, Giuliani sent a letter to Senator Lindsey Graham, chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary, informing him of three witnesses from Ukraine who Giuliani said had direct evidence of Democratic criminal conspiracy with Ukrainians to prevent Trump's election and, after his election, to remove him via contrived charges. Giuliani claimed the witnesses had evidence of the Biden family's involvement in bribery, money laundering and Hobbs Act extortion. The letter sought Graham's help obtaining visas for the witnesses to testify. Graham invited Giuliani to share his findings with the Judiciary Committee, and advised him \"to share what he got from Ukraine with the [intelligence community] to make sure it's not Russia propaganda\".\nDmytro Firtash is a Ukrainian oligarch prominent in natural gas. In 2017, the Justice Department characterized him as in the \"upper echelon of Russian organized crime\". Since his 2014 arrest in Vienna, at the request of American authorities, he has been living there on $155\u00a0million bail fighting extradition to the US on bribery and racketeering charges. Firtash's attorneys obtained a September 2019 statement from Viktor Shokin, the former Ukrainian prosecutor who was forced out under pressure from multiple countries and non-governmental organizations, as conveyed to Ukraine by Joe Biden. Shokin falsely asserted that Biden had him fired because he refused to stop his investigation into Burisma. Giuliani, who asserts he has \"nothing to do with\" and has \"never met or talked to\" Firtash, promoted the statement in television appearances as purported evidence of wrongdoing by the Bidens. Giuliani told CNN he met with a Firtash attorney at the time he was seeking information about the Bidens. Firtash was represented by Trump and Giuliani associates Joseph diGenova and his wife Victoria Toensing, having hired them on Parnas' recommendation in July 2019.\n\"The New York Times\" reported that Giuliani had directed Parnas to approach Firtash with the recommendation, with the proposition that Firtash could help provide damaging information on Biden, which Parnas' attorney described was \"part of any potential resolution to [Firtash's] extradition matter\". Shokin's statement notes that it was prepared \"at the request of lawyers acting for Dmitry Firtash ('DF'), for use in legal proceedings in Austria\". Bloomberg News reported that during summer 2019 Firtash associates began attempting to dig up dirt on the Bidens to solicit Giuliani's assistance with Firtash's legal matters; it also reported that Giuliani's publicising of the Shokin statement had reduced the chances of the Justice Department dropping the charges against Firtash, as it would appear to be a political \"quid pro quo\". \"The Washington Post\" reported on October 22 that after they began representing Firtash, Toensing and diGenova secured a rare face-to-face meeting with U.S. Attorney General Bill Barr to argue the Firtash charges should be dropped, but he declined to intervene.\nOn October 18, \"The New York Times\" reported that weeks earlier, before his associates Parnas and Fruman were indicted, Giuliani met with officials with the criminal and fraud divisions of the Justice Department regarding what Giuliani characterized as a \"very sensitive\" foreign bribery case involving a client of his. The \"Times\" did not name whom the case involved, but after publication of the story Giuliani told a reporter it was not Firtash. The Justice Department said its officials would not have met with Giuliani had they known his associates were under investigation by the U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York.\nOn December 3, 2019, the House Intelligence Committee's report included phone records, including calls made by Giuliani between April and August 2019. Calls involved Giuliani in contact with Kurt Volker, Republican representative and House Intelligence Committee ranking member Devin Nunes, Parnas, the White House switchboard, and an unidentified White House official whose phone number is referenced as \"-1\". Chairman Adam Schiff of the committee announced after the report's release that the committee was investigating whether \"-1\" referred to President Trump, citing grand jury evidence from the trial of Trump-associate Roger Stone in which phone number \"-1\" referred to Trump. Analyst Philip Bump reasoned that Giuliani's calls with \"-1\" are 'likely' calls with Trump citing that Giuliani spoke longer with \"-1\" than anyone else, \"-1\" always calls Giuliani, and generally after Giuliani calls the White House switchboard, and timing of Trump actions after Giuliani's calls with \"-1\" ended.\nIn December 2019, while the House Judiciary Committee began hearings for the impeachment inquiry, Giuliani returned to Ukraine to interview former officials for a documentary seeking to discredit impeachment proceedings. U.S. officials told \"The Washington Post\" that Giuliani would have been a target of Russian intelligence efforts during Trump's presidency, and particularly after Giuliani turned his focus to Ukraine\u00a0\u2013 a former Soviet republic under attack from Russia and with deep penetration by Russian intelligence. Analysts say Trump and Giuliani's habit of communicating over unencrypted lines makes it likely foreign agencies would be listening, and agencies often collect intelligence through monitoring communications of people who interact with their target.\nNBC News reported in December 2020 that SDNY investigators, had discussed with Justice Department officials the possibility of acquiring Giuliani's emails, which might require headquarters approval due to protection by attorney\u2013client privilege. \"The New York Times\" reported in 2021 that the SDNY had requested a search warrant of Giuliani's electronic records in summer 2020, but were met with resistance from political appointees in the Washington headquarters, ostensibly because the election was near, while career officials were supportive. The Justice Department generally avoids taking significant actions relating to political figures that might become public within sixty days of an election. Political appointees nevertheless opposed the effort after the election, noting Giuliani played a leading role in challenging the election results. The officials deferred the matter to the incoming Biden administration.\nFederal investigators in Manhattan executed search warrants on April 28, 2021, at Giuliani's office and Upper East Side apartment, seizing his electronic devices. In April 2021, Giuliani's attorney said investigators told him they had searched his client's iCloud account beginning in late 2019, later arguing to a judge that the search was illegal and so the raid on Giuliani's properties was \"fruit of this poisoned tree\", demanding to review documents justifying the iCloud search. In May 2021, the SDNY confirmed that in late 2019 it obtained search warrants for Giuliani's iCloud account, as part of \"an ongoing, multi-year grand jury investigation into conduct involving Giuliani, Toensing, and others\", and argued that attorneys for Giuliani were not entitled to review the underlying documents of the warrants prior to any charges. Giuliani and Toensing asserted their attorney-client privilege may have been violated by the iCloud searches, which investigators disputed, saying they employed a \"filter team\" to prevent them from seeing information protected by privilege. Federal judge J. Paul Oetken ruled in favor of investigators and granted their request for a special master to ensure attorney-client privilege was maintained. The special master released more than 3,000 of Giuliani's communications to prosecutors in 2022, agreeing to withhold forty for which Giuliani had asserted \"privilege and/or highly personal\" status and rejecting 37 such assertions.\n\"The New York Times\" reported in 2021 that the SDNY was scrutinizing Giuliani's association with Firtash in efforts to discredit the Bidens, and efforts to lobby the Trump administration on behalf of Ukrainian officials and oligarchs. \"Time\" reported it had spoken with three unidentified witnesses who said they were questioned by investigators, two of whom said they had worked with Giuliani while cooperating with investigators; one said investigators were particularly interested in Giuliani's association with Firtash.\nU.S. intelligence community analysis released in 2021 found Ukrainian politician Andrii Derkach was among proxies of Russian intelligence who promoted and laundered misleading or unsubstantiated narratives about Biden \"to US media organizations, US officials, and prominent US individuals, including some close to former President Trump and his administration\". Giuliani met with Derkach in December 2019. \"The New York Times\" confirmed in May 2021 that Derkach was the subject of a criminal investigation into foreign interference in the 2020 election, and further reported that \"Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn have been investigating whether several Ukrainian officials helped orchestrate a wide-ranging plan to meddle in the 2020 presidential campaign, including using Rudolph W. Giuliani to spread their misleading claims about President Biden and tilt the election in Donald J. Trump's favor.\" On June 8, 2021, CNN uncovered audio of a 2019 call, stating that \"Giuliani relentlessly pressured and coaxed the Ukrainian government to investigate baseless conspiracies about then-candidate Joe Biden.\" In November 2022, SDNY stated they would not indict Giuliani for his activities in Ukraine.\n2020 election lawsuits.\nIn November 2020, Trump placed Giuliani in charge of lawsuits related to alleged voter irregularities in the 2020 U.S. presidential election. On November 7, Giuliani gave a press conference at Four Seasons Total Landscaping in Philadelphia to discuss challenging the vote count in Pennsylvania, during which media networks called the presidential election for Biden. Trump designated Giuliani to lead a legal team to challenge the election results, telling Giuliani to \"go wild\" and \"do anything you want\" in his efforts to overturn them. This team, a self-described \"elite strike force\" that included Sidney Powell, Joseph diGenova, Victoria Toensing, and Trump campaign attorney Jenna Ellis, appeared at a November 19 press conference in which they made numerous false and unsubstantiated assertions revolving around an international Communist conspiracy, rigged voting machines, and polling place fraud.\nGiuliani repeatedly publicly denounced the use of provisional ballots (in which the poll worker does not see the voter's name on the rolls, so the voter swears an affidavit oath that they are registered to vote), arguing that the practice enables fraud, although Giuliani himself had cast this type of ballot on October 31, 2020, in Manhattan. By January 8, 2021, Trump and his team had lost 63 lawsuits. Giuliani's associate Maria Ryan sent a letter to White House chief of staff Mark Meadows requesting that Giuliani be paid $2.5\u00a0million and receive a \"general pardon\". A month later, when Trump was out of office, Giuliani was no longer representing him in any pending cases, according to a Trump adviser. While Trump continued to fundraise, purportedly for his election-related legal fights, as of the end of July 2021 he had not given any of this money to Giuliani. In October 2021, in another context, Trump remarked: \"I do pay my lawyers when they do a good job.\"\nPennsylvania lawsuit.\nOne early lawsuit sought to invalidate up to 700,000 mail-in ballots and stop Pennsylvania from certifying its election results. Giuliani said he had signed affidavits attesting to voter fraud and election official misconduct in Pennsylvania and elsewhere. Despite not having argued a case in any courtroom for over three decades, Giuliani applied for special permission to represent the Trump presidential campaign in the federal court of Pennsylvania. In doing so, Giuliani misrepresented his status with the District of Columbia Bar in his application by stating that he was a member of the bar in good standing, when in fact the District of Columbia had suspended him for nonpayment of fees. In his first day in court on the case, which was November 17, 2020, Giuliani struggled with rudimentary legal processes and was accused by lawyers for the Pennsylvania secretary of state of making legal arguments that were \"disgraceful in an American courtroom\". Judge Matthew Brann questioned how Giuliani could justify \"asking this court to invalidate some 6.8\u00a0million votes thereby disenfranchising every single voter in the commonwealth.\"\nHis federal lawsuit against Pennsylvania was dismissed with prejudice on November 21, 2020, with the judge citing \"strained legal arguments without merit and speculative accusations\", which were \"unsupported by evidence\". Giuliani and Jenna Ellis reacted by stating that the ruling \"helps\" the Trump campaign \"get expeditiously to the U.S. Supreme Court\". They also claimed that the judge, Matthew W. Brann, was \"Obama-appointed\", when he is a Republican and former member of the right-leaning Federalist Society.\nThe Trump campaign appealed the lawsuit to the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, where a three-judge panel on November 27 rejected the Trump campaign's attempt to undo Pennsylvania's vote certification, because the Trump campaign's \"claims have no merit\". The panel also ruled that the District Court was correct in preventing the Trump campaign from conducting a second amendment of its complaint. An amendment would be pointless, ruled the judges, because the Trump campaign was not bringing facts before the court, and not even alleging fraud. Judge Stephanos Bibas highlighted that Giuliani himself told the district court that the Trump campaign \"doesn't plead fraud\", and that this \"is not a fraud case\". The panel concluded that neither \"specific allegations\" nor \"proof\" was provided in this case, and that the Trump campaign \"cannot win this lawsuit\". Giuliani and Ellis reacted to the appeals court ruling by condemning the \"activist judicial machinery in Pennsylvania\". Of the three Appeal Court judges, Stephanos Bibas, who delivered the opinion, was appointed by Trump himself, while judges D. Brooks Smith and Michael Chagares were appointed by Republican president George W. Bush.\nDominion and Smartmatic lawsuits.\nAs part of his allegations that voting machines had been rigged, Giuliani made several false assertions about two rival companies, Dominion Voting Systems and Smartmatic. These false claims included that Smartmatic owned Dominion; that Dominion voting machines used Smartmatic software; that Dominion voting machines sent vote data to Smartmatic at foreign locations; that Dominion was founded by the former socialist Venezuelan leader Hugo Ch\u00e1vez; and that Dominion is a \"radical-left\" company with connections to antifa. Both companies sued Giuliani and Fox News. Dominion filed a defamation lawsuit against Giuliani in January 2021, seeking $1.3 billion in damages; the parties settled on September 26, 2025, for an undisclosed sum. Separately, Dominion sued Fox News for $1.6 billion, and settled for $787.5\u00a0million. Dominion also sued Sidney Powell for election-related lies.\nOn February 4, 2021, Smartmatic sued Giuliani, Fox News and some of its hosts, and Powell, accusing them of engaging in a \"disinformation campaign\" against the company; the company sought $2.7billion in damages. A New York State Supreme Court judge, in March 2022, denied the defendants' motion to dismiss, ruling that the Smartmatic's defamation suit against Fox News and Giuliani could proceed; however, the court dismissed two of the sixteen counts against Giuliani. In February 2023, the Appellate Division reinstated the two counts. On September 10, 2021, Fox News told Giuliani that neither he nor his son Andrew would be allowed on their network for nearly three months.\nJudgment for defaming Georgia election workers.\nIn 2021, Georgia election workers Ruby Freeman and daughter Wandrea' ArShaye Moss, sued Giuliani in U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia for defamation, after Giuliani falsely accused them of manipulating vote tallies. He accused them of \"passing around USB ports as if they were vials of heroin or cocaine\" and engaging in \"surreptitious illegal activity\", citing footage that according to Moss showed them with \"a ginger mint\". Moss testified before the U.S. House of Representatives that after Giuliani's remarks her family were subjected to racist threats.\nIn 2023, Giuliani was ordered to pay attorneys' fees to the election workers after being sanctioned for failing to turn over evidence. Giuliani admitted his statements had been \"defamatory per se\" yet denied they had caused damages. The judge asked him to explain why he was still fighting the lawsuit, given his admission. District judge Beryl Howell issued an order ruling that he forfeited his case by failing to comply with his discovery obligations. Meanwhile, the court increased what he owed for the plaintiffs' legal fees. The plaintiffs requested money to cover additional attorneys' fees that arose from discovery disputes. The judge increased what Giuliani owed; the total was $230,000.\nIn October, the judge said that due to Giuliani's \"continued and flagrant disregard of this Court's...order that he produce financial-related documents concerning his...assets\", she would tell jurors he intentionally hid financial documents. The trial began on December 11, the plaintiffs' testified that Giuliani's false statements, beginning with a tweet, prompted threatening phone calls and messages against them. They testified that Giuliani's lies caused others to show up at Freeman's home, to attempt to conduct a \"citizen's arrest\" of Moss, and barrage Moss' son with phone messages. Giuliani repeated his false claim that Freeman and Moss \"were engaged in changing votes\" and claimed that \"When I testify, the whole story will be definitively clear that what I said was true.\" Giuliani declined to testify. Giuliani's attorney pointed to another defamation lawsuit Freeman and Moss had filed against \"The Gateway Pundit\", saying the site had likely instigated the harassment against them.\nOn December 15, the jury ordered Giuliani to pay $148\u00a0million to Freeman and Moss, including $75\u00a0million in punitive damages. Giuliani said he regretted nothing and would appeal. On December 20, concerned given the \"ample record ... of Giuliani\u2019s efforts to conceal ... assets\", Judge Beryl Howell ordered swift payment of damages. On December 21, Giuliani filed for bankruptcy. Earlier on December 18, Freeman and Moss sued Giuliani again, seeking an injunction to permanently prohibit him from defaming them. They agreed to drop this in exchange for Giuliani's promise never again to state, imply, or assist others' remarks that they \"engaged in wrongdoing in connection with the 2020 presidential election\".\nIn January 2024, Freeman and Moss accused Giuliani of taking unfair advantage of the bankruptcy system in a court filing, with their attorneys calling Giuliani's approach \"a flawed, impermissible litigation tactic from an actor with a history of engaging the judicial system in bad faith.\" In March, creditors filed a motion to force him to sell his Florida condo to pay the judgment. On July 12, the judge, citing Giuliani's lack of transparency over the six months of litigation, said he was no longer entitled to bankruptcy protection. On October 22, a federal judge in Manhattan ordered Giuliani to turn over his $6 million Manhattan penthouse apartment and other valuable possessions to Freeman and Moss. On October 31, Freeman and Moss visited Giuliani's apartment. They discovered it had been emptied of \"the vast majority ... of the valuable receivership property that was known to be stored there\", a fact that \"neither Defendant nor Defendant's counsel had bothered to mention\". Giuliani's lawyers told them unspecified property was in a storage facility on Long Island and his vintage Mercedes was in Florida. Giuliani's lawyers provided bank statements showing a large amount of money had been transferred out of his account in July and August and that less than $4,000 remained in the account.\nAt a hearing on November 7, Giuliani's lawyer proposed the Mercedes might be worth under $4,000, meaning Giuliani would be allowed to keep it. Giuliani claimed he had no idea of the whereabouts of his other valuables. The judge gave Giuliani until November 15 to turn over his property. Two days before that deadline, lawyers told the judge they did not want to represent Giuliani anymore. Joseph Cammarata took on Giuliani's case and told the court on November 15 that he had turned over the Mercedes, 18 watches, a diamond ring, and had begun a process to turn over $30,000 in cash. A week later, the cash had still not arrived, and Freeman and Moss still did not have the keys to his apartment. On November 22, Freeman and Moss told U.S. district judge Lewis Liman there had been attempts to \"intimidate or interfere\" with their access to the storage unit and it was taking the form of a social media campaign against them. Giuliani was ruled in contempt by Liman at a hearing on January 3, 2025. On January 10, Howell found him in contempt for refusing to turn over financial records. On January 16, the day of a trial before Liman to enforce payment, the parties settled. Giuliani kept his homes in exchange for compensating Freeman and Moss with an undisclosed amount and agreeing to refrain from defaming them again.\nAttack on the Capitol.\nOn January 6, 2021, Giuliani spoke at the \"Save America March\" rally on the Ellipse that was attended by Trump supporters protesting the election results. He repeated conspiracy theories that voting machines used in the election were \"crooked\" and called for \"trial by combat\", which he claimed after the riot had not been a call to violence but a reference to \"Game of Thrones\". Trump supporters subsequently stormed the U.S. Capitol in a riot that resulted in the deaths of four people, and temporarily disrupted the counting of the Electoral College vote.\nGiuliani had reportedly called Republican lawmakers to urge them to delay the electoral vote count with the intention of throwing the election to Trump. Giuliani attempted to contact Alabama senator Tommy Tuberville, a Trump ally, around 7p.m. following the Capitol storming, planning to ask him to \"try to just slow it down\" by objecting to multiple states and \"raise issues so that we get ourselves into tomorrow\u00a0\u2013 ideally until the end of tomorrow\". Giuliani mistakenly left the message on the voicemail of another senator, who leaked the recording to \"The Dispatch\". Rick Perlstein, a noted historian of the American conservative movement, termed Giuliani's effort as treasonous and days later tweeted: \"Sedition. Open and shut. He talked about the time that was being opened up. He was welcoming, and using, the violence. This needs to be investigated.\"\nGiuliani faced criticism for his appearance at the rally and the Capitol riot that followed it. Former congressman and MSNBC host Joe Scarborough called for the arrest of Giuliani, President Trump, and Donald Trump Jr. Manhattan College president Brennan O'Donnell stated in a January7 open letter to the college community, \"one of the loudest voices fueling the anger, hatred, and violence that spilled out yesterday is a graduate of our College, Rudolph Giuliani. His conduct as a leader of the campaign to de-legitimize the election and disenfranchise millions of voters\u00a0\u2013 has been and continues to be a repudiation of the deepest values of his alma mater.\"\nOn January 11, the New York State Bar Association, an advocacy group for the legal profession in New York state, announced that it was launching an investigation into whether Giuliani should be removed from its membership rolls, noting both Giuliani's comments to the Trump supporter rally at the Ellipse on January 6, and that it \"has received hundreds of complaints in recent months about Mr. Giuliani and his baseless efforts on behalf of President Trump to cast doubt on the veracity of the 2020 presidential election and, after the votes were cast, to overturn its legitimate results\". Removal from the group's membership rolls would not directly disbar Giuliani from practicing law in New York. New York state senator Brad Hoylman and lawyers' group Lawyers Defending American Democracy, also filed a complaints against Giuliani with the Attorney Grievance Committee of the First Judicial Department of the New York Supreme Court, which has the authority to discipline and disbar licensed New York lawyers.\nAlso on January 11, District of Columbia attorney general Karl Racine said that he is looking at whether to charge Giuliani, along with Trump Jr. and Representative Mo Brooks, with inciting the violent attack. On January 29, Giuliani said falsely that the Lincoln Project played a role in the organization of the Capitol riot. In response, Steve Schmidt threatened to sue Giuliani for defamation. On March 5, Representative Eric Swalwell filed a civil lawsuit against Giuliani and three others (Trump, Trump Jr., and Representative Mo Brooks), seeking damages for their alleged role in inciting the Capitol riot. Responding to a January 2022 subpoena from the U.S. House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack, Giuliani testified on May 20, 2022.\nIndictments.\nOn August 1, 2023, the Justice Department's special counsel investigating Trump's efforts to overturn the 2020 election charged Trump with four criminal counts related to those efforts. News reports widely identified Giuliani as the unnamed \"Co-Conspirator 1\" (of six) mentioned at least 46 times in the 45-page indictment. In a statement, Giuliani's lawyer, Robert J. Costello, acknowledged that it \u201cappears that Mayor Giuliani is alleged to be co-conspirator No. 1.\u201d\nOn August 14, 2023, Giuliani was indicted, along with Trump and 17 others, by an Atlanta, Georgia, grand jury. The 41-count indictment charged the group of 19 under state racketeering laws for conspiring to \"change the outcome of the election in favor of Trump\". Giuliani's false testimony in December 2020 to Georgia lawmakers about election fraud was among the events listed in the indictment. His lawyer (at least for the arraignment) was Brian Tevis. Giuliani turned himself in at the Fulton County Sheriff's Office on August 23. On September 9, he filed to have the charges against him quashed.\nIn April 2024, Giuliani was among 18 people who were indicted on charges related to the 2020 election in Arizona. By mid-May, Giuliani was the only defendant yet to be served with a summons to court for this case, with prosecutors stating that they had mailed Giuliani the documents with no response, called Giuliani's telephone with no response, and visited his apartment building but were \"not granted access\", to which Giuliani responded: \"Arizona officials say they can't find Giuliani. So this is perfect evidence that if they're so incompetent, they can't find me, they also can't count votes correctly.\"\nOn May 17, during his early 80th birthday celebration, Giuliani posted on social media a photo of himself smiling in a group of people along with balloons, with Giuliani writing, \"If Arizona authorities can't find me by tomorrow morning; 1. They must dismiss the indictment\", and around one hour later, Arizona's attorney general Kris Mayes announced that Giuliani had been successfully served, while Giuliani's spokesperson responded by criticizing the \"decision to try and embarrass [Giuliani] during his 80th birthday party\".\nOn May 21, Giuliani and ten other co-defendants pled not guilty after being arraigned in Maricopa County Superior Court. Giuliani was among five of these eleven defendants who appeared virtually rather than in-person. The same day, Giuliani was ordered to post a $10,000 bond and was required to book himself into the custody of the Maricopa County Sheriff's Office within 30 days as a result of him ducking efforts by the state to serve him with a summons within the past week; in contrast to Giuliani, all of the other ten defendants would be released without bond. In August 2024, an Arizona judge set the trial date for Giuliani and others for January 5, 2026.\nSuspension of law license and New York disbarment.\nOn June 24, 2021, a New York Appellate Court suspended Giuliani's law license. The panel of five justices found that there was \"uncontroverted\" evidence that Giuliani made \"demonstrably false and misleading statements to courts, lawmakers and the public\" and added, \"These false statements were made to improperly bolster (Giuliani's) narrative that due to widespread voter fraud, victory in the 2020 United States presidential election was stolen from his client.\" The court concluded that Giuliani's conduct \"immediately threatens the public interest and warrants interim suspension from the practice of law\". His license was also suspended in Washington, D.C., on July 7, 2021. On July 2, 2024, a New York state appeals court disbarred Giuliani as a result of his efforts to subvert the 2020 election by making false allegations about mass voter fraud.\nEthics charges for baseless claims in favor of Trump.\nOn June 10, 2022, the DC Bar's Office of Disciplinary Counsel filed charges with the DC Court of Appeals' Board on Professional Responsibility against Giuliani. The ethics charges said that Giuliani's federal court filings regarding the 2020 presidential election in Pennsylvania contained baseless claims in favor of Trump. On December 15, 2022, after a week-long hearing, the D.C. Bar Disciplinary Counsel recommended Giuliani be disbarred for violating rules of professional conduct by making false election fraud claims and trying to overturn the 2020 presidential election results in Pennsylvania. The counsel's decision is preliminary and non-binding. On July 7, 2023, an ad hoc hearing committee of the Board on Professional Responsibility recommended that he be disbarred, and on May 31, 2024, the board itself agreed. He was disbarred by the DC Court of Appeals on September 26, 2024.\nSupermarket incident.\nOn June 27, 2022, Giuliani appeared at ShopRite, a supermarket in Staten Island, campaigning on behalf of his son Andrew, who was attempting to become the Republican nominee for governor of New York. After Giuliani's appearance, a 39-year-old supermarket employee, Daniel Gill, was arrested and charged with second-degree assault for allegedly slapping Giuliani's back in the store. Giuliani responded publicly that it was like \"a boulder hit me\" or \"like somebody shot me\", and that \"it hurt tremendously\". Giuliani further stated that the \"very, very heavy shot\" by Gill caused him to stumble and \"could've easily ... knocked me to the ground and killed me by my head getting hit\", and called for Gill's firing and prosecution. The Legal Aid Society, representing Gill, asserted that Giuliani had exaggerated the severity of the slap in order to garner greater amounts of attention from the media, stating in a press release: \"Our client merely patted Mr. Giuliani, who sustained nothing remotely resembling physical injuries, without malice to simply get his attention, as the video footage clearly showed.\"\nWithin a day of the incident, the \"New York Post\" posted video footage of it. \"The New York Times\" described that the video \"contradicted\" Giuliani's account, showing Gill walking quickly past Giuliani, \"patting him on the back\", whereby Giuliani \"wobbled slightly forward\". The Hill described that the \"video shows Giuliani barely moving after a ShopRite employee's hand makes contact with his back\", while Giuliani responded that the \"videotape that you see is probably a little deceptive\", stressing that he was \"hit very, very hard on the back. To such an extent that it knocked me back about two steps.\"\nAfter the video was released, Gill's charge was reduced to third-degree assault on June 28, while third-degree menacing and second-degree harassment charges were simultaneously added. Gill acknowledged telling Giuliani \"What's up, scumbag?\" during the incident. In September 2022, Gill agreed to an adjournment in contemplation of dismissal, whereby all charges would be dismissed if he does not violate the law in the next six months. In May 2023, Gill sued Giuliani, seeking monetary damages \"for false arrest, civil rights conspiracy resulting in false arrest and false imprisonment, defamation, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and negligent infliction of emotional distress\". The case was dismissed in 2024.\nSexual assault and misconduct allegations.\nOn May 15, 2023, Noelle Dunphy, a former off-the-books employee of Giuliani, filed a civil lawsuit against him. She accused Giuliani of sexual assault, wage theft and unlawful abuse of power. Dunphy claimed that sexually satisfying Giuliani was an \"absolute requirement\" of her job; the complaint also said that Giuliani \"often made outrageous comments that created and added to the hostile work environment that Ms. Dunphy was forced to endure\", and that he was constantly under the effects of alcohol. The lawsuit further alleged that Giuliani complained about \"'freakin Arabs' and Jews\", and implied that \"[Jewish men's] penises were inferior due to 'natural selection'\". The lawsuit also alleged that Giuliani and Donald Trump sold pardons for $2\u00a0million apiece. In her 2023 memoir \"Enough\", Cassidy Hutchinson says that Giuliani groped her backstage during Donald Trump's speech on January 6, 2021.\nOther legal issues.\nIn September 2023, law firm Davidoff Hutcher &amp; Citron sued Giuliani for over $1.3\u00a0million in unpaid legal fees. The firm alleged that Giuliani had paid only $214,000 of his total legal bill between November 2019 and July 2023. Giuliani said in a statement that the firm's bill \"is way in excess to anything approaching legitimate fees.\" Also in September 2023, Hunter Biden filed a civil lawsuit against Giuliani, his companies and attorney Robert Costello, alleging that they had spent years \"hacking into, tampering with, manipulating, copying, disseminating, and generally obsessing over data that they were given that was taken or stolen from\" his personal devices and caused \"total annihilation\" of his digital privacy. Biden dropped the lawsuit in June 2024.\nIn October 2023, Giuliani filed a defamation lawsuit in New Hampshire against President Joe Biden for referring to him as a \"Russian pawn\" during a 2020 presidential debate. Giuliani alleged that Biden's comments were false and that he had been personally harmed by them. Giuliani did not respond to a motion to dismiss the lawsuit in March 2024. The lawsuit was dismissed in September, with the judge saying that Giuliani had \"utterly failed\" to carry his burden.\nOther post-mayoral ventures.\nGiuliani Partners.\nAfter leaving the New York City mayor's office, Giuliani founded a security consulting business, Giuliani Partners LLC, in 2002, a firm that has been categorized by multiple media outlets as a lobbying entity capitalizing on Giuliani's name recognition, and which has been the subject of allegations surrounding staff hired by Giuliani and due to the firm's chosen client base. Over five years, Giuliani Partners earned more than $100million.\nIn June 2007, he stepped down as CEO and chairman of Giuliani Partners, although this action was not made public until December 4, 2007; he maintained his equity interest in the firm. Giuliani subsequently returned to active participation in the firm following the election. In late 2009, Giuliani announced that they had a security consulting contract with Rio de Janeiro, Brazil regarding the 2016 Summer Olympics. He faced criticism in 2012 for advising people once allied with Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107 who had lauded Serbian war criminals.\nBracewell &amp; Giuliani.\nIn 2005, Giuliani joined the law firm of Bracewell &amp; Patterson LLP (renamed Bracewell &amp; Giuliani LLP) as a name partner and basis for the expanding firm's new New York office. When he joined the Texas-based firm he brought Marc Mukasey, the son of Attorney General Michael Mukasey, into the firm. Despite a busy schedule, Giuliani was highly active in the day-to-day business of the law firm, which was a high-profile supplier of legal and lobbying services to the oil, gas, and energy industries. Its aggressive defense of pollution-causing coal-fired power plants threatened to cause political risk for Giuliani, but association with the firm helped Giuliani achieve fund-raising success in Texas.\nIn 2006, Giuliani acted as the lead counsel and lead spokesmen for Bracewell &amp; Giuliani client Purdue Pharma, the makers of OxyContin, during their negotiations with federal prosecutors over charges that the pharmaceutical company misled the public about OxyContin's addictive properties. The agreement reached resulted in Purdue Pharma and some of its executives paying $634.5million in fines. Bracewell &amp; Giuliani represented corporate clients before many U.S. government departments and agencies. Some clients have worked with corporations and foreign governments. The firm was rebranded as Bracewell LLP after Giuliani left it in January 2016, reportedly by \"amicable agreement\".\nGreenberg Traurig.\nIn January 2016, Giuliani moved to the law firm Greenberg Traurig, where he served as the global chairman for Greenberg's cybersecurity and crisis management group, as well as a senior advisor to the firm's executive chairman. He took an unpaid leave of absence in April 2018 when he joined Trump's legal defense team. He resigned from the firm on May 9, 2018.\nLobbying in Romania.\nIn August 2018, Giuliani was retained by Freeh Group International Solutions, a global consulting firm run by former FBI director Louis Freeh, which paid him a fee to lobby Romanian president Klaus Iohannis to change Romania's anti-corruption policy and reduce the role of the National Anticorruption Directorate. Giuliani argued that the anti-corruption efforts had gone too far.\nPodcast.\nGiuliani launched a podcast, \"Rudy Giuliani's Common Sense\", in January 2020.\nTelevision appearances.\nGiuliani was reportedly revealed to be the first unmasking on the seventh season of \"The Masked Singer\", which caused judges Ken Jeong and Robin Thicke to leave the set in disgust. Giuliani actually turned out to be the ninth unmasking as \"Jack in the Box\" of Team Bad. He mentioned that he partook in this show to do it for his newborn granddaughter. It was during his unmasked performance of George Thorogood's \"Bad to the Bone\" when Jeong walked off.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and relationships.\nGiuliani married Regina Peruggi, his second cousin, whom he had known since childhood, on October 26, 1968. The marriage was in trouble by the mid-1970s and they agreed to a trial separation in 1975. Peruggi did not accompany him to Washington when he accepted the job in the U.S. Attorney General's Office. Giuliani met local television personality Donna Hanover sometime in 1982, and they began dating when she was working in Miami. Giuliani filed for legal separation from Peruggi on August 12, 1982. The Giuliani-Peruggi marriage legally ended in two ways: a civil divorce was issued by the end of 1982, while a Roman Catholic church annulment of the marriage was granted at the end of 1983, reportedly because Giuliani had discovered that he and Peruggi were second cousins. Alan Placa, Giuliani's best man, later became a priest and helped secure the annulment. Giuliani and Peruggi had no children.\nGiuliani married Hanover at St. Monica's church in Manhattan on April 15, 1984. They had two children: Andrew and Caroline Rose, who is a filmmaker in the LGBTQ+ community and has described herself as \"multiverses apart\" from her father. Giuliani was still married to Hanover in May 1999 when he met Judith Nathan, a sales manager for a pharmaceutical company, at Club Macanudo, an Upper East Side cigar bar. By 1996, Donna Hanover had reverted to her professional name and virtually stopped appearing in public with her husband amid rumors of marital problems. Nathan and Giuliani formed an ongoing relationship. In summer 1999, Giuliani charged the costs for his NYPD security detail to obscure city agencies in order to keep his relationship with Nathan from public scrutiny. The police department began providing Nathan with city-provided chauffeur services in early 2000.\nBy March 2000, Giuliani had stopped wearing his wedding ring. The appearances that he and Nathan made at functions and events became publicly visible, although they were not mentioned in the press. The \"Daily News\" and the \"New York Post\" both broke news of Giuliani's relationship with Nathan in early May 2000. Giuliani first publicly acknowledged her on May 3, 2000, when he said Judith was his \"very good friend\".\nOn May 10, 2000, Giuliani held a press conference to announce that he intended to separate from Hanover. Giuliani had not informed Hanover about his plans before the press conference. This was an omission for which Giuliani was widely criticized. Giuliani then went on to praise Nathan as a \"very, very fine woman\" and said about Hanover that \"over the course of some period of time in many ways, we've grown to live independent and separate lives.\" Hours later Hanover said, \"I had hoped that we could keep this marriage together. For several years, it was difficult to participate in Rudy's public life because of his relationship with one staff member\", in reference to another woman who worked on Giuliani's staff. Giuliani moved out of Gracie Mansion by August 2001 and into an apartment with a couple he was friends with. Giuliani filed for divorce from Hanover in October 2000, and a public battle broke out between their representatives. Nathan was barred by court order from entering Gracie Mansion or meeting his children before the divorce was final.\nIn May 2001, Giuliani's attorney revealed that Giuliani was impotent due to prostate cancer treatments and had not had sex with Nathan for the preceding year. Giuliani said, \"You don't get through treatment for cancer and radiation all by yourself. You need people to help you and care for you and support you. And I'm very fortunate I had a lot of people who did that, but nobody did more to help me than Judith Nathan.\" In a court case, Giuliani argued that he planned to introduce Nathan to his children on Father's Day 2001 and that Hanover had prevented this visit. Giuliani and Hanover finally settled their divorce case in July 2002 after his mayoralty had ended, with Giuliani paying Hanover a $6.8million settlement and granting her custody of their children. Giuliani married Nathan on May 24, 2003, and gained a stepdaughter, Whitney. It was also Nathan's third marriage after two divorces.\nBy March 2007, \"The New York Times\" and the \"Daily News\" reported that Giuliani had become estranged from both his son Andrew and his daughter Caroline. In September 2024, while endorsing Kamala Harris for the 2024 United States presidential election, Caroline wrote that her relationship with her father was \"cartoonishly complicated\", and added: \"Despite his faults, I love him.\" Nathan filed for divorce from Giuliani on April 4, 2018, after 15 years of marriage. According to an interview with \"New York\" magazine, Nathan said that \"For a variety of reasons that I know as a spouse and a nurse . . . he has become a different man.\" The divorce was settled on December 10, 2019.\nProstate cancer.\nGiuliani's father died at age 73 of prostate cancer at Memorial Sloan\u2013Kettering Cancer Center in April 1981. Nineteen years later, in April 2000, Giuliani, then aged 55, was diagnosed with prostate cancer following a prostate biopsy, after an elevated screening PSA. Giuliani would go on to make a full recovery, becoming a spokesman for cancer survivors.\nReligious beliefs.\nGiuliani has declined to comment publicly on his religious practice and beliefs, although he identifies religion as an important part of his life. When asked if he is a practicing Catholic, Giuliani answered, \"My religious affiliation, my religious practices and the degree to which I am a good or not-so-good Catholic, I prefer to leave to the priests.\"\nCar crash.\nOn August 30, 2025, Giuliani's car was rear-ended on a New Hampshire highway. Shortly before, he had stopped to help a victim of domestic violence who had flagged him down, then he had resumed travel. His car was in motion when he was hit from behind by a speeding vehicle. He suffered injuries to his arms and legs, including a fractured vertebra. On September 1, Trump announced he would award Giuliani the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nAwards and honors.\nIn 1989, Syracuse University awarded Giuliani an honorary law degree; in 2022, the university announced that it was developing a process that would allow them to revoke Giuliani's degree. In 1998, Giuliani received the Hundred Year Association of New York's Gold Medal Award \"in recognition of outstanding contributions to the City of New York\". In December 2001, Giuliani was made Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of Savoy by \"motu proprio\". For his leadership on and after the September 11 attacks, Giuliani was made an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II on February 13, 2002. He was awarded Medal of Heroism by Czech president V\u00e1clav Havel on October 28, 2002.\nGiuliani was named the \"Time\" \"Person of the Year\" for 2001. In 2002, the Episcopal Diocese of New York gave Giuliani the Fiorello LaGuardia Public Service Award for Valor and Leadership in the Time of Global Crisis. Also in 2002, former first lady Nancy Reagan awarded Giuliani the Ronald Reagan Freedom Award, and he received the U.S. senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually byJefferson Awards. In 2003, Giuliani received the Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award. Also in 2003, he was awarded a Doctor of Laws \"honoris causa\" by the University of Rhode Island, which was revoked in January 2022.\nIn 2004, construction began on the Rudolph W. Giuliani Trauma Center at St. Vincent's Hospital in New York. In 2005, Giuliani received honorary degrees from Loyola College in Maryland and Middlebury College. In 2006, Giuliani and his wife were honored by the American Heart Association at its annual Heart of the Hamptons benefit in Water Mill, New York. In 2007, Giuliani received an honorary doctorate in public administration from The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina. In 2021, Middlebury announced that it was revoking the degree given to Giuliani.\nAlso in 2007, Giuliani was honored by the National Italian American Foundation (NIAF), receiving the NIAF Special Achievement Award for Public Service, and was awarded the Margaret Thatcher Medal of Freedom by the Atlantic Bridge. In the 2009 graduation ceremony for Drexel University's Earle Mack School of Law, Giuliani was the keynote speaker and recipient of an honorary degree; in 2021, Drexel announced that it was rescinding the degree. Giuliani was the Robert C. Vance Distinguished Lecturer at Central Connecticut State University in 2013.\nIn popular culture.\nDuring his career, Giuliani was referenced in popular culture through television and other media. In 1993, he made a cameo appearance as himself in the \"Seinfeld\" episode \"The Non-Fat Yogurt\", which is a fictionalized account of the 1993 mayoral election. Giuliani's scenes were filmed the morning after his real-world election. In late 2000, Giuliani made an appearance as himself in the 11th season\" Law &amp; Order\" episode titled \"Endurance\", where he introduces ADA Nora Lewin (portrayed by Dianne Wiest). In 2003, Giuliani was portrayed by James Woods in the USA Network television film \"\". In 2007, Giuliani guest starred as himself in \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Stop, or My Dog Will Shoot!\" In 2018, Giuliani was portrayed multiple times on \"Saturday Night Live\" by Kate McKinnon. McKinnon continued portraying him in 2019.\nIn 2020, Giuliani made a cameo appearance on a Netflix true crime limited series' \"\", talking about his role in leading the 1980s federal prosecution of the Five Families. Also in 2020, Giuliani made an unwitting appearance in \"Borat Subsequent Moviefilm\". In the mockumentary film, Giuliani agrees to an interview with Borat's \"daughter\", Tutar (played by actress Maria Bakalova), who is disguised as a reporter. When invited to Tutar's hotel room, Giuliani proceeds to lie on her bed and reach inside his trousers; they are immediately interrupted by Borat, who says: \"She 15. She too old for you.\" Giuliani later disregarded the accusation, calling it a \"complete fabrication\" and saying he was rather \"tucking in [his] shirt after taking off the recording equipment\". In 2021, Giuliani won two Razzie awards for his part in the film: Worst Supporting Actor and Worst Screen Combo for his pants zipper.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25939", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25939", "title": "Rudolph W. Giuliani", "text": ""}
{"id": "25943", "revid": "17631563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25943", "title": "Radical Islam", "text": ""}
{"id": "25944", "revid": "3048957", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25944", "title": "Renaissance dance", "text": "Type of dance\nRenaissance dances belong to the broad group of historical dances, specifically those during the Renaissance period. During that period, there was a distinction between country dances and court dances. Court dances required the dancers to be trained and were often for display and entertainment, whereas country dances could be attempted by anyone. At Court, the formal entertainment would often be followed by many hours of country dances which all present could join in. Dances described as country dances such as Chiarantana or Chiaranzana remained popular over a long period \u2013 over two centuries in the case of this dance. A Renaissance dance can be likened to a ball.\nKnowledge of court dances has survived better than that of country dances as they were collected by dancing masters in manuscripts and later in printed books. The earliest surviving manuscripts that provide detailed dance instructions are from 15th century Italy. The earliest printed dance manuals come from late 16th century France and Italy. The earliest dance descriptions in England come from the Gresley manuscript, c.1500, found in the Derbyshire Record Office, D77 B0x 38 pp 51\u201379. These have been recently published as \"Cherwell Thy Wyne (Show your joy): Dances of fifteenth-century England from the Gresley manuscript\". The first printed English source appeared in 1651, the first edition of Playford.\nThe dances in these manuals are extremely varied in nature. They range from slow, stately \"processional\" dances (bassadance, pavane, almain) to fast, lively dances (galliard, coranto, canario). The former, in which the dancers' feet were not raised high off the floor were styled the \"dance basse\" while energetic dances with leaps and lifts were called the \"haute dance\". Queen Elizabeth I enjoyed galliards, and \"la spagnoletta\" was a court favourite.\nSome were choreographed, others were improvised on the spot. One dance for couples, a form of the galliard called volta, involved a rather intimate hold between the man and woman, with the woman being lifted into the air while the couple made a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 turn. Other dances, such as branles or bransles, were danced by many people in a circle or line.\nFifteenth-century Italian dance.\nOur knowledge of 15th-century Italian dances comes mainly from the surviving works of three Italian dance masters: Domenico da Piacenza, Antonio Cornazzano and Guglielmo Ebreo da Pesaro. Their work deals with similar steps and dances, though some evolution can be seen. The main types of dances described are bassa danza and \"balletto\". These are the earliest European dances to be well-documented, as we have a reasonable knowledge of the choreographies, steps and music used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nModern performance.\nMany groups exist that recreate historical music and dance from the Renaissance period"}
{"id": "25945", "revid": "579914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25945", "title": "Rem Koolhaas", "text": "Dutch architect (born 1944)\nRemment Lucas Koolhaas (; born 17 November 1944) is a Dutch architect (Madelon Vriesendorp's husband), architectural theorist, urbanist and Professor in Practice of Architecture and Urban Design at the Graduate School of Design at Harvard University. He is often cited as a representative of deconstructivism and is the author of \"Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan\".\nHe is seen by some as one of the significant architectural thinkers and urbanists of his generation, by others as a self-important iconoclast. In 2000, Rem Koolhaas won the Pritzker Prize. In 2008, \"Time\" put him in their top 100 of \"The World's Most Influential People\". He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 2014.\nEarly life and career.\nRemment Koolhaas was born on 17 November 1944 in Rotterdam, Netherlands, to Anton Koolhaas (1912\u20131992) and Selinde Pietertje Roosenburg (born 1920). His father was a novelist, critic, and screenwriter. His maternal grandfather, Dirk Roosenburg (1887\u20131962), was a modernist architect who worked for Hendrik Petrus Berlage, before opening his own practice. Rem Koolhaas has a brother, Thomas, and a sister, Annabel. His paternal cousin was the architect and urban planner Teun Koolhaas (1940\u20132007). The family lived consecutively in Rotterdam (until 1946), Amsterdam (1946\u20131952), Jakarta (1952\u20131955), and Amsterdam (from 1955).\nHis father strongly supported the Indonesian cause for autonomy from the colonial Dutch in his writing. When the war of independence was won, he was invited over to run a cultural programme for three years and the family moved to Jakarta in 1952. \"It was a very important age for me,\" Koolhaas recalls \"and I really lived as an Asian.\"\nIn 1969, Koolhaas co-wrote \"The White Slave\", a Dutch film noir, and later wrote an unproduced script for American soft-porn king Russ Meyer.\nIn 1963 at age 19, he was a journalist for the \"Haagse Post\" before starting studies in architecture in 1968 at the Architectural Association School of Architecture in London, followed, in 1972, by further studies with Oswald Mathias Ungers at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, followed by studies at the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies in New York City.\nKoolhaas first came to public and critical attention with OMA (The Office for Metropolitan Architecture), the office he founded in 1975 together with architects Elia Zenghelis, Zoe Zenghelis and Madelon Vriesendorp in London. They were later joined by one of Koolhaas's students, Zaha Hadid \u2013 who would soon go on to achieve success in her own right. An early work which would mark their difference from the then dominant postmodern classicism of the late 1970s, was their contribution to the Venice Biennale of 1980, curated by Italian architect Paolo Portoghesi, titled \"The Presence of the Past\". Each architect had to design a stage-like \"frontage\" to a Potemkin-type internal street; the fa\u00e7ades by Costantino Dardi, Frank Gehry and OMA were the only ones that did not employ Post-Modern architecture motifs or historical references.\nOther early critically received (yet unbuilt) projects included the Parc de la Villette, Paris (1982) and the residence for the Prime Minister of Ireland (1979), as well as the Kunsthal in Rotterdam (1992). These schemes would attempt to put into practice many of the findings Koolhaas made in his book \"Delirious New York\" (1978), which was written while he was a visiting scholar at the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies in New York, directed by Peter Eisenman.\nArchitectural theory.\n\"Delirious New York\".\nKoolhaas's book \"Delirious New York\" set the pace for his career. Koolhaas analyzes the \"chance-like\" nature of city life: \"The City is an addictive machine from which there is no escape\" \"Rem Koolhaas...defined the city as a collection of 'red hot spots'.\" (Anna Klingmann). As Koolhaas himself has acknowledged, this approach had already been evident in the Japanese Metabolist Movement in the 1960s and early 1970s.\nA key aspect of architecture that Koolhaas interrogates is the \"Program\": with the rise of modernism in the 20th century the \"Program\" became the key theme of architectural design. The notion of the Program involves \"an act to edit function and human activities\" as the pretext of architectural design: epitomised in the maxim form follows function, first popularised by architect Louis Sullivan at the beginning of the 20th century. The notion was first questioned in \"Delirious New York\", in his analysis of high-rise architecture in Manhattan. An early design method derived from such thinking was \"cross-programming\", introducing unexpected functions in room programmes, such as running tracks in skyscrapers. More recently, Koolhaas unsuccessfully proposed the inclusion of hospital units for the homeless into the Seattle Public Library project (2003).\nProject on the city.\nKoolhaas' next publications were a by-product of his position as professor at Harvard University, in the Design school's \"Project on the City\"; firstly the 720-page \"Mutations\", followed by \"The Harvard Design School Guide to Shopping\" (2002) and \"The Great Leap Forward\" (2002).\nAll three books published student work analysing what others would regard as \"non-cities\", sprawling conglomerates such as Lagos in Nigeria, west Africa, which the authors argue are highly functional despite a lack of infrastructure. The authors also examine the influence of shopping habits and the recent rapid growth of cities in China. Critics of the books have criticised Koolhaas for being cynical, \u2013 as if Western capitalism and globalization demolish all cultural identity \u2013 highlighted in the notion expounded in the books that \"In the end, there will be little else for us to do but shop\". Perhaps such caustic cynicism can be read as a \"realism\" about the transformation of cultural life, where airports and even museums (due to finance problems) rely just as much on operating gift shops. It does, however, demonstrate one of the architect's characteristic devices for deflecting criticism: attack the client or subject of study after completing the work.\nWhen it comes to transforming these observations into practice, Koolhaas mobilizes what he regards as the omnipotent forces of urbanism into unique design forms and connections organised along the lines of present-day society. Koolhaas continuously incorporates his observations of the contemporary city within his design activities: calling such a condition the \u2018culture of congestion\u2019. Again, shopping is examined for \"intellectual comfort\", whilst the unregulated taste and densification of Chinese cities is analysed according to \"performance\", a criterion involving variables with debatable credibility: density, newness, shape, size, money etc.\nIn 2003, \"Content\", a 544-page magazine-style book designed by &amp;&amp;&amp; Creative and published by Koolhaas, gives an overview of the last decade of OMA projects including his designs for the Prada shops, the Seattle Public Library, a plan to save Cambridge from Harvard by rechanneling the Charles River, Lagos' future as Earth's third-biggest city, as well as interviews with Martha Stewart and Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown.\n\"Volume\".\nIn 2005, Rem Koolhaas co-founded \"Volume Magazine\" together with Mark Wigley and Ole Bouman. \"Volume Magazine\" \u2013 the collaborative project by Archis (Amsterdam), AMO and C-lab (Columbia University NY) \u2013 is a dynamic experimental think tank devoted to the process of spatial and cultural reflexivity. It goes beyond architecture's definition of \u2018making buildings\u2019 and reaches out for global views on architecture and design, broader attitudes to social structures, and creating environments to live in. The magazine stands for a journalism which detects and anticipates, is proactive and even pre-emptive \u2013 a journalism which uncovers potentialities, rather than covering done deals.\nOther analysis.\nKoolhaas coined the phrase \"generic city\" to refer to purpose-built new towns in southeast Asia.21 According to Koolhaas, such a city is \"a reflection of present need and present ability. It is big enough for everybody. It is easy, it does not need maintenance. If it gets too small it just expands. If it gets old it self destructs and renews. It is equally exciting -- or unexciting -- everywhere. It can produce a new identity every Monday morning.\"21\nBuildings and projects.\nIn the late 1990s he worked on the design for the new headquarters for Universal.\nIndeed, online marketing and propaganda has been a hallmark of OMA's rise in the current century. It has also led to pointed criticism, such as the critique by \"New York Magazine\" critic Justin Davidson, who found the 2020 Guggenheim exhibition \"Countryside, the Future\" \"mildly amusing if it weren\u2019t such terrible waste \u2014 of attention, of gallery square footage, of resources, talent, and expertise. Bored with being an architect and building things, Koolhaas lets his fingertips graze important topics, genuine insights, and actual lives. He treats them all as ironic bric-a-brac, meaningless souvenirs of his meanderings through a fragile world. How frustrating that the Guggenheim couldn\u2019t force a little more intellectual rigor on this romp.\"\nArchitecture, fashion, and theatre.\nWith his Prada projects, Koolhaas ventured into providing architecture for the fleeting world of fashion and with celebrity-studded cachet: not unlike Garnier's Opera, the central space of Koolhaas' Beverly Hills Prada store is occupied by a massive central staircase, ostensibly displaying select wares, but mainly the shoppers themselves. The notion of selling a brand rather than marketing clothes was further emphasised in the Prada store on Broadway in Manhattan, New York, which had previously been owned by the Guggenheim: the museum signs were not removed during the outfitting of the new store, as if emphasizing the premises as a cultural institution. The Broadway Prada store opened in December 2001, cost \u20ac32 million to build, and has 2,300 square meters of retail space.\n21st-century projects.\nProbably the most costly and celebrated OMA projects of the new century were the massive Central China Television Headquarters Building in Beijing, China, and the new building for the Shenzhen Stock Exchange.\nIn his design for the new CCTV Headquarters in Beijing (2009), Koolhaas did not opt for the stereotypical skyscraper, often used to symbolize and landmark such government enterprises; he patented a \"horizontal skyscraper\" in the U.S. The building, popularly called \"The Big Pants\" by Beijing residents, was designed as a series of volumes which attempt to tie together the numerous departments onto the nebulous site, but also introduce routes (again, the concept of cross-programming) for the general public through the site, allowing them some degree of access to the production procedure. An unfortunate incident that highlighted the folly of the circulation scheme (no effective fire egress for people on the upper floors), was the construction fire that nearly destroyed the building and a nearby hotel in 2009. In discussions of his design, Koolhaas has expressed his optimism for socialist development in China and critiqued the capitalist system for leading to architectural failure through its decentralizing of large organizations and discouragement of communication.\nIn February 2020, his exhibition \"Countryside, The Future\" opened at the Guggenheim in New York City. The exhibition closed within a month, after New York City closed all its major art institutions in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic.\nPersonal life.\nKoolhaas was previously married to Madelon Vriesendorp, an artist who is the mother of his two children, Charlie, a photographer, and Tomas, a filmmaker. Koolhaas divorced Vriesendorp in 2012. He has known his current partner Petra Blaisse, an interior and landscape designer, since 1986.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25946", "revid": "50564320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25946", "title": "Renzo Piano", "text": "Italian architect (born 1937)\nRenzo Piano (; born 14 September 1937) is an Italian architect. His notable works include the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris (with Richard Rogers, 1977), The Shard in London (2012), Kansai International Airport in Osaka (1994), the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York City (2015), Istanbul Museum of Modern Art in Istanbul (2022), Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center in Athens (2016) and The New York Times Building in New York City (2007). He was awarded the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 1998.\nPiano has served as a senator for life in the Italian Senate since 2013. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and first buildings.\nPiano was born and raised in Genoa, Italy, into a family of builders. His grandfather had created a masonry enterprise, which had been expanded by his father, Carlo Piano, and his father's three brothers, into the firm Fratelli Piano. The firm prospered after World War II, constructing houses and factories and selling construction materials. When his father retired, the enterprise was led by Renzo's older brother, Ermanno, who studied engineering at the University of Genoa. Renzo studied architecture at the University of Florence and Polytechnic University of Milan. He graduated in 1964 with a dissertation about modular coordination (\"coordinazione modulare\") supervised by Giuseppe Ciribini and began working with experimental lightweight structures and basic shelters.\nPiano taught at the Polytechnic University from 1965 until 1968, and expanded his horizons and technical skills by working in two large international firms, for the modernist architect Louis Kahn in Philadelphia and for the Polish engineer Zygmunt Stanis\u0142aw Makowski in London. He completed his first building, the IPE factory in Genoa, in 1968, with a roof of steel and reinforced polyester, and created a continuous membrane for the covering of a pavilion at the Milan Triennale in the same year. In 1970, he received his first international commission, for the Pavilion of Italian Industry for Expo 70 in Osaka, Japan. He collaborated with his brother Ermanno and the family firm, which manufactured the structure. It was lightweight and original composed of steel and reinforced polyester, and it appeared to be simultaneously artistic and industrial.\nThe 1970 Osaka structure was greatly admired by the British architect Richard Rogers, and in 1971 the two men decided to open their own firm, Piano and Rogers, where they worked together from 1971 to 1977. The first project of the firm was the administrative building of B&amp;B Italia, an Italian furniture company, in Novedrate, Como, Italy. This design featured suspended container and an open bearing structure, with the conduits for heating and water on the exterior painted in bright colors (blue, red and yellow). These unusual features attracted considerable attention in the architectural world, and influenced the choice of the jurors who selected Piano and Rogers to design the Pompidou Center.\nThe Centre Pompidou and early projects 1973\u20131977.\nCentre Pompidou (1973\u20131977).\nIn 1971, the thirty-four-year-old Renzo Piano and thirty-eight-year-old Richard Rogers, in collaboration with the Italian architect Gianfranco Franchini, competed with major architectural firms in the United States and Europe. They were awarded the commission for the most prestigious project in Paris: the new French national museum of 20th century art, to be located in Beaubourg. The award surprised the architectural world, as the team was relatively unknown and had no experience with museums or other major structures. \"The New York Times\" declared that their design \"turned the architecture world upside down\". \nMore literally, it turned architecture inside-out, since in the new museum, the apparent structural frame of the building and the heating and air conditioning ducts were on the exterior, painted in bright colors. The escalator, enclosed in a transparent tube, run diagonally across the fa\u00e7ade. The building was an astonishing success, transforming a run-down commercial area near the Marais in Paris, and made Piano one of the best-known architects in the world.\nThe media dubbed the style of the building as \"high-tech\", but this was later disputed by Piano: \"Beaubourg,\" he said, \"was a joyous urban machine, a creature which might have come out of a Jules Verne novel, a sort of bizarre boat in dry dock... It is a double provocation; a challenge to academism, but also a parody of the imagery of technology of our time. To consider it as a high-tech object is a mistake.\"\nMenil Collection (1981\u20131987).\nIn 1977, Piano ended his collaboration with Rogers and began working with engineer Peter Rice, who had contributed to the design of the Pompidou Center. They established their offices in Genoa. One of their first projects was a plan for the rehabilitation of the old port of Otranto, transforming it from an industrial site into a commercial and tourist destination (1977). \nTheir first major building was the Menil Collection, an art museum commissioned by collector Dominique de Menil. Her primary requirements was to maximize the use of natural light in the interiors. Piano wrote, \"Paradoxically, the Menil Collection, with its serenity, its calm, its discretion, is much more modern, scientifically speaking, than the Beaubourg.\" \nThe Menil Collection building, with its simple gray and white cubic forms, is the stylistic opposite of the Pompidou Center. Its technological innovations are not expressed on the fa\u00e7ade, but are embedded in discreet high-tech systems of shutters, screens, and air conditioning which allowed maximum natural light while protecting the interiors from Texas\u2019s intense heat and sunlight.\nOld Port of Genoa (1985\u20132001) and Lingotto Factory in Turin (1983\u20132003).\nIn the mid-1980s Piano and his firm took on a wide variety of projects, using the most advanced technology available, but, in contrast to the Pompidou Center, as discreetly as possible. His portable pavilion for IBM (1983\u20131986) was an example; designed with Peter Rice, of a lightweight portable tunnel for expositions. It composed of a series of pyramids of polycarbonate supported by a wooden frame, and could be transported in a truck. It was designed to integrate the scenery outside into displays in the interior. He designed two major reconstruction projects in northern Italy; the reanimation of the old port of his native city, Genoa, and the conversion and modernization of the gigantic and historic Fiat factory in Turin, Italy. For the Fiat Lingotto factory, he preserved the enormous main structure, including its famous oval test track for automobiles on the roof, but added new structures, including a concert hall beneath the building, a heliport, and a glass domed conference center on the roof. He continued his modifications and additions over two decades; without destroying the historic core of the building. The most recent was a museum for the art collection of the Fiat head Giovanni Agnelli in an elegant glass and steel box perched on the roof, as if it were about to take off; it was nicknamed the \"Flying bank vault\".\nPiano also carried out a large program for revitalization of the old port of Genoa to transform it from a rundown industrial area into a cultural center and tourist attraction. He prolonged streets to give access to the port, transformed old port buildings into cultural and commercial buildings, added a library, an aquarium and an auditorium, a botanical garden in glass dome and a giant multi-armed crane, modeled after the old cranes of the port, which hoists visitors high in the air for a view of the port.\nIn addition, he designed the new headquarters of his firm, the Renzo Piano Building Workshop (1989\u20131991), on a series of stepped terraces hanging over the Mediterranean to the west of the city. The building is accessed by an eight-passenger funicular railway car which shuttles up and down the hillside.\nParis \"The Whale\" Commercial Mall Bercy 2 (1990).\nBercy 2 , nicknamed \"The Whale\", is a shopping mall with 70 stores and 36,000 m2 of retail space, located in Paris Charenton, along the banks of the River Seine and the \"P\u00e9riph\u00e9rique\" ring road.\nInaugurated on 24 April 1990, it was only the third completed building by Piano after the Centre Pompidou. The mall\u2019s distinctive design features amcyclopean wooden structure clad in 27,000 satin-finished stainless steel tiles, and pierced with oculus to let an overhead light pass, is completely innovative. Its curved form, which follows the turn of the adjacent highway ramp, evokes the shape of a large airship, hence earning the nicknames \"The Zeppelin\" or \"The Whale\".\nProjects completed 1991\u20132000.\nCrown Class Cruise Ships (1989\u20131991).\nIn the mid-1980s Sitmar Cruises began a rigorous building schedule for the North American market. At the time one ship the Sitmar Fairmajesty was ordered for French shipyard Chantiers de l'Atlantique. The Italian government through Fincantieri would desire for the next Sitmar ships to be built in Italy. Piano was commissioned to design the ships. Piano designed the exterior of the ships to resemble a dolphin. The Crown Princess was delivered to Princess Cruises in 1990 and the Regal Princess followed a year later in 1991.\nKansai International Airport (1991\u20131994).\nIn 1988 Piano and Rice won an international competition for a new airport to be constructed on an artificial island in the port of Osaka, Japan. The main terminal he designed was extremely long (), with a very low profile, so that the controllers in the control tower could always see the aircraft on the runways. The frequent earthquakes in the Japanese islands required special building techniques; the structure is mounted on hydraulic joints which adjust to movements of the earth. The long, curving roof is covered with 82,000 panels of stainless steel, which reflect the sunlight, and is supported by arches long, which give a feeling of openness.\nFondation Beyeler (1991\u20131997).\nThe Fondation Beyeler is a private art museum in Riehen, near Basel, Switzerland, built for the art collection of Ernst Beyeler. Although it opened in the same year as the Guggenheim Bilbao of Frank Gehry, in spirit it was exactly the opposite. It was designed, at the request of the founder, to inspire tranquility, with white walls, light-colored wooden floors, and natural light. The wall separating the museum from the neighboring road constructed of porphyry stone from Patagonia. also used in different parts of the Museum.\nJean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre, Noumea, New Caledonia (1991\u20131998).\nThe Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre in Noum\u00e9a, New Caledonia (1991\u20131998), is among the most unusual of Piano's works. A joint project between New Caledonia and the French government, it is designed to display the culture of the Kanak people. The project uses a combination of traditional and modern material; local wood, along with glass and aluminum. The complex is located on a narrow peninsula in a lagoon with prevailing winds. Piano designed a series of curved wooden screens, from high, to protect the exposition structures, then three \"villages\" of structures; one for welcome and exhibitions space; one for an auditorium and media center; and one for service functions. The curving wooden pavilions, inspired in form by the local architecture, have a double wooden skin to protect against the weather, but also let in the sunlight. While it is devoted to the local culture, some of the buildings, particularly the towering reception center, with curving walls and wooden spires, are strikingly post-modern in form.\nHis other projects begun in the 1990s included the New Metropolis Museum in Amsterdam, which later became the science museum and technology NEMO (1992\u20131997), placed on the edge of the harbor, and resembling the hull of an enormous ship; the Parco della Musica, a complex of music performance halls in Rome (1994\u20132002), Each was entirely different from the others, and in this period it was difficult to discern a specific element that or style defined his architecture, other than careful craftsmanship and attention to detail.\nPotsdamer Platz, Berlin (1992\u20132000).\nPotsdamer Platz is a historic triangle in the heart of Berlin Germany, which had been largely destroyed during World War II, and then divided by the Berlin Wall between East and West Berlin. When a major reconstruction was commenced in 1990, Piano was selected to design the new buildings on five of the fifteen sites of the project, with the requirement that the buildings have roofs of copper, and facades of clear glass and materials of a baked earth color. Other architects engaged in the enormous project included Rafael Moneo, Arata Isozaki, and his former partner, Richard Rogers. The centerpiece of Piano's part of the project was the Debis building, composed of four different buildings of different sizes but in the same style. Distinctive elements include an atrium high, and a 21-story tower whose east, south and west facades are covered with double walls of glass separated by , which reduced the need for air conditioning and heating. The complex also included an IMAX movie theater, restaurant and shops. The dome of the IMAX theater was visible from a distance and also from the street, through the clear glass of the facade. Piano wrote in \"The Disobedience of the Architect\" (2004) that he tried to match his architecture to the personality of a city. \"The Berliners are accustomed to living outdoors, and to a certain form of conviviality.\" The new Potsdamer Platz was designed to capture the Berliner's \"sense of gaiety, their sense of humor...Why should a city be demoralizing? The beautiful thing about a city is that it is a place of meetings and surprises.\"\nAurora Place, Sydney, Australia (1996\u20132000).\nAurora Place in Sydney, Australia (1996\u20132009) is composed of two towers, an eighteen-story residential building next to a forty-one story office building with different facades but similar metal and glass sunscreens on the roofs. The lower tower was an early example of the luxury high-rise residential buildings by star architects in the center large cities which became very popular in the early 21st century. The office tower has a discreetly peculiar form; the east fa\u00e7ade bulges out slightly from its base, reaching its maximum width at the top floors. The curved and twisted shape of east the fa\u00e7ade echoes that of the Sydney Opera House on the harbor. The exterior glass curtain-wall extends beyond the main frame, creating an illusion that the wall is independent of the building. of its Glass shutters on the exterior can be opened for ventilation, and Piano designed an exterior skin combining glass and ceramics to regulate the intensity of the sunlight. The office building has interior winter gardens on each floor, and earth-colored ceramic tiles give a dash of color to the facade.\nProjects completed 2001\u20132009.\nAuditorium Niccol\u00f2 Paganini (1997\u20132001).\nThe Auditorium Niccol\u00f2 Paganini is a concert hall constructed inside a former sugar mill in the historic center of the city of Parma, Italy. The theater has 780 seats placed on a slope for maximum visibility of the stage. Piano retained the original exterior walls of the main building, but removed the transversal interior walls and replaced them with glass walls, so the entire interior is visible from the outside, and those inside can see the park outside the theater.\nMaison Herm\u00e8s (1998\u20132001).\nThe Maison Herm\u00e8s in the Ginza commercial district of Tokyo is the flagship store in Japan of the French luxury brand. The building is ten stories high, with three floors underground, and includes space for expositions and for a small museum on the history of the firm. The building is highly geometrical; precisely high, with a facade composed of 13,000 pieces of glass each exactly . The panels of glass were made in Florence, Italy, and placed in supports made in Switzerland, for assembly in Japan. Each piece of the facade is designed to be able to move to resist earthquakes. When illuminated a night, the building is intended to resemble a \"magic lantern\".\nAuditorium of the Parco della Musica (1994\u20132002).\nThe Parco della Musica is the complex of music venues located in the Rome neighborhood which hosted the 1960 Summer Olympics. The park has three theaters, the largest with 2800 seats; when completed it was the largest symphonic concert hall in Europe. Piano acknowledged that his inspiration for the interior plan was the vineyard style seating, placed around the orchestra, of the Berlin Philharmonic by Hans Sharon. The three brick concert halls covered with what New York Times critic Sam Lubell described as \"weathered armadillo-like steel shells,\" which looked forbidding in photographs but in person were \"lovely\"; and noted that the theaters \"inside are heavy with wood, fabrics, and typical Piano elegance.\" He called the whole complex \"deceptively simple but smart.\".\nNasher Sculpture Center (1999\u20132003).\nIn the first decade of the 21st century, a wave of new art museums or museum wings were built to house the collections of wealthy art patrons. Piano, who had been building art museums since 1977, was one of the most active and creative designers of these new buildings; though the requirements and the collections were often similar, he usually succeeded in giving each museum a distinct look and personality. The Nasher Sculpture Center in Dallas, Texas, was funded with 60 million dollars by Raymond Nasher, who had made a fortune in developing shopping centers, to display his collection of modern sculpture, which includes works by Auguste Rodin, Joan Mir\u00f3, Henri Matisse and Alberto Giacometti. The building is very simple in form, like his early Menil Collection in Houston, Texas, and does not distract from the sculptures within; six walls of travertine marble with a glass ceiling that filters the light define five long galleries, while outside a sunken sculpture garden is placed below the street level, away sheltered from noise giving the appearance of an overgrown archeological excavation.\nZentrum Paul Klee (1999\u20132005).\nThe Zentrum Paul Klee near Bern, Switzerland (1999\u20132005), continued his series of art museums each very different from the others. It was designed in large part to protect the fragile drawings of Paul Klee from sunlight. It housed in a series galleries resembling rolling hills in the Swiss countryside. Piano explained that the shape of the galleries was inspired by naval architecture and the hulls of ships, which were adapted to the form of waves as his building was adapted to the landscape.\nHigh Museum of Art Extension (1999\u20132005).\nThe original building of the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, Georgia, designed by Richard Meier, and inspired by the form of the Guggenheim Museum in New York City of Frank Lloyd Wright, opened in 1983. Piano's project added four new structures; a pavilion for exhibitions, a gallery for special collections, a building for offices, and a residence hall for the Atlanta College Of Art, creating of additional space. Both the new building and the original building are a gleaming white. A glass bridge with two levels connects the main pavilion with the original part of the museum. The careful management of external light is a particular feature of Piano's buildings; the High Museum Extension rows of curving fan-shaped panels on the facade and on the interior ceiling with filter the sunlight. From the parvis on the outside, the white facade gives the impression that the building has no weight at all.\nMorgan Library Renovation and Extension (2000\u20132006).\nThe extension of the Morgan Library in New York City is next to the original library, a monument of Beaux-Arts architecture designed by McKim, Meade and White (1903), which had been expanded several times. Piano extensively renovated the existing structures and a built a new building the same height as the historic building, with a simple rectangular facade that complemented it. He also added a cube as a small exhibit space, an underground auditorium with 199 seats, and a glass-walled atrium which united all the parts, old and new. The architecture critic of the \"New York Times\", Nicolai Ouroussoff, wrote, \"the result is a space with the weight of history and the lightness of clouds...a sublime expression of the architect's preoccupation with light.\"\nNew York Times Building (2000\u20132007).\nPiano's design for the New York Times Building was chosen after competition whose entrants included projects by Norman Foster, Frank Gehry and Cesar Pelli. The competition rules asked for a building that be as open and transparent as possible, to symbolize the connection between the newspaper and the city. The first six floors are occupied by an atrium with restaurants, shops and a conference center. The distinctive Piano feature of the tower is the clear glass curtain wall outside the facade, and rising higher than the facade itself. The curtain is composed of clear glass and a frame of ceramic tubes suspended from the facade; it serves as a sunscreen, eliminating the need for tinted or sintered glass.\nCalifornia Academy of Sciences renovation and extension, San Francisco (2000\u20132008).\nIn 1989, after their old museum buildings were damaged by an earthquake, the trustees of the California Academy of Sciences decided to rebuild their entire complex of twelve buildings, including an aquarium, planetarium, and a museum of Natural History, located in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco. Piano's plan called for \"a group of volumes under a single roof, a little like a village.\" The roof itself, 1.5 hectares in area, was covered with vegetation, and blends with the surrounding park. The facade of the building also harmonizes smoothly with the nearby turn-of-the-century greenhouse that is a landmark of the Park. Three cupolas resemble shallow hills across the roof, pierced by round portholes to admit natural light; they contain the entry hall, a botanical garden, and a planetarium. Piano's design for the new building was described by the \"New York Times\" as a \"comforting reminder of the civilizing function of great art in a barbaric age\".\nModern wing of the Art Institute of Chicago (2000\u20132009).\nIn 2000 the City of Chicago launched a major program of cultural buildings in Millennium Park with a new concert hall by Frank Gehry and a new wing of the beaux-arts building Art Institute of Chicago. With its construction of glass, steel and white stone, the new wing is carefully harmonized with the old structure, and, like his other art museums, makes maximum use of natural light. A horizontal sunscreen on the roof, nicknamed the \"flying carpet\", is a graceful update of his rooftop art museum on the Lingotto factory in Turin. He also designed a minimalist steel bridge connecting the sculpture terrace of the museum to Millennium Park. Nikolai Ouroussof, critic of the \"New York Times\", noted that some aspects of the building recalled the work of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who had made much of his career in Chicago. \"The taut forms and refined details, the elevation of an industrial aesthetic to an art form all are hallmarks of Mies's work.\" But he noted particularly Piano's masterful control of light within the building: \"...it is the light that most people will notice... The glass roof of the top-floor galleries is supported on delicate steel trusses. Rows of white blades rest on top of the trusses to filter out strong southern light; thin fabric panels soften the view from below... On a clear afternoon you can catch faint glimpses through the structural frame of clouds drifting by overhead. But most of the time the art takes center stage, everything else fading quietly into the background It is this obsessive refinement that raises Mr. Piano's best architecture to the level of art.\"\nProjects completed 2010 to present.\nThe Shard, London (2000\u20132010).\nThe Shard, built over the underground station of London Bridge, is sixty-six stories and high, which made it, when completed in 2012, the tallest skyscraper in Europe. Inside, it contains luxury residences and a hotel, along with offices, shops, restaurants, and cultural centers. It has a wide base and a split pinnacle point which seems to disappear into the clouds, like, as Piano described it, \"a bell tower of the 16th century, or the mast of great ship...Often buildings of great height are aggressive and arrogant symbols of power and egoism,\" but the Shard is designed \"to express its sharp and light presence in the urban panorama of London.\" Like his other tall buildings, the glass sunscreen on the exterior extends slightly above the building itself, appearing to split apart at the top. The critical reaction to the tower was predictably mixed. Simon Jenkins of the \"Guardian\" of London saw it as a foreign attack on the traditional London skyline and monuments: \"This tower is anarchy. It conforms to no planning policy. It marks no architectural focus or rond-point. It offers no civic forum or function, just luxury flats and hotels. It stands apart from the City cluster and pays no heed to its surrounding context in scale, materials or ground presence. It seems to have lost its way from Dubai to Canary Wharf... The Shard has slashed the face of London for ever.\" However, Jonathan Glancy in the London \"Telegraph\" defended Piano's building: \"The criticism \u2013 hurled against Piano like the spears of Ancient Britons fighting the civilised Romans \u2013 is, I think, a bottled up attack on our low standards of design and the beetle-browed politics that have allowed so many poor tall buildings to have been rushed up around St Paul's. The Shard, whatever its flaws \u2013 and all its many floors \u2013 is a much better building than most of the flakes below it.\"\nCentral Saint Giles, London (2002\u20132010).\nThe Central Saint Giles between St Giles High Street and New Oxford Street in London (2002\u20132010) is a complex composed of 56 luxury apartments, 53 social rented apartments, and of office around a public square with retail and food outlets, covering . The site was previously occupied by a Ministry of Defence building and is partially on the site of a medieval leper colony, St Giles Hospital. A block 109 flats rises 11 floors and is set alongside offices rising to 11 floors to the east. A distinctive element is strident solid color which is designed not to mellow with time; the buildings are covered with large kiln-fired ceramic panels glazed leaf green, orange, lime green, pale grey and yellow. \"Cities should not be dull and repetitive\", Piano declared. \"One of the reason we find them so beautiful and interesting is that they are full of surprises; even the idea of color represents a joyful surprise.\"\nLos Angeles County Museum of Art (BCAM and Resnick Pavilion), Los Angeles (2003\u20132010).\nCommissioned to design a \"transformation\" of the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Piano designed a new building, the Broad Contemporary Art Museum at LACMA (BCAM) (2008), with of space, as well as the BP Grand Entrance, an entrance pavilion with of space, and the Lynda and Stewart Resnick Exhibition Pavilion (2010). The BCAM facade is concrete covered with plaques of cream-colored Italian travertine, harmonizing with the older buildings of the museum complex, but added distinctive Piano touches; finlike white sun shutters on the roof softening the sunlight, a red escalator on the outside of the main facade, and a stairway suspended by red cables on the other facade, reminiscent of the Centre Pompidou. The Resnik Pavilion, to the north of the BCAM, has of space, with travertine covered walls to the east and west, glass walls on the north and south, and a roof with vertical glass shutters that open to the sky. Describing this project, Piano wrote: \"It's not enough that the light is perfect. You also have a need for calm, serenity, and even a quality of voluptuousness connected with the contemplation of a work of art.\" Nicolai Ouroussoff, the architecture critic of \"The New York Times\", admired the interior of the BCAM but was less impressed by the exteriors: \"There is little of the formal freedom that is at the heart of the city's architectural legacy; nor is there much evidence of the structural refinement that we have come to expect in Mr. Piano's best work. The museum's monumental travertine form and lipstick-red exterior stairways are a curious mix of pomposity and pop-culture references. It's an architecture without conviction.\"\nAstrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art, Oslo, Norway (2006\u20132012).\nThe Astrup Fearnley Museum of Modern Art in Oslo, Norway (2006\u20132012) was designed to revive an old port and industrial area southwest of the center of Oslo with an art museum and offices, and to provide a destination and attraction on the edge of the picturesque fjord. The project has three buildings, two museum buildings and an office building, under a single glass roof, which covers . The construction materials include both steel and wood beams. A canal and walkway connect the museum with another area under development nearby, while the museum and walkway offer views of the fjord and center of Oslo. A sculpture park with works of Anish Kapoor, Louise Bourgeois and other notable sculptors is placed between the museum and the water. The museum building on one side of the canal holds permanent exhibits, while the building on the other side is used for temporary exhibits. A bridge over the canal the two museum buildings. The construction materials include steel, glass and wooden beams, while the facades that are not made of glass are covered with finely crafted weathered panels, in the tradition of Scandinavian architecture.\nKimbell Art Museum extension, Fort Worth, Texas (2007\u20132013).\nThe extension of the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth, Texas (2007\u20132013) is an addition to the museum designed by Louis Kahn the modernist architect for whom Piano worked at the beginning of his career, completed in 1972. The building faces the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, designed by Tadao Ando (2002). The new gallery occupies , compared with for the Kahn building, and cost 135 million dollars. Piano created a dramatic new entrance for the museum, with huge windows showing the bright red furniture against the alabaster white walls within. The materials used in the new museum included light-colored concrete, to harmonize with the Kahn building, combined with beams and ceilings of Douglas fir, and floors of white oak and an abundance of double-paned and fritted glass. The museum also includes modern ecological features including a vegetal roof, photovoltaic cells on the roof, geothermal wells, and LED lighting. Piano wrote: \"Our building echoes the Kahn building through its height, its scale and its general plan, but our building has a character that is more transparent and more open. Light, discreet (half of the surfaces are underground), it nonetheless has its own character and creates a dialogue between the old and the new.\" However, the museum also attracted critics, who said it was not ambitious enough. Mark Lamster, architecture critic of the \"Dallas Morning News\", wrote: \"With its almost impossibly smooth walls and squared columns of titanium-treated concrete, Piano's front facade evinces a clinical, stoic perfectionism... Altogether, the assembly is a minor miracle of construction. Most impressive are the beams: 100-foot-long bars of laminated Douglas fir, trucked from Canada. But for all its technical mastery, it offers none of the elemental majesty of Kahn's building across the lawn. It is deferential to a fault.\"\nWhitney Museum of American Art, New York City (2007\u20132015).\nThe Whitney Museum of American Art decided to move from its original building on Madison Avenue, constructed by Marcel Breuer in 1966, to a new location at the corner of Gansevoort and Washington in Manhattan, a neighborhood once occupied by meat packing houses, next to the High Line, a riverside highway and park. The museum, with nine levels, has an asymmetric industrial look to match the architecture of the neighborhood. In addition to its interior galleries, it has of open-air exhibit space on a large terrace atop one section of the building. It was built of steel, concrete, and stone, but also with pine wood and other materials recycled from demolished factories. Jule Iovine, architecture critic of the \"Wall Street Journal\", called it \"a welcoming, creative machine\" thanks to its \"open, changeable spaces,\" and Michael Kimmelman, critic of the \"New York Times\", called it \"an outdoor perch to see and be seen... There's a generosity to the architecture, a sense of art connecting with the city and vice versa\".\nThe Harvard Art Museums, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2008\u20132014).\nBeginning in 2008, Piano rebuilt an existing structure to house the Harvard Art Museums, a consolidation of collections of the three art museums associated with Harvard University. The new museum preserved the picturesque brick Ivy-League facade of the 1925 Fogg Museum (1925), but added a new space in the courtyard, covered by a pyramidal glass roof, which increased the gallery space by 40 percent. The renovation adds six levels of galleries, classrooms, lecture halls, and new study areas providing access to parts of the 250,000-piece collection of the museums. The new building was opened in November 2014.\nValletta City Gate and Parliament House, Malta (2011\u20132015).\nThe 'City Gate' project in Valletta, Malta was the complete reorganization of the principal entrance to the Maltese capital of Valletta. It included a massive City Gate through the 16th-century city walls, an open-air theatre 'machine' within the ruins of the former Royal Opera House, and the construction of a new Parliament building. The gate project was controversial, though the old gate it replaced was only built in the 1960s, in the Italian rationalist style. The \"theater machine\" is particularly unusual; the original idea was that in summertime a steel portable theater with stage and wings and a thousand seats can be installed inside the ruins of the 19th century opera house, which had been destroyed in World War II. It has its own stage equipment and technology for reproducing the acoustics of a traditional opera house. When performances are not taking place, the \"machine\" was meant to turn back into a public square and gathering place. The Parliament House (2011\u20132015) is a mixture of modern technique and technology with the massive stone look of the city's old walls.\nCentro de Arte Bot\u00edn, Santander, Spain (2012\u20132017).\nThe \"Centro Bot\u00edn\" in Santander, Spain is a private sponsored project by the Fundaci\u00f3n Bot\u00edn whose aim is to be a hub for the promotion of culture both as a museum and as study centre. It consists on two buildings standing on columns over the sea line at the Bay of Santander. The western building hosts the exhibition space of and the eastern is the one dedicated to study which hosts an auditorium, study rooms and other installations. Both are connected by a suspended square and set of stairs and platforms named \"pachinko\". This was Piano's first project in Spain and had some controversy over its location. Critics describe the building as sublime and striking due to the conjunction of light, views and design that the buildings propose.\nStavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center, Athens, Greece (2016).\nThe Stavros Niarchos Foundation Cultural Center (SNFCC) in Athens, Greece is one of Piano's most dramatic projects. Located next to Falirio Bay at Kalithea, an ancient Greek port, south of central Athens, on a site which served as a parking lot for the 2004 Summer Olympics, it combines the Greek National Library and a new opera house for the Greek National Opera along with the Stavros Niarchos Park, an urban park covering an area of . An artificial hill was created to raise the building and give it a view of the nearby sea. The opera house has a 1400-seat main theater and a smaller \"black box\" theater of 400 seats. On top of the opera house a square horizontal glass box is placed, called \"Pharos (Lighthouse),\" similar to the perch of the art museum atop the Lingotto factory in Turin. The entire structure is covered by a single flat roof, which provides shade, and which is covered with of photovoltaic cells, generating 1.5 megawatts of electricity, designed to the building self-sufficient in energy during working hours. The cost of the project was 588 million dollars.\nKrause Gateway Center, Des Moines, Iowa (2019).\nThe Krause Gateway Center in downtown Des Moines, Iowa adjacent to Western Gateway Park is the headquarters for the Krause Group, parent company of Kum &amp; Go. The architecture features long overhangs and giant glass panels.\nAcademy Museum of Motion Pictures, Los Angeles, California (2021).\nAcademy Museum of Motion Pictures in Los Angeles is a conversion of the former May Company Department Store (1939), an Art Deco landmark opened in 2021.\nCERN Science Gateway, Meyrin, Switzerland (2023).\nIn April 2019 it was announced that CERN will be partnering with the Renzo Piano Building Workshop for its new education and outreach center named \"CERN Science Gateway\". It was opened in October 2023 housing three permanent exhibitions, two hands-on education labs and an auditorium for up to 800 people.\nHonors and awards.\nIn 1998, Piano won the Pritzker Prize, often considered the Nobel Prize of architecture. The jury citation compared Piano to Michelangelo and da Vinci and credited him with \"redefining modern and postmodern architecture.\"\nIn 2006, Piano was selected by \"TIME\" as one of the 100 most influential people in the world. He was chosen as the tenth most influential person in the \"Arts and Entertainment\" category.\nOn 18 March 2008, he became an honorary citizen of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nIn August 2013, he was appointed Senator for Life in the Senate by Italian president Giorgio Napolitano.\nProfessional and personal life.\nPiano founded the Renzo Piano Building Workshop (RPBW) in 1981. In 2017 it had 150 collaborators in offices in Paris, Genoa, and New York.\nIn 2004, he became head of the Renzo Piano Foundation, dedicated to the promotion of the architectural profession. Since June 2008, the headquarters has been co-located with his architectural office at Punta Nave, near Genoa.\nAfter his nomination as Senator for Life in 2013, an honour limited to five office holders in the sole gift of the Italian President, Renzo Piano set up a team of young architects called G124 whose mission is to work on the transformation of Italy's major cities' suburbs. Team members are paid with Renzo Piano senator's salary and change every year through a public selection. Projects have been developed in Turin, Milan, Padua, Venice and Rome.\nPiano resides in Paris with his second wife Milly and four children, Carlo, Matteo, Lia \u2013 from his first wife \u2013 and Giorgio.\nSince April 2023 he has been a member of the board of directors of the Agnelli Foundation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25948", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25948", "title": "Refraction", "text": "Physical phenomenon relating to the direction of waves\nIn physics, refraction is the redirection of a wave as it passes from one medium to another. The redirection can be caused by the wave's change in speed or by a change in the medium. Refraction of light is the most commonly observed phenomenon, but other waves such as sound waves and water waves also experience refraction. How much a wave is refracted is determined by the change in wave speed and the initial direction of wave propagation relative to the direction of change in speed.\nOptical prisms and lenses use refraction to redirect light, as does the human eye. The refractive index of materials varies with the wavelength of light, and thus the angle of the refraction also varies correspondingly. This is called dispersion and allows prisms and raindrops in rainbows to divide white light into its constituent spectral colors.\nLaw.\nFor light, refraction follows Snell's law, which states that, for a given pair of media, the ratio of the sines of the angle of incidence formula_1 and angle of refraction formula_2 is equal to the ratio of phase velocities formula_3 in the two media, or equivalently, to the refractive indices formula_4 of the two media:\nformula_5\nGeneral explanation.\nRefraction involves two related parts, both a result of the wave nature of light: a reduced speed in an optical medium and a change in angle when a wave front crosses between different media at an angle.\nSlowing of light.\nAs described above, the speed of light is slower in a medium other than vacuum. This slowing applies to any medium such as air, water, or glass, and is responsible for phenomena such as refraction. On the other side of the medium its speed will again be the speed of light in vacuum, c.\nA correct explanation rests on light's nature as an electromagnetic wave. Because light is an oscillating electrical/magnetic wave, light traveling in a medium causes the electrically charged electrons of the material to also oscillate. (The material's protons also oscillate but as they are around 2000 times more massive, their movement and therefore their effect, is far smaller). A moving electrical charge emits electromagnetic waves of its own. The electromagnetic waves emitted by the oscillating electrons interact with the electromagnetic waves that make up the original light, similar to water waves on a pond, a process known as constructive interference. When two waves interfere in this way, the resulting \"combined\" wave may have wave packets that pass an observer at a slower rate. The light has effectively been slowed. When the light leaves the material, this interaction with electrons no longer happens, and therefore the wave packet rate (and therefore its speed) return to normal.\nBending of light.\nConsider a wave going from one material to another where its speed is slower as in the figure. If it reaches the interface between the materials at an angle one side of the wave will reach the second material first, and therefore slow down earlier. With one side of the wave going slower the whole wave will pivot towards that side. This is why a wave will bend away from the surface or toward the normal when going into a slower material. In the opposite case of a wave reaching a material where the speed is higher, one side of the wave will speed up and the wave will pivot away from that side.\nAnother way of understanding the same thing is to consider the change in wavelength at the interface. When the wave goes from one material to another where the wave has a different speed v, the frequency f of the wave will stay the same, but the distance between wavefronts or wavelength \"\u03bb\" = \"v\"/\"f\" will change. If the speed is decreased, such as in the figure to the right, the wavelength will also decrease. With an angle between the wave fronts and the interface and change in distance between the wave fronts the angle must change over the interface to keep the wave fronts intact. From these considerations the relationship between the angle of incidence \"\u03b8\"1, angle of transmission \"\u03b8\"2 and the wave speeds \"v\"1 and \"v\"2 in the two materials can be derived. This is the law of refraction or Snell's law and can be written as\nformula_6\nThe phenomenon of refraction can in a more fundamental way be derived from the 2 or 3-dimensional wave equation. The boundary condition at the interface will then require the tangential component of the wave vector to be identical on the two sides of the interface. Since the magnitude of the wave vector depend on the wave speed this requires a change in direction of the wave vector.\nThe relevant wave speed in the discussion above is the phase velocity of the wave. This is typically close to the group velocity which can be seen as the truer speed of a wave, but when they differ it is important to use the phase velocity in all calculations relating to refraction.\nA wave traveling perpendicular to a boundary, i.e. having its wavefronts parallel to the boundary, will not change direction even if the speed of the wave changes.\nDispersion of light.\nRefraction is also responsible for rainbows and for the splitting of white light into a rainbow-spectrum as it passes through a glass prism. Glass and water have higher refractive indexes than air. When a beam of white light passes from air into a material having an index of refraction that varies with frequency (and wavelength), a phenomenon known as dispersion occurs, in which different coloured components of the white light are refracted at different angles, i.e., they bend by different amounts at the interface, so that they become separated. The different colors correspond to different frequencies and different wavelengths.\nOn water.\nRefraction occurs when light goes through a water surface since water has a refractive index of 1.33 and air has a refractive index of about 1. Looking at a straight object, such as a pencil in the figure here, which is placed at a slant, partially in the water, the object appears to bend at the water's surface. This is due to the bending of light rays as they move from the water to the air. Once the rays reach the eye, the eye traces them back as straight lines (lines of sight). The lines of sight (shown as dashed lines) intersect at a higher position than where the actual rays originated. This causes the pencil to appear higher and the water to appear shallower than it really is.\nThe depth that the water appears to be when viewed from above is known as the \"apparent depth\". This is an important consideration for spearfishing from the surface because it will make the target fish appear to be in a different place, and the fisher must aim lower to catch the fish. Conversely, an object above the water has a higher \"apparent height\" when viewed from below the water. The opposite correction must be made by an archer fish.\nFor small angles of incidence (measured from the normal, when sin \"\u03b8\" is approximately the same as tan \"\u03b8\"), the ratio of apparent to real depth is the ratio of the refractive indexes of air to that of water. But, as the angle of incidence approaches 90\u00b0, the apparent depth approaches zero, albeit reflection increases, which limits observation at high angles of incidence. Conversely, the apparent height approaches infinity as the angle of incidence (from below) increases, but even earlier, as the angle of total internal reflection is approached, albeit the image also fades from view as this limit is approached.\nAtmospheric.\nThe refractive index of air depends on the air density and thus vary with air temperature and pressure. Since the pressure is lower at higher altitudes, the refractive index is also lower, causing light rays to refract towards the earth surface when traveling long distances through the atmosphere. This shifts the apparent positions of stars slightly when they are close to the horizon and makes the sun visible before it geometrically rises above the horizon during a sunrise.\nTemperature variations in the air can also cause refraction of light. This can be seen as a heat haze when hot and cold air is mixed e.g. over a fire, in engine exhaust, or when opening a window on a cold day. This makes objects viewed through the mixed air appear to shimmer or move around randomly as the hot and cold air moves. This effect is also visible from normal variations in air temperature during a sunny day when using high magnification telephoto lenses and is often limiting the image quality in these cases.\n In a similar way, atmospheric turbulence gives rapidly varying distortions in the images of astronomical telescopes limiting the resolution of terrestrial telescopes not using adaptive optics or other techniques for overcoming these atmospheric distortions.\nAir temperature variations close to the surface can give rise to other optical phenomena, such as mirages and Fata Morgana. Most commonly, air heated by a hot road on a sunny day deflects light approaching at a shallow angle towards a viewer. This makes the road appear reflecting, giving an illusion of water covering the road.\nIn eye care.\nIn medicine, particularly optometry, ophthalmology and orthoptics, \"refraction\" (also known as \"refractometry\") is a clinical test in which a phoropter may be used by the appropriate eye care professional to determine the eye's refractive error and the best corrective lenses to be prescribed. A series of test lenses in graded optical powers or focal lengths are presented to determine which provides the sharpest, clearest vision.\nRefractive surgery is a medical procedure to treat common vision disorders.\nMechanical waves.\nWater.\nWater waves travel slower in shallower water. This can be used to demonstrate refraction in ripple tanks and also explains why waves on a shoreline tend to strike the shore close to a perpendicular angle. As the waves travel from deep water into shallower water near the shore, they are refracted from their original direction of travel to an angle more normal to the shoreline.\nSound.\nIn underwater acoustics, refraction is the bending or curving of a sound ray that results when the ray passes through a sound speed gradient from a region of one sound speed to a region of a different speed. The amount of ray bending is dependent on the amount of difference between sound speeds, that is, the variation in temperature, salinity, and pressure of the water.\nSimilar acoustics effects are also found in the Earth's atmosphere. The phenomenon of refraction of sound in the atmosphere has been known for centuries. Beginning in the early 1970s, widespread analysis of this effect came into vogue through the designing of urban highways and noise barriers to address the meteorological effects of bending of sound rays in the lower atmosphere.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25949", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25949", "title": "Recreational drug use", "text": "Use of drugs with the primary intention to alter the state of consciousness\nRecreational drug use is the use of one or more psychoactive drugs to induce an altered state of consciousness, either for pleasure or for some other casual purpose or pastime. When a psychoactive drug enters the user's body, it induces an intoxicating effect. Recreational drugs are commonly divided into three categories: depressants (drugs that induce a feeling of relaxation and calmness), stimulants (drugs that induce a sense of energy and alertness), and hallucinogens (drugs that induce perceptual distortions such as hallucination).\nIn popular practice, recreational drug use is generally tolerated as a social behaviour, rather than perceived as the medical condition of self-medication. However, drug use and drug addiction are severely stigmatized everywhere in the world. Many people also use prescribed and controlled depressants such as opioids, opiates, and benzodiazepines. What controlled substances are considered generally unlawful to possess varies by country, but usually includes cannabis (though some areas have legalised cannabis use), cocaine, opioids, MDMA, amphetamine, methamphetamine, psychedelics, benzodiazepines, and barbiturates. As of 2015,[ [update]] it is estimated that about 5% of people worldwide aged 15 to 65 (158 million to 351 million) had used controlled drugs at least once.\nCommon recreational drugs include caffeine, commonly found in coffee, tea, soft drinks, and chocolate; alcohol, commonly found in beer, wine, cocktails, and distilled spirits; nicotine, commonly found in tobacco, tobacco-based products, and electronic cigarettes; cannabis and hashish (with legality of possession varying inter/intra-nationally); and the controlled substances listed as controlled drugs in the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs (1961) and the Convention on Psychotropic Substances (1971) of the United Nations (UN). Since the early 2000s, the European Union (EU) has developed several comprehensive and multidisciplinary strategies as part of its drug policy in order to prevent the diffusion of recreational drug use and abuse among the European population and raise public awareness on the adverse effects of drugs among all member states of the European Union, as well as conjoined efforts with European law enforcement agencies, such as Europol and EMCDDA, in order to counter organized crime and illegal drug trade in Europe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReasons for use.\nMany researchers have explored the etiology of recreational drug use. Some of the most common theories are: genetics, personality type, psychological problems, self-medication, sex, age, depression, curiosity, boredom, rebelliousness, a sense of belonging to a group, family and attachment issues, history of trauma, failure at school or work, socioeconomic stressors, peer pressure, juvenile delinquency, availability, historical factors, or socio-cultural influences. There has been no consensus on a single cause. Instead, experts tend to apply the biopsychosocial model. Any number of factors may influence an individual's drug use, as they are not mutually exclusive. Regardless of genetics, mental health, or traumatic experiences, social factors play a large role in the exposure to and availability of certain types of drugs and patterns of use.\nAccording to addiction researcher Martin A. Plant, some people go through a period of self-redefinition before initiating recreational drug use. They tend to view using drugs as part of a general lifestyle that involves belonging to a subculture that they associate with heightened status and the challenging of social norms. Plant states: \"From the user's point of view there are many positive reasons to become part of the milieu of drug taking. The reasons for drug use appear to have as much to do with needs for friendship, pleasure and status as they do with unhappiness or poverty. Becoming a drug taker, to many people, is a positive affirmation rather than a negative experience\".\nEvolution.\nAnthropological research has suggested that humans \"may have evolved to counter-exploit plant neurotoxins\". The ability to use botanical chemicals to serve the function of endogenous neurotransmitters may have improved survival rates, conferring an evolutionary advantage. A typically restrictive prehistoric diet may have emphasized the apparent benefit of consuming psychoactive drugs, which had themselves evolved to imitate neurotransmitters. Chemical\u2013ecological adaptations and the genetics of hepatic enzymes, particularly cytochrome P450, have led researchers to propose that \"humans have shared a co-evolutionary relationship with psychotropic plant substances that is millions of years old.\"\nHealth risks.\nThe severity of impact and type of risks that come with recreational drug use vary widely with the drug in question and the amount being used. There are many factors in the environment and within the user that interact with each drug differently. Alcohol is sometimes considered one of the most dangerous recreational drugs. Alcoholic drinks, tobacco products and other nicotine-based products (e.g., electronic cigarettes), and cannabis are regarded by various medical professionals as the most common and widespread gateway drugs. In the United States, Australia, and New Zealand, the general onset of drinking alcohol, tobacco smoking, cannabis smoking, and consumption of multiple drugs most frequently occurs during adolescence and in middle school and secondary school settings.\nSome scientific studies in the early 21st century found that a low to moderate level of alcohol consumption, particularly of red wine, might have substantial health benefits such as decreased risk of cardiovascular diseases, stroke, and cognitive decline. This claim has been disputed, specifically by British researcher David Nutt, professor of neuropsychopharmacology at the Imperial College London, who stated that studies showing benefits for \"moderate\" alcohol consumption in \"some middle-aged men\" lacked controls for the variable of what the subjects were drinking beforehand. Experts in the United Kingdom have suggested that some psychoactive drugs that may be causing less harm to fewer users (although they are also used less frequently in the first place) are cannabis, psilocybin mushrooms, LSD, and MDMA; however, these drugs have risks and side effects of their own.\nDrug harmfulness.\nDrug harmfulness is defined as the degree to which a psychoactive drug has the potential to cause harm to the user and is measured in several ways, such as by addictiveness and the potential for physical harm. More objectively harmful drugs may be colloquially referred to as \"hard drugs\", and less harmful drugs as \"soft drugs\". The term \"soft drug\" is considered controversial by critics as it may imply the false belief that soft drugs cause lesser or insignificant harm.\nResponsible use.\nResponsible drug use advocates that users should not take drugs at the same time as activities such as driving, swimming, operating machinery, or other activities that are unsafe without a sober state. Responsible drug use is emphasized as a primary prevention technique in harm-reduction drug policies. Harm-reduction policies were popularized in the late 1980s, although they began in the 1970s counter-culture, through cartoons explaining responsible drug use and the consequences of irresponsible drug use to users. Another issue is that the illegality of drugs causes social and economic consequences for users\u2014the drugs may be \"cut\" with adulterants and the purity varies wildly, making overdoses more likely\u2014and legalization of drug production and distribution could reduce these and other dangers of illegal drug use.\nPrevention.\nIn efforts to curtail recreational drug use, governments worldwide introduced several laws prohibiting the possession of almost all varieties of recreational drugs during the 20th century. The \"war on drugs\" promoted by the United States, however, is now facing increasing criticism. Evidence is insufficient to tell if behavioral interventions help prevent recreational drug use in children.\nOne in four adolescents has used an illegal drug, and one in ten of those adolescents who need addiction treatment get some type of care. School-based programs are the most commonly used method for drug use education; however, the success rates of these intervention programs are highly dependent on the commitment of participants and are limited in general.\nDemographics.\nAustralia.\nAlcohol is the most widely used recreational drug in Australia. 86.2% of Australians aged 12 years and over have consumed alcohol at least once in their lifetime, compared to 34.8% of Australians aged 12 years and over who have used cannabis at least once in their lifetime.\nUnited States.\nFrom the mid-19th century to the 1930s, American physicians prescribed \"Cannabis sativa\" as a prescription drug for various medical conditions. In the 1960s, the counterculture movement introduced the use of psychoactive drugs, including cannabis. Young adults and college students reported the recreational prevalence of cannabis, among other drugs, at 20-25% while the cultural mindset of using was open and curious. In 1969, the FBI reported that between the years 1966 and 1968, the number of arrests for marijuana possession, which had been outlawed throughout the United States under Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, had increased by 98%. Despite acknowledgement that drug use was greatly growing among America's youth during the late 1960s, surveys have suggested that only as much as 4% of the American population had ever smoked marijuana by 1969. By 1972, however, that number would increase to 12%. That number would then double by 1977.\nThe Controlled Substances Act of 1970 classified marijuana along with heroin and LSD as a Schedule I drug, i.e., having the relatively highest abuse potential and no accepted medical use. Most marijuana at that time came from Mexico, but in 1975 the Mexican government agreed to eradicate the crop by spraying it with the herbicide paraquat, raising fears of toxic side effects. Colombia then became the main supplier. The \"zero tolerance\" climate of the Reagan and Bush administrations (1981\u20131993) resulted in passage of strict laws and mandatory sentences for possession of marijuana. The \"war on drugs\" thus brought with it a shift from reliance on imported supplies to domestic cultivation, particularly in Hawaii and California. Beginning in 1982, the Drug Enforcement Administration turned increased attention to marijuana farms in the United States, and there was a shift to the indoor growing of plants specially developed for small size and high yield. After over a decade of decreasing use, marijuana smoking began an upward trend once more in the early 1990s, especially among teenagers, but by the end of the decade this upswing had leveled off well below former peaks of use.\nSociety and culture.\nMany movements and organizations are advocating for or against the liberalization of the use of recreational drugs, most notably regarding the legalization of marijuana and cannabinoids for medical and/or recreational use. Subcultures have emerged among users of recreational drugs, in addition to alternative lifestyles and social movements among those who abstain from them, such as teetotalism and \"straight edge\".\nSince the early 2000s, medical professionals have acknowledged and addressed the problem of the increasing consumption of alcoholic drinks and club drugs (such as MDMA, cocaine, rohypnol, GHB, ketamine, PCP, LSD, and methamphetamine) associated with rave culture among adolescents and young adults in the Western world. Studies have shown that adolescents are more likely than young adults to use multiple drugs, and the consumption of club drugs is highly associated with the presence of criminal behaviors and recent alcohol abuse or dependence.\nThe prevalence of recreational drugs in human societies is widely reflected in fiction, entertainment, and the arts, subject to prevailing laws and social conventions. For instance, in the music industry, the musical genres hip hop, hardcore rap, and trap, alongside their derivative subgenres and subcultures, are most notorious for having continuously celebrated and promoted drug trafficking, gangster lifestyle, and consumption of alcohol and other drugs since their inception in the United States during the late 1980s\u2013early 1990s. In video games, for example, drugs are portrayed in a variety of ways: including power-ups (cocaine gum replenishes stamina in \"Red Dead Redemption 2\"), obstacles to be avoided (such as the Fuzzies in ' that distort the player's view when accidentally consumed), items to be bought and sold for in-game currency (coke dealing is a big part of '). In the \"Fallout\" video game franchise, drugs (\"chems\" in the game) can fill the role of any above mentioned. Drug trafficking, gang rivalries, and their related criminal underworld also play a big part in the \"Grand Theft Auto\" video game franchise.\nCommon recreational drugs.\nThe following substances are commonly used recreationally:\nRoutes of administration.\nDrugs are often associated with a particular route of administration. Many drugs can be consumed in more than one way. For example, marijuana can be swallowed like food or smoked, and cocaine can be \"sniffed\" in the nostrils, injected, or, with various modifications, smoked.\nMany drugs are taken through various routes. Intravenous route is the most efficient, but also one of the most dangerous. Nasal, rectal, inhalation and smoking are safer. The oral route is one of the safest and most comfortable, but of little bioavailability.\nTypes.\nDepressants.\nDepressants are psychoactive drugs that temporarily diminish the function or activity of a specific part of the body or mind. Colloquially, depressants are known as \"downers\", and users generally take them to feel more relaxed and less tense. Examples of these kinds of effects may include anxiolysis, sedation, and hypotension. Depressants are widely used throughout the world as prescription medicines and as illicit substances. When these are used, effects may include anxiolysis (reduction of anxiety), analgesia (pain relief), sedation, somnolence, cognitive/memory impairment, dissociation, muscle relaxation, lowered blood pressure/heart rate, respiratory depression, anesthesia, and anticonvulsant effects. Depressants exert their effects through a number of different pharmacological mechanisms, the most prominent of which include potentiation of GABA or opioid activity, and inhibition of adrenergic, histamine or acetylcholine activity. Some are also capable of inducing feelings of euphoria. The most widely used depressant by far is alcohol (i.e. ethanol).\nStimulants or \"uppers\", such as amphetamines or cocaine, which increase mental or physical function, have an opposite effect to depressants.\nDepressants, in particular alcohol, can precipitate psychosis. A 2019 systematic review and meta-analysis by Murrie et al. found that the rate of transition from opioid, alcohol and sedative induced psychosis to schizophrenia was 12%, 10% and 9% respectively.\nAntihistamines.\nAntihistamines (or \"histamine antagonists\") inhibit the release or action of histamine. \"Antihistamine\" can be used to describe any histamine antagonist, but the term is usually reserved for the classical antihistamines that act upon the H1 histamine receptor. Antihistamines are used as treatment for allergies. Allergies are caused by an excessive response of the body to allergens, such as the pollen released by grasses and trees. An allergic reaction causes release of histamine by the body. Other uses of antihistamines are to help with normal symptoms of insect stings even if there is no allergic reaction. Their recreational appeal exists mainly due to their anticholinergic properties, that induce anxiolysis and, in some cases such as diphenhydramine, chlorpheniramine, and orphenadrine, a characteristic euphoria at moderate doses. High dosages taken to induce recreational drug effects may lead to overdoses. Antihistamines are also consumed in combination with alcohol, particularly by youth who find it hard to obtain alcohol. The combination of the two drugs can cause intoxication with lower alcohol doses.\nHallucinations and possibly delirium resembling the effects of Datura stramonium can result if the drug is taken in much higher than therapeutic doses. Antihistamines are widely available over the counter at drug stores (without a prescription), in the form of allergy medication and some cough medicines. They are sometimes used in combination with other substances such as alcohol.\nThe most common unsupervised use of antihistamines in terms of volume and percentage of the total is perhaps in parallel to the medicinal use of some antihistamines to extend and intensify the effects of opioids and depressants. The most commonly used are hydroxyzine, mainly to extend a supply of other drugs, as in medical use, and the above-mentioned ethanolamine and alkylamine-class first-generation antihistamines, which are \u2013 once again as in the 1950s \u2013 the subject of medical research into their anti-depressant properties.\nFor all of the above reasons, the use of medicinal scopolamine for recreational uses is also observed.\nAnalgesics.\nAnalgesics (also known as \"painkillers\") are used to relieve pain (achieve analgesia). The word \"analgesic\" derives from Greek \"\u03b1\u03bd-\" (\"an-\", \"without\") and \"\u03ac\u03bb\u03b3\u03bf\u03c2\" (\"\u00e1lgos\", \"pain\"). Analgesic drugs act in various ways on the peripheral and central nervous systems; they include paracetamol (also known in the US as acetaminophen), the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as the salicylates (e.g. aspirin), and opioid drugs such as hydrocodone, codeine, heroin and oxycodone. Some further examples of the brand name prescription opiates and opioid analgesics that may be used recreationally include Vicodin, Lortab, Norco (hydrocodone), Avinza, Kapanol (morphine), Opana, Paramorphan (oxymorphone), Dilaudid, Palladone (hydromorphone), and OxyContin (oxycodone).\nTranquilizers.\nThe following are examples of tranquilizers (GABAergics):\nStimulants.\nStimulants, also known as \"psychostimulants\", induce euphoria with improvements in mental and physical function, such as enhanced alertness, wakefulness, and locomotion. Stimulants are also occasionally called \"uppers\". Depressants or \"downers\", which decrease mental or physical function, are in stark contrast to stimulants and are considered to be their functional opposites.\nStimulants enhance the activity of the central and peripheral nervous systems. Common effects may include increased alertness, awareness, wakefulness, endurance, productivity, and motivation, arousal, locomotion, heart rate, and blood pressure, and a diminished desire for food and sleep.\nUse of stimulants may cause the body to significantly reduce its production of endogenous compounds that fulfill similar functions. Once the effect of the ingested stimulant has worn off the user may feel depressed, lethargic, confused, and dysphoric. This is colloquially termed a \"crash\" and may promote reuse of the stimulant.\nAmphetamines are a significant cause of drug-induced psychosis. Importantly, a 2019 meta-analysis found that 22% of people with amphetamine-induced psychosis transition to a later diagnosis of schizophrenia.\nExamples of stimulants include:\nHallucinogens.\nHallucinogens can be divided into three broad categories: psychedelics, dissociatives, and deliriants. They can cause subjective changes in perception, thought, emotion and consciousness. Unlike other psychoactive drugs such as stimulants and opioids, hallucinogens do not merely amplify familiar states of mind but also induce experiences that differ from those of ordinary consciousness, often compared to non-ordinary forms of consciousness such as trance, meditation, conversion experiences, and dreams.\nPsychedelics, dissociatives, and deliriants have a long worldwide history of use within medicinal and religious traditions. They are used in shamanic forms of ritual healing and divination, in initiation rites, and in the religious rituals of syncretistic movements such as Uni\u00e3o do Vegetal, Santo Daime, Temple of the True Inner Light, and the Native American Church. When used in religious practice, psychedelic drugs, as well as other substances like tobacco, are referred to as entheogens.\nHallucinogen-induced psychosis occurs when psychosis persists despite no longer being intoxicated with the drug. It is estimated that 26% of people with hallucinogen-induced psychosis will transition to a diagnosis of schizophrenia. This percentage is less than the psychosis transition rate for cannabis (34%) but higher than that of amphetamines (22%).\nStarting in the mid-20th century, psychedelic drugs have been the object of extensive attention in the Western world. They have been and are being explored as potential therapeutic agents in treating depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive\u2013compulsive disorder, alcoholism, and opioid addiction. Yet the most popular, and at the same time most stigmatized, use of psychedelics in Western culture has been associated with the search for direct religious experience, enhanced creativity, personal development, and \"mind expansion\". The use of psychedelic drugs was a major element of the 1960s counterculture, where it became associated with various social movements and a general atmosphere of rebellion and strife between generations.\nInhalants.\nInhalants are gases, aerosols, or solvents that are breathed in and absorbed through the lungs. While some \"inhalant\" drugs are used for medical purposes, as in the case of nitrous oxide, a dental anesthetic, inhalants are used as recreational drugs for their intoxicating effect. Most inhalant drugs that are used non-medically are ingredients in household or industrial chemical products that are not intended to be concentrated and inhaled, including organic solvents (found in cleaning products, fast-drying glues, and nail polish removers), fuels (gasoline (petrol) and kerosene), and propellant gases such as Freon and compressed hydrofluorocarbons that are used in aerosol cans such as hairspray, whipped cream, and non-stick cooking spray. A small number of recreational inhalant drugs are pharmaceutical products that are used illicitly, such as anesthetics (ether and nitrous oxide) and volatile anti-angina drugs (alkyl nitrites, more commonly known as \"poppers\").\nThe most serious inhalant abuse occurs among children and teens who \"[...] live on the streets completely without family ties\". Inhalant users inhale vapor or aerosol propellant gases using plastic bags held over the mouth or by breathing from a solvent-soaked rag or an open container. The effects of inhalants range from an alcohol-like intoxication and intense euphoria to vivid hallucinations, depending on the substance and the dosage. Some inhalant users are injured due to the harmful effects of the solvents or gases, or due to other chemicals used in the products inhaled. As with any recreational drug, users can be injured due to dangerous behavior while they are intoxicated, such as driving under the influence. Computer cleaning dusters are dangerous to inhale, because the gases expand and cool rapidly upon being sprayed. In many cases, users have died from hypoxia (lack of oxygen), pneumonia, cardiac failure or arrest, or aspiration of vomit.\nExamples include:\nList of drugs which can be smoked.\nPlants:\nSubstances (also not necessarily psychoactive plants smoked within them):\nList of psychoactive plants, fungi, and animals.\nMinimally psychoactive plants which contain mainly caffeine and theobromine:\nMost known psychoactive plants:\n\"Solanaceae\" plants\u2014contain atropine, hyoscyamine, and scopolamine:\n\"Cacti\" with mescaline:\nOther plants:\nFungi:\nPsychoactive animals:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25951", "revid": "27357804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25951", "title": "Robert Frost", "text": "American poet (1874\u20131963)\nRobert Lee Frost (March26, 1874\u00a0\u2013 January29, 1963) was an American poet. Known for his realistic depictions of rural life and his command of American colloquial speech, Frost frequently wrote about settings from rural life in New England in the early 20th century, using them to examine complex social and philosophical themes.\nFrequently honored during his lifetime, Frost is the only poet to receive four Pulitzer Prizes for Poetry. He became one of America's rare \"public literary figures, almost an artistic institution\". Appointed United States Poet Laureate in 1958, he also received the Congressional Gold Medal in 1960, and in 1961 was named poet laureate of Vermont. Randall Jarrell wrote: \"Robert Frost, along with Stevens and Eliot, seems to me the greatest of the American poets of this century. Frost's virtues are extraordinary. No other living poet has written so well about the actions of ordinary men; his wonderful dramatic monologues or dramatic scenes come out of a knowledge of people that few poets have had, and they are written in a verse that uses, sometimes with absolute mastery, the rhythms of actual speech\". In his 1939 essay \"The Figure a Poem Makes\", Frost explains his poetics:No tears in the writer, no tears in the reader. No surprise for the writer, no surprise for the reader. For me the initial delight is in the surprise of remembering something I didn't know I knew...[Poetry] must be a revelation, or a series of revelations, for the poet as for the reader. For it to be that there must have been the greatest freedom of the material to move about in it and to establish relations in it regardless of time and space, previous relation, and everything but affinity.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nRobert Frost was born in San Francisco to journalist William Prescott Frost Jr. and Isabelle Moodie. His father was a descendant of Nicholas Frost of Tiverton, Devon, England, who had sailed to New Hampshire in 1634 on the \"Wolfrana\", and his mother was a Scottish immigrant.\nFrost was also a descendant of Samuel Appleton, one of the early English settlers of Ipswich, Massachusetts, and Rev. George Phillips, one of the early English settlers of Watertown, Massachusetts.\nFrost's father was a teacher and later an editor of the \"San Francisco Evening Bulletin\" (which later merged with the \"San Francisco Examiner\"), and an unsuccessful candidate for city tax collector. After his death on May 5, 1885, the family moved across the country to Lawrence, Massachusetts, under the patronage of Robert's grandfather William Frost Sr., who was an overseer at a New England mill. Frost graduated from Lawrence High School in 1892, where he published his first poem in the high school magazine, served as class poet and, with his future wife Elinor White, was co-valedictorian. Frost's mother joined the Swedenborgian church and had him baptized in it, but he left it as an adult.\nAlthough known for his later association with rural life, Frost grew up in the city. He attended Dartmouth College for two months, long enough to be accepted into the Theta Delta Chi fraternity. Frost returned home to teach and to work at various jobs, helping his mother teach her class of unruly boys, delivering newspapers and working in a factory maintaining carbon arc lamps. He said that he did not enjoy these jobs, feeling that his true calling was to write poetry.\nAdult years.\nIn 1894, he sold his first poem, \"My Butterfly. An Elegy\" (published in the November 8, 1894, edition of \"The Independent\" of New York) for $15 ($ today). Proud of his accomplishment, he proposed marriage to Elinor Miriam White, but she demurred, wanting to finish college at St. Lawrence University before they married. Frost then went on an excursion to the Great Dismal Swamp in Virginia and asked Elinor again upon his return. Having graduated, she agreed, and they were married in Lawrence, Massachusetts, on December 19, 1895.\nFrost attended Harvard University from 1897 to 1899, but he left voluntarily due to illness. Shortly before his death, Frost's grandfather purchased a farm for Robert and Elinor in Derry, New Hampshire; Frost worked the farm for nine years while writing early in the mornings and producing many of the poems that would later become famous. Ultimately his farming proved unsuccessful and he returned to the field of education as an English teacher at New Hampshire's Pinkerton Academy from 1906 to 1911, then at the New Hampshire Normal School (now Plymouth State University) in Plymouth, New Hampshire.\nIn 1912, Frost sailed with his family to Great Britain, settling first in Beaconsfield, a small town in Buckinghamshire outside London. His first book of poetry, \"A Boy's Will\", was published the next year. In England he made some important acquaintances, including Edward Thomas (a member of the group known as the Dymock poets and Frost's inspiration for \"The Road Not Taken\"), T. E. Hulme and Ezra Pound. Although Pound would become the first American to write a favorable review of Frost's work, Frost later resented Pound's attempts to manipulate his American prosody. Frost met or befriended many contemporary poets in England, especially after his first two poetry volumes were published in London in 1913 (\"A Boy's Will\") and 1914 (\"North of Boston\").\nIn 1915, during World War I, Frost returned to America, where Holt's American edition of \"A Boy's Will\" had recently been published, and bought a farm in Franconia, New Hampshire, where he launched a career of writing, teaching and lecturing. This family homestead served as the Frosts' summer home until 1938. It is maintained today as The Frost Place, a museum and poetry conference site. He was made an honorary member of Phi Beta Kappa at Harvard in 1916. During the years 1917\u201320, 1923\u201325, and, on a more informal basis, 1926\u20131938, Frost taught English at Amherst College in Massachusetts, notably encouraging his students to account for the myriad sounds and intonations of the spoken English language in their writing. He called his colloquial approach to language \"the sound of sense\".\nHe won the first of four Pulitzer Prizes for \"New Hampshire: A Poem with Notes and Grace Notes\" (1923). He would win Pulitzers for \"Collected Poems\" (1930), \"A Further Range\" (1936) and \"A Witness Tree\" (1942).\nFrom 1921 to 1962, Frost spent almost every summer and fall teaching at the Bread Loaf School of English of Middlebury College, at its mountain campus at Ripton, Vermont. He is credited with being a major influence upon the development of the school and its writing programs. The college now owns and maintains his former Ripton farmstead, a National Historic Landmark, near the Bread Loaf campus. In 1921, Frost accepted a fellowship teaching post at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, where he resided until 1927, when he returned to teach at Amherst. While teaching at the University of Michigan, he was awarded a lifetime appointment at the university as a Fellow in Letters. The Robert Frost Ann Arbor home was purchased by The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan and relocated to the museum's Greenfield Village site for public tours. Throughout the 1920s, Frost also lived in his colonial-era house in Shaftsbury, Vermont. In 2002, the house was opened to the public as the Robert Frost Stone House Museum and was given to Bennington College in 2017.\nIn 1934, Frost began to spend winter months in Florida. In March 1935, he gave a talk at the University of Miami. In 1940, he bought a plot in South Miami, Florida, naming it \"Pencil Pines\"; he spent his winters there for the rest of his life. In her memoir about Frost's time in Florida, Helen Muir writes, \"Frost had called his five acres \"Pencil Pines\" because he said he had never made a penny from anything that did not involve the use of a pencil.\" His properties also included a house on Brewster Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts.\nFrost was appointed United States Poet Laureate in 1958 by Librarian of Congress Lawrence Quincy Mumford, serving for one year until succeeded by Richard Eberhart. He was 86 when he performed a reading at the inauguration of John F. Kennedy on January 20, 1961. Frost began by attempting to read his poem \"Dedication\", which he had composed for the occasion, but due to the brightness of the sunlight he was unable to see the text, so he recited \"The Gift Outright\" from memory instead. In the summer of 1962, he accompanied Interior Secretary Stewart Udall on a visit to the Soviet Union in hopes of meeting Nikita Khrushchev to lobby for peaceful relations between the two Cold War powers.\nIn the early hours of January 29, 1963, Frost died at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston, at the age of 88. He was buried in the Old Bennington Cemetery in Bennington, Vermont. His epitaph, from the last line of his poem \"The Lesson for Today\" (1942), is: \"I had a lover's quarrel with the world.\"\nPersonal life.\nFrost's personal life was plagued by grief and loss. In 1885, when he was 11, his father died of tuberculosis, leaving the family with just eight dollars. Frost's mother died of cancer in 1900. In 1920, he had to commit his younger sister Jeanie to a mental hospital, where she died nine years later. Mental illness apparently ran in Frost's family, as both he and his mother suffered from depression, and his daughter Irma was committed to a mental hospital in 1947. Frost's wife, Elinor, also experienced bouts of depression.\nElinor and Robert Frost had six children: son Elliott (1896\u20131900, died of cholera); daughter Lesley Frost Ballantine (1899\u20131983); son Carol (1902\u20131940); daughter Irma (1903\u20131967); daughter Marjorie (1905\u20131934, died as a result of puerperal fever after childbirth); and daughter Elinor Bettina (died just one day after her birth in 1907). Only Lesley and Irma outlived their father. Frost's wife, who had heart problems throughout her life, developed breast cancer in 1937 and died of heart failure in 1938.\nWork.\nStyle and critical reception.\nCritic Harold Bloom argued that Frost was one of \"the major American poets\".\nRandall Jarrell's influential essays on Frost include \"Robert Frost's 'Home Burial'\" (1962), an extended close reading of that particular poem, and \"To The Laodiceans\", (1952) in which Jarrell defended Frost against critics who had accused Frost of being too \"traditional\" and out of touch with Modern or Modernist poetry. Jarrell wrote \"the regular ways of looking at Frost's poetry are grotesque simplifications, distortions, falsifications\u2014coming to know his poetry well ought to be enough, in itself, to dispel any of them, and to make plain the necessity of finding some other way of talking about his work.\" Jarrell's close readings of poems like \"Neither Out Too Far Nor In Too Deep\" led readers and critics to perceive more of the complexities in Frost's poetry.\nBrad Leithauser notes that \"the 'other' Frost that Jarrell discerned behind the genial, homespun New England rustic\u2014the 'dark' Frost who was desperate, frightened, and brave\u2014has become the Frost we've all learned to recognize, and the little-known poems Jarrell singled out as central to the Frost canon are now to be found in most anthologies\". Jarrell lists a selection of the Frost poems he considers the most masterful, including \"The Witch of Co\u00f6s\", \"Home Burial\", \"A Servant to Servants\", \"Directive\", \"Neither Out Too Far Nor In Too Deep\", \"Provide, Provide\", \"Acquainted with the Night\", \"After Apple Picking\", \"Mending Wall\", \"The Most of It\", \"An Old Man's Winter Night\", \"To Earthward\", \"Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening\", \"Spring Pools\", \"The Lovely Shall Be Choosers\", \"Design\" and \"Desert Places\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom \"Birches\"\n&lt;poem&gt;I'd like to get away from earth awhile\nAnd then come back to it and begin over.\nMay no fate willfully misunderstand me\nAnd half grant what I wish and snatch me away\nNot to return. Earth's the right place for love:\nI don't know where it's likely to go better.\nI'd like to go by climbing a birch tree,\nAnd climb black branches up a snow-white trunk\nToward heaven, till the tree could bear no more,\nBut dipped its top and set me down again.\nThat would be good both going and coming back.\nOne could do worse than be a swinger of birches.&lt;/poem&gt;\nRobert Frost\nIn 2003, the critic Charles McGrath noted that critical views on Frost's poetry have changed over the years (as has his public image). In \"The Vicissitudes of Literary Reputation,\" McGrath wrote, \"Robert Frost\u00a0... at the time of his death in 1963 was generally considered to be a New England folkie\u00a0... In 1977, the third volume of Lawrance Thompson's biography suggested that Frost was a much nastier piece of work than anyone had imagined; a few years later, thanks to the reappraisal of critics like William H. Pritchard and Harold Bloom and of younger poets like Joseph Brodsky, he bounced back again, this time as a bleak and unforgiving modernist.\"\nIn \"The Norton Anthology of Modern Poetry\", editors Richard Ellmann and Robert O'Clair compared and contrasted Frost's unique style to the work of the poet Edwin Arlington Robinson since they both frequently used New England settings for their poems. However, they state that Frost's poetry was \"less [consciously] literary\" and that this was possibly due to the influence of English and Irish writers like Thomas Hardy and W. B. Yeats. They note that Frost's poems \"show a successful striving for utter colloquialism\" and always try to remain down to earth, while at the same time using traditional forms, despite the trend of American poetry towards free verse, which Frost famously said was \"'like playing tennis without a net.'\"\nThe Poetry Foundation makes the same point, placing Frost's work \"at the crossroads of nineteenth-century American poetry [with regard to his use of traditional forms] and modernism [with his use of idiomatic language and ordinary, everyday subject matter].\" They also note that Frost believed that \"the self-imposed restrictions of meter in form\" was more helpful than harmful because he could focus on the content of his poems instead of concerning himself with creating \"innovative\" new verse forms.\nAn earlier study by the poet James Radcliffe Squires spoke to the distinction of Frost as a poet whose verse soars more for the difficulty and skill by which he attains his final visions, than for the philosophical purity of the visions themselves. \"He has written at a time when the choice for the poet seemed to lie among the forms of despair: Science, solipsism, or the religion of the past century ... Frost has refused all of these and in the refusal has long seemed less dramatically committed than others ... But no, he must be seen as dramatically uncommitted to the single solution ... Insofar as Frost allows to both fact and intuition a bright kingdom, he speaks for many of us. Insofar as he speaks through an amalgam of senses and sure experience so that his poetry seems a nostalgic memory with overtones touching some conceivable future, he speaks better than most of us. That is to say, as a poet must.\"\nThe classicist Helen H. Bacon has proposed that Frost's deep knowledge of Greek and Roman classics influenced much of his work. Frost's education at Lawrence High School, Dartmouth, and Harvard \"was based mainly on the classics\". As examples, she links imagery and action in Frost's early poems \"Birches\" (1915) and \"Wild Grapes\" (1920) with Euripides' \"Bacchae\". She cites certain motifs, including that of the tree bent down to earth, as evidence of his \"very attentive reading of \"Bacchae\", almost certainly in Greek\". Bacon compares the poetic techniques used by Frost in \"One More Brevity\" (1953) to those of Virgil in the \"Aeneid\". She notes that \"this sampling of the ways Frost drew on the literature and concepts of the Greek and Roman world at every stage of his life indicates how imbued with it he was\".\nThemes.\nIn \"Contemporary Literary Criticism\", the editors state that \"Frost's best work explores fundamental questions of existence, depicting with chilling starkness the loneliness of the individual in an indifferent universe.\" The critic T. K. Whipple focused on this bleakness in Frost's work, stating that \"in much of his work, particularly in \"North of Boston\", his harshest book, he emphasizes the dark background of life in rural New England, with its degeneration often sinking into total madness.\"\nIn sharp contrast, the founding publisher and editor of \"Poetry\", Harriet Monroe, emphasized the folksy New England persona and characters in Frost's work, writing that \"perhaps no other poet in our history has put the best of the Yankee spirit into a book so completely.\" She notes his frequent use of rural settings and farm life, and she likes that in these poems, Frost is most interested in \"showing the human reaction to nature's processes.\" She also notes that while Frost's narrative, character-based poems are often satirical, Frost always has a \"sympathetic humor\" towards his subjects.\nAwards and recognition.\nFrost was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature 31 times.\nHarvard's 1965 alumni directory notes that Frost received an honorary degree there. Although he never graduated from college, Frost received over 40 honorary degrees, including from Princeton, Oxford and Cambridge universities, and became the only person to have received two honorary degrees from Dartmouth College. During his lifetime, the Robert Frost Middle School in Fairfax, Virginia, the Robert L. Frost School in Lawrence, Massachusetts, and the main library of Amherst College were named after him.\nIn 1960, Frost was awarded a United States Congressional Gold Medal, \"In recognition of his poetry, which has enriched the culture of the United States and the philosophy of the world\"; it was formally bestowed on him by John F. Kennedy in March 1962. Also in 1962, he was awarded the Edward MacDowell Medal for outstanding contribution to the arts by the MacDowell Colony.\nIn June 1922, the Vermont State League of Women's Clubs elected Frost as Poet Laureate of Vermont. When a \"New York Times\" editorial strongly criticized the decision of the Women's Clubs, Sarah Cleghorn and other women wrote to the newspaper defending Frost. Frost was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1931 and the American Philosophical Society in 1937. On July 22, 1961, Frost was named Poet Laureate of Vermont by the state legislature through Joint Resolution R-59 of the Acts of 1961, which also created the position. Frost won the 1963 Bollingen Prize.\nLegacy and cultural influence.\nOne of the original collections of Frost materials, which he personally helped compile, is held in the Special Collections department of the Jones Library in Amherst, Massachusetts. The collection consists of approximately twelve thousand items, including original manuscript poems and letters, correspondence, photographs, and audio and visual recordings. The Archives and Special Collections at Amherst College holds a small collection of his papers. The University of Michigan Library holds the Robert Frost Family Collection of manuscripts, photographs, printed items, and artwork. The most significant collection of Frost's working manuscripts is held by Dartmouth.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25956", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25956", "title": "Rudy Guiliani", "text": ""}
{"id": "25960", "revid": "3938795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25960", "title": "Rotary dial", "text": "Device for sending telephone numbers\nA rotary dial is a component of a telephone or a telephone switchboard that implements a signaling technology in telecommunications known as pulse dialing. It is used when initiating a telephone call to transmit the destination telephone number to a telephone exchange as a succession of individual digits.\nOn the rotary dial, the digits are arranged in a circular layout, with one finger hole in the finger wheel for each digit. For dialing a digit, the wheel is rotated against spring tension with one finger positioned in the corresponding hole, pulling the wheel with the finger to a stop position given by a mechanical barrier, the finger stop. When released at the finger stop, the wheel returns to its home position driven by the spring at a speed regulated by a governor device. During this return rotation, an electrical switch interrupts the direct current (DC) of the telephone line (local loop) the specific number of times associated with each digit and thereby generates electrical pulses which the telephone exchange decodes into each dialed digit. Thus, each of the ten digits is encoded in sequences to correspond to the number of pulses; thus, the method is sometimes called \"decadic dialing\". Pulse count dialing is a digital addressing system which uses decimal pulse count modulation. The typical average baud rate is 10 bits per second, though the system will usually accept from about 9 through 13 pulses per second, a requirement due to variations in the rotary dial mechanism governor speed. \nThe first patent for an automatic telephone exchange was granted to Almon Brown Strowger on November 29, 1892, but the commonly known rotary dial with holes in the finger wheel was not introduced until about 1907. While used in telephone systems of the independent telephone companies, rotary dial service in the Bell System in the United States was not common until the early 1920s.\nFrom the 1960s onward, the rotary dial was gradually supplanted by push-button telephones, first introduced to the public at the 1962 World's Fair under the trade name Touch-Tone (DTMF). Touch-tone technology primarily used a keypad in the form of a rectangular array of push-buttons. Although no longer in common use, the rotary dial's legacy remains in the verb \"to dial (a telephone number)\".\nHistory.\nFrom as early as 1836 onward, various suggestions and inventions of dials for sending telegraph signals were reported. After the first commercial telephone exchange was installed in 1878, the need for an automated, user-controlled method of directing a telephone call became apparent. By 1891, numerous inventions were competing for acceptance and 26 patents for dials, push-buttons, and similar mechanisms, specified methods of signaling a destination telephone number. Most inventions involved costly, intricate mechanisms and required the user to perform complex operations.\nThe first commercial installation of a telephone dial accompanied the first commercial installation of a 99-line automatic telephone exchange in La Porte, Indiana, in 1892, which was based on the 1891 Strowger designs. The original dials required complex operational sequences. A workable, albeit error-prone, system was invented by the Automatic Electric Company using three push-buttons on the telephone. These buttons represented the hundreds, tens, and single units of a telephone number. When calling the subscriber number 163, for example, the user had to push the hundreds button once, followed by six presses of the tens button, and three presses of the units button. In 1896, this system was supplanted by an automatic \"contact-making machine\", or \"calling device\". Further development continued during the 1890s and the early 1900s in conjunction with improvements in switching technology.\nAlmon Brown Strowger was the first to file a patent for an automatic telephone exchange on December 21, 1891, which was awarded on November 29, 1892, as https://. The company later developed a rotary dial with lugs on a finger plate instead of holes that interrupted two independent circuits for control of relays in the exchange switch. The pulse train was generated without the control of spring action or a governor on the forward movement of the wheel, which proved to be difficult to operate correctly.\nDespite their lack of modern features, rotary dials occasionally find special uses. For instance, the anti-drug Fairlawn Coalition of the Anacostia section of Washington, D.C., persuaded the phone company to reinstall rotary-dial pay phones in the 1980s to discourage loitering by drug purchasers, since they lacked a telephone keypad to leave messages on dealers' pagers. They are also retained for authenticity in historic properties such as the U.S. Route 66 Blue Swallow Motel, which date back to the era of named exchanges and pulse dialing.\nFunction.\nFor dialing a digit of the telephone number, the user inserts a finger into the corresponding finger hole and rotates the dial clockwise until the finger reaches the finger stop. The user then releases the finger wheel by pulling the finger from the hole. A spring around the dial shaft rotates it back to the rest position. During the period of return, the dial operates electrical contacts that break the electrical continuity of the local loop, and interrupt the current flow a certain number of times for each digit marked on the front of the dial.\nThe number of pulses sent for each digit is defined by the type of dial system in use. The encoding has traditionally varied by country, or by the manufacturer of the telephone system. For example, Sweden used one pulse to signal the number zero, and ten pulses to signal the number nine. In Finland, where many telephones were of Swedish manufacture, one pulse signaled digit \"1\", and ten pulses \"0\". New Zealand used ten pulses minus the number desired; so dialing the digit \"7\" produces three pulses. In Norway, the North American system with the digit \"1\" corresponding to one pulse was used, except for the capital city, Oslo, which used the same \"inverse\" system as in New Zealand. The sequencing of the digits on the dial varies accordingly. \nConstruction.\nA rotary dial typically features a circular construction. The shaft that actuates the mechanical switching mechanism is driven by the finger wheel, a disk that has ten finger holes aligned close to the circumference. The finger wheel may be transparent or opaque permitting the viewing of the face plate (number plate), either in whole, or only showing the number assignment for each finger hole. The faceplate is printed with digits, and often letters, corresponding to each finger hole. Digit 1 is typically set in the upper right quadrant of the dial front, then the numbers progress counterclockwise. A curved device, the \"finger stop\" is positioned in the lower right quadrant. Some dialing mechanism allowed the use of physical locking mechanisms to prevent unauthorized use. The lock could be integral to the telephone itself or a separate device inserted through the finger hole nearest the finger stop to prevent the dial from rotating.\nThe rotational return speed of the dial to its rest position is controlled by the \"governor\", a mechanical regulating device, that assures a constant electrical pulsing rate of the dial.\nPrincipal dial mechanisms in the United States.\nIn the United States, two principal dial mechanisms arose in the engineering laboratories of the largest manufacturers, that of the Western Electric Company for the Bell System, and that of the Automatic Electric Company.\nThe Western Electric dial had spur gears to power the governor, so the axis of the governor was parallel to the dial shaft. The Automatic Electric governor shaft was parallel to the plane of the dial at a right angle to the dial shaft. The governor shaft had worm gearing in which, very atypically, the gear drove the worm. The worm, highly polished, had extreme pitch, with teeth at about 45\u00b0 to its axis. This was the same as the gearing for the speed-limiting fan in traditional music boxes. The Western Electric governor was a cup surrounding spring-loaded pivoted weights with friction pads. The Automatic Electric governor had weights on the middle of curved springs made from strip stock. When it sped up after the dial was released, the weights moved outward, pulling the ends of their springs together. Springs were fixed to a collar on the shaft at one end and to the hub of a sliding brake disc at the other end. At speed, the brake disc contacted a friction pad. This governor was similar to that in spring-driven windup phonograph turntables of the early 20th century.\nBoth types had wrap-spring clutches for driving their governors. When winding the dial-return spring, these clutches disconnected to let the dial turn quickly. When the dial was released, the clutch spring wrapped tightly to drive the governor.\nWhile winding the dial, a spring-centered pawl in the Western Electric dial wiggled off-center when driven by the cam on the dial shaft. Teeth on that cam were spaced apart by the same angle as dial hole spacing. During winding, the pawl moved off-center away from the normally-closed pulsing contacts. When the dial was released, the cam teeth moved the pawl the other way to open and release the dial contacts. In the Automatic Electric dial, the pulsing cam and governor were driven by a wrap-spring clutch as the dial returned. When winding, that clutch disconnected both cam and governor.\nRecoil spring.\nEarly dials worked by direct or forward rotating action. The pulses were generated as the dial turned toward the finger stop position. When the user's hand motion was erratic, it could produce the wrong digit. In the late 19th century, the dial was refined to operate automatically by a recoil spring. The user selected the digit to be dialed, rotated the dial to the finger stop, then released it. The spring caused the dial to rotate back to its home position during which time constant speed was maintained with a centrifugal governor.\nDials at user stations typically produced pulses at the rate of ten pulses per second (PPS), while dials on operator consoles on crossbar or electronic exchanges often pulsed at 18 PPS.\nThe rotary dial governor is subject to wear and aging, and may require periodic cleaning, lubrication and adjustment by a technician. In the video, the green LED shows the dial impulse pulses and the red LED shows the dial's off-normal contact function.\nOff-normal contacts typically serve two additional functions. They may implement a shunt across the transmitter circuit and induction coil to maximize the pulsing signal of the dial by eliminating all internal impedances of the telephone set. Another function is to short-circuit or interrupt the telephone receiver during dialing, to prevent audible clicking noise from being heard by the telephone user.\nDials located in handsets.\nSome telephones include a small dial built into the handset, with a movable finger stop. The user rotates the dial clockwise until the finger stop ceases moving, then releases both. In this design the holes extend around the full circumference of the dial, allowing a reduced diameter. This was introduced by Western Electric on the compact Trimline telephone, the first to locate the dial in the handset. In Spain, such phones were manufactured for CTNE (Compa\u00f1\u00eda Telef\u00f3nica Nacional de Espa\u00f1a) by M\u00e1laga-based factory \"CITESA\", being named as \"G\u00f3ndola\" phones by its particular shape. Spanish G\u00f3ndola sets were fitted from the beginning with a red LED series connected with the line, allowing the dial (\"disco\" in Spanish) to be backlit while dialling. For that, the LED was bridged by an anti-parallel Zener diode, to allow the DC to pass even if the line polarity were reversed. In case of line polarity reversal, the LED would not light, but the phone would work anyway. The LED and Zener diode were contained in the same package for ease of assembly in manufacturing.\nBritain.\nIn the United Kingdom the letter \"O\" was combined with the digit \"0\" rather than \"6\". In large cities the seven-digit numbers comprised three letters for the exchange name, followed by four numbers. \nAustralia.\nBefore 1960 Australian rotary dial telephones had each number's corresponding letter printed on a paper disc in the centre of the plate, with space where the subscriber could add the phone number. The paper was protected by a clear plastic disc, held in place by a form of retaining ring which also served to locate the disc radially. The Australian letter-to-number mapping was A=1, B=2, F=3, J=4, L=5, M=6, U=7, W=8, X=9, Y=0, so the phone number BX 3701 was in fact 29 3701. When Australia around 1960 changed to all-numeric telephone dials, a mnemonic to help people associate letters with numbers was the sentence, \"All Big Fish Jump Like Mad Under Water eXcept Yabbies.\"\nEastern bloc.\nAlphabetic designation of exchanges with Cyrillic letters (\u0410, \u0411, \u0412, \u0413, \u0414, \u0415, \u0416, \u0418, \u041a, \u041b for each of the digits from 1 through 0 respectively) was also used for a short period in the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s, but by the next decade this practice was largely discontinued.\nLetter codes were not used in all East European countries.\nEmergency calling.\nA relic of these differences is found in emergency telephone numbers used in various countries; the United Kingdom selected 999 due to the ease of converting call office dials to make free calls. \"0\" for the Operator was already free, and the cam that removed the shunt on the line when the dial was rotated to the \"0\" position could be altered to include the adjacent digit \"9\" (and \"8\" if required) so that calls to \"0\" and \"999\" could be made without inserting coins. In New Zealand, 111 was selected because New Zealand reverse-numbered dials make each digit \"1\" send 9 pulses to the central office/telephone exchange (like \"9\" in Britain), allowing British exchange equipment to be used off the shelf. \nAlphanumeric dialing.\nIn addition to the ten digits, the faceplate is often printed with letters corresponding to each position. \nIn North America, traditional dials have letter codes displayed with the numbers under the finger holes in the following pattern: 1, 2 ABC, 3 DEF, 4 GHI, 5 JKL, 6 MNO, 7 PRS, 8 TUV, 9 WXY, and 0 (sometimes Z) Operator. Letters were associated with the dial numbers to represent telephone exchange names in communities that required multiple central offices. For example, \"RE7-3456\" represented \"REgent 7-3456\".\nIn 1917, W. G. Blauvelt of AT&amp;T developed the combination pattern of letters assigned to each digit, which became the standard in North America. Large cities like New York City would ultimately require a seven-digit telephone number. Some tests in the early 1900s indicated that the short-term memory span of many people was insufficient for seven digits, causing dialing errors (the documentation for these tests is lost). As large cities had both manual and automatic exchanges for many years, the numbers for manual or automatic exchanges used the same format, which could be either spoken or dialed.\nIn the late 1940s, telephones were redesigned with the numbers and letters displayed on a ring outside the finger wheel to provide better visibility.\nPush-button pulse dialing.\nEven after the transition to DTMF dialing with push-button keypads in most areas, pulse-dialing telephones continued to be produced for some time, even with keypads for dialing, for use with certain private exchange systems. Some of these can be distinguished visually by the lack of keys with the symbols \"#\" and \"*\". Some telephones may have an option to select pulse dialing or DTMF dialing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25964", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25964", "title": "Revolution", "text": "Rapid and fundamental political change\nIn political science, a revolution (, 'a turn around') is a rapid, fundamental transformation of a society's class, state, ethnic or religious structures. According to sociologist Jack Goldstone, all revolutions contain \"a common set of elements at their core: (a) efforts to change the political regime that draw on a competing vision (or visions) of a just order, (b) a notable degree of informal or formal mass mobilization, and (c) efforts to force change through noninstitutionalized actions such as mass demonstrations, protests, strikes, or violence.\"\nRevolutions have occurred throughout human history and varied in their methods, durations and outcomes. Some revolutions started with peasant uprisings or guerrilla warfare on the periphery of a country; others started with urban insurrection aimed at seizing the country's capital city. Revolutions can be inspired by the rising popularity of certain political ideologies, moral principles, or models of governance such as nationalism, republicanism, egalitarianism, self-determination, human rights, democracy, liberalism, fascism, or socialism. A regime may become vulnerable to revolution due to a recent military defeat, or economic chaos, or an affront to national pride and identity, or persistent repression and corruption. Revolutions typically trigger counter-revolutions which seek to halt revolutionary momentum, or to reverse the course of an ongoing revolutionary transformation.\nNotable revolutions in recent centuries include the American Revolution (1765\u20131783), French Revolution (1789\u20131799), Haitian Revolution (1791\u20131804), Spanish American wars of independence (1808\u20131826), Revolutions of 1848 in Europe, Mexican Revolution (1910\u20131920), Xinhai Revolution in China in 1911, Revolutions of 1917\u20131923 in Europe (including the Russian Revolution and German Revolution), Chinese Communist Revolution (1927\u20131949), decolonization of Africa (mid-1950s to 1975), Algerian War of Independence (1954-1962), Cuban Revolution in 1959, Iranian Revolution and Nicaraguan Revolution in 1979, worldwide Revolutions of 1989, and Arab Spring in the early 2010s.\nEtymology.\nThe French noun \"revolucion\" traces back to the 13th century, and the English equivalent \"revolution\" to the late 14th century. The word was limited then to mean the revolving motion of celestial bodies. \"Revolution\" in the sense of abrupt change in a social order was first recorded in the mid-15th century. By 1688, the political meaning of the word was familiar enough that the replacement of James II with William III was termed the \"Glorious Revolution\".\nDefinition.\n\"Revolution\" is now employed most often to denote a change in social and political institutions. Jeff Goodwin offers two definitions. First, a broad one, including \"any and all instances in which a state or a political regime is overthrown and thereby transformed by a popular movement in an irregular, extraconstitutional or violent fashion\". Second, a narrow one, in which \"revolutions entail not only mass mobilization and regime change, but also more or less rapid and fundamental social, economic or cultural change, during or soon after the struggle for state power\".\nJack Goldstone defines a revolution thusly:\n\"[Revolution is] an effort to transform the political institutions and the justifications for political authority in society, accompanied by formal or informal mass mobilization and noninstitutionalized actions that undermine authorities. This definition is broad enough to encompass events ranging from the relatively peaceful revolutions that toppled communist regimes to the violent Islamic revolution in Afghanistan. At the same time, this definition is strong enough to exclude coups, revolts, civil wars, and rebellions that make no effort to transform institutions or the justification for authority.\" Goldstone's definition excludes peaceful transitions to democracy through plebiscite or free elections, as occurred in Spain after the death of Francisco Franco, or in Argentina and Chile after the demise of their military juntas. Early scholars often debated the distinction between revolution and civil war. They also questioned whether a revolution is purely political (i.e., concerned with the restructuring of government) or whether \"it is an extensive and inclusive social change affecting all the various aspects of the life of a society, including the economic, religious, industrial, and familial as well as the political\".\nTypes.\nThere are numerous typologies of revolution in the social science literature. Alexis de Tocqueville differentiated between:\nOne of the Marxist typologies divides revolutions into: \nCharles Tilly, a modern scholar of revolutions, differentiated between: \nMark Katz identified six forms of revolution:\nThese categories are not mutually exclusive; the Russian Revolution of 1917 began with an urban revolution to depose the Czar, followed by a rural revolution, followed by the Bolshevik coup in November. Katz also cross-classified revolutions as follows:\nA further dimension to Katz's typology is that revolutions are either against (anti-monarchy, anti-dictatorial, anti-communist, anti-democratic) or for (pro-fascism, pro-communism, pro-nationalism, etc.). In the latter cases, a transition period is generally necessary to decide which direction to take to achieve the desired form of government. Other types of revolution, created for other typologies, include proletarian or communist revolutions (inspired by the ideas of Marxism that aim to replace capitalism with communism); failed or abortive revolutions (that are not able to secure power after winning temporary victories or amassing large-scale mobilizations); or violent vs. nonviolent revolutions. The term \"revolution\" has also been used to denote great changes outside the political sphere. Such revolutions, often labeled social revolutions, are recognized as major transformations in a society's culture, philosophy, or technology, rather than in its political system. Some social revolutions are global in scope, while others are limited to single countries. Commonly cited examples of social revolution are the Industrial Revolution, Scientific Revolution, Commercial Revolution, and Digital Revolution. These revolutions also fit the \"slow revolution\" type identified by Tocqueville.\nStudies of revolution.\nPolitical and socioeconomic revolutions have been studied in many social sciences, particularly sociology, political science and history. Scholars of revolution differentiate four generations of theoretical research on the subject of revolution. Theorists of the first generation, including Gustave Le Bon, Charles A. Ellwood, and Pitirim Sorokin, were mainly descriptive in their approach, and their explanations of the phenomena of revolutions were usually related to social psychology, such as Le Bon's crowd psychology theory. The second generation sought to develop detailed frameworks, grounded in social behavior theory, to explain why and when revolutions arise. Their work can be divided into three categories: psychological, sociological and political.\nThe writings of Ted Robert Gurr, Ivo K. Feierbrand, Rosalind L. Feierbrand, James A. Geschwender, David C. Schwartz, and Denton E. Morrison fall into the first category. They utilized theories of cognitive psychology and frustration-aggression theory to link the cause of revolution to the state of mind of the masses. While these theorists varied in their approach as to what exactly incited the people to revolt (e.g., modernization, recession, or discrimination), they agreed that the primary cause for revolution was a widespread frustration with the socio-political situation.\nThe second group, composed of academics such as Chalmers Johnson, Neil Smelser, Bob Jessop, Mark Hart, Edward A. Tiryakian, and Mark Hagopian, drew on the work of Talcott Parsons and the structural-functionalist theory in sociology. They saw society as a system in equilibrium between various resources, demands, and subsystems (political, cultural, etc.). As in the psychological school, they differed in their definitions of what causes disequilibrium, but agreed that it is a state of severe disequilibrium that is responsible for revolutions.\nThe third group, including writers such as Charles Tilly, Samuel P. Huntington, Peter Ammann, and Arthur L. Stinchcombe, followed a political science path and looked at pluralist theory and interest group conflict theory. Those theories view events as outcomes of a power struggle between competing interest groups. In such a model, revolutions happen when two or more groups cannot come to terms within the current political system's normal decision-making process, and when they possess the required resources to employ force in pursuit of their goals.\nThe second-generation theorists regarded the development of revolutionary situations as a two-step process: \"First, a pattern of events arises that somehow marks a break or change from previous patterns. This change then affects some critical variable\u2014the cognitive state of the masses, the equilibrium of the system, or the magnitude of conflict and resource control of competing interest groups. If the effect on the critical variable is of sufficient magnitude, a potentially revolutionary situation occurs.\" Once this point is reached, a negative incident (a war, a riot, a bad harvest) that in the past might not have been enough to trigger a revolt, will now be enough. However, if authorities are cognizant of the danger, they can still prevent revolution through reform or repression.\nIn his influential 1938 book \"The Anatomy of Revolution\", historian Crane Brinton established a convention by choosing four major political revolutions\u2014England (1642), Thirteen Colonies of America (1775), France (1789), and Russia (1917)\u2014for comparative study. He outlined what he called their \"uniformities\", although the American Revolution deviated somewhat from the pattern. As a result, most later comparative studies of revolution substituted China (1949) in their lists, but they continued Brinton's practice of focusing on four.\nIn subsequent decades, scholars began to classify hundreds of other events as revolutions (see List of revolutions and rebellions). Their expanded notion of revolution engendered new approaches and explanations. The theories of the second generation came under criticism for being too limited in geographical scope, and for lacking a means of empirical verification. Also, while second-generation theories may have been capable of explaining a specific revolution, they could not adequately explain why revolutions failed to occur in other societies experiencing very similar circumstances.\nThe criticism of the second generation led to the rise of a third generation of theories, put forth by writers such as Theda Skocpol, Barrington Moore, Jeffrey Paige, and others expanding on the old Marxist class-conflict approach. They turned their attention to \"rural agrarian-state conflicts, state conflicts with autonomous elites, and the impact of interstate economic and military competition on domestic political change.\" In particular, Skocpol's \"States and Social Revolutions\" (1979) was a landmark book of the third generation. Skocpol defined revolution as \"rapid, basic transformations of society's state and class structures ... accompanied and in part carried through by class-based revolts from below\", and she attributed revolutions to \"a conjunction of multiple conflicts involving state, elites and the lower classes\".\nIn the late 1980s, a new body of academic work started questioning the dominance of the third generation's theories. The old theories were also dealt a significant blow by a series of revolutionary events that they could not readily explain. The Iranian and Nicaraguan Revolutions of 1979, the 1986 People Power Revolution in the Philippines, and the 1989 Autumn of Nations in Europe, Asia and Africa saw diverse opposition movements topple seemingly powerful regimes amidst popular demonstrations and mass strikes in nonviolent revolutions.\nFor some historians, the traditional paradigm of revolutions as class struggle-driven conflicts centered in Europe, and involving a violent state versus its discontented people, was no longer sufficient to account for the multi-class coalitions toppling dictators around the world. Consequently, the study of revolutions began to evolve in three directions. As Goldstone describes it, scholars of revolution:\nThe fourth generation increasingly turned to quantitative techniques when formulating its theories. Political science research moved beyond individual or comparative case studies towards large-N statistical analysis assessing the causes and implications of revolution. The initial fourth-generation books and journal articles generally relied on the Polity data series on democratization. Such analyses, like those by A. J. Enterline, Zeev Maoz, and Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Snyder, identified a revolution by a significant change in the country's score on Polity's autocracy-to-democracy scale.\nSince the 2010s, scholars like Jeff Colgan have argued that the Polity data series\u2014which evaluates the degree of democratic or autocratic authority in a state's governing institutions based on the openness of executive recruitment, constraints on executive authority, and political competition\u2014is inadequate because it measures democratization, not revolution, and doesn't account for regimes which come to power by revolution but fail to change the structure of the state and society sufficiently to yield a notable difference in the Polity score. Instead, Colgan offered a new data set to single out governments that \"transform the existing social, political, and economic relationships of the state by overthrowing or rejecting the principal existing institutions of society.\" This data set has been employed to make empirically based contributions to the literature on revolution by finding links between revolution and the likelihood of international disputes.\nRevolutions have been further examined from an anthropological perspective. Drawing on Victor Turner's writings on ritual and performance, Bjorn Thomassen suggested that revolutions can be understood as \"liminal\" moments: modern political revolutions very much resemble rituals and can therefore be studied within a process approach. This would imply not only a focus on political behavior \"from below\", but also a recognition of moments where \"high and low\" are relativized, subverted, or made irrelevant, and where the micro and macro levels fuse together in critical conjunctions. Economist Douglass North raised a note of caution about revolutionary change, how it \"is never as revolutionary as its rhetoric would have us believe\". While the \"formal rules\" of laws and constitutions can be changed virtually overnight, the \"informal constraints\" such as institutional inertia and cultural inheritance do not change quickly and thereby slow down the societal transformation. According to North, the tension between formal rules and informal constraints is \"typically resolved by some restructuring of the overall constraints\u2014in both directions\u2014to produce a new equilibrium that is far less revolutionary than the rhetoric.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25969", "revid": "910180", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25969", "title": "Roland TB-303", "text": "Bass synthesizer\nThe Roland TB-303 Bass Line (also known as the 303) is a bass synthesizer released by Roland Corporation in 1981. Designed to simulate bass guitars, it was a commercial failure and was discontinued in 1984. However, cheap second-hand units were adopted by electronic musicians, and its \"squelching\" or \"chirping\" sound became a foundation of electronic dance music genres such as acid house, Chicago house and techno. It has inspired numerous clones.\nDesign and features.\nThe TB-303 was manufactured by the Japanese company Roland. It was designed by Tadao Kikumoto, who also designed the Roland TR-909 drum machine. It was marketed as a \"computerised bass machine\" to replace the bass guitar. However, according to \"Forbes\", it instead produces a \"squelchy tone more reminiscent of a psychedelic mouth harp than a stringed instrument\".\nThe TB-303 has a single oscillator, which produces either a \"buzzy\" sawtooth wave or a \"hollow-sounding\" square wave. This is fed into a 24\u00a0dB/octave low-pass filter, which is manipulated by an envelope generator. Users program notes and slides using the internal sequencer.\nLegacy.\nThe TB-303's unrealistic sound made it unpopular with its target audience, musicians who wanted to replace bass guitars. It was discontinued in 1984, and Roland sold off remaining units cheaply. 10,000 units were manufactured.\nIndian musician Charanjit Singh's 1982 album \"Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat\" featured an early use of a TB-303, alongside the TR-808. The album remained obscure until the early 21st century, when it was reissued and recognized as a precursor to acid house. Singh had an influence on Bollywood music producer Bappi Lahiri, who experimented with tweaked TB-303 basslines for several Indian disco film songs released in 1983: \"Koi Lutera\" in \"\", \"Aah Ha Oonh Hun\" in \"Do Gulaab\", and \"Tum Tum Tumba\" in \"Karate\". The first song using the TB-303 to enter the top ten of the UK Singles Chart was \"Rip It Up\" (1983) by Scottish band Orange Juice. The same year, Japanese musician Ryo Kawasaki used the TB-303 with a TR-808 and synth guitar in his electronic jazz album \"Lucky Lady\" (1983).\nThe Chicago group Phuture bought a cheap TB-303 and began experimenting. By manipulating the synthesizer as it played, they created a unique \"squelching, resonant and liquid sound\". This became the foundation of the single \"Acid Tracks\" (1987), often credited as the first acid house track. With the TB-303 as a staple sound, acid house became popular worldwide, particularly as part of the UK's emerging rave culture known as the second summer of love.\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, as new acid styles emerged, the TB-303 was often overdriven, producing a harsher sound, such as on Hardfloor's 1992 EP \"Acperience\" and Interlect 3000's 1993 EP \"Volcano\". In 1995, the TB-303 was distorted and processed on Josh Wink's hit \"Higher State of Consciousness\" and on Daft Punk's \"Da Funk\". The English producer Fatboy Slim admired the simplicity of the controls, and named his first single \"Everybody Needs a 303\" (1996). \nIn 2011, the \"Guardian\" named the release of the TB-303 one of the 50 key events in the history of dance music. The popularity of acid caused a dramatic increase in the price of used 303 units. As of 2014, units sold for over \u00a31,000.\nSuccessors.\nThe TB-303 has inspired numerous software emulations and clones, such as the TD-3 by Behringer, released in 2019. In 2014, Roland released the TB-3 Touch Bassline, with a touchpad interface and MIDI and USB connections. In 2017, Roland released the TB-03, a miniaturized model featuring an LED display and delay and overdrive effects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25970", "revid": "51020022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25970", "title": "RCA Corporation", "text": "American electronics company (1919\u20131988)\nRCA Corporation, founded as the Radio Corporation of America, was a major American electronics company in existence from 1919 to 1987. Initially, RCA was a patent trust owned by a partnership of General Electric (GE), Westinghouse, AT&amp;T Corporation and United Fruit Company. It became an independent company in 1932 after the partners agreed to divest their ownerships in settling an antitrust lawsuit by the United States.\nAn innovative and progressive company, RCA was the dominant electronics and communications firm in the United States for over five decades. In the early 1920s, RCA was at the forefront of the mushrooming radio industry, both as a major manufacturer of radio receivers and as the exclusive manufacturer of the first superheterodyne receiver. In 1926, the company founded the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), the first nationwide radio network. During the '20s and '30s RCA also pioneered the introduction and development of broadcast television\u2014both black and white and especially color television. Throughout most of its existence, RCA was closely identified with the leadership of David Sarnoff. He became general manager at the company's founding, served as president from 1930 to 1965, and remained active as chairman of the board until the end of 1969.\nUntil the 1970s, RCA maintained a seemingly impregnable stature as corporate America's leading name in technology, innovation, and home entertainment. However, the company's performance began to weaken as it expanded beyond its original focus\u2014developing and marketing consumer electronics and communications in the US\u2014towards the larger goal of operating as a diversified multinational conglomerate. The company also faced increasing domestic competition from international electronics firms such as Sony, Philips, Matsushita and Mitsubishi. RCA suffered enormous financial losses attempting to enter the mainframe computer industry, and in other failed projects including the CED videodisc system.\nBy the mid 1980s, RCA was rebounding but the company was never able to regain its former eminence. In 1986, RCA was reacquired by General Electric during the Jack Welch era at GE. Welch sold or liquidated most of RCA's assets, retaining only NBC and some government services units. Today, RCA exists as a brand name only; the various RCA trademarks are currently owned by Sony Music Entertainment and Vantiva, which in turn license the RCA brand name and trademarks for various products to several other companies, including Voxx International, Curtis International, AVC Multimedia, TCL Corporation, and Express LUCK International.\nEstablishment by General Electric.\nRCA originated as a reorganization of the Marconi Wireless Telegraph Company of America, commonly called \"American Marconi\". In 1897, the Wireless Telegraph and Signal Company, Limited, was founded in London to promote the radio\u2014then known as \"wireless telegraphy\"\u2014inventions of Guglielmo Marconi. As part of worldwide expansion, American Marconi was organized as a subsidiary in 1899, holding the rights to Marconi patents in the United States and Cuba. In 1912, American Marconi took control of the assets of the bankrupt United Wireless Telegraph Company, and from that point forward, was the dominant radio communications company in the United States.\nWhen the United States entered World War I in April 1917, the federal government took control of most civilian radio stations to use them for the war effort. Although the government planned to restore civilian ownership of the radio stations once the war ended, many United States Navy officials hoped to retain a monopoly on radio communication even after the war. Contrary to instructions it had received, the Navy began purchasing large numbers of radio stations. When the war ended, Congress rejected the Navy's efforts to have peacetime control of the radio industry and instructed that the Navy return the stations to the original owners.\nDue to national security considerations, the Navy was particularly concerned about returning high-powered international stations to American Marconi, since the majority of its stock was in foreign hands, and the British already largely controlled the international undersea telegraph cables. This concern was increased by the announcement in late 1918 of the formation of the Pan-American Wireless Telegraph and Telephone Company, a joint venture between American Marconi and the Federal Telegraph Company, with plans to set up service between the United States and South America.\nThe Navy had installed a high-powered Alexanderson alternator, built by General Electric (GE), at the American Marconi transmitter site in New Brunswick, New Jersey. It proved to be superior for transatlantic transmissions to the spark-gap transmitters that had been traditionally used by the Marconi companies. Marconi officials were so impressed by the capabilities of the Alexanderson alternators that they began making preparations to adopt them as their standard transmitters for international communication. A tentative plan made with General Electric proposed that over a two-year period the Marconi companies would purchase most of GE's alternator production. However, the U.S. Navy objected to the plan, fearing British domination in international radio communications and the national security concerns this raised.\nThe Navy, claiming support from U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, looked for an alternative that would result in an \"all-American\" company taking over the American Marconi assets. In April 1919, two naval officers, Admiral H. G. Bullard and Commander S. C. Hooper, met with GE president, Owen D. Young and requested a suspension of the pending alternator sales to the Marconi companies. This would leave General Electric without a buyer for its transmitters, so the officers proposed that GE purchase American Marconi, and use the assets to form its own radio communications subsidiary. Young consented to this proposal, which, effective November 20, 1919, transformed American Marconi into the Radio Corporation of America. The decision to form the new company was promoted as a patriotic gesture. The corporate officers were required to be citizens of the United States, with a majority of the company stock to be held by U.S. citizens.\nUpon its founding, RCA was the largest radio communications firm in the United States. Most of the former American Marconi staff continued to work for RCA. Owen Young became the chairman of the board of the new company. Former American Marconi vice president and general manager E. J. Nally become RCA's first president. Nally was succeeded by Major General James G. Harbord, who served from 1922 until January 3, 1930, when Harbord replaced Owen Young as chairman of the board. David Sarnoff, who was RCA's founding general manager, became its third president on the same day. RCA worked closely with the federal government and felt it deserved to maintain its predominant role in U.S. radio communications. At the company's recommendation, President Wilson appointed Rear Admiral Bullard \"to attend the stockholders' and director's meetings... in order that he may present and discuss informally the Government's views and interests\".\nThe radio industry had been making technical advances, particularly in the area of vacuum tube technology and GE needed access to additional patents before its new subsidiary could be fully competitive. During this time American Marconi had been steadily falling behind others in the industry. The two companies then proceeded to negotiate a series of mutually beneficial cross-licensing agreements between themselves and various other companies in the industry. On July 1, 1920, the American Telephone &amp; Telegraph Company (AT&amp;T), agreed to purchase 500,000 shares of RCA\u2014although it divested these shares in early 1923. The United Fruit Company held a small portfolio of radio patents, and signed two agreements in 1921. GE's traditional electric company rival, the Westinghouse Electric &amp; Manufacturing Corporation, had also purchased rights to some critical patents, including one for heterodyne receiving originally issued to Reginald Fessenden, plus regenerative circuit and superheterodyne receiver patents issued to Edwin Armstrong. Westinghouse used this position to negotiate a cross-licensing agreement, effective July 1, 1921, that included a concession that 40% of RCA's equipment purchases would be from Westinghouse. Following these transactions, GE owned 30.1% of RCA's stock, Westinghouse 20.6%, AT&amp;T 10.3%, and United Fruit 4.1%, with the remaining 34.9% owned by individual shareholders.\nIn 1930, RCA agreed to occupy the yet-to-be-constructed landmark skyscraper of the Rockefeller Center complex, 30 Rockefeller Plaza, which in 1933 became known as the RCA Building (renamed the GE Building in 1988 and currently known as the Comcast Building after Comcast acquired NBC). This lease was critical for enabling the massive project to proceed as a commercially viable venture\u2014David Rockefeller cited RCA's action as being responsible for \"the salvation of the project\".\nRadio development.\nInternational and marine communication.\nRCA's primary business objectives at its founding were to provide equipment and services for seagoing vessels, and \"worldwide wireless\" communication in competition with existing international undersea telegraph cables. To provide the international service, the company soon undertook a massive project to build a \"Radio Central\" communications hub at Rocky Point, Long Island, New York, designed to achieve \"the realization of the vision of communication engineers to transmit messages to all points of the world from a single centrally located source\". Construction began in July 1920, and the site was dedicated on November 5, 1921, after two of the proposed twelve antenna spokes had been completed, and two of the 200-kilowatt alternators installed. The debut transmissions received replies from stations in 17 countries.\nAlthough the initial installation would remain in operation, the additional antenna spokes and alternator installations would not be completed, due to a major discovery about radio signal propagation. While investigating transmitter \"harmonics\" \u2013 unwanted additional radio signals produced at higher frequencies than a station's normal transmission frequency \u2013 Westinghouse's Frank Conrad unexpectedly found that in some cases the harmonics could be heard farther than the primary signal, something previously thought impossible, as high-frequency shortwave signals, which had poor groundwave coverage, were thought to have a very limited transmission range. In 1924, Conrad demonstrated to Sarnoff that a low-powered shortwave station in East Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania could be readily received in London by a simple receiver using a curtain rod as an antenna, matching, at a small fraction of the cost, the performance of the massive alternator transmitters. In 1926, Harold H. Beverage further reported that a shortwave signal, transmitted on a 15-meter wavelength (approximately 20\u00a0MHz), was received in South America more readily during the daytime than the 200-kilowatt alternator transmissions.\nThe Alexanderson alternators, control of which had led to RCA's formation, were now considered obsolete, and international radio communication would be primarily conducted using vacuum tube transmitters operating on shortwave bands. RCA would continue to operate international telecommunications services for the remainder of its existence, through its subsidiary RCA Communications, Inc., and later the RCA Global Communications Company. In 1975, the company formed RCA American Communications, which operated its Satcom series of geostationary communications satellites. International shortwave links were in turn largely supplanted by communications satellites, especially for distributing network radio and television programming.\nAt the time RCA was founded in 1919, all radio and telegraphic communication between China and the US, including official messages, were sent through either German radio or British cable links. The U.S. Navy lobbied RCA to seek a concession for a radio link to China, however the company was reluctant because its other concessions were already operating at a loss. This link began operation in 1928. The Mackay Radio and Telegraph Company of California signed a similar agreement with China in 1932. RCA claimed this was breach of contract on the grounds that its 1928 agreement had given it exclusive rights. The dispute went to arbitration, and in 1935 a decision, issued in \"Radio Corporation of America v China\", concluded the Mackay concession was valid, because the earlier RCA concession had not granted exclusive rights.\nBroadcasting.\nThe introduction of organized radio broadcasting in the early 1920s resulted in a dramatic reorientation and expansion of RCA's business activities. The development of vacuum tube radio transmitters made audio transmissions practical, in contrast with the earlier transmitters which were limited to sending the dits-and-dahs of Morse code. Since at least 1916, when he was still at American Marconi, David Sarnoff had proposed establishing broadcasting stations, but his memos to management promoting the idea for sales of a \"Radio Music Box\" had not been followed up at the time.\nA small number of broadcasting stations began operating, and soon interest in the innovation was spreading nationwide. In the summer of 1921, a Madison Square Garden employee, Julius Hopp, devised a plan to raise charitable funds by broadcasting, from ringside, the July 2, 1921 Dempsey-Carpentier heavyweight championship fight to be held in Jersey City, New Jersey. Hopp recruited theaters and halls as listening locations that would charge admission fees to be used as charitable donations. He also contacted RCA's J. Andrew White, the acting president of the National Amateur Wireless Association (NAWA), an organization originally formed by American Marconi which had been inherited by RCA. White agreed to recruit the NAWA membership for volunteers to provide assistance at the listening sites, and also enlisted David Sarnoff for financial and technical support. RCA was authorized to set up a temporary longwave radio station, located in Hoboken a short distance from the match site, and operating under the call letters WJY. For the broadcast White and Sarnoff telephoned commentary from ringside, which was typed up and then read over the air by J. Owen Smith. The demonstration was a technical success, with a claimed audience of 300,000 listeners throughout the northeast.\nRCA quickly moved to expand its broadcasting activities. In the fall of 1921, it set up its first full-time broadcasting station, WDY, at the Roselle Park, New Jersey company plant. By 1923, RCA was operating three stations\u2014WJZ (now WABC) and WJY in New York City, and WRC (now WTEM) in Washington, D.C. A restriction imposed by AT&amp;T's interpretation of the patent cross-licensing agreements required that the RCA stations remain commercial free, and they were financed by profits from radio equipment sales.\nNational Broadcasting Company.\nBeginning in 1922, AT&amp;T became heavily involved in radio broadcasting, and soon was the new industry's most important participant. From the beginning, AT&amp;T's policy was to finance stations by commercial sponsorship of the programs. The company also created the first radio network, centered on its New York City station WEAF (now WFAN), using its long-distance telephone lines to interconnect stations. This allowed them to economize by having multiple stations carry the same program.\nRCA and its partners soon faced an economic crisis, as the costs of providing programming threatened to exceed the funds available from equipment profits. In 1926, AT&amp;T transferred its broadcasting related activities into a new subsidiary, the Broadcasting Company of America (BCA), with its primary assets consisting of broadcasting stations WEAF in New York City and WCAP in Washington, D.C., plus its network operations. Two months later, AT&amp;T unexpectedly decided to exit the radio broadcasting field, and RCA purchased the BCA subsidiary for $1,000,000. These assets formed the basis for the creation of the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), with ownership divided between RCA (50%), General Electric (30%), and Westinghouse (20%) until 1930, when RCA assumed 100% ownership. This purchase also included the right to begin commercial operations. NBC formed two radio networks that eventually expanded nationwide: the NBC-Red Network, with flagship station WEAF, and NBC-Blue, centered on WJZ. Although NBC was originally promoted as expecting to just break even economically, it soon became extremely profitable, which would be an important factor in helping RCA survive the economic pressures of the Great Depression that began in late 1929.\nConcerned that NBC's control of two national radio networks gave it too much power over the industry, in 1941 the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) issued an industry review, Report on Chain Broadcasting, which included a rule designed to force NBC to divest one of them. This order was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court, and on October 12, 1943, the NBC-Blue network was sold to candy magnate Edward J. Noble for $8,000,000, and renamed \"The Blue Network, Inc.\" In 1946 the name was changed to the American Broadcasting Company (ABC). The \"Red\" network retained the NBC name and remained under RCA ownership until 1986.\nFor two decades the NBC radio network's roster of stars provided ratings consistently surpassing those of its main competitor, the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS). But in 1948, as the transition from radio to television was beginning, NBC's leadership came under attack due to what became known as the \"Paley raids\", named after the president of CBS, William S. Paley. After World War II the tax rate for annual incomes above $70,000 was 77%, while capital gains were taxed at 25%. Paley worked out an accounting technique whereby individual performers could set up corporations that allowed their earnings to be taxed at the significantly lower rate. Instead of NBC responding with a similar package, Sarnoff decided that this accounting method was legally and ethically wrong. NBC's performers did not agree, and most of the top stars, including Amos and Andy, Jack Benny, Red Skelton, Edgar Bergen, Burns and Allen, Ed Wynn, Fred Waring, Al Jolson, Groucho Marx and Frank Sinatra moved from NBC to CBS. As a result, CBS boasted of having sixteen of the twenty top-rated programs in 1949. The consequences would carry over to television, where CBS maintained its newfound dominance for decades. Paley had personally worked to woo the performers, while Sarnoff professed his indifference to the defections, stating at an annual meeting that \"Leadership built over the years on a foundation of solid service cannot be snatched overnight by buying a few high-priced comedians. Leadership is not a laughing matter.\"\nRadio receivers.\nFollowing its founding, RCA acted as the sales agent for a small line of Westinghouse and GE branded receivers and parts used by home constructors, originally for a limited market of amateur radio enthusiasts. By 1922, the rise of broadcasting had dramatically increased the demand for radio equipment by the general public, and this development was reflected in the title of RCA's June 1, 1922 catalog, \"Radio Enters the Home\". RCA began selling receivers under the \"Radiola\" name, marketing equipment produced by GE and Westinghouse under the production agreement that allocated a 60%\u201340% ratio in output between the two companies. Although the patent cross-licensing agreements had been intended to give the participants domination of equipment sales, the tremendous growth of the market led to fierce competition, and in 1925 RCA fell behind Atwater Kent as the leader in receiver sales. RCA was particularly hamstrung by the need to coordinate its sales within the limits of the GE/Westinghouse production quotas, and often had difficulty keeping up with industry trends. However, the company made a key advance in early 1924 when it began selling the first superheterodyne receivers, whose high level of performance increased the brand's reputation and popularity. RCA was the exclusive manufacturer of superheterodyne radio sets until 1930. All RCA receivers were battery powered until late 1927 when plug-in AC sets were introduced, providing another boost in sales.\nVacuum tubes.\nRCA inherited American Marconi's status as a major producer of vacuum tubes, which were branded Radiotron in the United States. Especially after the rise of broadcasting, they were a major profit source for the company. RCA's strong patent position meant that the company effectively set the selling prices for vacuum tubes in the U.S., which were significantly higher than in Europe, where Lee de Forest had allowed a key patent to lapse.\nThe company began work on a secret project for the U.S. Navy called Madame X in September 1942. The Bloomington, Indiana, plant was one of the first of five RCA plants to produce Madame X vacuum tubes, which included a proximity fuse used to electronically detonate its payload when it was in range of its target, as opposed to relying on a direct hit. James V. Forrestal, former secretary of the Navy said, \"The proximity fuse had helped blaze the trail to Japan. Without the protection this ingenious device has given the surface ships of the fleet, our westward push could not have been so swift and the cost in men and ships would have been immeasurably greater.\"\nRCA was responsible for creating a series of innovative products, ranging from octal base metal tubes co-developed with General Electric before World War II, to greatly miniaturized Nuvistor tubes, used in the tuners of the New Vista series of television receivers. The Nuvistors were a last major vacuum tube innovation, along with General Electric's Compactron, and were meant to compete with the newly introduced transistor. By 1975, RCA had completely switched from tubes to solid-state devices in their television sets, except for the Cathode-ray tube (CRT) picture tube itself.\nPhonographs and records.\nThe rapid rise of radio broadcasting during the early 1920s, which provided unlimited free entertainment in the home, had a detrimental effect on the American phonograph record industry. The Victor Talking Machine Company in Camden, New Jersey, was then the world's largest manufacturer of records and phonographs, including its popular showcase \"Victrola\" line. In January 1929, RCA purchased the Victor Talking Machine Company; this acquisition became known as the RCA Victor Division of the Radio Corporation of America, and included ownership of Victor's Japanese subsidiary, the Victor Company of Japan (JVC), formed in 1927 and controlling interest in The Gramophone Company Ltd. (later EMI Records) in England.\nRCA's acquisition of the Victor company included the rights to the iconic Nipper/\"His Master's Voice\" trademark across North America. RCA Victor popularized combined radio receiver-phonographs, and also created RCA Photophone, a movie sound-on-film system that competed with William Fox's sound-on-film Movietone and Warner Bros.' sound-on-disc Vitaphone. Although early announcements of the merger between RCA and Victor stressed that the two firms were linking on equal terms to form a joint new company, RCA initially had little interest in the phonograph record business. RCA's management was interested essentially in Victor's superior sales capabilities through the record company's large network of authorized distributors and dealers, as well as the extensive, efficient manufacturing facilities in Camden, New Jersey. Immediately following the purchase of Victor, RCA began planning the manufacture of radio sets and components on Victor's Camden assembly lines, while gradually decreasing the production of Victrolas and records.\nFollowing the Stock market crash of 1929 and subsequent Great Depression, the entire phonograph record industry in America nearly foundered. During the nadir of the record business in the early 1930s, the manufacture of phonographs and records had all but ceased; extant older phonographs were now obsolete and most had been relegated to the attic or basement. RCA Victor began selling the first all-electric Victrola in 1930 and in 1931, the company attempted to revitalize record sales with the introduction of 33&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 revolutions-per-minute (rpm) long play records, which were a commercial failure during the Great Depression, partly because the Victrolas with two speed turntables required to play them were exorbitantly expensive, and also because the audio performance of the new records was generally poor; the new format used the same groove size as existing 78\u00a0rpm records, and it would require the smaller-radius stylus of the later microgroove systems to achieve acceptable slower-speed performance. Additionally, the new long-play records were pressed in a pliable, vinyl-based material called \"Victrolac\" which wore out rapidly under the heavy tonearms then in use.\nIn 1934, following the debacle of its long-play record, RCA Victor introduced the Duo Jr., an inexpensive, small, basic electric turntable designed to be plugged into radio sets. The Duo Jr. was sold at cost, but was practically given away with the purchase of a certain number of Victor records. The Duo Jr.'s rock-bottom price and America's slowly improving economy helped to overcome the national apathy to phonographs, and record sales gradually began to recover. Around 1935, RCA began marketing the modernistic RCA Victor M Special, a polished aluminum portable record player designed by John Vassos that has become an icon of 1930s American industrial design. In 1949, RCA Victor released the first 45\u00a0rpm \"single\" records, as a response to Columbia Records successful introduction of its microgroove 33&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443\u00a0rpm \"LP\" format in 1948. As RCA Victor adopted Columbia's 33&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443\u00a0rpm LP records in 1950, Columbia then adopted RCA Victor's 45\u00a0rpm records.\nMotion pictures.\nRCA also made investments in the movie industry, but they performed poorly. In April 1928, RCA Photophone, Inc., was organized by a group of companies including RCA to develop sound-movie technology. In the fall of 1927, RCA had purchased stock in Film Booking Office (FBO), and on October 25, 1928, with the help of Joseph P. Kennedy, the Radio-Keith-Orpheum Corporation (RKO) studio was formed by merging FBO with Keith-Albee-Orpheum Corporation (KAO), a company whose holdings included motion picture theaters. The theaters in which RKO had an interest provided a potential market for the RCA Photophone sound systems. RCA ownership of RKO stock expanded from about one quarter in 1930 to about 61% in 1932. RKO encountered severe financial problems, going into receivership from early 1933 until 1940. RCA sold its holdings in the studio to raise funds for its basic operations.\nSeparation from General Electric.\nAfter years of industry complaints that the cross-licensing agreements between RCA, GE, and Westinghouse had in effect created illegal monopolies, the U.S. Department of Justice brought antitrust charges against the three companies in May 1930. After much negotiation, in 1932 the Justice Department accepted a consent agreement that removed the restrictions established by the cross-licensing agreements, and also provided that RCA would become a fully independent company. As a result, GE and Westinghouse gave up their ownership interests in RCA, while RCA was allowed to keep its factories. To give RCA a chance to establish itself, GE and Westinghouse were required to refrain from competing in the radio business for the next two and one-half years.\nTelevision.\nRCA began television development in early 1929, after an overly optimistic Vladimir K. Zworykin convinced Sarnoff that a commercial version of his prototype system could be produced in a relatively short time for $100,000. Following what would actually be many years of additional research and millions of dollars, RCA demonstrated an all-electronic black-and-white television system at the 1939 New York World's Fair. RCA began regular experimental television broadcasting from the NBC studios to the New York metropolitan area on April 30, 1939, via station W2XBS, channel 1 (which evolved into WNBC channel 4) from the new Empire State Building transmitter on top of the structure. Around this time, RCA began selling its first television set models, including the TRK-5 and TRK-9, in various New York stores. However, the FCC had not approved the start of commercial television operations, because technical standards had not yet been finalized. Concerned that RCA's broadcasts were an attempt to flood the market with sets that would force it to adopt RCA's current technology, the FCC stepped in to limit its broadcasts.\nFollowing the adoption of National Television System Committee (NTSC) recommended standards, the FCC authorized the start of commercial television broadcasts on July 1, 1941. The entry of the United States into World War II a few months later greatly slowed its deployment, but RCA resumed selling television receivers almost immediately after the war ended in 1945.\nIn 1950, the FCC adopted a standard for color television that had been promoted by CBS, but the effort soon failed, primarily because the color broadcasts could not be received by existing black-and-white sets. As the result of a major research push, RCA engineers developed a method of \"compatible\" color transmissions that, through the use of interlacing, simultaneously broadcast color and black-and-white images, which could be picked up by both color and existing black-and-white sets. In 1953, RCA's all-electronic color television technology was adopted as the standard for the United States. At that time, Sarnoff predicted annual color television sales would reach 1.78\u00a0million in 1956, but the receivers were expensive and difficult to adjust, and there was initially a lack of color programming, so sales lagged badly and the actual 1956 total would only be 120,000. RCA's ownership of NBC proved to be a major benefit, as that network was instructed to promote its color program offerings; even so, it was not until 1968 that color television sales in the United States surpassed those of black-and-white sets.\nWhile lauding the technical prowess of his RCA engineers who had developed color television, David Sarnoff, in marked contrast to William Paley, president of CBS, did not disguise his dislike for popular television programs. His authorized biography even boasted that \"no one has yet caught him in communion with one of the upper dozen or so top-rated programs\" and \"The popular programs, to put the matter bluntly, have very little appeal for him.\"\nRCA professional video cameras and studio gear, particularly of the TK-40/41 series, became standard equipment at many American television network affiliates, as RCA CT-100 (\"RCA Merrill\" to dealers) television sets introduced color television to the public.\nDiversification.\nIn 1941, shortly before the United States entered World War II, the cornerstone was laid for a research and development facility in Princeton, New Jersey called RCA Laboratories. Led for many years by Elmer Engstrom, it was used to develop many innovations, including color television, the electron microscope, CMOS-based technology, heterojunction physics, optoelectronic emitting devices, liquid crystal displays (LCDs), videocassette recorders, direct broadcast television, direct broadcast satellite systems and high-definition television.\nRCA plants switched to war production shortly after the U.S. entered the war in December 1941. During World War II, RCA was involved in radar and radio development in support of the war effort, and ranked 43rd among United States corporations in the value of wartime military production contracts. One such contract was to outfit the battleship USS Texas with a 400-megahertz pulse radar set, using technology developed by RCA acoustics scientist, Irving Wolff. During and after the war, RCA set up several new divisions for defense, space exploration and other activities. The RCA Service Corporation provided large numbers of staff for the Distant Early Warning (DEW) Line. RCA units won five Army\u2013Navy \"E\" Awards for Excellence in production. Due to the hostilities between Japan and the United States during World War II, the Victor Company of Japan became an independent company after seceding from RCA Victor in the United States; JVC retained the 'Victor' and \"His Master's Voice\" trademarks for use in Japan only.\nIn 1955, RCA sold its Estate brand of large appliance operations to Whirlpool Corporation. As part of this transaction, Whirlpool was given the right to market \"RCA Whirlpool\" appliances through the mid-1960s.\nRCA manufactured equipment, such as oscilloscopes, for repairing radios, \nRCA Graphic Systems Division (GSD) was an early supplier of electronics designed for the printing and publishing industries. It contracted with German company Rudolf Hell to market adaptations of the Digiset photocomposition system as the Videocomp, and a Laser Color Scanner. The Videocomp was supported by a Spectra computer that ran the Page-1 and, later the Page-II and FileComp composition systems. RCA later sold the Videocomp rights to Information International Inc.\nRCA Victor became a major proponent of the 8-track tape cartridge, which it launched in 1965. Initially, the 8-track made a huge and profitable impact on consumers of recorded music. Sales of the 8-track tape format began to decline during the late 1970s when consumers increasingly favored the 4-track compact cassette tape format developed by Philips.\nComputers.\nRCA was one of a number of companies in the 1960s that entered the mainframe computer field to challenge the market leader International Business Machines (IBM). Although at this time computers were almost universally used for routine data processing and scientific research, in 1964 Sarnoff, who prided himself as a visionary, predicted that \"The computer will become the hub of a vast network of remote data stations and information banks feeding into the machine at a transmission rate of a billion or more bits of information a second\u00a0... Eventually, a global communications network handling voice, data and facsimile will instantly link man to machine\u2014or machine to machine\u2014by land, air, underwater, and space circuits. [The computer] will affect man's ways of thinking, his means of education, his relationship to his physical and social environment, and it will alter his ways of living. ...\u00a0[Before the end of this century, these forces] will coalesce into what unquestionably will become the greatest adventure of the human mind.\"\nRCA marketed a Spectra 70 computer line that was hardware, but not software, compatible with IBM's System/360 series. It also produced the RCA Series, which competed against the IBM System/370. This technology was leased to the English Electric company, which used it for their System 4 series, which were essentially RCA Spectra 70 clones. RCA's TSOS operating system was the first mainframe, demand paging, virtual memory operating system on the market. By 1971, despite a significant investment, RCA had only a 4% market share, and it was estimated that it would cost around $500\u00a0million over the next five years to remain competitive with the IBM/370 series. On September 17, 1971, the RCA board of directors announced its decision to close its computer systems division (RCA-CSD), which would be written off as a $490\u00a0million company loss. Sperry Rand's UNIVAC division took over the RCA computer division in January 1972. Univac did not want the Spectra computers because they were similar to its own 9000 series; instead, they wanted RCA's computer customer base.\nLater years.\nOn January 1, 1965, Robert Sarnoff succeeded his father as RCA's president, although the elder Sarnoff remained in control as chairman of the board. The younger Sarnoff sought to modernize RCA's image with the introduction in late 1968 of what was then a futuristic-looking new logo (the letters 'RCA' in block, modernized form), replacing the original lightning bolt logo, and the virtual retirement of both the Victor and Nipper/\"His Master's Voice\" trademarks. The RCA Victor Division was renamed RCA Records; the 'Victor' and 'Victrola' trademarks were no longer used on RCA consumer electronics. 'Victor' was now restricted to the labels and album covers of RCA's regular popular record releases, while the Nipper/\"His Master's Voice\" trademark was seen only on the album covers of Red Seal records.\nIn 1969, the company name was officially changed from Radio Corporation of America to the \"RCA Corporation\", to reflect its broader range of corporate activities and expansion into other countries. At the end of that same year, David Sarnoff, after being incapacitated by a long-term illness, was removed as the company's chairman of the board. He died in December 1971.\nRCA's exit from the mainframe computer market in 1971 marked a milestone in its transition from electronics and technology toward Robert Sarnoff's goal to diversify RCA as a multinational business conglomerate. During the late 1960s and 1970s, the company made a wide-ranging series of acquisitions, including Hertz (rental cars), Banquet (frozen foods and TV dinners), Coronet (carpeting), Random House (publishing) and Gibson (greeting cards). However, the company was slipping into financial disarray, with wags calling it \"Rugs Chickens &amp; Automobiles\" (RCA), to poke fun at its new direction.\nDuring this period, RCA continued to maintain its high standards of engineering excellence in broadcast and satellite communications equipment, but profits generated by the NBC television and radio networks began to decline.\nRobert Sarnoff's tenure as RCA president was unsuccessful, marked by falling profits. While out of the country in October 1975, Sarnoff was ousted in a \"boardroom coup\" led by Anthony Conrad, who became RCA's new president. Conrad resigned less than a year later after he admitted failing to file income tax returns for six years. His successor, Edgar H. Griffiths, proved to be unpopular and retired in early 1981. Griffiths was succeeded by Thornton Bradshaw, who turned out to be the last RCA president.\nAfter the departure of Robert Sarnoff, Griffiths, who considered the demoted \"His Master's Voice\" trademark a \"valuable company asset\", restored Nipper as RCA's corporate mascot. On October 31, 1976, RCA formally announced the return of the Nipper trademark to RCA products and advertising. Earlier that year, RCA Records had begun to reinstate Nipper to most record labels in countries and territories where RCA held the rights to the trademark. Once again, Nipper was widely used in RCA newspaper, magazine, and TV advertisements. The trademark also returned to company stationery, sales literature, shipping cartons, store displays, delivery and service vehicles and reappeared on RCA television sets and in 1981, the new CED Videodisc system. Several newspaper articles and TV news reports about Nipper's revival appeared at the time. A multitude of new Nipper promotional items and collectibles also appeared, including T-shirts, caps, neckties, beach towels, cigarette lighters, coin banks, keychains, watches, clocks, coffee mugs, drinking glasses and stuffed toys.\nProjects attempting to establish new consumer electronics products during this era failed and lost RCA much money and prestige. An RCA Studio II home video game console, introduced in 1977, was canceled just under two years later due to poor sales. Development of RCA's capacitance electronic (CED) videodisc system began in 1964, and after several years of delays was launched in March 1981. Marketed under the SelectaVision name, the RCA CED videodisc system represented the largest investment RCA made in a single product, even greater than color TV. However, the system was practically obsolete by the time it finally appeared, and never reached the manufacturing volumes needed to bring its price down to the level needed to compete against the newer, recordable and increasingly cheaper videotape technology. In April 1984, after three years of slow sales, RCA abandoned manufacture of the CED players, and ended videodisc production in 1986, after a loss of around $650 million.\nAround 1980, RCA corporate strategy reported on moving manufacture of its television receivers to Mexico. In 1981, Columbia Pictures sold its share in the home video division to RCA and outside of North America this division was renamed \"RCA/Columbia Pictures International Video (now Sony Pictures Home Entertainment)\". The following year, within North America, it was renamed to \"RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video\". In 1983, the German media conglomerate Bertelsmann sold 50% of Arista Records to RCA Records; in 1985, RCA and Bertelsmann formed a joint venture, RCA/Ariola International, which took over management of RCA Records. Bertelsmann would fully acquire RCA Records from General Electric after GE absorbed RCA in 1986.\nRCA was still profitable in 1983, when it switched manufacturing of its VHS VCRs from Panasonic to Hitachi. In 1984, RCA Broadcast Systems Division moved from the RCA Victor plant in Camden, New Jersey, to the site of the RCA antenna engineering facility in Gibbsboro, New Jersey. On October 3, 1985, RCA announced it was closing the Broadcast Systems Division. In the years that followed, the broadcast product lines developed in Camden were terminated or sold off, and most of the old RCA Victor buildings and factories in Camden were demolished, except for a few of the original Victor buildings that had been declared national historic buildings. For several years, RCA spinoff L-3 Communications Systems East was headquartered in the famous Nipper Building, but has since moved to an adjacent building built by the city for them. The renovated Nipper Building now houses shops and luxury loft apartments. Also in 1985, RCA sold the Hertz car rental company to UAL, Inc.\nRe-acquisition and breakup by General Electric.\nIn December 1985, it was announced that General Electric would reacquire its former subsidiary for $6.28\u00a0billion in cash, or $66.50 per share of stock. GE's acquisition of RCA was the largest non-oil company merger in history up to that time and was completed on June 9, 1986. Despite initial assurances that under GE, RCA would continue to operate as a mostly autonomous unit, over the next few years, GE proceeded to sell off most of RCA's remaining assets. It was revealed that GE's main motivation for purchasing RCA was to acquire the NBC Television Network and the corporation's defense related businesses. In 1987, GE disposed of its 50% interest in RCA Records to its German partner Bertelsmann and RCA Records became a division of Bertelsmann Music Group. RCA Global Communications Inc., a division with roots dating back to RCA's founding in 1919, was sold to the MCI Communications Corporation; also in 1987, Westwood One purchased the NBC Radio Network.\nIn 1988, the rights to manufacture consumer electronics products under the RCA and GE brands was acquired by Thomson Consumer Electronics, in exchange for some of Thomson's medical businesses. Also in 1988, its semiconductor business (including the former RCA Solid State unit and Intersil) was bought by Harris Corporation. That same year, the iconic RCA Building, known as \"30 Rock\" at Rockefeller Center was renamed the GE Building.\nIn 1991, GE sold its share in RCA/Columbia to Sony Pictures which renamed the unit \"Columbia TriStar Home Video\" (later further renamed to Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment, now Sony Pictures Home Entertainment).\nSarnoff Labs was put on a five-year plan whereby GE would fund all the labs' activities for the first year, then reduce its support to near zero after the fifth year. This required Sarnoff Labs to change its business model to become an industrial contract research facility. In 1988, it was transferred to SRI International (SRI) as the David Sarnoff Research Center, and subsequently renamed the Sarnoff Corporation. In January 2011, Sarnoff Corporation was fully integrated into SRI.\nIn 2011, GE sold its controlling interest in NBC, by this time part of the multimedia NBCUniversal venture that included TV and cable, to Comcast, and in 2013, Comcast acquired the remaining interest. After the sale of NBCUniversal, the only former RCA unit which GE retained was Government Services.\nIn 2022, Thomson's successor company, Technicolor SA, sold the RCA trademarks to licensing firm Talisman Brands, Inc. d/b/a Established Incorporated, stylized as \"established.\"\nLegacy.\nRCA antique radios, and early color television receivers such as the RCA Merrill/CT-100, are among the more sought-after collectible radios and televisions, due to their popularity during the golden age of radio and the historic significance of the RCA name, as well as their styling, manufacturing quality and engineering innovations. Most collectable are the pre-war television sets manufactured by RCA beginning in 1939, including the TRK-5, TRK-9 and TRK-12 models.\nThe RCA Heritage Museum was established at Rowan University in 2012.\nThe historic RCA Victor Building 17, the \"Nipper Building\", in Camden, New Jersey, was converted to luxury apartments in 2003.\nA type of plug/jack combination used in audio and video cables is still called the RCA connector.\nTo this day, a variety of consumer electronics including 2-in-1 tablets, televisions and telephones, home appliances and more are sold under the RCA brand name.\nEnvironmental issues.\nNumerous former RCA manufacturing sites have been reported to be polluted with industrial waste.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25971", "revid": "13974845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25971", "title": "Rubik's Cube", "text": "3D combination puzzle\nThe Rubik's Cube is a 3D combination puzzle invented in 1974 by Hungarian sculptor and professor of architecture Ern\u0151 Rubik. Originally called the Magic Cube, the puzzle was licensed by Rubik to be sold by Pentangle Puzzles in the UK in 1978, and then by Ideal Toy Corp in 1980 via businessman Tibor Laczi and Seven Towns founder Tom Kremer. The cube was released internationally in 1980 and became one of the most recognized icons in popular culture. It won the 1980 German Game of the Year special award for Best Puzzle. As of \u00a02024[ [update]], around 500\u00a0million cubes had been sold worldwide, making it the world's bestselling puzzle game and bestselling toy. The Rubik's Cube was inducted into the US National Toy Hall of Fame in 2014.\nOn the original, classic Rubik's Cube, each of the six faces was covered by nine stickers, with each face in one of six solid colours: white, red, blue, orange, green and yellow. Some later versions of the cube have been updated to use coloured plastic panels instead. Since 1988, the arrangement of colours has been standardised, with white opposite yellow, blue opposite green and orange opposite red, and with the red, white and blue arranged clockwise, in that order. On early cubes, the position of the colours varied from cube to cube.\nAn internal pivot mechanism enables each layer to turn independently, thus mixing up the colours. For the puzzle to be solved, each face must be returned to having only one colour. The cube has inspired other designers to create a number of similar puzzles with various numbers of sides, dimensions and mechanisms.\nAlthough the Rubik's Cube reached the height of its mainstream popularity in the 1980s, it is still widely known and used. Many speedcubers continue to practise it and similar puzzles, competing for the fastest times in various categories. Since 2003, the World Cube Association (WCA), the international governing body of the Rubik's Cube, has organised competitions worldwide and has recognised world records.\nHistory.\nPrecursors.\nIn March 1970, Larry D. Nichols invented a 2x2x2 \"Puzzle with Pieces Rotatable in Groups\" and filed a Canadian patent application for it. Nichols's cube was held together by magnets. Nichols was granted https:// on 11 April 1972, two years before Rubik invented his Cube.\nOn 9 April 1970, Frank Fox applied to patent an \"amusement device\", a type of sliding puzzle on a spherical surface with \"at least two 3\u00d73 arrays\" intended to be used for the game of noughts and crosses. He received his UK patent (1344259) on 16 January 1974.\nRubik's invention.\nIn the mid-1970s, Ern\u0151 Rubik worked at the Department of Interior Design at the Academy of Applied Arts and Crafts in Budapest. Although it is widely reported that the Cube was built as a teaching tool to help his students understand 3D objects, his actual purpose was solving the structural problem of moving the parts independently without the entire mechanism falling apart. He did not realise that he had created a puzzle until the first time he scrambled his new Cube and then tried to restore it, which took him about a month to solve himself. Rubik applied for a patent in Hungary for his \"Magic Cube\" () on 30 January 1975, and HU170062 was granted later that year. He wrote his experience in his book, Cubed: The Book of Us All.\nThe first test batches of the Magic Cube were produced in late 1977 and released in toy shops in Budapest. Magic Cube was held together with interlocking plastic pieces that prevented the puzzle from being easily pulled apart, unlike the magnets in Nichols's design. With Ern\u0151 Rubik's permission, businessman Tibor Laczi took a Cube to Germany's Nuremberg Toy Fair in February 1979 in an attempt to popularise it. It was noticed by Seven Towns founder Tom Kremer, and they signed a deal with Ideal Toys in September 1979 to release the Magic Cube worldwide. Ideal wanted at least a recognisable name to trademark; that arrangement put Rubik in the spotlight because the Magic Cube was renamed after its inventor in 1980. The puzzle made its international debut at the toy fairs of London, Paris, Nuremberg, and New York in January and February 1980.\nAfter its international debut, the progress of the Cube towards the toy shop shelves of the West was briefly halted so that it could be manufactured to Western safety and packaging specifications. A lighter Cube was produced, and Ideal decided to rename it. \"The Gordian Knot\" and \"Inca Gold\" were considered, but the company finally decided on \"Rubik's Cube\", and the first batch was exported from Hungary in May 1980.\nThe packaging had a few variations depending on the country, most popular being a clear plastic cylinder but cardboard versions were also used. The cube itself had slightly different variations in the order of the colours (Western vs. Japanese colour scheme where blue/yellow are switched) and some of the cubes did not have a white piece logo.\n1980s Cube craze.\nAfter the first batches of Rubik's Cubes were released in May 1980, initial sales were modest, but Ideal began a television advertising campaign in the middle of the year which it supplemented with newspaper advertisements. At the end of 1980, Rubik's Cube won a German Game of the Year special award and won similar awards for best toy in the UK, France, and the US. By 1981, Rubik's Cube had become a craze, and it is estimated that in the period from 1980 to 1983 around 200\u00a0million Rubik's Cubes were sold worldwide. In March 1981, a speedcubing championship organised by the Guinness Book of World Records was held in Munich, and a Rubik's Cube was depicted on the front cover of \"Scientific American\" that same month. In June 1981, \"The Washington Post\" reported that Rubik's Cube is \"a puzzle that's moving like fast food right now ... this year's Hoola Hoop or Bongo Board\", and by September 1981, \"New Scientist\" noted that the cube had \"captivated the attention of children of ages from 7 to 70 all over the world this summer.\"\nAs most people could solve only one or two sides, numerous books were published including David Singmaster's \"Notes on Rubik's \"Magic Cube\"\" (1980) and Patrick Bossert's \"You Can Do the Cube\" (1981). At one stage in 1981, three of the top ten best selling books in the US were books on solving Rubik's Cube, and the best-selling book of 1981 was James G. Nourse's \"The Simple Solution to Rubik's Cube\" which sold over 6\u00a0million copies. In 1981, the Museum of Modern Art in New York exhibited a Rubik's Cube, and at the 1982 World's Fair in Knoxville, Tennessee a six-foot Cube was put on display. In 1983, ABC Television released a cartoon show called \"Rubik, the Amazing Cube\". In June 1982, the First Rubik's Cube World Championship took place in Budapest and would become the only competition recognized as official until the championship was revived in 2003.\nIn October 1982, \"The New York Times\" reported that sales had fallen and that \"the craze has died\", and by 1983 it was clear that sales had plummeted. However, in some countries such as China and the USSR, the craze had started later and demand was still high because of a shortage of Cubes.\n21st-century revival.\nRubik's Cubes continued to be marketed and sold throughout the 1980s and 1990s, but it was not until the early 2000s that interest in the Cube began increasing again. In the US, sales doubled between 2001 and 2003, and \"The Boston Globe\" remarked that it was \"becoming cool to own a Cube again\". The 2003 Rubik's Cube World Championship was the first speedcubing tournament since 1982. It was held in Toronto and was attended by 83 participants. The tournament led to the formation of the World Cube Association in 2004. Annual sales of Rubik branded cubes were said to have reached 15\u00a0million worldwide in 2008. Part of the new appeal was ascribed to the advent of Internet video sites, such as YouTube, which allowed fans to share their solving strategies. Following the expiration of Rubik's patent in 2000, other brands of cubes appeared, especially from Chinese companies. Many of these Chinese branded cubes have been engineered for speed and are favoured by speedcubers. On 27 October 2020, Spin Master said it will pay $50 million to buy the Rubik's Cube brand.\nImitations.\nTaking advantage of an initial shortage of cubes, many imitations and variations appeared, many of which may have violated one or more patents. In 2000, the patents expired, and since then, many Chinese companies have produced copies, modifications, and improvements upon the Rubik and V-Cube designs.\nPatent history.\nNichols assigned his patent to his employer Moleculon Research Corp., which sued Ideal in 1982. In 1984, Ideal lost the patent infringement suit and appealed. In 1986, the appeals court affirmed the judgment that Rubik's 2\u00d72\u00d72 Pocket Cube infringed Nichols's patent, but overturned the judgment on Rubik's 3\u00d73\u00d73 Cube.\nEven while Rubik's patent application was being processed, Terutoshi Ishigi, a self-taught engineer and ironworks owner near Tokyo, filed for a Japanese patent for a nearly identical mechanism, which was granted in 1976 (Japanese patent publication JP55-008192). Until 1999, when an amended Japanese patent law was enforced, Japan's patent office granted Japanese patents for non-disclosed technology within Japan without requiring worldwide novelty. Hence, Ishigi's patent is generally accepted as an independent reinvention at that time. Rubik applied for more patents in 1980, including another Hungarian patent on 28 October. In the United States, Rubik was granted https:// on 29 March 1983 for the Cube. This patent expired in 2000.\nTrademarks.\nRubik's Brand Ltd. also holds the registered trademarks for the word \"Rubik\" and \"Rubik's\" and for the 2D and 3D visualisations of the puzzle. The trademarks were upheld by a ruling of the General Court of the European Union on 25 November 2014 in a successful defence against a German toy manufacturer seeking to invalidate them. However, European toy manufacturers are allowed to create differently shaped puzzles that have a similar rotating or twisting functionality of component parts such as for example Skewb, Pyraminx or Impossiball.\nOn 10 November 2016, Rubik's Cube lost a ten-year battle over a key trademark issue. The European Union's highest court, the Court of Justice, ruled that the puzzle's shape was not sufficient to grant it trademark protection.\nMechanics.\nA standard Rubik's Cube measures on each side. The puzzle consists of 26 unique miniature cubes, also known as \"cubies\" or \"cubelets\". Each of these includes a concealed inward extension that interlocks with the other cubes while permitting them to move to different locations. However, the centre cube of each of the six faces is merely a single square fa\u00e7ade; all six are affixed to the core mechanism. These provide structure for the other pieces to fit into and rotate around. Hence, there are 21 pieces: a single core piece consisting of three intersecting axes holding the six centre squares in place but letting them rotate, and 20 smaller plastic pieces that fit into it to form the assembled puzzle.\nEach of the six centre pieces pivots on a fastener held by the centre piece, a \"3D cross\". A spring between each fastener and its corresponding piece tensions the piece inward, so that collectively, the whole assembly remains compact but can still be easily manipulated. The older versions of the official Cube used a screw that can be tightened or loosened to change the \"feel\" of the Cube. Newer official Rubik's brand cubes have rivets instead of screws and cannot be adjusted. Inexpensive clones do not have screws or springs, all they have is a plastic clip to keep the centre piece in place and freely rotate.\nThe Cube can be taken apart without much difficulty, typically by rotating the top layer by 45\u00b0 and then prying one of its edge cubes away from the other two layers. Consequently, it is a simple process to \"solve\" a Cube by taking it apart and reassembling it in a solved state.\nThere are six central pieces that show one coloured face, twelve edge pieces that show two coloured faces, and eight corner pieces that show three coloured faces. Each piece shows a unique colour combination, but not all combinations are present (for example, if red and orange are on opposite sides of the solved Cube, there is no edge piece with both red and orange sides). The location of these cubes relative to one another can be altered by twisting an outer third of the Cube by increments of 90 degrees, but the location of the coloured sides relative to one another in the completed state of the puzzle cannot be altered; it is fixed by the relative positions of the centre squares. However, Cubes with alternative colour arrangements also exist; for example, with the yellow face opposite the green, the blue face opposite the white, and red and orange remaining opposite each other.\nDouglas Hofstadter, in the July 1982 issue of \"Scientific American\", pointed out that Cubes could be coloured in such a way as to emphasise the corners or edges, rather than the faces as the standard colouring does; but neither of these alternative colourings has ever become popular.\nMathematics.\nThe puzzle was originally advertised as having \"over 3,000,000,000 (three billion) combinations but only one solution\". Depending on how combinations are counted, the actual number is significantly higher.\nPermutations.\nThe original (3\u00d73\u00d73) Rubik's Cube has eight corners and twelve edges. There are 8! (40,320) ways to arrange the corner cubes. Each corner has three possible orientations, although only seven (of eight) can be oriented independently; the orientation of the eighth (final) corner depends on the preceding seven, giving 37 (2,187) possibilities. There are 12!/2 (239,500,800) ways to arrange the edges, restricted from 12! because edges must be in an even permutation exactly when the corners are. (When arrangements of centres are also permitted, as described below, the rule is that the combined arrangement of corners, edges, and centres must be an even permutation.) Eleven edges can be flipped independently, with the flip of the twelfth depending on the preceding ones, giving 211 (2,048) possibilities. Thus the total number of arrangements of a Rubik's Cube is\nformula_1\nwhich is about 43 quintillion. To put this into perspective, if one had one standard-sized Rubik's Cube for each permutation, one could cover the Earth's surface 275 times, or stack them in a tower 261 light-years high.\nThe preceding figure is limited to permutations that can be reached solely by turning the sides of the cube. If one considers permutations reached through disassembly of the cube, the number becomes twelve times larger:\nformula_2\nwhich is approximately 519\u00a0quintillion possible arrangements of the pieces that make up the cube, but only one-twelfth of these are actually solvable. This is because there is no sequence of moves that will swap a single pair of pieces or rotate a single corner or edge cube. Thus, there are 12 possible sets of reachable configurations, sometimes called \"universes\" or \"orbits\", into which the cube can be placed by dismantling and reassembling it.\nThe preceding numbers assume the centre faces are in a fixed position. If one considers turning the whole cube to be a different permutation, then each of the preceding numbers should be multiplied by 24. A chosen colour can be on one of six sides, and then one of the adjacent colours can be in one of four positions; this determines the positions of all remaining colours.\nCentre faces.\nThe original Rubik's Cube had no orientation markings on the centre faces (although some carried the \"Rubik's Cube\" mark on the centre square of the white face), and therefore solving it does not require any attention to orienting those faces correctly. However, with marker pens, one could, for example, mark the central squares of an unscrambled Cube with four coloured marks on each edge, each corresponding to the colour of the adjacent face; a cube marked in this way is referred to as a \"supercube\". Some Cubes have also been produced commercially with markings on all of the squares, such as the Lo Shu magic square or playing card suits. Cubes have also been produced where the nine stickers on a face are used to make a single larger picture, and centre orientation matters on these as well. Thus one can nominally solve a Cube yet have the markings on the centres rotated; it then becomes an additional test to solve the centres as well.\nMarking Rubik's Cube's centres increases its difficulty, because this expands the set of distinguishable possible configurations. There are 46/2 (2,048) ways to orient the centres since an even permutation of the corners implies an even number of quarter turns of centres as well. In particular, when the Cube is unscrambled apart from the orientations of the central squares, there will always be an even number of centre squares requiring a quarter turn. Thus orientations of centres increases the total number of possible Cube permutations from 43,252,003,274,489,856,000 (4.3\u00d71019) to 88,580,102,706,155,225,088,000 (8.9\u00d71022).\nWhen turning a cube over is considered to be a change in permutation then we must also count arrangements of the centre faces. Nominally there are 6! ways to arrange the six centre faces of the cube, but only 24 of these are achievable without disassembly of the cube. When the orientations of centres are also counted, as above, this increases the total number of possible Cube permutations from 88,580,102,706,155,225,088,000 (8.9\u00d71022) to 2,125,922,464,947,725,402,112,000 (2.1\u00d71024).\nAlgorithms.\nIn Rubik's cubers' parlance, a memorised sequence of moves that have a desired effect on the cube is called an \"algorithm\". This terminology is derived from the mathematical use of \"algorithm\", meaning a list of well-defined instructions for performing a task from a given initial state, through well-defined successive states, to a desired end-state. Each method of solving the Cube employs its own set of algorithms, together with descriptions of what effect the algorithm has, and when it can be used to bring the cube closer to being solved.\nMany algorithms are designed to transform only a small part of the cube without interfering with other parts that have already been solved so that they can be applied repeatedly to different parts of the cube until the whole is solved. For example, there are well-known algorithms for cycling three corners without changing the rest of the puzzle or flipping the orientation of a pair of edges while leaving the others intact.\nSome algorithms do have a certain desired effect on the cube (for example, swapping two corners) but may also have the side-effect of changing other parts of the cube (such as permuting some edges). Such algorithms are often simpler than the ones without side effects and are employed early on in the solution when most of the puzzle has not yet been solved and the side effects are not important. Towards the end of the solution, the more specific (and usually more complicated) algorithms are used instead.\nRelevance and application of mathematical group theory.\nRubik's Cube lends itself to the application of mathematical group theory, which has been helpful for deducing certain algorithms \u2013 in particular, those which have a \"commutator\" structure, namely \"XYX\"\u22121\"Y\"\u22121 (where \"X\" and \"Y\" are specific moves or move-sequences and \"X\"\u22121 and \"Y\"\u22121 are their respective inverses), or a \"conjugate\" structure, namely \"XYX\"\u22121, often referred to by speedcubers colloquially as a \"setup move\". In addition, the fact that there are well-defined subgroups within the Rubik's Cube group enables the puzzle to be learned and mastered by moving up through various self-contained \"levels of difficulty\". For example, one such \"level\" could involve solving cubes that have been scrambled using only 180-degree turns. These subgroups are the principle underlying the computer cubing methods by Thistlethwaite and Kociemba, which solve the cube by further reducing it to another subgroup.\nUnitary representation.\nThe Rubik's group can be endowed with a unitary representation: such a description allows the Rubik's Cube to be mapped into a quantum system of few particles, where the rotations of its faces are implemented by unitary operators. The rotations of the faces act as generators of the Lie group.\nSolutions.\nSingmaster notation.\nMany 3\u00d73\u00d73 Rubik's Cube enthusiasts use a notation developed by David Singmaster to denote a sequence of moves, referred to as \"Singmaster notation\" or simple \"Cube notation\". Its relative nature allows algorithms to be written in such a way that they can be applied regardless of which side is designated the top or how the colours are organised on a particular cube.\nWhen a prime symbol (\u00a0\u2032\u00a0) follows a letter, it indicates an anticlockwise face turn; while a letter without a prime symbol denotes a clockwise turn. These directions are as one is looking at the specified face. A letter followed by a\u00a02 (occasionally a superscript\u00a02) denotes two turns, or a 180-degree turn. For example, \"R\" means to turn the right side clockwise, but \"R\u2032\" means to turn the right side anticlockwise. The letters \"x\", \"y\", and \"z\" are used to indicate that the entire Cube should be turned about one of its axes, corresponding to R, U, and F turns respectively. When \"x\", \"y\", or \"z\" is primed, it is an indication that the cube must be rotated in the opposite direction. When \"x\", \"y\", or \"z\" is squared, the cube must be rotated 180 degrees. \nOne of the most common deviations from Singmaster notation, and in fact the current official standard, is to use \"w\", for \"wide\", instead of lowercase letters to represent moves of two layers; thus, a move of \"Rw\" is equivalent to one of \"r\".\nFor methods using middle-layer turns (particularly corners-first methods), there is a generally accepted \"MES\" extension to the notation where letters \"M\", \"E\", and \"S\" denote middle layer turns. It was used e.g. in Marc Waterman's Algorithm.\nThe 4\u00d74\u00d74 and larger cubes use an extended notation to refer to the additional middle layers. Generally speaking, uppercase letters (\"F B U D L R\") refer to the outermost portions of the cube (called faces). Lowercase letters (\"f b u d l r\") refer to the inner portions of the cube (called slices). An asterisk (L*), a number in front of it (2L), or two layers in parentheses (Ll), means to turn the two layers at the same time (both the inner and the outer left faces) For example: (\"Rr\")'\u00a0\"l\"2\u00a0\"f\"' means to turn the two rightmost layers anticlockwise, then the left inner layer twice, and then the inner front layer anticlockwise. By extension, for cubes of 6\u00d76\u00d76 and larger, moves of three layers are notated by the number 3, for example, 3L.\nAn alternative notation, Wolstenholme notation, is designed to make memorising sequences of moves easier for novices. This notation uses the same letters for faces except it replaces U with T (top), so that all are consonants. The key difference is the use of the vowels O, A, and I for clockwise, anticlockwise, and twice (180-degree) turns, which results in word-like sequences such as LOTA RATO LATA ROTI (equivalent to LU\u2032 R\u2032 U L\u2032 U\u2032 R U2 in Singmaster notation). The addition of a C implies rotation of the entire cube, so ROC is the clockwise rotation of the cube around its right face. Middle layer moves are denoted by adding an M to the corresponding face move, so RIM means a 180-degree turn of the middle layer adjacent to the R face.\nAnother notation appeared in the 1981 book \"The Simple Solution to Rubik's Cube\". Singmaster notation was not widely known at the time of publication. The faces were named Top (T), Bottom (B), Left (L), Right (R), Front (F), and Posterior (P), with + for clockwise, \u2013 for anticlockwise, and 2 for 180-degree turns.\nAnother notation appeared in the 1982 \"The Ideal Solution\" book for Rubik's Revenge. Horizontal planes were noted as tables, with table 1 or T1 starting at the top. Vertical front to back planes were noted as books, with book 1 or B1 starting from the left. Vertical left to right planes were noted as windows, with window 1 or W1 starting at the front. Using the front face as a reference view, table moves were left or right, book moves were up or down, and window moves were clockwise or anticlockwise.\nPeriod of move sequences.\nThe repetition of any given move sequence on a cube which is initially in solved state will eventually return the cube back to its solved state: the smallest number of iterations required is the period of the sequence. For example, the 180-degree turn of any side has period 2 (e.g. {U2}2); the 90-degree turn of any side has period 4 (e.g. {R}4). The maximum period for a move sequence is 1260: for example, allowing for full rotations, {F x}1260 or {R y}1260 or {U z}1260; not allowing for rotations, {D R' U2 M}1260, or {B E L' F2}1260, or {S' U' B D2}1260; only allowing for clockwise quarter turns, {U R S U L}1260, or {F L E B L}1260, or {R U R D S}1260; only allowing for lateral clockwise quarter turns, {F B L F B R F U}1260, or {U D R U D L U F}1260, or {R L D R L U R F}1260.\nOptimal solutions.\nAlthough there are a significant number of possible permutations for Rubik's Cube, a number of solutions have been developed which allow solving the cube in well under 100 moves.\nMany general solutions for the Cube have been discovered independently. David Singmaster first published his solution in the book \"Notes on Rubik's \"Magic Cube\"\" in 1981. This solution involves solving the Cube layer by layer, in which one layer (designated the top) is solved first, followed by the middle layer, and then the final and bottom layer. After sufficient practice, solving the Cube layer by layer can be done in under one minute. Other general solutions include \"corners first\" methods or combinations of several other methods. In 1982, David Singmaster and Alexander Frey hypothesised that the number of moves needed to solve the Cube, given an ideal algorithm, might be in \"the low twenties\". In 2007, Daniel Kunkle and Gene Cooperman used computer search methods to demonstrate that any 3\u00d73\u00d73 Rubik's Cube configuration can be solved in 26 moves or fewer.\nIn 2008, Tomas Rokicki lowered that number to 22 moves, and in July 2010, a team of researchers including Rokicki, working with computers provided by Google, proved that the so-called \"God's number\" for Rubik's Cube is 20. This means that all initial configurations can be solved in 20 moves or less, and some (in fact millions) require 20. More generally, it has been shown that an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\"\u00d7\"n\" Rubik's Cube can be solved optimally in \u0398(\"n\"2\u00a0/\u00a0log(\"n\")) moves.\nSpeedcubing methods.\nA solution commonly used by speedcubers was developed by Jessica Fridrich. This method is called CFOP standing for \"Cross, F2L, OLL, PLL\". It is similar to the layer-by-layer method but employs the use of a large number of algorithms, especially for orienting and permuting the last layer. The cross is solved first, followed by first layer corners and second layer edges simultaneously, with each corner paired up with a second-layer edge piece, thus completing the first two layers (F2L). This is then followed by orienting the last layer, then permuting the last layer (OLL and PLL respectively). There are a total of 120 algorithms for Fridrich's method, however they are not all required to use the CFOP method. Most dedicated cubers will learn as many of these algorithms as possible, and most advanced cubers know all of them. If a cuber knows every algorithm for OLL they may be described as knowing full OLL. It is the same for PLL and F2L.\nA now well-known method was developed by Lars Petrus. In this method, a 2\u00d72\u00d72 section is solved first, followed by a 2\u00d72\u00d73, and then the incorrect edges are solved using a three-move algorithm, which eliminates the need for a possible 32-move algorithm later. The principle behind this is that in layer-by-layer, one must constantly break and fix the completed layer(s); the 2\u00d72\u00d72 and 2\u00d72\u00d73 sections allow three or two layers (respectively) to be turned without ruining progress. One of the advantages of this method is that it tends to give solutions in fewer moves. For this reason, the method is also popular for fewest move competitions.\nThe Roux Method, developed by Gilles Roux, is similar to the Petrus method in that it relies on block building rather than layers, but derives from corners-first methods. In Roux, a 3\u00d72\u00d71 block is solved, followed by another 3\u00d72\u00d71 on the opposite side. Next, the corners of the top layer are solved. The cube can then be solved using only moves of the U layer and M slice.\nBeginners' methods.\nMost beginner solution methods involve solving the cube one layer at a time (\"layer-by-layer\" method or \"beginner's method\"), using algorithms that preserve what has already been solved. The easiest layer by layer methods require only 3\u20138 algorithms.\nIn 1981, thirteen-year-old Patrick Bossert developed a solution for solving the cube, along with a graphical notation, designed to be easily understood by novices. It was subsequently published as \"You Can Do The Cube\" and became a best-seller.\nIn 1997, Denny Dedmore published a solution described using diagrammatic icons representing the moves to be made, instead of the usual notation.\nPhilip Marshall's \"The Ultimate Solution to Rubik's Cube\" takes a different approach, averaging only 65 twists yet requiring the memorisation of only two algorithms. The cross is solved first, followed by the remaining edges (using the Edge Piece Series FR'F'R), then five corners (using the Corner Piece Series URU'L'UR'U'L, which is the same as the typical last layer corner permutation algorithm), and finally the last three corners.\nRubik's Cube solver programs.\nThe fastest move optimal online Rubik's Cube solver program uses Michael Feather's two-phase algorithm. The fastest suboptimal online Rubik's Cube solver which can typically determine a solution of 20 moves or fewer uses an optimized version of Herbert Kociemba's two-phase algorithm. The user has to set the colour configuration of the scrambled cube, and the program returns the steps required to solve it in the half-turn metric.\nCompetitions and records.\nSpeedcubing competitions.\nSpeedcubing (or speedsolving) is the practice of trying to solve a Rubik's Cube in the shortest time possible. There are a number of speedcubing competitions that take place around the world.\nA speedcubing championship organised by Guinness World Records was held in Munich on 13 March 1981. The contest used standardised scrambling and fixed inspection times, and the winners were Ronald Brinkmann and Jury Fr\u00f6schl with times of 38.0 seconds. The first world championship was the 1982 World Rubik's Cube Championship held in Budapest on 5 June 1982, which was won by Minh Thai, a Vietnamese student from Los Angeles, with a time of 22.95 seconds.\nSince 2003, the winner of a competition has been determined by taking a trimmed average of five solves, removing the slowest and fastest. The single best time is usually also recorded.\nThe World Cube Association maintains a history of world records.\nIn 2004, the WCA introduced a requirement to use a special timing device known as a Stackmat Timer for any solve to be officially counted.\nIn addition to the main 3x3x3 event, the WCA also holds events where the cube is solved in different ways:\nIn blindfolded solving, the contestant first studies the scrambled cube (i.e., looking at it normally with no blindfold), and is then blindfolded before beginning to turn the cube's faces. Their recorded time for this event includes both the time spent memorizing the cube and the time spent solving it.\nIn multiple blindfolded solving, all of the cubes are memorised, and then all of the cubes are solved once blindfolded; thus, the main challenge is memorising many\u00a0\u2013 often ten or more\u00a0\u2013 separate cubes. The event is scored not by time but by the number of points achieved after the one-hour time limit has elapsed. The number of points achieved is equal to the number of cubes solved correctly, minus the number of cubes unsolved after the end of the attempt, where a greater number of points is better. If multiple competitors achieve the same number of points, rankings are assessed based on the total time of the attempt, with a shorter time being better.\nIn fewest moves solving, the contestant is given a set of moves that scramble the cube (a \"scramble\"), and they have one hour to write down the shortest solution to the cube they can find.\nOn 4 November 2012, 3248 people, mainly students of the College of Engineering Pune, successfully solved Rubik's cube in 30 minutes on college ground. The successful attempt is recorded in the Limca Book of Records. The college will submit the relevant data, witness statements and video of the event to Guinness authorities.\nVariations.\nThere are many different variations of Rubik's Cubes. The most common class of variants changes the \"order\" of the cube, defined by the number of layers in each dimension or equivalently by the number of pieces along each edge (including corners). The 2\u00d72\u00d72 (Pocket/Mini Cube), the standard 3\u00d73\u00d73 cube, the 4\u00d74\u00d74 (Rubik's Revenge/Master Cube), and the 5\u00d75\u00d75 (Professor's Cube) are the most well known, as they are all available under the official Rubik's brand. The WCA sanctions speedsolving competitions for cube orders up to 7\u00d77\u00d77. These \"big cubes\" represent about the limit of practicality for the purpose of competitive speedsolving, as the cubes become increasingly ungainly and prone to mechanical failure (such as \"popping\", where one or more pieces become dislodged from the puzzle), and average solve times increase quadratically with each larger order, in proportion to the number of total \"facelets\" of the cube.\nEven larger cubes based on the V-Cube patents are commercially available to the mass-market from non-licensed manufacturers, most of them Chinese firms which also produce popular cubes designed for speed-solving. The 17\u00d717\u00d717 \"Over the Top\" cube (available late 2011) was until December 2017 the largest commercially sold cube, and the most expensive, costing over US$2000. A mass-produced 17\u00d717\u00d717 was later introduced by the Chinese manufacturer YuXin. A working design for a 22\u00d722\u00d722 cube exists and was demonstrated in January 2016, a 33\u00d733\u00d733 in December 2017, and a 49\u00d749\u00d749 in August 2024, though designs this large are not currently mass-produced. Chinese manufacturer ShengShou has been producing cubes in all sizes from 2\u00d72\u00d72 to 15\u00d715\u00d715 (as of May 2020), and has also come out with a 17\u00d717\u00d717. The largest currently mass-produced cube is 21\u00d721\u00d721, made by MoYu beginning in 2021, and costing between $1100 and $1600.\nThere are many variations of the original cube, some of which are made by Rubik. The mechanical products include Rubik's Magic, 360, and Twist. There are electronic variants such as Rubik's Revolution and Slide that were also inspired by the original. One of the 3\u00d73\u00d73 Cube variants is Rubik's TouchCube. Sliding a finger across its faces causes its patterns of coloured lights to rotate the same way they would on a mechanical cube. The TouchCube also has buttons for hints and self-solving, and it includes a charging stand. The TouchCube was introduced at the American International Toy Fair in New York on 15 February 2009. Other electronic variations include Rubik\u2019s Connected cubes, which have an associated app that can track player times and give suggestions, and the WOWCube, which has screens instead of stickers and supports dozens of other games.\nThe Cube has inspired an entire category of similar puzzles, commonly referred to as \"twisty puzzles\", which includes the cubes of different sizes mentioned above, as well as various other geometric shapes. Some such shapes include the tetrahedron (Pyraminx), the octahedron (Skewb Diamond), the dodecahedron (Megaminx), and the icosahedron (Dogic). There are also puzzles that change shape such as Rubik's Snake and the Square One.\nIn 2011, Guinness World Records awarded the \"largest order Rubiks magic cube\" to a 17\u00d717\u00d717 cube, made by Oskar van Deventer. On 2 December 2017, Gr\u00e9goire Pfennig announced that he had broken this record, with a 33\u00d733\u00d733 cube, and that his claim had been submitted to Guinness for verification. On 8 April 2018, Gr\u00e9goire Pfennig announced another world record, the 2x2x50 cube. Whether this is a replacement for the 33\u00d733\u00d733 record, or an additional record, remains to be seen. Pfennig's record was later broken on 30 March 2024 when Preston Alden unveiled his 49\u00d749\u00d749 cube on his YouTube channel and recognized by Guinness.\nSome puzzles have also been created in the shape of Kepler\u2013Poinsot polyhedra, such as Alexander's Star (a great dodecahedron). Gr\u00e9goire Pfennig has also created at least one puzzle in the shape of a small stellated dodecahedron.\nCustom-built puzzles.\nPuzzles have been built resembling Rubik's Cube, or based on its inner workings. For example, a cuboid is a puzzle based on Rubik's Cube, but with different functional dimensions, such as 2\u00d72\u00d74, 2\u00d73\u00d74, and 3\u00d73\u00d75.\nOther Rubik's Cube modifications include \"shape mods\", cubes that have been extended or truncated to form a new shape. An example of this is the Trabjer's Octahedron, which can be built by truncating and extending portions of a regular 3\u00d73\u00d73. Most shape modifications can be adapted to higher-order cubes. In the case of Tony Fisher's Rhombic Dodecahedron, there are 3\u00d73\u00d73, 4\u00d74\u00d74, 5\u00d75\u00d75, and 6\u00d76\u00d76 versions of the puzzle.\nRubik's Cube software.\nPuzzles like Rubik's Cube can be simulated by computer software to provide very large puzzles that are impractical to build, as well as virtual puzzles that cannot be physically built, such as many higher dimensional analogues of the Rubik's Cube. Google has released the Chrome Cube Lab in association with Ern\u0151 Rubik. The site has various interactive objects based on Rubik's Cube. Customised versions of Rubik's Cube can be created and uploaded.\nExhibits and art.\nLiberty Science Center in Jersey City, New Jersey, and Google designed an interactive exhibit based on the Rubik's Cube. It opened in April 2014 in celebration of the 40th anniversary of the Cube's invention before traveling internationally for seven years. Exhibition elements include a 35-foot-tall rooftop cube made of lights that people can manipulate with their cellphones, a $2.5 million cube made of diamonds, a giant walk-in cube displaying the inner workings of the puzzle, and cube-solving robots.\nProbably from the earliest days of the Rubik's Cube craze in the 1980s people have assembled cubes to form simple art pieces, several early 'Folk Artists' are noted for their work. Rubik's Cubes have also been the subject of several pop art installations. Owing to their popularity as a children's toy several artists and groups have created large Rubik's Cubes.\nTony Rosenthal's \"Alamo\" (The \"Astor Place Cube\") is a spinnable statue of a Cube standing in New York City. Once the cube was covered with coloured panels so that it resembled a Rubik's Cube. Similarly, the University of Michigan students covered \"Endover\" creating a large Rubik's Cube on the University of Michigan's Central Campus for April Fool's Day in 2008.\nRubik's Cubism.\nBeyond Folk Art and oversized cube replicas, artists developed a pointillist art style using the cubes known as Rubik's Cube Art or Rubik's Cubism, which uses a standard Rubik's cube. The earliest recorded artworks appear to have been created by Fred Holly, a legally blind man in his 60s in the mid-1980s. These early pieces focus on geometrics and colour patterns. There does not appear to be other recorded art pieces until the mid-1990s by cube aficionados involved in the puzzle and game industry.\nThe Folk art form reached another level of its evolution with the development and maturity into a Pop art form consisting of pointillist Cube Art renderings. The street artist who uses the alias \"Invader\" or \"Space Invader\" started exhibiting pointillist pieces, including one of a man behind a desk and Mario Bros, using Rubik's Cube in June 2005 in an exhibition named 'Rubik Cubism' at Sixspace in Los Angeles. Prior to this exhibition the artist had used Rubik's Cubes to create giant Space Invaders. Another artist includes Robbie Mackinnon of Toronto Canada with earliest published work in 2007 who claims to have developed his pointillist Cube Art years earlier while being a teacher in China. Robbie Mackinnon's work has been exhibited in Ripley's Believe it or Not and focussed on using pop-art, while Space Invader has exhibited his Cube Art alongside mosaic Space Invaders in commercial and public galleries.\nIn 2010 artist Pete Fecteau created \"Dream Big\", a tribute to \"Martin Luther King Jr.\" using 4,242 officially licensed Rubik's Cubes. Fecteau also worked with the organization You Can Do The Rubik's Cube to create two separate guides designed to teach school children how to create Rubik's Cube mosaics from templates which he also created.\nMusic.\nItalian composer Maria Mannone created a cube called \"CubeHarmonic\" which has musical note names on its facets, creating different chord structures depending on its configuration.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25973", "revid": "50404235", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25973", "title": "Red Army Faction", "text": "West German far-left militant organisation (1970\u20131998) \nThe Red Army Faction (, ; RAF ), also known as the Baader\u2013Meinhof Group or Baader\u2013Meinhof Gang ( ), was a West German far-left militant group founded in 1970 and active until 1998, considered a terrorist organisation by the West German government. The RAF described itself as a communist and anti-imperialist urban guerrilla group. It was engaged in armed resistance against what it considered a fascist state. Members of the RAF generally used the Marxist\u2013Leninist term \"faction\" when they wrote in English. Early leadership included Andreas Baader, Ulrike Meinhof, Gudrun Ensslin, and Horst Mahler. \nThe RAF engaged in a series of bombings, assassinations, kidnappings, bank robberies, and shootouts with police over the course of three decades. Its activities peaked in late 1977, which led to a national crisis that became known as the \"German Autumn\". The RAF has been held responsible for 34 deaths, including industrialist and former Nazi SS officer Hanns Martin Schleyer, the Dresdner Bank head J\u00fcrgen Ponto, federal prosecutor Siegfried Buback, police officers, American servicemen stationed in Germany, as well as many cases of collateral damage, such as chauffeurs and bodyguards, with many others injured throughout its almost thirty years of activity; 26 RAF members or supporters were killed. Although better-known, the RAF conducted fewer attacks than the Revolutionary Cells, which is held responsible for 296 bomb attacks, arson and other attacks between 1973 and 1995. The group was motivated by leftist political concerns and the perceived failure of their parents' generation to confront Germany's Nazi past, and in later years some ex-members received support from Stasi and other Eastern Bloc security services.\nSometimes, the group is talked about in terms of generations:\nOn 20 April 1998, an eight-page typewritten letter in German was faxed to the Reuters news agency, signed \"RAF\" with the submachine-gun red star, declaring that the group had dissolved. In 1999, after a robbery in Duisburg, evidence pointing to Ernst-Volker Staub and Daniela Klette was found, causing an official investigation into a re-founding.\nName.\nThe usual translation into English is the \"Red Army Faction\"; however, the founders wanted it to reflect not a splinter group but rather an embryonic militant unit that was embedded, in or part of, a wider communist workers' movement, i.e., a \"fraction\" of a whole.\nThe group always called itself the , never the Baader\u2013Meinhof Group or Baader\u2013Meinhof Gang. The name refers to all incarnations of the organization: the \"first generation\" RAF, which consisted of Baader, Ensslin, Meinhof, and others; the \"second generation\" RAF; and the \"third generation\" RAF, which existed in the 1980s and 90s. The terms \"Baader\u2013Meinhof Gang\" and \"Baader\u2013Meinhof Group\" were first used by the media and the government. The group never used these names to refer to itself, because it viewed itself as a co-founded group consisting of numerous members and not a group with two figureheads.\nBackground.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The Red Army Faction's Urban Guerrilla Concept is not based on an optimistic view of the prevailing circumstances in the Federal Republic and West Berlin.\"\n\u2013 \"The Urban Guerrilla Concept\" written by RAF co-founder Ulrike Meinhof (April 1971)\nThe origins of the group can be traced back to the 1968 student protest movement in West Germany. Industrialised nations in the late 1960s experienced social upheavals related to the maturing of the \"baby boomers\", the Cold War, and the end of colonialism. Newly-found youth identity and issues such as racism, women's liberation, and anti-imperialism were at the forefront of left-wing politics. Many young people were alienated from their parents and the institutions of the state. The historical legacy of Nazism drove a wedge between the generations and increased suspicion of authoritarian structures in society (some analysts see the same occurring in post-fascism Italy, giving rise to ).\nIn West Germany there was anger among leftist youth at the post-war denazification in West Germany and East Germany, a process which these leftists perceived as a failure or as ineffective, as former (actual and supposed) Nazis held positions in government and the economy. The Communist Party of Germany had been outlawed since 1956. Elected and appointed government positions down to the local level were often occupied by ex-Nazis. Konrad Adenauer, the first Federal Republic chancellor (in office 1949\u20131963), had even appointed former Nazi jurist Hans Globke as Director of the Federal Chancellery of West Germany (in office 1953\u20131963).\nThe radicals regarded the conservative media as biased\u00a0\u2013 at the time conservatives such as Axel Springer, who was implacably opposed to student radicalism, owned and controlled the conservative media including all of the most influential mass-circulation tabloid newspapers. The emergence of the Grand Coalition between the two main parties, the SPD and CDU, with former Nazi Party member Kurt Georg Kiesinger as chancellor, occurred in 1966. This horrified many on the left and was viewed as a monolithic, political marriage of convenience with pro-NATO, pro-capitalist collusion on the part of the social democratic SPD. With about 90% of the Bundestag controlled by the coalition, an Extra-Parliamentary Opposition (APO) was formed with the intent of generating protest and political activity outside of government. In 1972 a law was passed\u00a0\u2013 the \u00a0\u2013 that banned radicals or those with a \"questionable\" political persuasion from public sector jobs.\nStudent activists, who associated older generations of Germans with Nazism, argued against peaceful reconciliation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They'll kill us all. You know what kind of pigs we're up against. This is the Auschwitz generation. You can't argue with people who made Auschwitz. They have weapons and we haven't. We must arm ourselves!\u2014\u200a\nThe radicalized were, like many in the New Left, influenced by:\nRAF founder Ulrike Meinhof had a long history in the Communist Party. Holger Meins had studied film and was a veteran of the Berlin revolt; his short feature \"How To Produce A Molotov Cocktail\" was seen by huge audiences. Jan Carl Raspe lived at the Kommune 2; Horst Mahler was an established lawyer but also at the center of the anti-Springer revolt from the beginning. From their personal experiences and assessments of the socio-economic situation, they soon became more specifically influenced by Leninism and Maoism, calling themselves \"Marxist\u2013Leninist\" though they effectively added to or updated this ideological tradition. RAF frequently cited Mao Zedong in its public statements, especially in its early years. One of the Maoist doctrines emphasized by the group was the importance of organizing political resistance to bourgeois society, and that armed struggle from the fringes of society will bring the revolution into mainstream society as well, with the bourgeois state revealing its oppressive apparatus by overreacting to fringe groups and their activities. A contemporaneous critique of the Red Army Faction's view of the state, published in a pirate edition of , ascribed to it \"state-fetishism\"\u00a0\u2013 an ideologically obsessive misreading of bourgeois dynamics and the nature and role of the state in post-WWII societies, including West Germany.\nIt is claimed that property destruction during the Watts riots in the United States in 1965 influenced the practical and ideological approach of the RAF founders, as well as some of those in Situationist circles. According to one former RAF member, in meetings with KGB in Dresden the group was also met by Vladimir Putin, then KGB resident in East Germany. In these meetings RAF members would discuss weapons that were needed for their activities, and pass a \"shopping list\" to the KGB.\nThe writings of Antonio Gramsci and Herbert Marcuse were drawn upon. Gramsci wrote on power, cultural, and ideological conflicts in society and institutions\u00a0\u2013 real-time class struggles playing out in rapidly developing industrial nation states through interlinked areas of political behavior. Marcuse wrote on coercion and hegemony in that cultural indoctrination and ideological manipulation through the means of communication (\"repressive tolerance\") dispensed with the need for complete brute force in modern 'liberal democracies'. His \"One-Dimensional Man\" was addressed to the restive students of the sixties. Marcuse argued that only marginal groups of students and poor alienated workers could effectively resist the system. Both Gramsci and Marcuse came to the conclusion that analyzing the ideological underpinnings and the 'superstructure' of society was vitally important to understanding class control (and acquiescence). This Gramscian and Marcusian contribution could perhaps be seen as an extension of Marx's work, as he did not cover this area in detail. , his mainly economic work, was meant to be one of a series of books which would have included one on society and one on the state, but his death prevented fulfillment of this.\nMany of the radicals felt that Germany's lawmakers were continuing authoritarian policies from the country's past and that the public's apparent acquiescence to these policies was a consequence of the indoctrination that the Nazis had pioneered and implemented in German society (). The Federal Republic was exporting arms to African dictatorships, which the radicals viewed as supporting the war in Southeast Asia and engineering the remilitarization of Germany with the U.S.-led entrenchment against the Warsaw Pact nations.\nThe ongoing events further catalyzed the situation. Protests turned into riots on 2 June 1967, when Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, visited West Berlin. There were protesters but also hundreds of supporters of the Shah, as well as a group of fake supporters armed with wooden staves, there to disturb the normal course of the visit. These extremists beat the protesters. After a day of angry protests by exiled Iranian radical Marxists, a group widely supported by German students, the Shah visited the Berlin Opera, where a crowd of German student protesters gathered. During the opera house demonstrations, German student Benno Ohnesorg was shot in the head by a police officer while attending his first protest rally. The officer, Karl-Heinz Kurras, was acquitted in a subsequent trial. It was later discovered that Kurras had been a member of the West Berlin communist party SEW and had also worked for the Stasi, though there is no indication that Kurras' killing of Ohnesorg was under anyone's, including the Stasi's, orders.\nAlong with perceptions of state and police brutality, and widespread opposition to the Vietnam War, Ohnesorg's death galvanized many young Germans and became a rallying point for the West German New Left. The Berlin 2 June Movement, a militant-Anarchist group, later took its name to honor the date of Ohnesorg's death.\nOn 2 April 1968, Gudrun Ensslin and Andreas Baader, joined by Thorwald Proll and Horst S\u00f6hnlein, set fire to two department stores in Frankfurt as a protest against the Vietnam war. They were arrested two days later.\nOn 11 April 1968, Rudi Dutschke, a leading spokesman for protesting students, was shot in the head in an assassination attempt by the right-wing sympathizer Josef Bachmann. Although badly injured, Dutschke returned to political activism with the German Green Party before his death in a bathtub in 1979, as a consequence of his injuries.\nAxel Springer's populist newspaper , which had run headlines such as \"Stop Dutschke now!\", was accused of being the chief culprit in inciting the shooting. Meinhof commented, \"If one sets a car on fire, that is a criminal offence. If one sets hundreds of cars on fire, that is political action.\"\nFormation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"World War II was only twenty years earlier. Those in charge of the police, the schools, the government\u00a0\u2013 they were the same people who'd been in charge under Nazism. The chancellor, Kurt Georg Kiesinger, had been a Nazi. People started discussing this only in the 60s. We were the first generation since the war, and we were asking our parents questions. Due to the Nazi past, everything bad was compared to the Third Reich. If you heard about police brutality, that was said to be just like the SS. The moment you see your own country as the continuation of a fascist state, you give yourself permission to do almost anything against it. You see your action as the resistance that your parents did not put up.\"\n \u2013 Stefan Aust, author of \"Der Baader Meinhof Komplex\"\nAll four of the defendants charged with arson and endangering human life were convicted, for which they were sentenced to three years in prison. In June 1969, however, they were temporarily paroled under an amnesty for political prisoners, but in November of that year, the Federal Constitutional Court () demanded that they return to custody. Only Horst S\u00f6hnlein complied with the order; the rest went underground and made their way to France, where they stayed for a time in a house owned by prominent French journalist and revolutionary R\u00e9gis Debray, famous for his friendship with Che Guevara and the theory of guerrilla warfare. Eventually they made their way to Italy, where the lawyer Mahler visited them and encouraged them to return to Germany with him to form an underground guerrilla group.\nThe Red Army Faction was formed with the intention of complementing the plethora of revolutionary and radical groups across West Germany and Europe, as a more class conscious and determined force compared with some of its contemporaries. The members and supporters were already associated with the 'Revolutionary Cells' and 2 June Movement as well as radical currents and phenomena such as the Socialist Patients' Collective, , and the Situationists.\nBaader was arrested again in April 1970, but on 14 May 1970 he was freed by Meinhof and others. Less than a month later, Gudrun Ensslin wrote an article in a West Berlin underground paper by the name of \"Agit883\" (\"Magazine for Agitation and Social Practice\"), demanding a call to arms and a building of the Red Army. The article ended with the words, \"Develop the class struggles. Organize the proletariat. Start the armed resistance!\" Baader, Ensslin, Mahler, and Meinhof then went to Jordan, where they trained with Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) guerrillas and looked to the Palestinian cause for inspiration and guidance. But RAF organization and outlook were also partly modeled on the Uruguayan Tupamaros movement, which had developed as an urban resistance movement, effectively inverting Che Guevara's Mao-like concept of a peasant or rural-based guerrilla war and instead situating the struggle in the metropole or cities.\nMany members of the RAF operated through a single contact or only knew others by their codenames. Actions were carried out by active units called 'commandos', with trained members being supplied by a quartermaster in order to carry out their mission. For more long-term or core cadre members, isolated cell-like organization was absent or took on a more flexible form.\nIn 1969 the Brazilian revolutionary Carlos Marighella published his \"Minimanual of the Urban Guerrilla\". He described the urban guerrilla as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe importance of small arms training, sabotage, expropriation, and a substantial safehouse/support base among the urban population was stressed in Marighella's guide. This publication was an antecedent to Meinhof's \"The Urban Guerrilla Concept\" and has subsequently influenced many guerrilla and insurgent groups around the globe. Although some of the Red Army Faction's supporters and operatives could be described as having an anarchist or libertarian communist slant, the group's leading members professed a largely Marxist\u2013Leninist ideology. That said, they shied away from overt collaboration with communist states, arguing along the lines of the Chinese side in the Sino-Soviet split that the Soviet Union and its European satellite states had become traitors to the communist cause by, in effect if not in rhetoric, giving the United States a free pass in their exploitation of Third World populations and support of \"useful\" Third World dictators. Nevertheless, RAF members did receive intermittent support and sanctuary over the border in East Germany during the 1980s.\nAnti-imperialism and public support.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"The Baader\u2013Meinhof Gang drew a measure of support that violent leftists in the United States, like the Weather Underground, never enjoyed. A poll at the time showed that a quarter of West Germans under forty felt sympathy for the gang and one-tenth said they would hide a gang member from the police. Prominent intellectuals spoke up for the gang's righteousness [as] Germany even into the 1970s was still a guilt-ridden society. When the gang started robbing banks, newscasts compared its members to Bonnie and Clyde. (Andreas) Baader, a charismatic action man indulged in the imagery, telling people that his favourite movies were Bonnie and Clyde, which had recently come out, and The Battle of Algiers. The pop poster of Che Guevara hung on his wall, [while] he paid a designer to make a Red Army Faction logo, a drawing of a machine gun against a red star.\"\n \u2013 Stefan Aust, author of \nWhen they returned to West Germany, they began what they called an \"anti-imperialistic struggle\", with bank robberies to raise money and bomb attacks against U.S. military facilities, German police stations, and buildings belonging to the Axel Springer press empire. In 1970, a manifesto authored by Meinhof used the name \"RAF\" and the red star logo with a Heckler &amp; Koch MP5 submachine gun for the first time.\nAfter an intense manhunt, Baader, Ensslin, Meinhof, Meins, and Raspe were eventually caught and arrested in June 1972.\nCustody and the Stammheim trial.\nAfter the arrest of the protagonists of the first generation of the RAF, they were held in solitary confinement in the newly constructed high security Stammheim Prison north of Stuttgart. When Ensslin devised an \"info system\" using aliases for each member (names deemed to have allegorical significance from \"Moby Dick\"), the four prisoners were able to communicate, circulating letters with the help of their defense counsel.\nTo protest against their treatment by authorities, they went on several coordinated hunger strikes; eventually, they were force-fed.\nHolger Meins died of self-induced starvation on 9 November 1974. After public protests, their conditions were somewhat improved by the authorities.\nThe so-called second generation of the RAF emerged at that time, consisting of sympathizers independent of the inmates. On 27 February 1975, Peter Lorenz, the CDU candidate for mayor of Berlin, was kidnapped by the 2 June Movement as part of pressure to secure the release of several non-RAF detainees, alongside estranged member Horst Mahler (who declined to be freed). Since none of these were on trial for murder, the state agreed, and those inmates (and later Lorenz himself) were released.\nAccording to Aust, the success of this operation led to the RAF themselves to attempt their own exchange: on 24 April 1975, the West German embassy in Stockholm was seized by members of the RAF; two of the hostages were murdered as the German government under Chancellor Helmut Schmidt refused to give in to their demands. Two of the hostage-takers died from injuries they suffered when the explosives they planted detonated later that night.\nOn 21 May 1975, the Stammheim trial of Baader, Ensslin, Meinhof, and Raspe began, named after the district in Stuttgart where it took place. The Bundestag had earlier changed the Code of Criminal Procedure so that several of the attorneys who were accused of serving as links between the inmates and the RAF's second generation could be excluded.\nOn 9 May 1976, Ulrike Meinhof was found dead in her prison cell, hanging from a rope made from jail towels. An investigation concluded that she had hanged herself, a result hotly contested at the time, triggering a plethora of conspiracy theories. Alternative theories suggest that she took her life because she was being ostracized by the rest of the group. Her comrades consistently denied this hypothesis, repudiating alleged jailhouse recordings cited as evidence.\nDuring the trial, more attacks took place. One of these was on 7 April 1977, when Federal Prosecutor Siegfried Buback, his driver, and his bodyguard were shot and killed by two RAF members while waiting at a red traffic light. Buback, who had been a Nazi member during WWII, was considered by RAF as one of the key persons for their trial. Among other things, two years earlier, while being interviewed by \"Stern\" magazine, he stated that \"Persons like Baader don't deserve a fair trial.\" In February 1976, when interviewed by he stated that \"We do not need regulation of our jurisdiction, national security survives thanks to people like me and Herold [chief of BKA], who always find the right way\".\nEventually, on 28 April 1977, the trial's 192nd day, the three remaining defendants were convicted of several murders, more attempted murders, and of forming a terrorist organization; they were sentenced to life imprisonment.\nSecurity measures.\nA new section of Stammheim Prison was built especially for the RAF and was considered one of the most secure prison blocks around the world at the time. The prisoners were transferred there in 1975 (three years after their arrest). The roof and the courtyard were covered with steel mesh. During the night, the precinct was illuminated by 54 spotlights and twenty-three neon bulbs. Special military forces, including snipers, guarded the roof. Four hundred police officers along with the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution patrolled the building. The mounted police officers rotated on a double shift. One hundred more GSG-9 tactical police officers reinforced the police during the trial while BKA detectives guarded the front of the court area. Finally, helicopters overflew the area.\nDuring the trial, accredited media correspondents had to pass a police road block 400 meters from the court. The police noted their data and the number-plate and photographed their cars. After that they had to pass three verification audits, and finally they were undressed and two judicial officials thoroughly searched their bodies. They were allowed to keep only a pencil and a notepad inside the court. Their personal items including their identity papers were withheld by the authorities during the trial. Every journalist could attend the trial only twice (two days). \"The Times\" questioned the possibility whether a fair trial could be conducted under these circumstances which involved siege-like conditions. wondered whether that atmosphere anticipated \"the condemnation of the defendants who were allegedly responsible for the emergency measures\".\nWhile the trial progressed, the prisoners received visits from lawyers (and on rare occasions relatives; friends were not allowed). For those visits, three jailers were always present to observe the conversations between prisoners and visitors. The prisoners were not allowed to meet each other inside the prison, until late 1975 when a regular meeting time was established (30 minutes, twice per day), during which they were guarded.\nTrial.\nThe judges and their pasts are considered important by supporters of the accused. Judge Weiss (Mahler's trial) had judged Joachim Raese (president of the Third Reich's court) as innocent seven times. When he threatened Meinhof that she would be put into a glass cage she answered caustically, \"So you are threatening me with Eichmann's cage, fascist?\" (Adolf Eichmann who was an in the SS, was held inside a glass cage during his trial in Israel.) Siegfried Buback, the RAF's main trial judge in Stammheim, had been a Nazi Party member. Along with Federal Prosecutor Heinrich Wunder (who served as senior government official in the Ministry of Defense), Buback had ordered the arrest of Rudolf Augstein and other journalists regarding the affair in 1962. Theodor Prinzing was accused by defense attorney Otto Schily of having been appointed arbitrarily, displacing other judges.\nAt several points in the Stammheim trial, microphones were turned off while defendants were speaking. They were often expelled from the hall, and other actions were taken. It was later revealed that the conversation they had between themselves as well as with their attorneys were recorded. Finally it was reported by both the defendants' attorneys and some of the prison's doctors that the physical and psychological state of the prisoners held in solitary confinement and white cells was such that they could not attend the long trial days and defend themselves appropriately. By the time the Stammheim trial began in early 1975, some of the prisoners had already been in solitary confinement for three years.\nTwo former members of the RAF, Karl-Heinz Ruhland and Gerhard M\u00fcller, testified under BKA's orders, as revealed later. Their statements were often contradictory, something that was also commented on in the newspapers. Ruhland himself later reported to that his deposition was prepared in cooperation with police. M\u00fcller was reported to \"break\" during the third hunger strike in the winter of 1974\u20131975 which lasted 145 days. The prosecution offered him immunity for the murder of officer Norbert Schmidt in Hamburg (1971), and blamed Baader, Meinhof, Ensslin, and Raspe instead. He was eventually freed and relocated to the US after getting a new identity and 500,000 Deutsche Marks.\nLawyers' arrests.\nThe government hastily approved several special laws for use during the Stammheim trial. Lawyers were excluded from trial for the first time since 1945, after being accused of various inappropriate actions, such as helping to form criminal organizations (Section 129, Criminal Law). The authorities invaded and checked the lawyers' offices for possible incriminating material. Minister of Justice Hans-Jochen Vogel boasted that no other Western state had such extensive regulation to exclude defense attorneys from a trial. Klaus Croissant, Hans-Christian Str\u00f6bele, Kurt Groenewold, who had been working preparing for the trial for three years, were expelled the second day of the trial. On 23 June 1975, Croissant, Str\u00f6bele (who had already been expelled), and Mary Becker were arrested, and in the meantime police invaded several defense attorneys' offices and homes, seizing documents and files. Str\u00f6bele and Croissant were remanded and held for four and eight weeks respectively. Croissant had to pay 80,000 Deutsche Marks and report weekly to a police station, and his transport and identity papers were seized.\nThe defense lawyers and prisoners were not the only ones affected by measures adopted for the RAF trial. On 26 November 1974 an unprecedented mobilization by police and GSG-9 units arrested 23 suspected RAF members, invaded dozens of homes, left-wing bookstores, and meeting places, and made arrests. No guerrillas were found. BKA's chief, Horst Herold stated that despite the fact that \"large-scale operations usually don't bring practical results, the impression of the crowd is always a considerable advantage\".\nOn 16 February 1979 Croissant was arrested (on the accusation of supporting a criminal organization\u00a0\u2013 section 129) after France denied his request for political asylum, and was sentenced to a prison term of two and half years to be served in Stammheim prison.\nDefense strategy.\nThe general approach by defendants and their attorneys was to highlight the political purpose and characteristics of the RAF.\nOn 13 and 14 January 1976 the defendants readied their testimony (about 200 pages), in which they analyzed the role of imperialism and its fight against the revolutionary movements in the countries of the \"third world\". They also expounded the fascistization of West Germany and its role as an imperialistic state (in alliance with the U.S. over Vietnam). Finally they talked about the task of urban guerrillas and undertook the political responsibility for the bombing attacks. Finally their lawyers (following Ulrike Meinhof's proposal) requested that the accused be officially regarded as prisoners of war.\nOn 4 May (five days before Meinhof's death) the four defendants demanded to be allowed to provide data about the Vietnam War. They claimed that because the military intervention in Vietnam by the U.S. (and, indirectly, the FRG) had violated international law, the U.S. military bases in West Germany were justifiable targets of international retaliation. They requested several politicians (like Richard Nixon and Helmut Schmidt) as well as some former U.S. agents (who were willing to testify) to be called as witnesses.\nLater when their requests were rejected, U.S. agents Barton Osbourne (ex-CIA, ex-member of the Phoenix Program), G. Peck (NSA), and Gary Thomas gave extensive interviews (organized by defense lawyers) on 23 June 1976 where they explained how FRG support was crucial for U.S. operations in Vietnam. Peck concluded that the RAF \"was the response to criminal aggression of the U.S. government in Indochina and the assistance of the German government. The real terrorist was my government.\" Thomas presented data about the joint operations of FRG and U.S. secret services in Eastern Europe. He had also observed the Stammheim trial and referred to a CIA instructor teaching them how to make a murder look like a suicide. These statements were confirmed by the CIA case officer Philip Agee.\nCriminal acts.\nThe RAF has been associated with various serious criminal acts (including bombings, kidnappings and murder) since their founding. The first criminal act attributed to the group after the student Benno Ohnesorg had been killed by a policeman in 1967 was the bombing of the Kaufhaus Schneider department store. On 2 April 1968, affiliates of the group firebombed the store and caused an estimated US$200,000 in property damage. Prominent members of the bombing included Andreas Baader and Gudrun Ensslin, two of the founders of the RAF. The bombs detonated at midnight when no one was in the store and no one was injured. As the bombs ignited, Gudrun Ensslin was at a nearby payphone, yelling to the German Press Agency, \"This is a political act of revenge.\"\nOn 11 May 1972, the RAF placed three pipe bombs at a United States headquarters in Frankfurt. The bombing resulted in the death of a US officer and the injury of 13 other people. The stated reason for the bombing was a political statement in protest of US imperialism, specifically, a protest of US mining of North Vietnam harbours.\nOn 19 May 1972, members of the RAF armed five bombs in the Springer publishing house in Hamburg. Only three of the five bombs exploded, but 36 people were injured.\nOn 24 May 1972, two weeks after the bombing of the United States headquarters in Frankfurt, the group set off a car bomb at the IDHS (Intelligence Data Handling Service) Building at Campbell Barracks in Heidelberg. The bombing resulted in the deaths of three soldiers and the injury of five others.\nOn 10 November 1974, the group killed G\u00fcnter von Drenkmann, the president of the state court of Berlin. The killing occurred after a string of events that led to a failed kidnapping by the 2 June Movement, a group that splintered off the RAF after the death of Holger Meins by hunger strike in prison.\nStarting in February 1975 and continuing through March 1975, the 2 June Movement kidnapped Peter Lorenz, who at the time was the Christian Democratic candidate in the race for the mayor of West Berlin. In exchange for the release of Lorenz, the group demanded that several RAF and 2 June Movement members that were imprisoned for reasons other than violence be released from jail. The government obliged and released several of these members for the safe release of Lorenz.\nOn 24 April 1975, six members affiliated with the RAF seized the West German Embassy in Stockholm. The group took hostages and set the building to explode. They demanded the release of several imprisoned members of the RAF. The government refused the request, which led to the murder of two of the hostages. A few of the bombs that were intended to blow up the embassy prematurely detonated, which resulted in the death of two of the six RAF affiliates. The other four members eventually surrendered to the authorities.\nIn May 1975, several British intelligence reports circulated that stated that the RAF had stolen mustard gas from a joint U.S. and British storage facility. The reports also indicated that the RAF had intended to use the stolen gas in German cities. It eventually turned out that the mustard gas canisters were merely misplaced; however, the RAF still successfully capitalized on the news by frightening several different agencies.\nIn the 1970's, the RAF was involved in several raids, taking advantage of Switzerland's loosely guarded military armories. According to the source, the group was involved in the theft of 200 Swiss rifles, 500 revolvers, and 400 large grenades.\nDuring the early 1980s, German and French newspapers reported that the police had raided an RAF safe house in Paris and had found a makeshift laboratory that contained flasks full of \"Clostridium botulinum\", which makes botulinum toxin. These reports were later found to be incorrect; no such lab was ever found.\nGerman Autumn.\nOn 30 July 1977, J\u00fcrgen Ponto, the head of Dresdner Bank, was shot and killed in front of his house in Oberursel in a botched kidnapping. Those involved were Brigitte Mohnhaupt, Christian Klar, and Susanne Albrecht, the sister of Ponto's goddaughter.\nFollowing the convictions, Hanns Martin Schleyer, a former officer of the SS who was then President of the German Employers' Association (and thus one of the most powerful industrialists in West Germany), was abducted in a violent kidnapping. On 5 September 1977, Schleyer's convoy was stopped by the kidnappers reversing a car into the path of Schleyer's vehicle, causing the Mercedes in which he was being driven to crash. Once the convoy was stopped, five masked assailants immediately shot and killed three policemen and the driver and took Schleyer hostage. One of the group (Sieglinde Hofmann) produced her weapon from a pram she was pushing down the road.\nA letter was then received by the federal government, demanding the release of eleven detainees, including those in Stammheim. A crisis committee was formed in Bonn, headed by Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, which, instead of acceding, resolved to employ delaying tactics to give the police time to discover Schleyer's location. At the same time, a total communication ban was imposed on the prison inmates, who were now allowed visits only from government officials and the prison chaplain.\nThe crisis dragged on for more than a month, while the Federal Criminal Police Office carried out its biggest investigation to date. Matters escalated when, on 13 October 1977, Lufthansa Flight 181 from Palma de Mallorca to Frankfurt was hijacked. A group of four PFLP members took control of the plane (which was named \"Landshut\"). The leader introduced himself to the passengers as \"Captain Mahmud\", and was later identified as Zohair Youssif Akache. When the plane landed in Rome for refueling, he issued the same demands as the Schleyer kidnappers, plus the release of two Palestinians held in Turkey and payment of US$15 million.\nThe Bonn crisis team again decided not to give in. The plane flew on via Larnaca, then Dubai, and then to Aden, where flight captain J\u00fcrgen Schumann, whom the hijackers deemed not cooperative enough, was brought before an improvised \"revolutionary tribunal\" and murdered on 16 October. His body was dumped on the runway. The aircraft again took off, flown by the co-pilot J\u00fcrgen Vietor, this time headed for Mogadishu, Somalia.\nA high-risk rescue operation was led by Hans-J\u00fcrgen Wischnewski, then undersecretary in the chancellor's office, who had been secretly flown in from Bonn. At five past midnight CET on 18 October, the plane was stormed in a seven-minute assault by GSG 9, an elite unit of the German federal police. All four hijackers were shot; three of them died on the spot. None of the passengers were seriously hurt and Wischnewski was able to phone Schmidt and tell the Bonn crisis team that the operation had been a success.\n\"Stammheim Death Night\".\nAfter the conclusion of the Landshut hostage crisis was announced in the late evening of 17 October, all the RAF members incarcerated in Stammheim committed suicide during the following night. Their lawyer, Arndt M\u00fcller, had smuggled pistols into the prison. Andreas Baader and Jan-Carl Raspe shot themselves with these weapons\u00a0\u2013 Baader in the back of his head\u00a0\u2013 while Gudrun Ensslin hanged herself. Irmgard M\u00f6ller tried to kill herself with a knife, but survived severely injured. The suicides went unnoticed until early next morning, at which time doctors were rushed in. Baader and Ensslin were already dead when found. Raspe was still alive and moved to the hospital where he died soon after. M\u00f6ller recovered after being brought to a hospital. Authorities claimed that the prisoners\u00a0\u2013 who had been held in isolation for weeks\u00a0\u2013 learned of the failure of the hijacking through smuggled radio equipment, and coordinated the group suicide over an improvised electronic communication system between their maximum-security cells, which had been under surveillance during previous hostage crises.\nThe coordinated attempt sparked numerous conspiracy theories. It was alleged that the RAF members did not kill themselves, but instead were killed by the German authorities, the BND, CIA, the United States and NATO. These theories were spread by RAF supporters and sympathizers, and some were taken up by the mainstream press. Available evidence shows that these suicides were planned and prepared for a long time by the RAF members.\nOn the very same day, Hanns-Martin Schleyer was shot to death by his captors en route to Mulhouse, France. On 19 October, Schleyer's kidnappers announced that he had been \"executed\" and pinpointed his location. His body was recovered later that day in the trunk of a green Audi 100 on Rue Charles P\u00e9guy. The French newspaper received a letter declaring:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After 43 days we have ended Hanns-Martin Schleyer's pitiful and corrupt existence... His death is meaningless to our pain and our rage... The struggle has only begun. Freedom through armed, anti-imperialist struggle.\nRAF since the 1990s.\nThe dissolution of the Soviet Union in late December 1991 was a serious blow to Leninist groups, but well into the 1990s attacks were still being committed under the name RAF. Among these were the killing of Ernst Zimmermann, CEO of MTU Aero Engines, a German engineering company; another bombing at the US Air Force's Rhein-Main Air Base (near Frankfurt), which targeted the base commander and killed two bystanders; a car bomb attack that killed Siemens executive Karl-Heinz Beckurts and his driver; and the shooting of Gerold von Braunm\u00fchl, a leading official at Germany's foreign ministry.\nOn 30 November 1989, Deutsche Bank chairman Alfred Herrhausen was killed with a highly complex bomb when his car triggered a photo sensor in Bad Homburg. On 1 April 1991, Detlev Karsten Rohwedder, leader of the government organization responsible for the privatization of the East German state economy, was shot and killed. The assassins of Zimmermann, von Braunm\u00fchl, Herrhausen, and Rohwedder were never reliably identified.\nAfter German reunification in 1990, it was confirmed that the Stasi, the security and intelligence organization of East Germany, had been monitoring the RAF, and in the 1980s had provided ten ex-members shelter and new identities. This was already generally suspected at the time. In 1978 part of the group was exfiltrated through Yugoslavia to communist Poland to avoid a manhunt in Germany. Brigitte Mohnhaupt, Peter Boock, Rolf Wagner, and Sieglinde Hoffmann spent most of the year in facilities of the Polish Ministry of Public Security in Masuria, northeastern Poland, where they were also going through series of training programs along with others from Arab countries.\nIn 1992, the German government assessed that the RAF's main field of engagement now was missions to release imprisoned RAF members. To weaken the organization further the government declared that some RAF inmates would be released if the RAF refrained from violent attacks in the future. Subsequently, the RAF announced their intention to \"de-escalate\" and refrain from significant activity.\nThe last action taken by the RAF took place in 1993 with a bombing of a newly-built prison in Weiterstadt by overcoming the officers on duty and planting explosives. Although no one was seriously injured, this operation caused property damage amounting to 123 million Deutsche Marks (over 50 million euros).\nThe last big action against the RAF took place on 27 June 1993. An agent of the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution (the West German domestic intelligence agency) named Klaus Steinmetz had infiltrated the RAF. As a result, Birgit Hogefeld and Wolfgang Grams were arrested in Bad Kleinen. Grams and GSG 9 officer Michael Newrzella died during the mission. Due to a number of operational mistakes involving the various police services, German Minister of the Interior Rudolf Seiters took responsibility and resigned from his post.\nHistorians and the German authorities have much more clarity about the names and actions of the first and second generations of the RAF than is the case with the third generation. The lawyer and author Butz Peters describes the third generation of the RAF as a \"black box\": The members have learned from the mistakes of the first and second generations. \"You were up to date with the latest forensic technology\" In addition, you were much more reserved in your actions. \"The first generations had many supporters and many members who at some point became soft. The third generation learned from this that they lived very conspiratorially and insularly.\"\nDissolution.\nOn 20 April 1998, an eight-page typewritten letter in German was faxed to the Reuters news agency, signed \"RAF\" with the machine-gun red star, declaring the group dissolved:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn response to this statement, former BKA President Horst Herold said, \"With this statement the Red Army Faction has erected its own tombstone.\"\nLegacy.\nHorst Mahler, a founding RAF member, became a vocal Neo-Nazi and Holocaust denier later in life. In 2005, he was sentenced to six years in prison for incitement to racial hatred against Jews. He is on record as saying (\"The enemy is the same\").\nIn 2007, amidst widespread media controversy, German president Horst K\u00f6hler considered pardoning RAF member Christian Klar, who had filed a pardon application several years before. On 7 May 2007, pardon was denied; regular parole was later granted on 24 November 2008. RAF member Brigitte Mohnhaupt was granted release on five-year parole by a German court on 12 February 2007 and Eva Haule was released 17 August 2007.\nIn 2011, the last imprisoned RAF member, Birgit Hogefeld, was released on parole.\nPolice in Europe investigating the whereabouts of Ernst-Volker Staub, Burkhard Garweg and Daniela Klette stated that a search had been made in Spain, France and Italy. This followed reports that they could be hiding in the Netherlands in 2017 after being suspected of masterminding robberies in supermarkets and cash transit vehicles in Wolfsburg, Bremen and Cremlingen between 2011 and 2016. On 26 February 2024, Daniela Klette was arrested in Berlin; according to coverage in \"The Guardian\", Klette's arrest followed an investigative TV report about the missing trio, which sparked 250 independent tips to local police about their whereabouts.\nAccording to scholarly research into Stasi documents, RAF members in East Germany were trained and assisted by personnel from the Stasi Arbeitsgruppe des Ministers S.\nRAF Commandos.\nThe following is a list of all known RAF Commando Units. Most RAF units were named after deceased RAF members, while others were named after deceased members of international militant left-wing groups such as the Black Panthers, Irish National Liberation Army, and the Red Brigades.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nFilms.\nNumerous West German film and TV productions have been made about the RAF. These include Klaus Lemke's telefeature \"Brandstifter\" (\"The Arsonists\", 1969); Volker Schloendorff and Margarethe von Trotta's co-directed \"The Lost Honour of Katharina Blum\" (a 1975 adaptation of Heinrich B\u00f6ll's novel \"Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum\"); \"Germany in Autumn\" (1978), co-directed by 11 directors, including Alexander Kluge, Volker Schloendorff, Rainer Werner Fassbinder, and Edgar Reitz; Fassbinder's \"Die dritte Generation\" (\"The Third Generation\", 1979); Margarethe von Trotta's \"Die bleierne Zeit\" (\"The German Sisters\"/\"Marianne and Juliane\", 1981); and Reinhard Hauff's \"Stammheim\" (1986). Post-reunification German films include Christian Petzold's \"Die innere Sicherheit\" (\"The State I Am In\", 2000); Kristina Konrad's \"Grosse Freiheit, Kleine Freiheit\" (\"Greater Freedom, Lesser Freedom\", 2000); and Christopher Roth's \"Baader\" (2002).\nUli Edel's 2008 \"The Baader Meinhof Complex\" (German: \"Der Baader Meinhof Komplex\"), based on the bestselling book by Stefan Aust, was nominated for Best Foreign Language Film in both the 81st Academy Awards and 66th Golden Globe Awards.\nOutside Germany, films include Swiss director Markus Imhoof's \"Die Reise\" (\"The Journey\") (1986). On TV, there was Heinrich Breloer's \"Todesspiel\" (\"Death Game\") (1997), a two-part docu-drama, and Volker Schloendorff's \"Die Stille nach dem Schuss\" (\"The Legend of Rita\") (2000).\nThere have been several documentaries: \"Im Fadenkreuz \u2013 Deutschland &amp; die RAF\" (1997, several directors); Gerd Conradt's \"Starbuck Holger Meins\" (2001); Andres Veiel's \"Black Box BRD\" (2001); Klaus Stern's \"Andreas Baader \u2013 Der Staatsfeind\" (\"Enemy of the State\") (2003); Ben Lewis's \"In Love With Terror\", for BBC Four (2003); and \"Ulrike Meinhof \u2013 Wege in den Terror\" (\"Ways into Terror\") (2006).\nThe 2010 feature documentary \"Children of the Revolution\" tells Ulrike Meinhof's story from the perspective of her daughter, journalist and historian Bettina R\u00f6hl, while Andres Veiel's 2011 feature film \"If Not Us, Who?\" provides a context for the RAF's origins through the perspective of Gudrun Ensslin's partner Bernward Vesper. In 2015, Jean-Gabriel P\u00e9riot released his feature-length, found-footage documentary \"A German Youth\" on the Red Army Faction.\nThe 2018 remake of \"Suspiria\" features a secondary character attempting to run away to join the Red Army Faction, serving as a catalyst for the later events of the film.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25974", "revid": "2927383", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25974", "title": "Radiosity (computer graphics)", "text": "Computer graphics rendering method using diffuse reflection\nIn 3D computer graphics, radiosity is an application of the finite element method to solving the rendering equation for scenes with surfaces that reflect light diffusely. Unlike rendering methods that use Monte Carlo algorithms (such as path tracing), which handle all types of light paths, typical radiosity only account for paths (represented by the code \"LD*E\") which leave a light source and are reflected diffusely some number of times (possibly zero) before hitting the eye. Radiosity is a global illumination algorithm in the sense that the illumination arriving on a surface comes not just directly from the light sources, but also from other surfaces reflecting light. Radiosity is viewpoint independent, which increases the calculations involved, but makes them useful for all viewpoints.\nRadiosity methods were first developed in about 1950 in the engineering field of heat transfer. They were later refined specifically for the problem of rendering computer graphics in 1984\u20131985 by researchers at Cornell University and Hiroshima University.\nNotable commercial radiosity engines are Enlighten by Geomerics (used for games including Battlefield 3 and ); 3ds Max; form\u2022Z; LightWave 3D and the Electric Image Animation System.\nVisual characteristics.\nThe inclusion of radiosity calculations in the rendering process often lends an added element of realism to the finished scene, because of the way it mimics real-world phenomena. Consider a simple room scene.\nThe image on the left was rendered with a typical direct illumination renderer. There are \"three types\" of lighting in this scene which have been specifically chosen and placed by the artist in an attempt to create realistic lighting: spot lighting with shadows (placed outside the window to create the light shining on the floor), ambient lighting (without which any part of the room not lit directly by a light source would be totally dark), and omnidirectional lighting without shadows (to reduce the flatness of the ambient lighting).\nThe image on the right was rendered using a radiosity algorithm. There is only one source of light: an image of the sky placed outside the window. The difference is marked. The room glows with light. Soft shadows are visible on the floor, and subtle lighting effects are noticeable around the room. Furthermore, the red color from the carpet has bled onto the grey walls, giving them a slightly warm appearance. None of these effects were specifically chosen or designed by the artist.\nOverview of the radiosity algorithm.\nThe surfaces of the scene to be rendered are each divided up into one or more smaller surfaces (patches).\nA view factor (also known as \"form factor\") is computed for each pair of patches; it is a coefficient describing how well the patches can see each other. Patches that are far away from each other, or oriented at oblique angles relative to one another, will have smaller view factors. If other patches are in the way, the view factor will be reduced or zero, depending\non whether the occlusion is partial or total.\nThe view factors are used as coefficients in a linear system of rendering equations. Solving this system yields the radiosity, or brightness, of each patch, taking into account diffuse interreflections and soft shadows.\nProgressive radiosity solves the system iteratively with intermediate radiosity values for the patch, corresponding to bounce levels. That is, after each iteration, we know how the scene looks after one light bounce, after two passes, two bounces, and so forth. This is useful for getting an interactive preview of the scene. Also, the user can stop the iterations once the image looks good enough, rather than wait for the computation to numerically converge.\nAnother common method for solving the radiosity equation is \"shooting radiosity,\" which iteratively solves the radiosity equation by \"shooting\" light from the patch with the most energy at each step. After the first pass, only those patches which are in direct line of sight of a light-emitting patch will be illuminated. After the second pass, more patches will become illuminated as the light begins to bounce around the scene. The scene continues to grow brighter and eventually reaches a steady state.\nMathematical formulation.\nThe basic radiosity method has its basis in the theory of thermal radiation, since radiosity relies on computing the amount of light energy transferred among surfaces. In order to simplify computations, the method assumes that all scattering is perfectly diffuse. Surfaces are typically discretized into quadrilateral or triangular elements over which a piecewise polynomial function is defined.\nAfter this breakdown, the amount of light energy transfer can be computed by using the known reflectivity of the reflecting patch, combined with the view factor of the two patches. This dimensionless quantity is computed from the geometric orientation of two patches, and can be thought of as the fraction of the total possible emitting area of the first patch which is covered by the second.\nMore correctly, radiosity \"B\" is the energy per unit area leaving the patch surface per discrete time interval and is the combination of emitted and reflected energy:\nformula_1\nwhere:\nIf the surfaces are approximated by a finite number of planar patches, each of which is taken to have a constant radiosity \"Bi\" and reflectivity \"\u03c1i\", the above equation gives the discrete radiosity equation,\nformula_2\nwhere \"Fij\" is the geometrical view factor for the radiation leaving \"j\" and hitting patch \"i\".\nThis equation can then be applied to each patch. The equation is monochromatic, so color radiosity rendering requires calculation for each of the required colors.\nSolution methods.\nThe equation can formally be solved as matrix equation, to give the vector solution:\nformula_3\nThis gives the full \"infinite bounce\" solution for B directly. However the number of calculations to compute the matrix solution scales according to \"n\"3, where \"n\" is the number of patches. This becomes prohibitive for realistically large values of \"n\".\nInstead, the equation can more readily be solved iteratively, by repeatedly applying the single-bounce update formula above. Formally, this is a solution of the matrix equation by Jacobi iteration. Because the reflectivities \u03c1i are less than 1, this scheme converges quickly, typically requiring only a handful of iterations to produce a reasonable solution. Other standard iterative methods for matrix equation solutions can also be used, for example the Gauss\u2013Seidel method, where updated values for each patch are used in the calculation as soon as they are computed, rather than all being updated synchronously at the end of each sweep. The solution can also be tweaked to iterate over each of the sending elements in turn in its main outermost loop for each update, rather than each of the receiving patches. This is known as the \"shooting\" variant of the algorithm, as opposed to the \"gathering\" variant. Using the view factor reciprocity, \"A\"i \"F\"ij = \"A\"j \"F\"ji, the update equation can also be re-written in terms of the view factor \"F\"ji seen by each \"sending\" patch \"A\"j:\nformula_4\nThis is sometimes known as the \"power\" formulation, since it is now the total transmitted power of each element that is being updated, rather than its radiosity.\nThe view factor \"F\"ij itself can be calculated in a number of ways. Early methods used a \"hemicube\" (an imaginary cube centered upon the first surface to which the second surface was projected, devised by Michael F. Cohen and Donald P. Greenberg in 1985). The surface of the hemicube was divided into pixel-like squares, for each of which a view factor can be readily calculated analytically. The full form factor could then be approximated by adding up the contribution from each of the pixel-like squares. The projection onto the hemicube, which could be adapted from standard methods for determining the visibility of polygons, also solved the problem of intervening patches partially obscuring those behind.\nHowever all this was quite computationally expensive, because ideally form factors must be derived for every possible pair of patches, leading to a quadratic increase in computation as the number of patches increased. This can be reduced somewhat by using a binary space partitioning tree to reduce the amount of time spent determining which patches are completely hidden from others in complex scenes; but even so, the time spent to determine the form factor still typically scales as \"n\" log \"n\". New methods include adaptive integration.\nSampling approaches.\nThe form factors \"F\"ij themselves are not in fact explicitly needed in either of the update equations; neither to estimate the total intensity \u03a3j \"F\"ij \"B\"j gathered from the whole view, nor to estimate how the power \"A\"j \"B\"j being radiated is distributed. Instead, these updates can be estimated by sampling methods, without ever having to calculate form factors explicitly. Since the mid 1990s such sampling approaches have been the methods most predominantly used for practical radiosity calculations.\nThe gathered intensity can be estimated by generating a set of samples in the unit circle, lifting these onto the hemisphere, and then seeing what was the radiosity of the element that a ray incoming in that direction would have originated on. The estimate for the total gathered intensity is then just the average of the radiosities discovered by each ray. Similarly, in the power formulation, power can be distributed by generating a set of rays from the radiating element in the same way, and spreading the power to be distributed equally between each element a ray hits.\nThis is essentially the same distribution that a path-tracing program would sample in tracing back one diffuse reflection step; or that a bidirectional ray-tracing program would sample to achieve one forward diffuse reflection step when light source mapping forwards. The sampling approach therefore to some extent represents a convergence between the two techniques, the key difference remaining that the radiosity technique aims to build up a sufficiently accurate map of the radiance of all the surfaces in the scene, rather than just a representation of the current view.\nReducing computation time.\nStatic, pre-computed radiosity may be displayed in real time via lightmaps using standard rasterization techniques.\nLimitations.\nTypical radiosity methods only account for light paths of the form LD*E, i.e. paths which start at a light source and make multiple diffuse bounces before reaching the eye. Although there are several approaches to integrating other illumination effects such as specular and glossy reflections, radiosity-based methods are generally not used to solve the complete rendering equation.\nBasic radiosity also has trouble resolving sudden changes in visibility (e.g. hard-edged shadows) because coarse, regular discretization into piecewise constant elements corresponds to a low-pass box filter of the spatial domain. Discontinuity meshing https:// uses knowledge of visibility events to generate a more intelligent discretization.\nConfusion about terminology.\nRadiosity was perhaps the first rendering algorithm in widespread use which accounted for diffuse indirect lighting. Earlier rendering algorithms, such as Whitted-style ray tracing were capable of computing effects such as reflections, refractions, and shadows, but despite being highly global phenomena, these effects were not commonly referred to as \"global illumination.\" As a consequence, the terms \"diffuse interreflection\" and \"radiosity\" both became confused with \"global illumination\" in popular parlance. However, the three are distinct concepts.\nThe radiosity method, in the context of computer graphics, derives from (and is fundamentally the same as) the radiosity method in heat transfer. In this context, radiosity is the total radiative flux (both reflected and re-radiated) leaving a surface; this is also sometimes known as radiant exitance. Calculation of radiosity, rather than surface temperatures, is a key aspect of the radiosity method that permits linear matrix methods to be applied to the problem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25975", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25975", "title": "Reign of Terror", "text": "1793\u201394 period of political violence during the French Revolution\nThe Reign of Terror () was a period of the French Revolution when, following the creation of the First Republic, a series of massacres and numerous public executions took place in response to the Federalist revolts, revolutionary fervour, anticlerical sentiment, and accusations of treason by the Committee of Public Safety. While terror was never formally instituted as a legal policy by the Convention, it was more often employed as a concept.\nHistorians disagree when exactly the \"Terror\" began. Some consider it to have begun in 1793, often giving the date as 5 September or 10 March, when the Revolutionary Tribunal came into existence. Others cite the earlier September Massacres in 1792, or even July 1789 when the first killing of the revolution occurred. Will Durant stated that \"strictly, it should be dated from the Law of Suspects, September 17, 1793, to the execution of Maximilien Robespierre, July 28, 1794.\"\nThe Terror concluded with the fall of Robespierre and his alleged allies in July 1794, in what is known as the Thermidorian Reaction. By then, 16,594 official death sentences had been dispensed throughout France since June 1793, of which 2,639 were in Paris alone. An additional 10,000 people had been executed without trial or died in prison.\nBackground.\nEnlightenment thought.\nEnlightenment thought emphasized the importance of rational thinking and began challenging legal and moral foundations of society, providing the leaders of the Reign of Terror with new ideas about the role and structure of government. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's \"Social Contract\" argues that each person was born with rights, and they would come together in forming a government that would then protect those rights. Under the social contract, the government was required to act for the general will, which represented the interests of everyone rather than a few factions. Drawing from the idea of a general will, Robespierre felt that the French Revolution could result in a republic built for the general will but only once those who fought against this ideal were expelled. Those who resisted the government were deemed \"tyrants\" fighting against the virtue and honor of the general will. The leaders felt that their ideal version of government was threatened from the inside and outside of France, and terror was the only way to preserve the dignity of the republic created in the French Revolution.\nThe writings of Baron de Montesquieu, another Enlightenment thinker of the time, also greatly influenced Robespierre. Montesquieu's \"The Spirit of Law\" defines a core principle of a democratic government: virtue\u2014described as \"the love of laws and of our country.\" In Robespierre's speech to the National Convention on 5 February 1794, he regards virtue as being the \"fundamental principle of popular or democratic government.\" This was, in fact, the same virtue defined by Montesquieu almost 50 years prior. Robespierre believed the virtue needed for any democratic government was extremely lacking in the French people. As a result, he decided to weed out those he believed could never possess this virtue. The result was a continual push towards terror. The convention used this as justification for the course of action to \"crush the enemies of the revolution\u2026let the laws be executed\u2026and let liberty be saved.\"\nThreats of foreign invasion.\nAt the beginning of the French Revolution, the surrounding monarchies did not show great hostility towards the rebellion. Though mostly ignored, Louis XVI was later able to find support in Leopold II of Austria (brother of Marie Antoinette) and Frederick William II of Prussia. On 27 August 1791, these foreign leaders made the Pillnitz Declaration, saying they would restore the French monarch if other European rulers joined. In response to what they viewed to be the meddling of foreign powers, France declared war on 20 April 1792. However, at this point, the war was only Prussia and Austria against France.\nMassive reforms of military institutions, while very effective in the long run, presented the initial problems of inexperienced forces and leaders of questionable political loyalty. In the time it took for officers of merit to use their new freedoms to climb the chain of command, France suffered. Many of the early battles were definitive losses for the French. There was the constant threat of the Austro-Prussian forces which were advancing easily toward the capital, threatening to destroy Paris if the monarch was harmed. This series of defeats, coupled with militant uprisings and protests within the borders of France, pushed the government to resort to drastic measures to ensure the loyalty of every citizen, not only to France but more importantly to the revolution.\nWhile this series of losses was eventually broken, the reality of what might have happened if they persisted hung over France. In September 1792 the French won a critical victory at Valmy, preventing an Austro-Prussian invasion. While the French military had stabilized and was producing victories by the time the Reign of Terror officially began, the pressure to succeed in this international struggle acted as justification for the government to pursue its actions. It was not until after the execution of Louis XVI and the annexation of the Rhineland that the other monarchies began to feel threatened enough to form the First Coalition. The coalition, consisting of Russia, Austria, Prussia, Spain, Holland, and Sardinia began attacking France from all directions, besieging and capturing ports and retaking ground lost to France. With so many similarities to the first days of the Revolutionary Wars for the French government, with threats on all sides, unification of the country became a top priority. As the war continued and the Reign of Terror began, leaders saw a correlation between using terror and achieving victory. Well phrased by Albert Soboul, \"terror, at first an improvised response to defeat, once organized became an instrument of victory.\" The threat of defeat and foreign invasion may have helped spur the origins of the Terror, but the timely coincidence of the Terror with French victories added justification to its growth.\nPopular pressure.\nDuring the Reign of Terror, the \"sans-culottes\" \u2014the urban workers of France\u2014 and the H\u00e9bertists put pressure on the National Convention delegates and contributed to the overall instability of France. The National Convention was bitterly split between the Montagnards and the Girondins. The Girondins were more conservative leaders of the National Convention, while the Montagnards supported radical violence and pressures of the lower classes. Once the Montagnards gained control of the National Convention, they began demanding radical measures. \nMoreover, the \"sans-culottes\" agitated leaders to inflict punishments on those who opposed the interests of the poor. The \"sans-culottes\" violently demonstrated, pushing their demands and creating constant pressure for the Montagnards to enact reform. They fed the frenzy of instability and chaos by utilizing popular pressure during the Revolution. For example, they sent letters and petitions to the Committee of Public Safety urging them to protect their interests and rights with measures such as taxation of foodstuffs that favored workers over the rich. They advocated for arrests of those deemed to oppose reforms against those with privilege, and the more militant members would advocate pillage in order to achieve the desired equality. The resulting instability caused problems that made forming the new republic and achieving full political support critical.\nReligious upheaval.\nThe Reign of Terror was characterized by a dramatic rejection of long-held religious authority, its hierarchical structure, and the corrupt and intolerant influence of the aristocracy and clergy. Religious elements that long stood as symbols of stability for the French people, were replaced by views on reason and scientific thought. The radical revolutionaries and their supporters desired a cultural revolution that would rid the French state of all Christian influence. This process began with the fall of the monarchy, an event that effectively defrocked the state of its sanctification by the clergy via the doctrine of Divine Right and ushered in an era of reason.\nMany long-held rights and powers were stripped from the Catholic Church and given to the state. In 1789, church lands were expropriated and priests killed or forced to leave France. Later in 1792, \"refractory priests\" were targeted and replaced with their secular counterpart from the Jacobin club. Not all religions experienced equal aggression; the Jewish community, on the contrary, received admittance into French citizenship in 1791. A Festival of Reason was held in the Notre Dame Cathedral, which was renamed \"The Temple of Reason\", and the traditional calendar was replaced with a new revolutionary one. The leaders of the Terror tried to address the call for these radical, revolutionary aspirations, while at the same time trying to maintain tight control on the de-Christianization movement that was threatening to the clear majority of the still devoted Catholic population of France. Robespierre used the event as a means to combat the \"moral counterrevolution\" taking place among his rivals. Additionally, he hoped to stem \"the monster atheism\" that was a result of the radical secularization in philosophical and social circles. The tension sparked by these conflicting objectives laid a foundation for the \"justified\" use of terror to achieve revolutionary ideals and rid France of the religiosity that revolutionaries believed was standing in the way.\nTerror of the day.\nIn the summer of 1793, leading politicians in France felt a sense of emergency between the widespread civil war and counter-revolution. Bertrand Bar\u00e8re exclaimed on 5 September 1793 in the National Convention: \"Let's make terror the order of the day!\" This quote has frequently been interpreted as the beginning of a \"system of Terror\". Under the pressure of the radical \"sans-culottes\", the Convention agreed to institute a revolutionary army but refused to make terror the order of the day. According to French historian Jean-Cl\u00e9ment Martin, there was no \"system of terror\" instated by the Convention between 1793 and 1794, despite the pressure from some of its members and the \"sans-culottes\". The members of the Convention were determined to avoid street violence such as the September Massacres of 1792 by taking violence into their own hands as an instrument of government. The monarchist Jacques Cazotte who predicted the Terror was guillotined at the end of the month.\nWhat Maximilien Robespierre called \"terror\" was the fear that the \"justice of exception\" would inspire the enemies of the French First Republic. He opposed the idea of terror as the order of the day, defending instead \"justice\" as the order of the day. In February 1794 in a speech he explains why this \"terror\" was necessary as a form of exceptional justice in the context of the revolutionary government:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMarxist historian Albert Mathiez argues that such terror was a necessary reaction to the circumstances. Others suggest there were additional causes, including ideological and emotional.\nMajor events.\nOn 10 March 1793 the National Convention set up the Revolutionary Tribunal. Among those charged by the tribunal, initially, about half of those arrested were acquitted, but the number dropped to about a quarter after the enactment of the Law of 22 Prairial on 10 June 1794. In March, rebellion broke out in the Vend\u00e9e in response to mass conscription, which developed into a civil war. Discontent in the Vend\u00e9e lasted\u2014according to some accounts\u2014until after the Terror.\nOn 6 April 1793 the National Convention established the Committee of Public Safety, which gradually became the \"de facto\" war-time government of France. The Committee oversaw the Reign of Terror. \"During the Reign of Terror, at least 300,000 suspects were arrested; 17,000 were officially executed, and perhaps 10,000 died in prison or without trial.\"\nOn 2 June the Parisian \"Sans-culottes\" surrounded the National Convention, calling for administrative and political purges, a fixed low price for bread, and a limitation of the electoral franchise to \"sans-culottes\" alone. With the backing of the national guard, they persuaded the Convention to arrest 29 Girondist leaders. In reaction to the imprisonment of the Girondin deputies, some 13 departments started the Federalist revolts against the Convention, which were ultimately crushed. \nOn 24 June the Convention adopted the first republican constitution of France, the French Constitution of 1793. It was ratified by public referendum, but never put into force. On 13 July the assassination of Jean-Paul Marat\u2014a Jacobin leader and journalist\u2014resulted in a further increase in Jacobin political influence. Georges Danton, the leader of the August 1792 uprising against the king, was removed from the Committee of Public Safety on 10 July. On 27 July Robespierre became part of the Committee of Public Safety.\nOn 23 August the National Convention decreed the \"lev\u00e9e en masse\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The young men shall fight; the married man shall forge arms and transport provisions; the women shall make tents and clothes and shall serve in the hospitals; the children shall pick rags to lint [for bandages]; the old men shall betake themselves to the public square in order to arouse the courage of the warriors and preach hatred of kings and the unity of the Republic.\nOn 5 September on the proposal of Bar\u00e8re, the Convention was supposed to have declared by vote that \"terror is the order of the day\". On that day's session, the Convention, upon a proposal by Pierre Gaspard Chaumette and supported by Billaud and Danton, decided to form a revolutionary army of 6,000 men in Paris. Bar\u00e8re, representing the Committee of Public Safety, introduced a decree that was promptly passed, establishing a paid armed force of 6,000 men and 1,200 gunners \"tasked with crushing counter-revolutionaries, enforcing revolutionary laws and public safety measures decreed by the National Convention, and safeguarding provisions.\" This allowed the government to form \"revolutionary armies\" designed to force French citizens into compliance with Maximilian rule. These armies were also used to enforce \"the law of the General Maximum\", which controlled the distribution and pricing of food. Addressing the Convention, Robespierre claimed that the \"weight and willpower\" of the people loyal to the republic would be used to oppress those who would turn \"political gatherings into gladiatorial arenas\". The policy change unleashed a newfound military power in France, which was used to defend against the future coalitions formed by rival nations. The event also solidified Robespierre's rise to power as president of the Committee of Public Safety earlier in July.\nOn 8 September banks and exchange offices were shuttered to curb the circulation of counterfeit \"assignats\" and the outflow of capital, with investments in foreign countries punishable by death. The following day, the extremists Jean-Marie Collot d'Herbois and Jacques-Nicolas Billaud-Varenne were elected in the Committee of Public Safety. On 9 September the convention established paramilitary forces, the \"revolutionary armies\", to force farmers to surrender grain demanded by the government. On 17 September the Law of Suspects was passed, which authorized the imprisonment of vaguely defined \"suspects\". This created a mass overflow in the prison systems. On 29 September the Convention extended price fixing from grain and bread to other essential goods and also fixed wages.\nOn 10 October the Convention decreed \"the provisional government shall be revolutionary until peace.\" On 16 October Marie Antoinette was executed. The trial of the Girondins started on the same day; they were executed on 31 October in just over half an hour by Charles-Henri Sanson. Joseph Fouch\u00e9 and Collot d'Herbois suppressed the revolt of Lyon against the National Convention, while Jean-Baptiste Carrier ordered the drownings at Nantes. Jean-Lambert Tallien ensured the operation of the guillotine in Bordeaux, while Barras and Fr\u00e9ron addressed issues in Marseille and Toulon. Joseph Le Bon was sent to the Somme and Pas-de-Calais regions.\nOn 8 November, the director of the \"assignats\" manufacture, and Manon Roland were executed. On 13 November the Convention shut down the Paris Bourse and banned all commerce in precious metals, under penalties. Anti-clerical sentiments increased and a campaign of dechristianization occurred at the end of 1793. Eventually, Robespierre denounced the \"de-Christianisers\" as foreign enemies.\nIn early December, Robespierre accused Danton in the Jacobin Club of \"too often showing his vices and not his virtue\". Camille Desmoulins defended Danton and warned Robespierre not to exaggerate the revolution. On 5 December the National Convention passed the Law of Frimaire, which gave the central government more control over the actions of the representatives on mission. The Commune of Paris and the revolutionary committees in the sections had to obey the law, the two Committees, and the Convention. Desmoulins argued that the Revolution should return to its original ideas en vogue around 10 August 1792. A Committee of Grace had to be established. On 8 December, Madame du Barry was guillotined. On receiving notice that he was to appear on the next day before the Revolutionary Tribunal, \u00c9tienne Clavi\u00e8re committed suicide. American Thomas Paine lost his seat in the Convention, was arrested, and locked up for his association with the Girondins, as well as being a foreign national. By the end of 1793, two major factions had emerged, both threatening the revolutionary government: the H\u00e9bertists, who called for an intensification of the Terror and threatened insurrection, and the Dantonists, led by Danton, who demanded moderation and clemency. The Committee of Public Safety took actions against both.\nOn 8 February 1794 Carrier was recalled from Nantes after a member of the Committee of Public Safety wrote to Robespierre with information about the atrocities being carried out, although Carrier was not put on trial. On 26 February and 3 March Louis Antoine de Saint-Just proposed decrees to confiscate the property of exiles and opponents of the revolution, known as the Vent\u00f4se Decrees.\nIn March the major H\u00e9bertists were tried before the Revolutionary Tribunal and executed on 24 March. On 30 March the two committees decided to arrest Danton and Desmoulins after Saint-Just became uncharacteristically angry. The Dantonists were tried on 3 to 5 April and executed on 5 April. In mid-April it was decreed to centralise the investigation of court records and to bring all the political suspects in France to the Revolutionary Tribunal to Paris. Saint-Just and Philippe-Fran\u00e7ois-Joseph Le Bas journeyed the Rhine Army to oversee the generals and punish officers for perceived treasonous timidity or lack of initiative. The two committees received the power to interrogate them immediately. A special police bureau inside the Comit\u00e9 de salut public was created, whose task was to monitor public servants, competing with both the Committee of General Security and the Committee of Public Safety. Foreigners were no longer allowed to travel through France or visit a Jacobin club; Dutch patriots who had fled to France before 1790 were excluded. \nOn 22 April Guillaume-Chr\u00e9tien de Lamoignon de Malesherbes, Isaac Ren\u00e9 Guy le Chapelier, Jacques Guillaume Thouret were taken to be executed. Saint-Just and Le Bas left Paris at the end of the month for the army in the north. On 21 May the revolutionary government decided that the Terror would be centralised, with almost all \nthe tribunals in the provinces closed and all the trials held in Paris. On 20 May Robespierre signed Theresa Cabarrus's arrest warrant, and on 23 May, following an attempted assassination on d'Herbois. C\u00e9cile Renault was arrested near Robespierre's residence with two penknives and a change of underwear claiming the fresh linen was for her execution. She was executed on 17 June.\nOn 10 June the National Convention passed a law proposed by Georges Couthon, known as the Law of 22 Prairial, which simplified the judicial process and greatly accelerated the work of the Revolutionary Tribunal. With the enactment of the law, the number of executions greatly increased, and the period became known as \"The Great Terror\" (). Between 10 June and 27 July, another 1,366 were executed, causing fear among d'Herbois, Fouch\u00e9 and Tallien due to their past actions. Like Brissot, Madame Roland, P\u00e9tion, H\u00e9bert and Danton, Tallien was accused of participating in conspicuous dinners. On 18 June P\u00e9tion de Villeneuve and Fran\u00e7ois Buzot committed suicide, and Joachim Vilate was arrested on 21 June.\nOn 26 June the French army won the Battle of Fleurus, which marked a turning point in France's military campaign and undermined the necessity of wartime measures and the legitimacy of the revolutionary government. In early July about 60 individuals were arrested as \"enemies of the people\" and accused of conspiring against liberty. The total of death sentences in Paris in July was more than double the number in June, with two new mass graves dug at Picpus Cemetery by mid-July. There was widespread agreement among deputies that their parliamentary immunity, in place since 1 April 1793, had become perilous. On 14 July Robespierre had Fouch\u00e9 expelled. To evade arrest about 50 deputies avoided staying at home.\nThermidorian Reaction.\nThe fall of Robespierre was brought about by a combination of those who wanted more power for the Committee of Public Safety (and a more radical policy than he was willing to allow) and the moderates who completely opposed the revolutionary government. They had, between them, made the Law of 22 Prairial one of the charges against him, so that after his fall, to advocate terror would be seen as adopting the policy of a convicted enemy of the republic, putting the advocate's own head at risk.\nBetween his arrest and his execution, Robespierre may have tried to commit suicide by shooting himself, although the bullet wound he sustained, whatever its origin, only shattered his jaw. Alternatively, he may have been shot by the gendarme Charles-Andr\u00e9 Merda. According to Bourdon, M\u00e9da then hit Couthon's adjutant in his leg. Couthon was found lying at the bottom of a staircase in a corner, having fallen from the back of his adjutant. Saint-Just gave himself up without a word. According to M\u00e9da, Hanriot tried to escape by a concealed staircase to the third floor and his apartment. The great confusion that arose during the storming of the municipal Hall of Paris, where Robespierre and his friends had found refuge, makes it impossible to be sure of the wound's origin. A group of 15 to 20 conspirators were locked up in a room inside the H\u00f4tel de Ville. In any case, Robespierre was guillotined the next day, together with Saint-Just, Couthon and his brother Augustin Robespierre. The day following his demise, approximately half of the Paris Commune (70 members) met their fate at the guillotine.\nAccording to Bar\u00e8re, who just like Robespierre never went on mission: \"We did not deceive ourselves that Saint-Just, cut out as a more dictatorial boss, would have finished by overthrowing [Robespierre] to put himself in his place; we also knew that we who stood in the way of his projects, he would have us guillotined; we overthrew him.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25976", "revid": "1300871411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25976", "title": "Reliabilism", "text": "Theory that beliefs are justified when from reliable processes\nReliabilism, a category of theories in the philosophical discipline of epistemology, has been advanced as a theory both of justification and of knowledge. Process reliabilism has been used as an argument against philosophical skepticism, such as the brain in a vat thought experiment.\nProcess reliabilism is a form of epistemic externalism.\nOverview.\nA broadly reliabilist theory of knowledge is roughly as follows:\nGiven that \"p\" stands for any proposition (such as, \"the sky is blue\"), then one knows that \"p\" if and only if \"p\" is true, one believes that \"p\" is true, and one has arrived at the belief that \"p\" is true through some \"reliable process.\"\nA broadly reliabilist theory of justified belief can be stated as follows:\nOne has a justified belief that \"p\" if, and only if, the belief is the result of a reliable process.\nMoreover, a similar account can be given (and an elaborate version of this has been given by Alvin Plantinga) for such notions as 'warranted belief' or 'epistemically rational belief'.\nLeading proponents of reliabilist theories of knowledge and justification have included Alvin Goldman, Marshall Swain, Kent Bach and more recently, Alvin Plantinga. Goldman's article \"A Causal Theory of Knowing\" (\"Journal of Philosophy\", 64 (1967), pp.\u00a0357\u2013372) is generally credited as being the first full treatment of the theory, though D. M. Armstrong is also regarded as an important source, and (according to Hugh Mellor) Frank Ramsey was the very first to state the theory, albeit in passing.\nOne classical or traditional analysis of 'knowledge' is \"justified true belief\". In order to have a valid claim of knowledge for any proposition, one must be justified in believing \"p\" and \"p\" must be true. Since Gettier proposed his counterexamples the traditional analysis has included the further claim that knowledge must be more than justified true belief. Reliabilist theories of knowledge are sometimes presented as an alternative to that theory: rather than justification, all that is required is that the belief be the product of a reliable process. But reliabilism need not be regarded as an alternative, but instead as a further explication of the traditional analysis. On this view, those who offer reliabilist theories of justification further analyze the 'justification' part of the traditional analysis of 'knowledge' in terms of reliable processes. Not all reliabilists agree with such accounts of justification, but some do.\nObjections.\nSome find reliabilisms of justification objectionable because it entails externalism, which is the view that one can have knowledge, or have a justified belief, despite not knowing (having \"access\" to) the evidence, or other circumstances, that make the belief justified. Most reliabilists maintain that a belief can be justified, or can constitute knowledge, \"even if\" the believer does not know about or understand the process that makes the belief reliable. In defending this view, reliabilists (and externalists generally) are apt to point to examples from simple acts of perception: if one sees a bird in the tree outside one's window and thereby gains the belief that there is a bird in that tree, one might not at all understand the cognitive processes that account for one's successful act of perception; nevertheless, it is the fact that the processes worked reliably that accounts for why one's belief is justified. In short, one finds one holds a belief about the bird, and that belief is justified if any is, but one is not acquainted at all with the processes that led to the belief that justified one's having it. \nAnother of the most common objections to reliabilism, made first to Goldman's reliable process theory of knowledge and later to other reliabilist theories, is the so-called generality problem. For any given justified belief (or instance of knowledge), one can easily identify many different (concurrently operating) \"processes\" from which the belief results. My belief that there is a bird in the tree outside my window might be accorded a result of the process of forming beliefs on the basis of sense-perception, of visual sense-perception, of visual sense-perception through non-opaque surfaces in daylight, and so forth, down to a variety of different very specifically described processes. Some of these processes might be statistically reliable, while others might not. It would no doubt be better to say, in any case, that we are choosing not which process to say resulted in the belief, but instead how to describe the process, out of the many different levels of generality on which it can be accurately described.\nAn objection in a similar line was formulated by Stephen Stich in \"The Fragmentation of Reason\". Reliabilism usually considers that for generating justified beliefs a process needs to be reliable in a set of relevant possible scenarios. However, according to Stich, these scenarios are chosen in a culturally biased manner. Stich does not defend any alternative theory of knowledge or justification, but instead argues that all accounts of normative epistemic terms are culturally biased and instead only a pragmatic account can be given.\nAnother objection to reliabilism is called the \"new evil demon problem\". The evil demon problem originally motivated skepticism, but can be repurposed to object to reliabilist accounts as follows: If our experiences are controlled by an evil demon, it may be the case that we believe ourselves to be doing things that we are not doing. However, these beliefs are clearly justified. Robert Brandom has called for a clarification of the role of belief in reliabilist theories. Brandom is concerned that unless the role of belief is stressed, reliabilism may attribute knowledge to things that would otherwise be considered incapable of possessing it. Brandom gives the example of a parrot that has been trained to consistently respond to red visual stimuli by saying 'that's red'. The proposition is true, the mechanism that produced it is reliable, but Brandom is reluctant to say that the parrot \"knows\" it is seeing red because he thinks it cannot \"believe\" that it is. For Brandom, beliefs pertain to concepts: without the latter there can be no former. Concepts are products of the 'game of giving and asking for reasons'. Hence, only those entities capable of reasoning, through language in a social context, can for Brandom believe and thus have knowledge. Brandom may be regarded as hybridising externalism and internalism, allowing knowledge to be accounted for by reliable external process so long as a knower possess some internal understanding of why the belief is reliable.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25977", "revid": "2821695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25977", "title": "Ideal (ring theory)", "text": "Submodule of a mathematical ring\nIn mathematics, and more specifically in ring theory, an ideal of a ring is a special subset of its elements. Ideals generalize certain subsets of the integers, such as the even numbers or the multiples of 3. Addition and subtraction of even numbers preserves evenness, and multiplying an even number by any integer (even or odd) results in an even number; these closure and absorption properties are the defining properties of an ideal. An ideal can be used to construct a quotient ring in a way similar to how, in group theory, a normal subgroup can be used to construct a quotient group.\nAmong the integers, the ideals correspond one-for-one with the non-negative integers: in this ring, every ideal is a principal ideal consisting of the multiples of a single non-negative number. However, in other rings, the ideals may not correspond directly to the ring elements, and certain properties of integers, when generalized to rings, attach more naturally to the ideals than to the elements of the ring. For instance, the prime ideals of a ring are analogous to prime numbers, and the Chinese remainder theorem can be generalized to ideals. There is a version of unique prime factorization for the ideals of a Dedekind domain (a type of ring important in number theory).\nThe related, but distinct, concept of an ideal in order theory is derived from the notion of an ideal in ring theory. A fractional ideal is a generalization of an ideal, and the usual ideals are sometimes called integral ideals for clarity.\nHistory.\nErnst Kummer invented the concept of ideal numbers to serve as the \"missing\" factors in number rings in which unique factorization fails; here the word \"ideal\" is in the sense of existing in imagination only, in analogy with \"ideal\" objects in geometry such as points at infinity.\nIn 1876, Richard Dedekind replaced Kummer's undefined concept by concrete sets of numbers, sets that he called ideals, in the third edition of Dirichlet's book \"Vorlesungen \u00fcber Zahlentheorie\", to which Dedekind had added many supplements.\nLater the notion was extended beyond number rings to the setting of polynomial rings and other commutative rings by David Hilbert and especially Emmy Noether.\nDefinitions.\nGiven a ring formula_1, a left ideal is a subset formula_2 of formula_1 that is a subgroup of the additive group of formula_1 that is closed under left multiplication by elements of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; that is, for every formula_5 and every &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, one has:\nIn other words, a left ideal is a left submodule of formula_1, considered as a left module over itself.\nA right ideal is defined similarly, with the condition formula_7 replaced by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. A two-sided ideal is a left ideal that is also a right ideal.\nIf the ring is commutative, the definitions of left, right, and two-sided ideal coincide, and one talks simply of an ideal. In the non-commutative case, \"ideal\" is often used instead of \"two-sided ideal\".\nSince an ideal formula_2 is an abelian subgroup, the relation between &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; defined by \n formula_9\nis an equivalence relation on formula_1, and the set of equivalence classes is an abelian group denoted &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and called the \"quotient\" of formula_1 by formula_2. If formula_2 is a left or a right ideal, the quotient &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a left or right &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-module, respectively.\nIf the ideal formula_2 is two-sided, the quotient formula_15 is a ring, and the function \nformula_16 \nthat associates to each element of formula_1 its equivalence class is a surjective ring homomorphism that has the ideal as its kernel. Conversely, the kernel of a ring homomorphism is a two-sided ideal. Therefore, \"the two-sided ideals are exactly the kernels of ring homomorphisms.\"\nNotes on convention.\nBy convention, a ring has the multiplicative identity. But some authors do not require a ring to have the multiplicative identity; i.e., for them, a ring is a rng. For a rng formula_1, a left ideal formula_2 is a subrng with the additional property that formula_20 is in formula_2 for every formula_5 and every formula_23. (Right and two-sided ideals are defined similarly.) For a ring, an ideal formula_2 (say a left ideal) is rarely a subring; since a subring shares the same multiplicative identity with the ambient ring formula_1, if formula_2 were a subring, for every formula_5, we have formula_28 i.e., formula_29.\nThe notion of an ideal does not involve associativity; thus, an ideal is also defined for non-associative rings (often without the multiplicative identity) such as a Lie algebra.\nTraditionally, ideals are denoted using Fraktur lower-case letters, generally the first few letters (formula_30, etc.) for generic ideals, formula_31 for maximal ideals, and formula_32 (and sometimes formula_33) for prime ideals. In modern texts, capital letters, like formula_2 or formula_35 (or formula_36 and formula_37 for maximal and prime ideals, respectively) are also commonly used.\nTypes of ideals.\n\"To simplify the description all rings are assumed to be commutative. The non-commutative case is discussed in detail in the respective articles.\"\nIdeals are important because they appear as kernels of ring homomorphisms and allow one to define factor rings. Different types of ideals are studied because they can be used to construct different types of factor rings.\nTwo other important terms using \"ideal\" are not always ideals of their ring. See their respective articles for details:\nIdeal operations.\nThe sum and product of ideals are defined as follows. For formula_40 and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, left (resp. right) ideals of a ring \"R\", their sum is\n formula_143,\nwhich is a left (resp. right) ideal,\nand, if formula_88 are two-sided,\n formula_145\ni.e. the product is the ideal generated by all products of the form \"ab\" with \"a\" in formula_40 and \"b\" in &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nNote formula_147 is the smallest left (resp. right) ideal containing both formula_40 and formula_91 (or the union &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;), while the product formula_150 is contained in the intersection of formula_40 and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe distributive law holds for two-sided ideals &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;,\nIf a product is replaced by an intersection, a partial distributive law holds:\n formula_152\nwhere the equality holds if formula_40 contains formula_91 or formula_155.\nRemark: The sum and the intersection of ideals is again an ideal; with these two operations as join and meet, the set of all ideals of a given ring forms a complete modular lattice. The lattice is not, in general, a distributive lattice. The three operations of intersection, sum (or join), and product make the set of ideals of a commutative ring into a quantale.\nIf formula_88 are ideals of a commutative ring \"R\", then formula_157 in the following two cases (at least) \nAn integral domain is called a Dedekind domain if for each pair of ideals formula_160, there is an ideal formula_155 such that &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. It can then be shown that every nonzero ideal of a Dedekind domain can be uniquely written as a product of maximal ideals, a generalization of the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.\nExamples of ideal operations.\nIn formula_52 we have\n formula_163\nsince formula_164 is the set of integers that are divisible by both formula_53 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nLet formula_166 and let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then,\nIn the first computation, we see the general pattern for taking the sum of two finitely generated ideals, it is the ideal generated by the union of their generators. In the last three we observe that products and intersections agree whenever the two ideals intersect in the zero ideal. These computations can be checked using Macaulay2.\nRadical of a ring.\nIdeals appear naturally in the study of modules, especially in the form of a radical.\n \"For simplicity, we work with commutative rings but, with some changes, the results are also true for non-commutative rings.\"\nLet \"R\" be a commutative ring. By definition, a primitive ideal of \"R\" is the annihilator of a (nonzero) simple \"R\"-module. The Jacobson radical formula_173 of \"R\" is the intersection of all primitive ideals. Equivalently,\n formula_174\nIndeed, if formula_36 is a simple module and \"x\" is a nonzero element in \"M\", then formula_176 and formula_177, meaning formula_178 is a maximal ideal. Conversely, if formula_31 is a maximal ideal, then formula_31 is the annihilator of the simple \"R\"-module &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. There is also another characterization (the proof is not hard):\n formula_181\nFor a not-necessarily-commutative ring, it is a general fact that formula_182 is a unit element if and only if formula_183 is (see the link) and so this last characterization shows that the radical can be defined both in terms of left and right primitive ideals.\nThe following simple but important fact (Nakayama's lemma) is built-in to the definition of a Jacobson radical: if \"M\" is a module such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then \"M\" does not admit a maximal submodule, since if there is a maximal submodule &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, formula_184 and so &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a contradiction. Since a nonzero finitely generated module admits a maximal submodule, in particular, one has:\n If formula_185 and \"M\" is finitely generated, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nA maximal ideal is a prime ideal and so one has\n formula_186\nwhere the intersection on the left is called the nilradical of \"R\". As it turns out, formula_187 is also the set of nilpotent elements of \"R\".\nIf \"R\" is an Artinian ring, then formula_188 is nilpotent and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. (Proof: first note the DCC implies formula_189 for some \"n\". If (DCC) formula_190 is an ideal properly minimal over the latter, then formula_191. That is, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a contradiction.)\nExtension and contraction of an ideal.\nLet \"A\" and \"B\" be two commutative rings, and let formula_192 be a ring homomorphism. If formula_40 is an ideal in \"A\", then formula_194 need not be an ideal in \"B\" (e.g. take \"f\" to be the inclusion of the ring of integers formula_52 into the field of rationals formula_196). The extension formula_197 of formula_40 in \"B\" is defined to be the ideal in \"B\" generated by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Explicitly,\n formula_199\nBy abuse of notation, formula_200 is another common notation for this ideal extension.\nIf formula_91 is an ideal of \"B\", then formula_202 is always an ideal of \"A\", called the contraction formula_203 of formula_91 to \"A\".\nAssuming formula_192 is a ring homomorphism, formula_40 is an ideal in \"A\", formula_91 is an ideal in \"B\", then:\nIt is false, in general, that formula_40 being prime (or maximal) in \"A\" implies that formula_197 is prime (or maximal) in \"B\". Many classic examples of this stem from algebraic number theory. For example, consider the embedding formula_215 In formula_216, the element 2 factors as formula_217 where (one can show) neither of formula_218 are units in \"B\". So formula_219 is not prime in \"B\" (and therefore not maximal, as well). Indeed, formula_220 shows that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and therefore &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nOn the other hand, if \"f\" is surjective and formula_221 then:\nRemark: Let \"K\" be a field extension of \"L\", and let \"B\" and \"A\" be the rings of integers of \"K\" and \"L\", respectively. Then \"B\" is an integral extension of \"A\", and we let \"f\" be the inclusion map from \"A\" to \"B\". The behaviour of a prime ideal formula_230 of \"A\" under extension is one of the central problems of algebraic number theory.\nThe following is sometimes useful: a prime ideal formula_32 is a contraction of a prime ideal if and only if formula_232. (Proof: Assuming the latter, note formula_233 intersects formula_234, a contradiction. Now, the prime ideals of formula_235 correspond to those in \"B\" that are disjoint from formula_234. Hence, there is a prime ideal formula_33 of \"B\", disjoint from formula_234, such that formula_239 is a maximal ideal containing formula_240. One then checks that formula_33 lies over formula_32. The converse is obvious.)\nGeneralizations.\nIdeals can be generalized to any monoid object &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, where formula_1 is the object where the monoid structure has been forgotten. A left ideal of formula_1 is a subobject formula_2 that \"absorbs multiplication from the left by elements of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\"; that is, formula_2 is a left ideal if it satisfies the following two conditions:\nA right ideal is defined with the condition \"&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\" replaced by \"'&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;\". A two-sided ideal is a left ideal that is also a right ideal, and is sometimes simply called an ideal. When formula_1 is a commutative monoid object respectively, the definitions of left, right, and two-sided ideal coincide, and the term ideal is used alone.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25978", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25978", "title": "Reversi", "text": "Strategy board game\nReversi is a strategy board game for two players, played on an 8\u00d78 uncheckered board. It was invented in 1883. Othello, a variant with a fixed initial setup of the board, was patented in 1971.\nBasics.\nTwo players compete, using 64 identical game pieces (\"disks\") that are light on one side and dark on the other. Each player chooses one color to use throughout the game. Players take turns placing one disk on an empty square, with their assigned color facing up. After a play is made, any disks of the opponent's color that lie in a straight line bounded by the one just played and another one in the current player's color are turned over. When all playable empty squares are filled, the player with more disks showing in their own color wins the game.\nHistory.\nOriginal version.\nEnglishmen Lewis Waterman and John W. Mollett both claim to have invented the game of reversi in 1883, each denouncing the other as a fraud. The game gained considerable popularity in England at the end of the 19th century. The game's first reliable mention is in the 21 August 1886 edition of \"The Saturday Review\". Later mention includes an 1895 article in \"The New York Times\", which describes reversi as \"something like Go Bang, [...] played with 64 pieces.\" In 1893, the German games publisher Ravensburger started producing the game as one of its first titles. Two 18th century continental European books dealing with a game that may or may not be reversi are mentioned on page fourteen of the Spring 1989 \"Othello Quarterly\", and there has been speculation, so far without documentation, that the game has older origins.\nA Japanese publication in 1907 titled \"World Games Rules Complete Collection\" (\u4e16\u754c\u904a\u622f\u6cd5\u5927\u5168) describes the board game reversi with the same rules as \"Othello\" where the first four pieces go in the center in a diagonal pattern and the player who cannot make a move simply passes.\n\"Othello\".\nThe modern version of the game\u2014the most regularly used rule-set, and the one used in international tournaments\u2014is marketed and recognized as . It was patented in Japan in 1971 by Goro Hasegawa (legal name: Satoshi Hasegawa), then a 38-year-old salesman. Hasegawa initially explained that \"Othello\" was an improvement on reversi, but from around 2000, he began to claim that he invented it in Mito regardless of reversi. Hasegawa also claimed that the origin of reversi/\"Othello\" dates back 5,000 years.\nHasegawa established the Japan Othello Association in March 1973, and held the first national \"Othello\" championship on 4 April 1973 in Japan. The Japanese game company Tsukuda Original launched \"Othello\" in late April 1973 in Japan under Hasegawa's license, which led to an immediate commercial success.\nThe name was selected by Hasegawa as a reference to the Shakespearean play \"Othello, the Moor of Venice\", referring to the conflict between the Moor Othello and Iago, and to the unfolding drama between Othello, who is black, and Desdemona, who is white. The green color of the board is inspired by the image of the general Othello, valiantly leading his battle in a green field. It can also be likened to a jealousy competition (jealousy being the central theme in Shakespeare's play, which popularized the term \"green-eyed monster\"), since players engulf the pieces of the opponent, thereby turning them to their possession.\n\"Othello\" was first launched in the U.S. in 1975 by Gabriel Industries and it also enjoyed commercial success there. Sales have reportedly exceeded $600\u00a0million. More than 40 million classic games have been sold in over 100 countries.\nHasegawa's \"How to play Othello (Osero No Uchikata)\" in Japan in 1974, was published in 1977 in an English translation entitled \"How to Win at Othello\".\nKabushiki Kaisha Othello, which was owned by Hasegawa, registered the trademark \"OTHELLO\" for board games in Japan; Tsukuda Original registered the trademark in the rest of the world. All intellectual property regarding \"Othello\" outside Japan is now owned by MegaHouse, the Japanese toy company that acquired Tsukuda Original's successor PalBox.\nRules.\nEach of the disks' two sides corresponds to one player; they are referred to here as \"light\" and \"dark\" after the sides of \"Othello\" pieces, but any counters with distinctive faces are suitable. The game may for example be played with a chessboard and Scrabble pieces, with one player \"letters\" and the other \"backs\".\nThe historical version of reversi starts with an empty board, and the first two moves made by each player are in the four central squares of the board. The players place their disks alternately with their colors facing up and no captures are made. A player may choose to not play both pieces on the same diagonal, different from the standard \"Othello\" opening. It is also possible to play variants of Reversi and \"Othello\" where the second player's second move may or must flip one of the opposite-colored disks (as variants closest to the normal games).\nFor the specific game of \"Othello\", the game begins with four disks placed in a square in the middle of the grid, two facing light-side-up, two dark-side-up, so that the same-colored disks are on a diagonal. Convention has this such that the dark-side-up disks are to the north-east and south-west (from both players' perspectives), though this is only marginally consequential: where sequential openings' memorization is preferred, such players benefit from this. The dark player moves first.\nDark must place a piece (dark-side-up) on the board and so that there exists at least one straight (horizontal, vertical, or diagonal) occupied line between the new piece and another dark piece, with one or more contiguous light pieces between them. For move one, dark has four options shown by translucently drawn pieces below:\nPlay always alternates unless one player has no legal move, in which case they pass. After placing a dark disk, dark turns over (flips to dark, captures) the single disk (or chain of light disks) on the line between the new piece and an anchoring dark piece. Multiple chains of disks may be captured in a single move. No player can look back to the previous status of disks when playing moves. A valid move is one where at least one piece is reversed (flipped over).\nIf dark decided to put a piece in the topmost location (all choices are strategically equivalent at this time), one piece gets turned over, so that the board appears thus:\nNow light plays. This player operates under the same rules, with the roles reversed: light lays down a light piece, causing a dark piece to flip. Possibilities at this time appear thus (indicated by transparent pieces):\nLight takes the bottom left option and reverses one piece:\nPlayers take alternate turns. If one player cannot make a valid move, play passes back to the other player. The game ends when the grid has filled up or if neither player can make a valid move.\nExamples where the game ends before the grid is completely filled:\nThe player with the most pieces on the board at the end of the game wins. The game is scored by counting the number of discs in each player's color. If the game ended before the grid was completely filled, any empty squares are scored for the winner. However, if one player defaults by running out of time, that player's opponent wins regardless of the board configuration. There are varying methods to determine the official score when a player defaults.\nIn common practice over the Internet, opponents agree upon a time-control of, typically, from one to thirty minutes per game per player. Standard time control in the World Championship is thirty minutes, and this or something close to it is common in over-the-board (as opposed to internet) tournament play generally. In time-defaulted games, where disk differential is used for tie-breaks in tournaments or for rating purposes, one common over-the-board procedure for the winner of defaulted contests to complete both sides' moves with the greater of the result thereby or one disk difference in the winner's favor being the recorded score. Games in which both players have the same number of disks their color at the end (almost always with a full-board 32\u201332 score) are not very common, but also not rare, and these are designated as 'ties' and scored as half of a win for each player in tournaments. The term 'draw' for such may also be heard, but is somewhat frowned upon.\nWhat are generally referred to as \"transcript sheets\" are generally in use in tournament over-the-board play, with both players obligated to record their game's moves by placing the number of each move in an 8\u00d78 grid. This both enables players to look up past games of note and tournament directors and players to resolve disputes (according to whatever specific rules are in place) where claims that an illegal move, flip or other anomaly are voiced. An alternative recording method not requiring a grid is also in use, where positions on a board are labeled left to right by letters \"a\" through \"h\" and top to bottom by digits \"1\" through \"8\". Note that the numbers run in the opposite direction to the chess standard, and that the perspective may be that of either player (with no fixed standard). This alternate notational scheme is used primarily in verbal discussions or where a linear representation is desirable in print, but may also be permissible as during-game transcription by either or both players.\nTournament over-the-board play has various ways of handling illegal moves and incorrect flips. For example, one procedure that has been used is to permit either player to make corrections going back some fixed number of moves.\nAnti-Reversi.\n\"Anti-Reversi\" or \"Reversed Reversi\" is a variant of the game where the player wins who has \"fewer\" own-colored disks at the end of the game; draw is also a possible result. To put a disk on the board, the same rules apply as in normal reversi.\nBrightwell Quotient.\nInvented by the British mathematician and three times runner-up at the World Championship and five times British Champion Graham Brightwell, this is the tie-breaker that is now used in many tournaments including the W.O.C. If two players have the same number of points in the thirteen-round W.O.C. Swiss, the tie is resolved in favour of the player with the higher Brightwell Quotient.\nThe Brightwell Quotient (BQ) is calculated as follows:\nComputer opponents and research.\nGood Othello computer programs play very strongly against human opponents. This is mostly due to difficulties in human look-ahead peculiar to Othello: The interchangeability of the disks and therefore apparent strategic meaninglessness (as opposed to chess pieces for example) makes an evaluation of different moves much harder. This can be demonstrated with blindfold games, as the memorization of the board demands much more dedication from the players than in blindfold chess.\nThe first tournament pitting \"Othello\" computer programs against human opponents took place in 1980. In it, then world champion Hiroshi Inoue, although he would go on to win the tournament, lost a game against the computer program \"The Moor\". In 1997, the computer \"Othello\" program Logistello defeated the reigning human champion, Takeshi Murakami, six games to zero.\nAnalysts have estimated the number of legal positions in \"Othello\" is at most 1028, and it has a game-tree complexity of approximately 1058. Mathematically, Othello is solved up to 8x8 board. On 4\u00d74 and 6\u00d76 boards under perfect play, the second player wins. On 8x8 board, the game results in draw under perfect play, according to an arXiv paper. The first of these proofs is relatively trivial, the second dates to around 1990, and the last one was done in 2023. When generalizing the game to play on an \"n\"\u00d7\"n\" board, the problem of determining if the first player has a winning move in a given position is PSPACE-complete.\nWorld Othello Championship.\nThe World Othello Championship (WOC), which started in 1977, was first organized by the Japan Othello Association. From 1978 until 2004, the World Othello Championship was organized by the Othello TD group and Anjar Co. In 2005, the World Othello Federation took over the responsibility for the WOC.\nFrom 1977 to 1986, each country could send one player to participate in the WOC. From 1987, each country could send up to three players to participate. In 1987, the title WOC team championship started. In 2005, a female championship category was added to the WOC. From 2006, each World Othello Federation member could send a full team of up to four players. In 2016, a youth champion title was added to the WOC. The WOC was cancelled in 2020 and 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nReception.\n\"Games\" magazine included \"Othello\" in their \"Top 100 Games of 1980\", noting that it was \"Based on the Victorian game of reversi\" and had achieved \"remarkable success in this country for an abstract game of strategy\".\n\"Games\" magazine included \"Othello, Tournament Set\" in their \"Top 100 Games of 1981\", noting that by that time \"Othello has become so popular that Gabriel now markets a computer version and a players' association publishes a quarterly magazine\".\n\"Games\" magazine included \"Othello\" in their \"Top 100 Games of 1982\", noting that \"Although the goal is to finish with the most pieces of your color up, the best strategy, paradoxically, is usually to limit your opponent's options by flipping over as \"few\" of his discs as possible during the first two-thirds of the game.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25980", "revid": "44596665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25980", "title": "Radix sort", "text": "Non-comparative lexicographical sorting algorithm\nIn computer science, radix sort is a non-comparative sorting algorithm. It avoids comparison by creating and distributing elements into buckets according to their radix. For elements with more than one significant digit, this bucketing process is repeated for each digit, while preserving the ordering of the prior step, until all digits have been considered. For this reason, radix sort has also been called bucket sort and digital sort.\nRadix sort can be applied to data that can be sorted lexicographically, be they integers, words, punch cards, playing cards, or the mail.\nHistory.\nRadix sort dates back as far as 1887 to the work of Herman Hollerith on tabulating machines. Radix sorting algorithms came into common use as a way to sort punched cards as early as 1923.\nThe first memory-efficient computer algorithm for this sorting method was developed in 1954 at MIT by Harold H. Seward. Computerized radix sorts had previously been dismissed as impractical because of the perceived need for variable allocation of buckets of unknown size. Seward's innovation was to use a linear scan to determine the required bucket sizes and offsets beforehand, allowing for a single static allocation of auxiliary memory. The linear scan is closely related to Seward's other algorithm \u2014 counting sort.\nIn the modern era, radix sorts are most commonly applied to collections of binary strings and integers. It has been shown in some benchmarks to be faster than other more general-purpose sorting algorithms, sometimes 50% to three times faster.\nDigit order.\nRadix sorts can be implemented to start at either the most significant digit (MSD) or least significant digit (LSD). For example, with 1234, one could start with 1 (MSD) or 4 (LSD).\nLSD radix sorts typically use the following sorting order: short keys come before longer keys, and then keys of the same length are sorted lexicographically. This coincides with the normal order of integer representations, like the sequence [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. LSD sorts are generally stable sorts.\nMSD radix sorts are most suitable for sorting strings or fixed-length integer representations. A sequence like [b, c, e, d, f, g, ba] would be sorted as [b, ba, c, d, e, f, g]. If lexicographic ordering is used to sort variable-length integers in base 10, then numbers from 1 to 10 would be output as [1, 10, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9], as if the shorter keys were left-justified and padded on the right with blank characters to make the shorter keys as long as the longest key. MSD sorts are not necessarily stable.\nOther than the traversal order, MSD and LSD sorts differ in their handling of variable length input.\nLSD sorts can group by length, radix sort each group, then concatenate the groups in size order. MSD sorts must effectively 'extend' all shorter keys to the size of the largest key and sort them accordingly, which can be more complicated than the grouping required by LSD.\nHowever, MSD sorts are more amenable to subdivision and recursion. Each bucket created by an MSD step can itself be radix sorted using the next most significant digit, without reference to any other buckets created in the previous step. Once the last digit is reached, concatenating the buckets is all that is required to complete the sort.\nExamples.\nLeast significant digit.\nInput list:\n[170, 45, 75, 90, 2, 802, 2, 66]\nStarting from the rightmost (last) digit, sort the numbers based on that digit:\n[{170, 90}, {2, 802, 2}, {45, 75}, {66}]\nSorting by the next left digit:\n[{\"0\"2, 802, \"0\"2}, {45}, {66}, {170, 75}, {90}]\nAnd finally by the leftmost digit:\n[{\"00\"2, \"00\"2, \"0\"45, \"0\"66, \"0\"75, \"0\"90}, {170}, {802}]\nEach step requires just a single pass over the data, since each item can be placed in its bucket without comparison with any other element.\nSome radix sort implementations allocate space for buckets by first counting the number of keys that belong in each bucket before moving keys into those buckets. The number of times that each digit occurs is stored in an array.\nAlthough it is always possible to pre-determine the bucket boundaries using counts, some implementations opt to use dynamic memory allocation instead.\nMost significant digit, forward recursive.\nInput list, fixed width numeric strings with leading zeros:\n[170, 045, 075, 025, 002, 024, 802, 066]\nFirst digit, with brackets indicating buckets:\n[{045, 075, 025, 002, 024, 066}, {170}, {802}]\nNext digit:\n[{ {002}, {025, 024}, {045}, {066}, {075} }, 170, 802]\nFinal digit:\n[ 002, { {024}, {025} }, 045, 066, 075 , 170, 802]\nAll that remains is concatenation:\n[002, 024, 025, 045, 066, 075, 170, 802]\nComplexity and performance.\nRadix sort operates in formula_1 time, where formula_2 is the number of keys, and formula_3 is the key length in digits (e.g. 8-bit digits). LSD variants can achieve a lower bound for formula_3 of 'average key length' when splitting variable length keys into groups as discussed above.\nLSD Radix sort can run in linear time formula_5, where formula_3 is the number of digits in each array element with each digit in the range of 0 to formula_7, such as 0 to 255 for an 8-bit digit. This holds when formula_3 is constant and formula_9. No matter how large the value of formula_2, it makes formula_3 passes through the data. MSD Radix Sort uses just one pass in the best case, and in the worst case, it performs like LSD Radix sort.\nOptimized radix sorts can be very fast when working in a domain that suits them.\nThey are constrained to lexicographic data, but for many practical applications this is not a limitation. Large key sizes can hinder LSD implementations when the induced number of passes becomes the bottleneck.\nPerformance of LSD radix sort correlates with the number of passes over the array, which is formula_12. Two passes over the array are performed per digit: one pass for counting, followed by the permutation pass. The number of passes can be reduced to formula_13 by performing counting for all the digits of the key in a single pass. This is possible because the counts are always over the entire array, and permuting elements of the array does not change the resulting counts. \nSpecialized variants.\nIn-place MSD radix sort implementations.\nBinary MSD radix sort, also called binary quicksort, can be implemented in-place by splitting the input array into two bins - the 0s bin and the 1s bin. The 0s bin is grown from the beginning of the array, whereas the 1s bin is grown from the end of the array. The 0s bin boundary is placed before the first array element. The 1s bin boundary is placed after the last array element. The most significant bit of the first array element is examined. If this bit is a 1, then the first element is swapped with the element in front of the 1s bin boundary (the last element of the array), and the 1s bin is grown by one element by decrementing the 1s boundary array index. If this bit is a 0, then the first element remains at its current location, and the 0s bin is grown by one element. The next array element examined is the one in front of the 0s bin boundary (i.e. the first element that is not in the 0s bin or the 1s bin). This process continues until the 0s bin and the 1s bin reach each other. The 0s bin and the 1s bin are then sorted recursively based on the next bit of each array element. Recursive processing continues until the least significant bit has been used for sorting. Handling signed two's complement integers requires treating the most significant bit with the opposite sense, followed by unsigned treatment of the rest of the bits.\nIn-place MSD binary-radix sort can be extended to larger radix and retain in-place capability. Counting sort is used to determine the size of each bin and their starting index. Swapping is used to place the current element into its bin, followed by expanding the bin boundary. As the array elements are scanned the bins are skipped over and only elements between bins are processed, until the entire array has been processed and all elements end up in their respective bins. The number of bins is the same as the radix used - e.g. 16 bins for 16-radix. Each pass is based on a single digit (e.g. 4-bits per digit in the case of 16-radix), starting from the most significant digit. Each bin is then processed recursively using the next digit, until all digits have been used for sorting.\nNeither in-place binary-radix sort nor n-bit-radix sort, discussed in paragraphs above, are stable algorithms.\nStable MSD radix sort implementations.\nMSD radix sort can be implemented as a stable algorithm, but requires the use of a memory buffer of the same size as the input array. This extra memory allows the input buffer to be scanned from the first array element to last, and move the array elements to the destination bins in the same order. Thus, equal elements will be placed in the memory buffer in the same order they were in the input array. The MSD-based algorithm uses the extra memory buffer as the output on the first level of recursion, but swaps the input and output on the next level of recursion, to avoid the overhead of copying the output result back to the input buffer. Each of the bins are recursively processed, as is done for the in-place MSD radix sort. After the sort by the last digit has been completed, the output buffer is checked to see if it is the original input array, and if it's not, then a single copy is performed. If the digit size is chosen such that the key size divided by the digit size is an even number, the copy at the end is avoided.\nHybrid approaches.\nRadix sort, such as the two-pass method where counting sort is used during the first pass of each level of recursion, has a large constant overhead. Thus, when the bins get small, other sorting algorithms should be used, such as insertion sort. A good implementation of insertion sort is fast for small arrays, stable, in-place, and can significantly speed up radix sort.\nApplication to parallel computing.\nThis recursive sorting algorithm has particular application to parallel computing, as each of the bins can be sorted independently. In this case, each bin is passed to the next available processor. A single processor would be used at the start (the most significant digit). By the second or third digit, all available processors would likely be engaged. Ideally, as each subdivision is fully sorted, fewer and fewer processors would be utilized. In the worst case, all of the keys will be identical or nearly identical to each other, with the result that there will be little to no advantage to using parallel computing to sort the keys.\nIn the top level of recursion, opportunity for parallelism is in the counting sort portion of the algorithm. Counting is highly parallel, amenable to the parallel_reduce pattern, and splits the work well across multiple cores until reaching memory bandwidth limit. This portion of the algorithm has data-independent parallelism. Processing each bin in subsequent recursion levels is data-dependent, however. For example, if all keys were of the same value, then there would be only a single bin with any elements in it, and no parallelism would be available. For random inputs all bins would be near equally populated and a large amount of parallelism opportunity would be available.\nThere are faster parallel sorting algorithms available, for example optimal complexity O(log(\"n\")) are those of the Three Hungarians and Richard Cole and Batcher's bitonic merge sort has an algorithmic complexity of O(log2(\"n\")), all of which have a lower algorithmic time complexity to radix sort on a CREW-PRAM. The fastest known PRAM sorts were described in 1991 by David M W Powers with a parallelized quicksort that can operate in O(log(n)) time on a CRCW-PRAM with \"n\" processors by performing partitioning implicitly, as well as a radixsort that operates using the same trick in O(\"k\"), where \"k\" is the maximum keylength. However, neither the PRAM architecture or a single sequential processor can actually be built in a way that will scale without the number of constant fan-out gate delays per cycle increasing as O(log(\"n\")), so that in effect a pipelined version of Batcher's bitonic mergesort and the O(log(\"n\")) PRAM sorts are all O(log2(\"n\")) in terms of clock cycles, with Powers acknowledging that Batcher's would have lower constant in terms of gate delays than his Parallel quicksort and radix sort, or Cole's merge sort, for a keylength-independent sorting network of O(nlog2(\"n\")).\nTree-based radix sort.\nRadix sorting can also be accomplished by building a tree (or radix tree) from the input set, and doing a pre-order traversal. This is similar to the relationship between heapsort and the heap data structure. This can be useful for certain data types, see burstsort.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25981", "revid": "2030868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25981", "title": "Report program generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "25982", "revid": "43070105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25982", "title": "Tug of war", "text": "Sport in which two teams pull on a rope\nTug of war (also known as tug o' war, tug-a-war, tug war, rope war, rope pulling, or tugging war) is a sport in which two teams compete by pulling on opposite ends of a rope, with the goal of bringing the rope a certain distance in one direction against the force of the opposing team's pull. The sport has ancient origins and has been practiced in various cultures throughout history. It was included in the Summer Olympics from 1900 to 1920, but is no longer part of the Olympic program. Tug of war continues to be practiced in schools, community events, and organized competitions worldwide.\nTug of war typically involves teams of eight or more members, though the number can vary. The rope is marked with a centre line and two markers equidistant from the centre. The objective is to pull the opposing team\u2019s marker across the centre line. Specific rules govern techniques, such as prohibiting touching the ground for extended periods of time or lowering one's elbow below the knee during a pull. The sport requires both cooperation of team members and physical strength.\nInternationally, tug of war is governed by the Tug of War International Federation (TWIF), which organizes World Championships for nation teams biannually, for both indoor and outdoor contests, and a similar competition for club teams. It is particularly popular in Europe, Asia, and the United States, where it is often featured in festivals and national competitions.\nTug of war features as an important ritual in many societies, holding religious, cultural and historical significance. The sport remains a popular activity in both competitive and informal settings.\nTerminology.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" says that the phrase \"tug of war\" originally meant \"the decisive contest; the real struggle or tussle; a severe contest for supremacy\". Only in the 19th century was it used as a term for an athletic contest between two teams who haul at the opposite ends of a rope. Prior to that, \"French and English\" was the commonly used name for the game in the English-speaking world.\nOrigin.\nThe origins of tug of war are uncertain, but this sport was practised in Cambodia, ancient Egypt, Greece, India, and China. According to a Tang dynasty book, \"The Notes of Feng\", tug of war, under the name 'hook pulling' (), was used by the military commander of the State of Chu during the Spring and Autumn period (8th to 5th centuries BCE) to train warriors. During the Tang dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang promoted large-scale tug of war games, using ropes of up to with shorter ropes attached, and more than 500 people on each end of the rope. Each side also had its own team of drummers to encourage the participants.\nIn ancient Greece, the sport was called (Greek: ), () and (), which derives from (), meaning amongst others 'I pull through', all deriving from the verb (), 'I draw, I pull'. and seem to have been ordinary versions of tug of war, while had no rope, according to Julius Pollux. It is possible that the teams held hands when pulling, which would have increased difficulty, since handgrips are more difficult to sustain than a grip of a rope. Tug of war games in ancient Greece were among the most popular games used for strength and would help build strength needed for battle in full armor.\nArcheological evidence shows that tug of war was also popular in India in the 12th century:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no specific time and place in history to define the origin of the game of Tug of War. The contest of pulling on the rope originates from ancient ceremonies and rituals. Evidence is found in countries like Egypt, India, Myanmar, New Guinea... The origin of the game in India has strong archaeological roots going back at least to the 12th century CE in the area what is today the State of Orissa on the east coast. The famous Sun Temple of Konark has a stone relief on the west wing of the structure clearly showing the game of Tug of War in progress.\nTug of war stories about heroic champions from Scandinavia and Germany circulate Western Europe where Viking warriors pull on animal skins over open pits of fire in tests of strength and endurance, in preparation for battle and plunder.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, tug of war was popularised during tournaments in French ch\u00e2teaux gardens and later also in Great Britain.\nIn the 19th century, tug of war began a new tradition among seafaring men who were required to tug on lines to adjust sails while ships were under way and even in battle.\nThe Mohave people occasionally used tug-of-war matches as means of settling disputes.\nAs a sport.\nThere are tug of war clubs in many countries, and both men and women participate.\nThe sport was part of the Olympic Games from 1900 until 1920, but has not been included since. The sport is part of the World Games. The Tug of War International Federation (TWIF), organises World Championships for nation teams biannually, for both indoor and outdoor contests, and a similar competition for club teams.\nIn England the sport was formally governed by the AAA until 1984, but is now catered for by the Tug of War Association (formed in 1958), and the Tug of War Federation of Great Britain (formed in 1984). In Scotland, the Scottish Tug of War Association was formed in 1980. The sport also features in Highland Games.\nBetween 1976 and 1988 Tug of War was a regular event during the television series \"Battle of the Network Stars\". Teams of celebrities representing each major network competed in different sporting events culminating into the final event, the Tug of War. Lou Ferrigno's epic tug of war performance in May 1979 is considered the greatest feat in 'Battle' history.\nStarting with the 2024 Pro Bowl Games, the NFL included a five on five Tug of War competition in their Pro Bowl games skills competition.\nNational organizations.\nThe sport is played almost in every country in the world. However, some countries have set up a national body to govern the sport. Most of these national bodies are associated with the international governing body: TWIF, The Tug of War International Federation. As of 2008 there are 53 countries associated with TWIF, among which are Scotland, Ireland, England, India, Switzerland, Belgium, Italy, South Africa and the United States.\nRegional variations.\nBurma (Myanmar).\nIn Myanmar (Burma), the tug of war, called (\u101c\u103d\u1014\u103a\u1006\u103d\u1032; ) has both cultural and historical origins. It features as an important ritual in , the ceremonial cremation of high-ranking Buddhist monks, whereby the funerary pyres are tugged between opposite sides. The tug of war is also used as a traditional rainmaking custom, called (\u1019\u102d\u102f\u1038\u1001\u1031\u102b\u103a; ), to encourage rain. The tradition originated during the reign of King Shinmahti in the Bagan Era. The Rakhine people also hold tug of war ceremonies called () during the Burmese month of Tabodwe.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, is a popular sport held in many events, such as the Indonesian Independence Day celebration, school events, and scout events. The rope used is called , made from fibers of between two jousters. Two cinder blocks are placed a distance apart and the two jousters stand upon the blocks with a rope stretched between them. The objective for each jouster is to either a) cause their opponent to fall off their block, or b) to take their opponent's end of the rope from them.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, the is a staple of school sports festivals. The tug of war is also a traditional way to pray for a plentiful harvest throughout Japan and is a popular ritual around the country. The Kariwano Tug of war in Daisen, Akita, is said to be more than 500 years old, and is also a national folklore cultural asset. The Underwater Tug of War Festival in Mihama, Fukui, is 380 years old, and takes place every January. The Sendai Great Tug of War in Satsumasendai, Kagoshima is known as or 'brawl tug'. Around 3,000 men pull a huge rope which is long. The event is said to have been started by feudal warlord Yoshihiro Shimadzu, with the aim of boosting the morale of his soldiers before the decisive Battle of Sekigahara in 1600. Nanba Hachiman Jinja's tug of war, which started in the Edo period, is Osaka's folklore cultural asset. \nRyukyu Islands.\nAugust festivals often feature a communal tug-of-war using a giant fiber rope that can often take days to weave. The Naha Tug-of-war is famous. The rope in Naha is over 200m long and weighs more than 40 metric tons.\nKorea.\n (Korean:\u00a0, also ) is a traditional Korean sport similar to tug of war. It has a ritual and divinatory significance for many agricultural communities in the country and is performed at festivals and community gatherings. The sport uses two huge rice-straw ropes, connected by a central peg, which is pulled by teams representing the East and West sides of the village (the competition is often rigged in favor of the Western team). A number of religious and traditional rituals are performed before and after the actual competition.\nNew Zealand.\nA variant, originally brought to New Zealand by Boston whalers in the 1790s, is played with five-person teams lying down on cleated boards. The sport is played at two clubs in Te Awamutu and Hastings, supported by the New Zealand Tug of War Association. A four-person variant is played at the National Rover Scout Moot.\nPeru.\nThe Peruvian children's series \"Nubeluz\" featured its own version of tug of war (called ), where each team battled 3-on-3 on platforms suspended over a pool of water. The object was simply to pull the other team into the pool.\nPoland.\nIn Poland, a version of tug of war is sometimes played using a dragon boat, where teams of six or eight attempt to row towards each other.\nBasque Country.\nIn the Basque Country, this sport is considered a popular rural sport, with many associations and clubs. In Basque, it is called \"Sokatira\".\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, a form of tug of war using eight handles is used in competition at camps, schools, churches, and other events. The rope is called an \"Oct-O Pull\" and provides two-way, four-way and eight-way competition for 8 to 16 participants at one time.\nMiami University.\nPuddle Pull is a biannual tug of war contest held at Miami University. The event is a timed, seated variation of tug of war in which fraternities and sororities compete. In addition to the seated participants, each team has a caller who coordinates the movements of the team.\nAlthough the university hosted an unrelated freshman vs. sophomores tug of war event in the 1910s and 1920s, the first record of modern Puddle Pull is its appearance as a tug of war event in the school's newspaper, The Miami Student, in May 1949. This fraternity event was created by Frank Dodd of the Miami chapter of Delta Upsilon. Originally, the event was held as a standing tug of war over the Tallawanda stream near the Oxford waterworks bridge in which the losers were pulled into the water. This first event was later seen as a driving force for creating interfraternity competitive activities (Greek Week) at Miami University. As a part of moving to a seated event, a new rule was created in 1966 to prohibit locks and created the event that is seen today with the exception of a large pit that was still being dug in between the two teams. The event is held in a level grass field and uses a diameter rope that is at least long is used for the event. Footholes or \"pits\" are dug for each participant at intervals. The pits are dug with a flat front and an angled back. Women began to compete sporadically starting in the 1960s and became regular participants as sorority teams in the mid-1980s.\nHope College.\nThe Hope College Pull is an annual tug-of-war contest held across the Black River in Holland, Michigan on the fourth Saturday after Labor Day. Competitors are 40 members of the freshman and sophomore classes.\nFormal rules.\nTwo teams of eight, whose total mass must not exceed a maximum weight as determined for the class, align themselves at the end of a rope approximately in circumference. The rope must be free from knots and other \"holdings for the hands\". The rope is marked with a \"centre line\" and two markings to either side of the centre line. The teams start with the rope's centre line directly above a line marked on the ground, and once the contest (the \"pull\") has commenced, attempt to pull the other team such that the marking on the rope closest to their opponent crosses the centre line, or the opponents commit a foul.\nLowering one's elbow below the knee during a pull, known as \"locking\", is a foul, as is touching the ground for extended periods of time. The rope must go under the arms; actions such as pulling the rope over the shoulders may be considered a foul. These rules apply in highly organized competitions such as the World Championships. However, in small or informal entertainment competitions, the rules are often arbitrarily interpreted and followed.\nA contest may feature a moat in a neutral zone, usually of mud or softened ground, which eliminates players who cross the zone or fall into it.\nTactics.\nAside from the raw muscle power needed for tug of war, it is also a technical sport. The cooperation or \"rhythm\" of team members is just as important as physical strength. To achieve this, a person called a \"driver\" is used to harmonize the team's joint traction power. The driver moves up and down next to their team pulling on the rope, giving orders to them when to pull and when to rest (called \"hanging\"). If the driver spots the opposing team trying to pull the driver's team away, the driver gives a \"hang\" command, each member will dig into the grass with their boots and movement of the rope is limited. When the opponents are played out, the driver shouts \"pull\" and rhythmically waves their hat or handkerchief for their team to pull together. Slowly but surely, the other team is forced into surrender by a runaway pull.\nAnother factor that affects the game is the players' weights. The heavier someone is, the more static friction their feet have to the ground, but if there is not enough friction and they weigh too little, even if they are pulling extremely hard, the force will not be transmitted to the rope. Their feet will simply slide along the ground if their opponent(s) have better static friction with the ground. In general, as long as one team has enough static friction and can pull hard enough to overcome the static friction of their opponent(s), that team can easily win the match.\nInjury risks.\nIn addition to injuries from falling and from back strains (some of which may be serious), catastrophic injuries may occur as a result of looping or wrapping the rope around a hand or wrist, or impact from snapback if the rope should break. This may cause permanent damage to the body, requiring finger, hand, or even arm amputations.\nAmateur organizers of tugs of war may underestimate the forces generated and thus, may be unaware of the possible consequences if a rope snaps under extreme tension. Injury is primarily due to the large amount of potential energy stored in the rope during the competition. As both sides pull, tension is placed on the rope causing it to stretch as described by Hooke's law. If a rope exceeds its breaking point the potential energy is suddenly converted to kinetic energy and the broken ends of the rope will snapback at great speed, which can cause serious injuries. This phenomenon has been studied in ship operations as mooring ropes pose the same risk should they snap. For this reason, specially engineered tug of war ropes exist that can safely withstand the forces generated.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25983", "revid": "612852", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25983", "title": "Regular semantics", "text": "Regular semantics is a computer hardware consistency model. It describes a type of guarantee provided by a processor register that is shared by several processor cores in a parallel machine or in a network of computers working together. Regular semantics are defined for a variable with a single writer but multiple readers. These semantics are stronger than safe semantics but weaker than atomic semantics: they guarantee that there is a total order to the write operations consistent with real-time and that read operations return either the value of the last write completed before the read begins, or that of one of the writes which are concurrent with the read.\nExample.\nRegular semantics are weaker than linearizability. \nConsider the example shown below, where the horizontal axis represents time, and the arrows represent the interval during which a read or write operation takes place. According to a regular register's definition, the first read may return 5 or 2, and so may the second read. The first read could return 2 and the second read could return 5 (also known as a new/old inversion). This behavior would not satisfy atomic semantics. Therefore, regular semantics is a weaker property than atomic semantics. On the other hand, Leslie Lamport proved that a linearizable register may be implemented from registers with safe semantics, which are weaker than regular registers.\nA theorem from regularity to atomicity.\nA single-writer multi-reader (SWMR) atomic semantics is an SWMR regular register if any of its execution history H satisfies the following property:\nr1 and r2 are any two read invocations: (r1 \u2192H r2) \u21d2 \u00ac\u03c0(r2) \u2192H \u03c0(r1)\nBefore getting into the proof, first, it should be understood what the new/old inversion means. As it shown in the picture below, by looking at the execution it can be seen that the only difference between a regular execution and an atomic execution is when a = 0 and b = 1.In this execution, when considering the two read invocations R.read() \u2192 a \nfollowed by R.read() \u2192 b, our first value (new value) is a = 0 while the second value (old value) is b=1. This is actually the main difference between atomicity and regularity.\nThe theorem above states that a Single writer multi-reader regular register without new or old inversion is an atomic register. From it, R.read() \u2192 a \u2192H R.read() \u2192 b\nand R.write(1) \u2192H R.write(0), it is not possible to have \u03c0 (R.read() \u2192 b) =R.write(1) and \u03c0 (R.read() \u2192 a) = R.write(0) if the execution is atomic. \nTo prove the theorem above, first it must be proven that the register is safe, regular and that it does not allow for new/old inversion which proves the atomicity. \nBy the definition of the atomic register, a Single writer multiple reader atomic register is regular and satisfies the no new/old inversion property. So, the only required proof is to show that a regular register with no new/old inversion is atomic.\nMoreover, for any two read invocations (r1 and r2) when the register is regular and there is no new/old inversion \n(r1 \u2192H r2) \u21d2sn(\u03c0(r1)) \u2264 sn(\u03c0(r2)). For any execution (M) there is a total order (S) which includes the same operation invocations. It can be stated that S is built as follow:\nstarting from the total order on the write operations and the read operations being inserted as follow: \nfirst: Read operation (r) is inserted after the associated write operation (\u03c0(r)). Second: If two read operations (r1,r2) have the same (sn(r1)=sn(r2)) then first insert the operation which starts first in the execution. \nS includes all the operation invocation of M, from which it follows that S and M are equivalent. Since all the operations are ordered based on their sequence numbers is slightly a total order. Furthermore, this total order is an execution of M only adds an order on operations that are overlapping in M. If there is no overlapping between a read and write operations, there is no difference between the regularity and atomicity. Finally, it can be stated that S is legal since each read operation gets the last written value that comes before it in the total order. Therefore, the corresponding history is linearizable. Since this reasoning does not rely on a particular history H, it implies that the register is atomic. Since atomicity (linearizability) is a local property, it can stated that a set of SWMR regular registers behave atomically as soon as each of them satisfies the no new/old inversion property.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25984", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25984", "title": "Ray Kurzweil", "text": "American computer scientist, author and futurist (born 1948)\nRaymond Kurzweil ( ; born February 12, 1948) is an American computer scientist, author, entrepreneur, futurist, and inventor. He is involved in fields such as optical character recognition (OCR), text-to-speech synthesis, speech recognition technology and electronic keyboard instruments. He has written books on health technology, artificial intelligence (AI), transhumanism, the technological singularity, and futurism. Kurzweil is an advocate for the futurist and transhumanist movements and gives public talks to share his optimistic outlook on life extension technologies and the future of nanotechnology, robotics, and biotechnology.\nKurzweil received the 1999 National Medal of Technology and Innovation, the United States' highest honor in technology, from President Bill Clinton in a White House ceremony. He received the $500,000 Lemelson\u2013MIT Prize in 2001. He was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2001 for the application of technology to improve human-machine communication. In 2002 he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame, established by the U.S. Patent Office. He has 21 honorary doctorates and honors from three U.S. presidents. The Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) included Kurzweil as one of 16 \"revolutionaries who made America\" along with other inventors of the past two centuries. \"Inc.\" magazine ranked him No. 8 among the \"most fascinating\" entrepreneurs in the United States and called him \"Edison's rightful heir\".\nLife, inventions, and business career.\nEarly life.\nKurzweil grew up in Queens, New York City. He attended NYC Public Education Kingsbury Elementary School PS188. He was born to secular Jewish parents who had emigrated from Austria just before the onset of World War II. Through Unitarian Universalism he was exposed to a diversity of religious faiths during his upbringing. The Unitarian church has a philosophy that there are many paths to the truth: his religious education consisted of studying one religion for six months before moving on to another. His father, Fredric, was a concert pianist, a noted conductor and a music educator. His mother, Hannah, was a visual artist. He is the elder of two children; his sister Enid, an accountant in Santa Barbara, is six years his junior.\nRay Kurzweil decided at age five that he wanted to be an inventor. As a young boy, he had an inventory of parts from various construction toys he had been given and old electronic gadgets he had collected from neighbors. In his youth, Kurzweil was an avid reader of science fiction. At age eight, nine, and ten, he read the entire \"Tom Swift Jr.\" series. At age seven or eight, he built a robotic puppet theater and robotic game. He was involved with computers by age 12 (in 1960), when only a dozen computers existed in New York City, and built computing devices and statistical programs for the predecessor of Head Start. At age 14, Kurzweil wrote a paper detailing his theory of the neocortex. His parents were involved with the arts, and he is quoted in the documentary \"Transcendent Man\" as saying that the household always discussed the future and technology.\nKurzweil attended Martin Van Buren High School. During class, he often held onto his class textbooks to seemingly participate while focusing on his own projects hidden behind the book. His uncle, an engineer at Bell Labs, taught Kurzweil the basics of computer science. In 1963, at 15, he wrote his first computer program.\nKurzweil created pattern-recognition software that analyzed the works of classical composers, then synthesized its own songs in similar styles. In 1965 he was invited to appear on the CBS television program \"I've Got a Secret\", where he performed a piano piece composed by a computer he had built. Later in the year, he won first prize in the International Science Fair for the invention; his submission to Westinghouse Talent Search of his first computer program alongside several other projects resulted in his being one of the contest's national winners, for which President Lyndon B. Johnson personally congratulated him during a White House ceremony. The experiences impressed upon Kurzweil the belief that nearly any problem could be overcome.\nMidlife.\nWhile in high school, Kurzweil had corresponded with Marvin Minsky and was invited to visit him at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which he did. Kurzweil also visited Frank Rosenblatt, a psychologist at Cornell. He attended MIT to study with Minsky, obtaining a B.Sc. degree in computer science and literature in 1970. Kurzweil took all the computer programming courses (eight or nine) MIT offered in his first year and a half.\nIn 1968, during his second year at MIT, Kurzweil started a company that used a computer program to match high school students with colleges. The program, called the Select College Consulting Program, was designed by him and compared thousands of different criteria about each college with questionnaire answers each student applicant submitted. Around that time he sold the company to Harcourt, Brace &amp; World for $100,000 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) plus royalties. In 1974, he founded Kurzweil Computer Products, Inc., and led development of the first omni-font optical character recognition system, a computer program capable of recognizing text written in any normal font. Before that time, scanners had been able to read text in only a few fonts. He decided that the technology's best application would be to create a reading machine, which would allow blind people to understand text by having a computer read it to them aloud. But the device required the invention of two enabling technologies\u2014the CCD flatbed scanner and the text-to-speech synthesizer. Development of these technologies was completed at other institutions like Bell Labs, and on January 13, 1976, the finished product was unveiled during a news conference headed by Kurzweil and the leaders of the National Federation of the Blind. Called the Kurzweil Reading Machine, the device was large and covered an entire tabletop. Stevie Wonder heard about the demonstration of this new machine on \"The Today Show\", and later became the user of the first production Kurzweil Reading Machine, beginning a long-term association with Kurzweil.\nKurzweil's next major business venture began in 1978, when Kurzweil Computer Products began selling a commercial version of the optical character recognition computer program. LexisNexis was one of the first customers, and bought the program to upload paper legal and news documents to its nascent online databases. He sold Kurzweil Computer Products to Xerox, where it was first known as Xerox Imaging Systems and later as Scansoft; he was a consultant for Xerox until 1995. In 1999, Visioneer, Inc. acquired Scansoft from Xerox to form a new public company with Scansoft as the new company-wide name. Scansoft merged with Nuance Communications in 2005.\nKurzweil's next business venture was in electronic music technology. After a 1982 meeting with Stevie Wonder, in which Wonder lamented the divide in capabilities and qualities between electronic synthesizers and traditional musical instruments, Kurzweil was inspired to create a new generation of synthesizers that could duplicate the sounds of real instruments. Kurzweil Music Systems was founded in the same year, and in 1984, the Kurzweil K250 was unveiled. The machine could imitate a number of instruments, and according to Kurzweil's press packet, musicians could not tell the difference between the Kurzweil K250 on piano mode and a grand piano, though reviewers who actually attempted it questioned that. The machine's recording and mixing abilities coupled with its ability to imitate different instruments made it possible for a single user to compose and play an entire orchestral piece.\nSouth Korean musical instrument manufacturer Young Chang bought Kurzweil Music Systems in 1990. As with Xerox, Kurzweil remained as a consultant for several years. Hyundai acquired Young Chang in 2006, and in 2007 appointed Kurzweil as Chief Strategy Officer of Kurzweil Music Systems. Concurrent with Kurzweil Music Systems, he created the company Kurzweil Applied Intelligence (KAI) to develop computer speech recognition systems for commercial use. The first product, which debuted in 1987, was an early speech recognition program. KAI was sold to Lernout &amp; Hauspie in 1997.\nLater life.\nKurzweil started Kurzweil Educational Systems (KESI) in 1996 to develop new pattern-recognition-based computer technologies to help people with disabilities such as blindness, dyslexia, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in school. Products include the Kurzweil 1000 text-to-speech converter software program, which enables a computer to read electronic and scanned text aloud to blind or visually impaired users, and the Kurzweil 3000 program, a multifaceted electronic learning system that helps with reading, writing, and study skills. Kurzweil sold KESI to Lernout &amp; Hauspie. After the legal and bankruptcy problems of the latter, he and other KESI employees bought back the company. KESI was eventually sold to Cambium Learning Group, Inc.\nDuring the 1990s, Kurzweil founded the Medical Learning Company. In 1999, Kurzweil created a hedge fund called \"FatKat\" (Financial Accelerating Transactions from Kurzweil Adaptive Technologies), which began trading in 2006. He has said that the ultimate aim is to improve the performance of FatKat's A.I. investment software program, enhancing its ability to recognize patterns in \"currency fluctuations and stock-ownership trends\". In his 1999 book \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", Kurzweil predicted that computers would one day be better than humans at making profitable investment decisions. In June 2005, Kurzweil introduced the \"Kurzweil-National Federation of the Blind Reader\" (K-NFB Reader)\u2014a pocket-sized device consisting of a digital camera and computer unit. Like the Kurzweil Reading Machine of almost 30 years before, the K-NFB Reader is designed to aid blind people by reading written text aloud. The newer machine is portable and scans text through digital camera images, while the older machine is large and scans text through flatbed scanning.\nIn December 2012, Google hired Kurzweil in a full-time position to \"work on new projects involving machine learning and language processing\". Google co-founder Larry Page personally hired him. Page and Kurzweil agreed on a one-sentence job description: \"to bring natural language understanding to Google\". Kurzweil received a Technical Grammy Award on February 8, 2015, specifically for his invention of the Kurzweil K250.\nKurzweil has joined the Alcor Life Extension Foundation, a cryonics company. After his death, he has a plan to be perfused with cryoprotectants, vitrified in liquid nitrogen, and stored at an Alcor facility in the hope that future medical technology will be able to revive him.\nPersonal life.\nKurzweil is agnostic about the existence of a soul. Of the possibility of divine intelligence, Kurzweil has said: \"Does God exist? I would say 'Not yet.'\" He married Sonya Rosenwald Kurzweil in 1975. Sonya is a psychologist in private practice in Newton, Massachusetts; she works with women, children, parents, and families. She holds faculty appointments at Harvard Medical School and William James College in graduate education in psychology. Her research interests and publications are in psychotherapy practice. She also serves as an active overseer at Boston Children's Museum. Ray and Sonya Kurzweil have a son, Ethan, a venture capitalist, and a daughter, Amy, a cartoonist.\nCreative approach.\nKurzweil has said: \"I realize that most inventions fail not because the R&amp;D department can't get them to work, but because the timing is wrong\u200d\u2014\u200cnot all of the enabling factors are at play where they are needed. Inventing is a lot like surfing: you have to anticipate and catch the wave at just the right moment.\" For the past several decades, Kurzweil's most effective and common approach to doing creative work has been conducted during a lucid dreamlike state immediately preceding his waking state. He claims to have constructed inventions, solved algorithmic, business strategy, organizational, and interpersonal problems, and written speeches in this state.\nBooks.\nKurzweil's first book, \"The Age of Intelligent Machines\", was published in 1990. It discusses the history of computer artificial intelligence (AI) and forecasts future developments. Other AI experts contribute heavily to the book in the form of essays. The Association of American Publishers named it the \"Most Outstanding Computer Science Book\" of 1990.\nIn 1993, Kurzweil published a book on nutrition, \"The 10% Solution for a Healthy Life\". Its main idea is that high levels of fat intake are the cause of many health disorders common in the U.S., and thus that cutting fat consumption to 10% of total calories consumed is optimal for most people. In 1999, Kurzweil published \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", which further elucidates his theories of the future of technology, which stem from his analysis of long-term trends in biological and technological evolution. Much emphasis is on the likely course of AI development, along with the future of computer architecture. Kurzweil's next book, \"\" (2004), returns to human health and nutrition and is co-authored by Terry Grossman, a medical doctor and specialist in alternative medicine.\n\"The Singularity Is Near\", published in 2005, was made into a movie starring Pauley Perrette. In 2007, Ptolemaic Productions acquired the rights to \"The Singularity Is Near\", \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", and \"Fantastic Voyage\", including the rights to film Kurzweil's life and ideas for the documentary film \"Transcendent Man\", directed by Barry Ptolemy. \"Transcend: Nine Steps to Living Well Forever\", a follow-up to \"Fantastic Voyage\", was released in 2009. Kurzweil's book \"How to Create a Mind\" was released in 2012. In it he describes his Pattern Recognition Theory of Mind, the theory that the neocortex is a hierarchical system of pattern recognizers, and argues that emulating this architecture in machines could lead to artificial superintelligence.\nKurzweil's first novel, \"Danielle: Chronicles of a Superheroine\", follows a girl who uses her intelligence and her friends' help to tackle real-world problems. It follows a structure akin to the scientific method. Chapters are organized as year-by-year episodes from Danielle's childhood and adolescence. The book comes with companion materials, \"A Chronicle of Ideas\" and \"How You Can Be a Danielle\", that provide real-world context. It was released in 2019.\nKurzweil's latest book, \"\", was published in 2024.\nFilms.\nIn 2010, Kurzweil wrote and co-produced the film \"The Singularity Is Near: A True Story About the Future\", directed by Anthony Waller and based in part on the book \"The Singularity Is Near\". Part fiction, part nonfiction, the film blends interviews with 20 big thinkers (such as Marvin Minsky) with a narrative story that illustrates some of Kurzweil's key ideas, including a computer avatar (Ramona) who saves the world from self-replicating microscopic robots. An independent, feature-length documentary, \"Transcendent Man\", was made about Kurzweil, his life, and his ideas.\nIn 2010, an independent documentary film, \"Plug &amp; Pray\", premiered at the Seattle International Film Festival, in which Kurzweil and one of his major critics, the late Joseph Weizenbaum, argue about the benefits of eternal life. Independent filmmaker Doug Wolens's feature-length documentary film \"The Singularity\" (2012) showcases Kurzweil and has been acclaimed as \"a large-scale achievement in its documentation of futurist and counter-futurist ideas\" and \"the best documentary on the Singularity to date\".\nMusic.\nOur Lady Peace.\nOn December 12, 2000, Columbia Records released the Canadian alternative rock band Our Lady Peace's album \"Spiritual Machines\". Although not initially so intended, the project evolved into a conceptual interpretation of Kurzweil's 1999 book \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\". The band emailed Kurzweil to ask permission to use the title of his book for their project. Kurzweil's excitement at the prospect prompted them to invite him to record spoken excerpts from his book for the album. As a result, short tracks of spoken dialog by Kurzweil are interspersed among the album's songs. The Kurzweil K250 keyboard is also used on the album.\nViews.\nThe Law of Accelerating Returns.\nIn his 1999 book \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", Kurzweil proposed \"The Law of Accelerating Returns\", according to which the rate of change in a wide variety of evolutionary systems (including the growth of technologies) tends to increase exponentially. He further emphasized this issue in his 2001 essay \"The Law of Accelerating Returns\", which proposes an extension of Moore's law to a wide variety of technologies and argues in favor of John von Neumann's concept of a technological singularity.\nGenetics, nanotechnology, and robotics.\nKurzweil was working with the Army Science Board in 2006 to develop a rapid response system to deal with the possible abuse of biotechnology. He suggested that a bioterrorist could use the same technologies that empower us to reprogram biology away from cancer and heart disease to reprogram a virus to be more deadly, communicable, and stealthy. But he suggests we have the scientific tools to defend against such an attack, much as we defend against computer software viruses. Kurzweil has testified before Congress on nanotechnology, saying that it has the potential to solve serious global problems such as poverty, disease, and climate change: \"Nanotech Could Give Global Warming a Big Chill\".\nIn media appearances, Kurzweil has stressed nanotechnology's extreme potential dangers but argues that, in practice, progress cannot be stopped because that would require a totalitarian system, and any attempt to do so would drive dangerous technologies underground and deprive responsible scientists of the tools needed for defense. He suggests that the proper place of regulation is to ensure that technological progress proceeds safely and quickly but does not deprive the world of profound benefits. He said: \"To avoid dangers such as unrestrained nanobot replication, we need relinquishment at the right level and to place our highest priority on the continuing advance of defensive technologies, staying ahead of destructive technologies. An overall strategy should include a streamlined regulatory process, a global program of monitoring for unknown or evolving biological pathogens, temporary moratoriums, raising public awareness, international cooperation, software reconnaissance, and fostering values of liberty, tolerance, and respect for knowledge and diversity.\"\nHealth and aging.\nKurzweil admits that he cared little for his health until age 35, when he was found to suffer from a glucose intolerance, an early form of type II diabetes (a major risk factor for heart disease). He then found a doctor, Terry Grossman, who shared his unconventional beliefs and helped him to develop an extreme regimen involving hundreds of pills, chemical intravenous treatments, red wine, and various other methods to attempt to extend his lifespan. In 2007, Kurzweil was ingesting \"250 supplements, eight to 10 glasses of alkaline water and 10 cups of green tea\" every day and drinking several glasses of red wine a week in an effort to \"reprogram\" his biochemistry. By 2008, he had reduced the number of supplement pills to 150. By 2015, Kurzweil further reduced his daily pill regimen to 100 pills.\nKurzweil asserts that in the future, everyone will live forever. In a 2013 interview, he said that in 15 years, medical technology could add more than a year to one's remaining life expectancy for each year that passes, and we could then \"outrun our own deaths\". Among other things, he has supported the SENS Research Foundation's approach to finding a way to repair aging damage, and has encouraged the general public to hasten their research by donating.\nFuturism and transhumanism.\nKurzweil's standing as a futurist and transhumanist has led to his involvement in several singularity-themed organizations. In 2004, he joined the advisory board of the Machine Intelligence Research Institute. In 2005, he joined the scientific advisory board of the Lifeboat Foundation. On May 13, 2006, Kurzweil was the first speaker at the Singularity Summit at Stanford University in Palo Alto, California. In 2013, he was the keynote speaker at the Research, Innovation, Start-up and Employment (RISE) international conference in Seoul. In 2009, Kurzweil, Google, and the NASA Ames Research Center announced the creation of the Singularity University training center for corporate executives and government officials. The university's self-described mission is to \"assemble, educate and inspire a cadre of leaders who strive to understand and facilitate the development of exponentially advancing technologies and apply, focus and guide these tools to address humanity's grand challenges\". Using Vernor Vinge's Singularity concept as a foundation, the university offered its first nine-week graduate program to 40 students in 2009.\nKurzweil views the human body as a system of thousands of \"programs\" and believes that understanding all their functions could be the key to building truly sentient AI.\nUniversal basic income.\nKurzweil advocates universal basic income (UBI), arguing that progress in science and technology will lead to an abundance of virtually free resources, enabling every citizen to live without the need to work: \"We are clearly headed toward a situation where everyone can live very well\". According to him, the major hurdle to introducing UBI is not its feasibility, but political will, which is slowly emerging. In a 2018 TED Talk, he predicted that \"in the early 2030s, we'll have universal basic income in the developed world, and worldwide by the end of the 2030s. You'll be able to live very well on that. The primary concern will be meaning and purpose.\"\nNuclear weapons.\nDuring a September 17, 2022, interview, Kurzweil explained his worries about technology being used for violence. When asked about nuclear armageddon and the Russo-Ukrainian War, Kurzweil said: \"I don't think [nuclear war] is going to happen despite the terrors of that war. It is a possibility but it's unlikely, even with the tensions we've had with the nuclear power plant that's been taken over. It's very tense but I don't actually see a lot of people worrying that's going to happen. I think we'll avoid that. We had two nuclear bombs go off in [1945], so now we're 77 years later... we've never had another one go off through anger... there are other dangers besides nuclear weapons.\"\nPredictions.\nPast predictions.\nKurzweil's first book, \"The Age of Intelligent Machines\", presents his ideas about the future. Written from 1986 to 1989, it was published in 1990. Building on Ithiel de Sola Pool's \"Technologies of Freedom\" (1983), Kurzweil claims to have forecast the dissolution of the Soviet Union due to new technologies such as cellular phones and fax machines disempowering authoritarian governments by removing state control of the flow of information. In the book, Kurzweil also extrapolates trends in improving computer chess software performance, predicting that computers will beat the best human players \"by the year 2000\". In May 1997, IBM's Deep Blue computer defeated World Champion Garry Kasparov in a well-publicized match.\nKurzweil foresaw the explosive growth in worldwide Internet use that began in the 1990s. When \"The Age of Intelligent Machines\" was published, there were only 2.6\u00a0million Internet users in the world, and the medium was unreliable, difficult to use, and deficient in content. He also said that the Internet would explode not only in the number of users but in content, eventually granting users access \"to international networks of libraries, data bases, and information services\". Additionally, Kurzweil claims to have correctly foreseen that the preferred mode of Internet access would be through wireless systems, and estimated that this development would become practical for widespread use in the early 21st century. In October 2010, Kurzweil released his report \"How My Predictions Are Faring\" in PDF format, analyzing the predictions he made in his books \"The Age of Intelligent Machines\", \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", and \"The Singularity is Near\". Of the 147 predictions, Kurzweil claimed that 115 were \"entirely correct\", 12 were \"essentially correct\", 17 were \"partially correct\", and three were \"wrong\". Combining the \"entirely\" and \"essentially\" correct, Kurzweil's claimed accuracy rate comes to 86%.\nIn \"Newsweek\" magazine, Daniel Lyons criticized Kurzweil for some of his incorrect predictions for 2009, such as that the economy would continue to boom, that a U.S. company would have a market capitalization of more than $1\u00a0trillion, that a supercomputer would achieve 20 petaflops, that speech recognition would be in widespread use, and that cars would drive themselves using sensors installed in highways. To the charge that a 20-petaflop supercomputer had not been produced, Kurzweil responded that he considered Google a giant supercomputer, and that it was indeed capable of 20 petaflops.\n\"Forbes\" magazine claimed that Kurzweil's predictions for 2009 were mostly inaccurate, with seven incorrect, four partially correct, and one correct. For example, Kurzweil predicted, \"The majority of text is created using continuous speech recognition\", which was not the case.\nFuture predictions.\nIn 1999, Kurzweil published a second book, \"The Age of Spiritual Machines\", which explains his futurist ideas in more depth. In it, he says that with radical life extension will come radical life enhancement. He says he is confident that within 10 years we will have the option to spend some of our time in 3D virtual environments that appear just as real as reality, but that they will not yet be able to directly interact with our nervous system. He expounds on his prediction about nanorobotics, claiming that within 20 years millions of blood-cell sized devices, called nanobots, will fight disease inside our bodies and improve our memory and cognitive abilities. Kurzweil also believes a machine will pass the Turing test by 2029. He says that humans will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological intelligence that becomes increasingly dominated by its non-biological component. In \"Transcendent Man\", he writes, \"We humans are going to start linking with each other and become a metaconnection; we will all be connected and omnipresent, plugged into a global network that is connected to billions of people and filled with data.\"\nIn 2008, Kurzweil said in an expert panel in the National Academy of Engineering that solar power will scale up to produce all of humanity's energy needs in 20 years. According to him, we need to capture only 1 part in 10,000 of the energy from the Sun that hits Earth's surface to meet all of humanity's energy needs.\nReception.\nKurzweil was called \"the ultimate thinking machine\" by \"Forbes\" in 1998 and a \"restless genius\" by \"The Wall Street Journal\" in 1989. PBS included him as one of 16 \"revolutionaries who made America\", along with other inventors of the past two centuries. \"Inc.\" magazine ranked Kurzweil eighth among the \"most fascinating\" entrepreneurs in the U.S. and called him \"Edison's rightful heir\". Bill Gates called him \"the best at predicting the future of artificial intelligence\".\nAlthough technological singularity is a popular concept in science fiction, authors such as Neal Stephenson and Bruce Sterling have voiced skepticism about its real-world plausibility. Sterling expressed his view in a 2004 talk at the Long Now Foundation called \"The Singularity: Your Future as a Black Hole\". Other prominent AI thinkers and computer scientists who have criticized Kurzweil's projections include Daniel Dennett, Rodney Brooks, David Gelernter, and Paul Allen.\nIn the December 2010 issue of \"IEEE Spectrum\", John Rennie criticized Kurzweil for several predictions that did not come true by the originally predicted date. Sun Microsystems co-founder Bill Joy agrees with Kurzweil's timeline of future progress, but thinks that technologies such as AI, nanotechnology, and advanced biotechnology will create a dystopian world. Lotus Development Corporation founder Mitch Kapor has called the notion of a technological singularity \"intelligent design for the IQ 140 people... This proposition that we're heading to this point at which everything is going to be just unimaginably different\u2014it's fundamentally, in my view, driven by a religious impulse. And all of the frantic arm-waving can't obscure that fact for me.\" Cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter has said of Kurzweil's and Hans Moravec's books: \"It's an intimate mixture of rubbish and good ideas, and it's very hard to disentangle the two, because these are smart people; they're not stupid.\" VR pioneer Jaron Lanier has called Kurzweil's ideas \"cybernetic totalism\" and outlined his view on the culture surrounding Kurzweil's predictions in an essay for the Edge Foundation called \"One Half of a Manifesto\". Physicist and futurist Theodore Modis claims that Kurzweil's thesis of a technological singularity lacks scientific rigor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25985", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25985", "title": "Rutherford scattering", "text": ""}
{"id": "25986", "revid": "48714062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25986", "title": "Robert Langlands", "text": "Canadian mathematician\nRobert Phelan Langlands, (; born October 6, 1936) is a Canadian mathematician. He is best known as the founder of the Langlands program, a vast web of conjectures and results connecting representation theory and automorphic forms to the study of Galois groups in number theory, for which he received the 2018 Abel Prize. He is emeritus professor and occupied Albert Einstein's office at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, until 2020 when he retired.\nEarly life and career.\nLanglands was born in New Westminster, British Columbia, Canada, in 1936 to Robert Langlands and Kathleen J Phelan. He has two younger sisters (Mary b. 1938; Sally b. 1941). In 1945, his family moved to White Rock, near the US border, where his parents had a building supply and construction business.\nHe graduated from Semiahmoo Secondary School and started enrolling at the University of British Columbia at the age of 16, receiving his undergraduate degree in mathematics in 1957; he continued at UBC to receive a M.Sc. in 1958. He then went to Yale University, where he received a Ph.D. in 1960.\nHis first academic position was at Princeton University from 1960 to 1967, where he worked as an associate professor. He spent a year in Turkey at METU during 1967\u201368 in an office next to Cahit Arf's. He was a Miller Research Fellow at the University of California, Berkeley, from 1964 to 1965, then was a professor at Yale University from 1967 to 1972. He was appointed Hermann Weyl Professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in 1972, and became professor emeritus in January 2007.\nResearch.\nLanglands' Ph.D. thesis was on the analytical theory of Lie semigroups, but he soon moved into representation theory, adapting the methods of Harish-Chandra to the theory of automorphic forms. His first accomplishment in this field was a formula for the dimension of certain spaces of automorphic forms, in which particular types of Harish-Chandra's discrete series appeared.\nHe next constructed an analytical theory of Eisenstein series for reductive groups of rank greater than one, thus extending work of Hans Maass, Walter Roelcke, and Atle Selberg from the early 1950s for rank one groups such as formula_1. This amounted to describing in general terms the continuous spectra of arithmetic quotients, and showing that all automorphic forms arise in terms of cusp forms and the residues of Eisenstein series induced from cusp forms on smaller subgroups. As a first application, he proved the Weil conjecture on Tamagawa numbers for the large class of arbitrary simply connected Chevalley groups defined over the rational numbers. Previously this had been known only in a few isolated cases and for certain classical groups where it could be shown by induction.\nAs a second application of this work, he was able to show meromorphic continuation for a large class of formula_2-functions arising in the theory of automorphic forms, not previously known to have them. These occurred in the constant terms of Eisenstein series, and meromorphicity as well as a weak functional equation were a consequence of functional equations for Eisenstein series. This work led in turn, in the winter of 1966\u201367, to the now well known conjectures making up what is often called the Langlands program. Very roughly speaking, they propose a huge generalization of previously known examples of reciprocity, including (a) classical class field theory, in which characters of local and arithmetic abelian Galois groups are identified with characters of local multiplicative groups and the idele quotient group, respectively; (b) earlier results of Martin Eichler and Goro Shimura in which the Hasse\u2013Weil zeta functions of arithmetic quotients of the upper half plane are identified with formula_2-functions occurring in Hecke's theory of holomorphic automorphic forms. These conjectures were first posed in relatively complete form in a famous letter to Weil, written in January 1967. It was in this letter that he introduced what has since become known as the formula_2-group and along with it, the notion of functoriality.\nThe book by Herv\u00e9 Jacquet and Langlands on formula_5 presented a theory of automorphic forms for the general linear group formula_5, establishing among other things the Jacquet\u2013Langlands correspondence showing that functoriality was capable of explaining very precisely how automorphic forms for formula_5 related to those for quaternion algebras. This book applied the adelic trace formula for formula_5 and quaternion algebras to do this. Subsequently, James Arthur, a student of Langlands while he was at Yale, successfully developed the trace formula for groups of higher rank. This has become a major tool in attacking functoriality in general, and in particular has been applied to demonstrating that the Hasse\u2013Weil zeta functions of certain Shimura varieties are among the formula_2-functions arising from automorphic forms.\nThe functoriality conjecture is far from proven, but a special case (the octahedral Artin conjecture, proved by Langlands and Tunnell) was the starting point of Andrew Wiles' attack on the Taniyama\u2013Shimura conjecture and Fermat's Last Theorem.\nIn the mid-1980s Langlands turned his attention to physics, particularly the problems of percolation and conformal invariance. In 1995, Langlands started a collaboration with Bill Casselman at the University of British Columbia with the aim of posting nearly all of his writings\u2014including publications, preprints, as well as selected correspondence\u2014on the Internet. The correspondence includes a copy of the original letter to Weil that introduced the formula_2-group. In recent years he has turned his attention back to automorphic forms, working in particular on a theme he calls \"beyond endoscopy\".\nAwards and honors.\nLanglands has received the 1996 Wolf Prize (which he shared with Andrew Wiles), the 2005 AMS Steele Prize, the 1980 Jeffery\u2013Williams Prize, the 1988 NAS Award in Mathematics from the National Academy of Sciences, the 2000 grande m\u00e9daille de l'Acad\u00e9mie des sciences de Paris, the 2006 Nemmers Prize in Mathematics, the 2007 Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences (with Richard Taylor) for his work on automorphic forms. In 2018, Langlands was awarded the Abel Prize for \"his visionary program connecting representation theory to number theory\".\nHe was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Canada in 1972 and a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1981. In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society. Langlands was elected as a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1990. He was elected as a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1993 and a member of the American Philosophical Society 2004.\nAmong other honorary degrees, in 2003, Langlands received a doctorate \"honoris causa\" from Universit\u00e9 Laval.\nIn 2019, Langlands was appointed a Companion of the Order of Canada.\nOn January 10, 2020, Langlands was honoured at Semiahmoo Secondary, which installed a mural to celebrate his contributions to mathematics.\nPersonal life.\nLanglands has been married to Charlotte Lorraine Cheverie (b 1935) since 1957. They have four children (2 daughters and 2 sons). He holds Canadian and American citizenships. \nIn addition to his mathematical studies, Langlands likes to learn foreign languages, both for better understanding of foreign publications on his topic and just as a hobby. He speaks English, French, Turkish and German, and reads (but does not speak) Russian.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25987", "revid": "5034212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25987", "title": "Rickets", "text": "Childhood weak bone disorder\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nRickets (scientific nomenclature: rachitis; from Greek , meaning \"in or of the spine\" which was chosen as a back-formation, see Etymology), is a condition that results in weak or soft bones in children and may have either dietary-deficiency or genetic causes. Symptoms include bowed legs, stunted growth, bone pain, large forehead, and trouble sleeping. Complications may include bone deformities, bone pseudofractures and fractures, muscle spasms, or an abnormally curved spine. The analogous condition in adults is osteomalacia.\nOne can characterise a child who appears to suffer from rickets as rachitic.\nThe most common cause of rickets is a vitamin-D deficiency, although hereditary genetic forms also exist. The condition can result from eating a diet without enough vitamin D, dark skin, too little sun exposure, exclusive breastfeeding without vitamin D supplementation, celiac disease, and certain genetic conditions. Other factors may include not enough calcium or phosphorus. The underlying mechanism involves insufficient calcification of the growth plate. Diagnosis is generally based on blood tests finding a low calcium, low phosphorus, and a high alkaline phosphatase together with X-rays.\nPrevention for exclusively breastfed babies is vitamin D supplements. Otherwise, treatment depends on the underlying cause. If due to a lack of vitamin D, treatment is usually with vitamin D and calcium. This generally results in improvements within a few weeks. Bone deformities may also improve over time. Occasionally, surgery may be performed to correct bone deformities. Genetic forms of the disease typically require specialized treatment.\nRickets occurs relatively commonly in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia. It is generally uncommon in the United States and Europe, except among certain minority groups, but rates have been increasing among some populations. It begins in childhood, typically between the ages of 3 and 18 months of age. Rates of disease are equal in males and females. Cases of what is believed to have been rickets have been described since the 1st century AD, and the condition was widespread in the Roman Empire. The disease occurred commonly into the 20th century. Early treatments included the use of cod liver oil.\nSigns and symptoms.\nSigns and symptoms of dietary deficiency rickets can include bone tenderness, and a susceptibility for bone fractures, particularly greenstick fractures. Early skeletal deformities can arise in infants such as soft, thinned skull bones \u2013 a condition known as craniotabes, which is the first sign of rickets; skull bossing may be present and a delayed closure of the fontanelles.\nYoung children may have bowed legs and thickened ankles and wrists; older children may have knock knees. Spinal curvatures of kyphoscoliosis or lumbar lordosis may be present. The pelvic bones may be deformed. A condition known as rachitic rosary can result from the thickening caused by nodules forming on the costochondral joints. This appears as a visible bump in the middle of each rib in a line on each side of the body. This somewhat resembles a rosary, giving rise to its name. The deformity of a pigeon chest may result in the presence of Harrison's groove.\nHypocalcemia, a low level of calcium in the blood, can result in tetany \u2013 uncontrolled muscle spasms. Dental problems can also arise.\nAn X-ray or radiograph of an advanced patient with rickets tends to present in a classic way: the bowed legs (outward curve of long bones of the legs) and a deformed chest. Changes in the skull also occur, causing a distinctive \"square-headed\" appearance known as \"caput quadratum\". These deformities persist into adult life if not treated. Long-term consequences include permanent curvatures or disfiguration of the long bones, and a curved back.\nCause.\nMaternal deficiencies may be the cause of overt bone disease from before birth and impairment of bone quality after birth. The primary cause of congenital rickets is vitamin D deficiency in the mother's blood. Vitamin D ensures that serum phosphate and calcium levels are sufficient to facilitate the mineralization of bone. Congenital rickets may also be caused by other maternal diseases, including severe osteomalacia, untreated celiac disease, malabsorption, pre-eclampsia, and premature birth. Rickets in children is similar to osteomalacia in adults, and differs from osteoporosis, where there is increased porosity of bone leading to brittleness.. Prenatal care includes checking vitamin levels and ensuring that any deficiencies are supplemented.\nExclusively breast-fed infants may require rickets prevention by vitamin D supplementation or increased exposure to sunlight.\nIn sunny countries such as Nigeria, South Africa, and Bangladesh, there is sufficient endogenous vitamin D due to exposure to the sun. However, the disease occurs among older toddlers and children in these countries, which in these circumstances is attributed to low dietary calcium intakes due to a mainly cereal-based diet.\nThose at higher risk for developing rickets include:\nDiseases causing soft bones in infants, like hypophosphatasia or hypophosphatemia, can also lead to rickets.\nStrontium is allied with calcium uptake into bones; at excessive dietary levels, strontium has a rachitogenic (rickets-producing) action.\nSunlight.\nSunlight, especially ultraviolet light, lets human skin cells convert vitamin D from an inactive to an active state. In the absence of vitamin D, dietary calcium is not properly absorbed, resulting in hypocalcaemia, leading to skeletal and dental deformities and neuromuscular symptoms, e.g., hyperexcitability. Foods that contain vitamin D include butter, eggs, fish liver oils, margarine, fortified milk and juice, portabella and shiitake mushrooms, and oily fishes such as tuna, herring, and salmon. A rare X-linked dominant form exists called vitamin D-resistant rickets or X-linked hypophosphatemia.\nCases have been reported in Britain in recent years of rickets in children of many social backgrounds caused by insufficient production in the body of vitamin D because the sun's ultraviolet light was not reaching the skin due to use of strong sunblock, too much \"covering up\" in sunlight, or not getting out into the sun. Other cases have been reported among the children of some ethnic groups in which mothers avoid exposure to the sun for religious or cultural reasons, leading to a maternal shortage of vitamin D, and people with darker skin need more sunlight to maintain vitamin D levels.\nRickets had historically been a problem in London, especially during the Industrial Revolution. Persistent thick fog and heavy industrial smog permeating the city blocked out significant amounts of sunlight to such an extent that up to 80 percent of children had varying degrees of rickets. It is sometimes known \"the English Disease\" in some foreign languages (e.g. German: , Dutch: , Hungarian: , Swedish: ).\nSkin color theory.\nRickets is often a result of vitamin D3 deficiency. The correlation between human skin color and latitude is thought to be the result of positive selection to varying levels of solar ultraviolet radiation. Northern latitudes have selection for lighter skin that allows UV rays to produce vitamin D from 7-dehydrocholesterol. Conversely, latitudes near the equator have selection for darker skin that can block the majority of UV radiation to protect from toxic levels of vitamin D, as well as skin cancer.\nAn anecdote often cited to support this hypothesis is that Arctic populations whose skin is relatively darker for their latitude, such as the Inuit, have a diet that is historically rich in vitamin D. Since these people acquire vitamin D through their diet, there is no positive selective force to synthesize vitamin D from sunlight.\nEnvironment mismatch: Vitamin D deficiency arises from a mismatch between an individual's previous and current environment. This risk of mismatch increases with advances in transportation methods and increases in urban population size at high latitudes.\nSimilar to the environmental mismatch when dark-skinned people live at high latitudes, Rickets can also occur in religious communities that require long garments with hoods and veils. These hoods and veils act as sunlight barriers that prevent individuals from synthesizing vitamin D naturally from the sun.\nIn a study by Mithal et al., vitamin D insufficiency of various countries was measured by lower 25-hydroxyvitamin D. 25(OH) D is an indicator of vitamin D insufficiency that can be easily measured. These percentages should be regarded as relative vitamin D levels, and not as predictive evidence for the development of rickets.\nAsian immigrants living in Europe have an increased risk of vitamin D deficiency. Vitamin D insufficiency was found in 40% of non-Western immigrants in the Netherlands, and in more than 80% of Turkish and Moroccan immigrants.\nThe Middle East, despite high rates of sun-exposure, has the highest rates of rickets worldwide. This fact can be explained by limited sun exposure due to cultural practices and lack of vitamin D supplementation for breast-feeding women. Up to 70% and 80% of adolescent girls in Iran and Saudi Arabia, respectively, have vitamin D insufficiency. Socioeconomic factors that limit a vitamin D-rich diet also play a role.\nIn the United States, vitamin D insufficiency varies dramatically by ethnicity. Among females aged 70 years and older, the prevalence of low serum 25(OH) D levels was 28.5% for non-Hispanic whites, 55% for Mexican Americans, and 68% for non-Hispanic blacks. Among males, the prevalence was 23%, 45%, and 58%, respectively.\nA systematic review published in the Cochrane Library looked at children up to three years old in Turkey and China and found a beneficial association between vitamin D and rickets. In Turkey, children who received vitamin D had only a 4% chance of developing rickets compared to children who received no medical intervention. In China, a combination of vitamin D, calcium, and nutritional counseling was linked to a decreased risk of rickets.\nParents can supplement their nutritional intake with vitamin D enhanced beverages if they feel their child is at risk for vitamin D deficiency.\nA 2019 review linked rickets disease to exclusive consumption of Neocate baby formula.\nDiagnosis.\nRickets may be diagnosed with the help of:\nIn veterinary practice, rickets, osteodystrophy and mineral metabolism disorders are diagnosed using an ultrasound echosteometer in the design \u041c.\u041c. Orlov and \u0410.V. Savinkov.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nOsteochondrodysplasias, also known as genetic bone diseases, may mimic the clinical picture of rickets in regard to the features of bone deformities. The radiologic picture and the laboratory findings of serum calcium, phosphate, and alkaline phosphatase are important differentiating factors. Blount's disease is an important differential diagnosis because it similarly causes knee deformities to rickets, namely bow legs or genu varum. Infants with rickets can have bone fractures. This sometimes leads to child abuse allegations. This issue appears to be more common for solely nursing infants of black mothers, in winter in temperate climates, suffering poor nutrition and no vitamin D supplementation. People with darker skin produce less vitamin D than those with lighter skin, for the same amount of sunlight.\nTreatment.\nDiet and sunlight.\nTreatment involves increasing dietary intake of calcium, phosphates and vitamin D. Exposure to ultraviolet B light (most easily obtained when the sun is highest in the sky), cod liver oil, halibut-liver oil, and viosterol are all sources of vitamin D.\nA sufficient amount of ultraviolet B light in sunlight each day and adequate supplies of calcium and phosphorus in the diet can prevent rickets. Darker-skinned people need to be exposed longer to the ultraviolet rays. The replacement of vitamin D has been proven to correct rickets using these methods of ultraviolet light therapy and medicine.\nRecommendations are for 400 international units (IU) of vitamin D a day for infants and children. Children who do not get adequate amounts of vitamin D are at increased risk of rickets. Vitamin D is essential for allowing the body to uptake calcium for use in proper bone calcification and maintenance.\nSupplementation.\nSufficient vitamin D levels can also be achieved through dietary supplementation and/or exposure to sunlight. Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is the preferred form since it is more readily absorbed than vitamin D2. Most dermatologists recommend vitamin D supplementation as an alternative to unprotected ultraviolet exposure due to the increased risk of skin cancer associated with sun exposure. Endogenous production with full-body exposure to sunlight is approximately 250\u00a0\u03bcg (10,000 IU) per day.\nAccording to the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), all infants, including those who are exclusively breast-fed, may need vitamin D supplementation until they start drinking at least of vitamin D-fortified milk or formula a day.\nDespite this recommendation, a recent Cochrane systematic review has found limited evidence that vitamin D plus calcium, or calcium alone, compared to vitamin D, improves healing in children with nutritional rickets.\nSurgery.\nOccasionally, surgery is needed to correct severe and persistent deformities of the lower limbs, especially around the knees, namely genu varum and genu valgum. Surgical correction of rachitic deformities can be achieved through osteotomies or guided growth surgery. Guided growth surgery has almost replaced the use of corrective osteotomies. The functional results of guided growth surgery in children with rickets are satisfactory. While bone osteotomies work through acute/immediate correction of the limb deformity, guided growth works through gradual correction.\nEpidemiology.\nIn developed countries, rickets is a rare disease (incidence of less than 1 in 200,000). Recently, cases of rickets have been reported among children who are not fed enough vitamin D.\nIn 2013/2014, there were fewer than 700 cases in England. In 2019, the number of cases hospitalised was said to be the highest in 50 years.\nRickets occurs relatively commonly in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia.\nHistory.\nGreek physician Soranus of Ephesus, one of the chief representatives of the Methodic school of medicine who practiced in Alexandria and subsequently in Rome, reported deformation of the bones in infants as early as the first and second centuries AD. The first use of the word 'rickets' is the handwritten entry for 25 February 1632 in 'Receipt Books' of the Fairfax Family, which lists five remedies for 'rickets in children'. The word 'rickets' first occurred in print in 1634 in the Annual Bill of Mortality of the City of London. Rickets was not defined as a specific medical condition until 1645, when an English physician Daniel Whistler gave the earliest known description of the disease. \nIn 1650, a treatise on rickets was published by Francis Glisson, a physician at Caius College, Cambridge, who said it had first appeared about 30 years previously in the counties of Dorset and Somerset. \nIn 1857, John Snow suggested rickets, then widespread in Britain, was being caused by the adulteration of bakers' bread with alum. \nGerman pediatrician Kurt Huldschinsky successfully demonstrated in the winter of 1918\u20131919 how rickets could be treated with ultraviolet lamps. \nBetween 1918 and 1920, the role of diet in the development of rickets was determined by Edward Mellanby. \nIn 1923, American physician Harry Steenbock demonstrated that irradiation by ultraviolet light increased the vitamin D content of foods and other organic materials. Steenbock's irradiation technique was used for foodstuffs, but most memorably for milk. \nBy 1945, rickets had all but been eliminated in the United States. However, beginning around 2003, rickets reemerged as an issue in the US for some populations, prompting the American Academy of Pediatrics to recommend that all infants have a Vitamin D intake of 200 IU per day.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"rickets\" may be from the Old English word ('to twist'), although because this is conjectured, several major dictionaries simply say \"origin unknown\". The name \"rickets\" is plural in form but usually singular in construction. The Greek word (, meaning 'in or of the spine') was later adopted as the scientific term for rickets, due chiefly to the words' similarity in sound.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25989", "revid": "1315743897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25989", "title": "RGB color model", "text": "Color model based on red, green and blue\nThe RGB color model is an additive color model in which the red, green, and blue primary colors of light are added together in various ways to reproduce a broad array of colors. The name of the model comes from the initials of the three additive primary colors, red, green, and blue.\nThe main purpose of the RGB color model is for the sensing, representation, and display of images in electronic systems, such as televisions and computers, though it has also been used in conventional photography and colored lighting. Before the electronic age, the RGB color model already had a solid theory behind it, based in human perception of colors.\nRGB is a \"device-dependent\" color model: different devices detect or reproduce a given RGB value differently, since the color elements (such as phosphors or dyes) and their response to the individual red, green, and blue levels vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, or even in the same device over time. Thus an RGB value does not define the same \"color\" across devices without some kind of color management.\nTypical RGB input devices are color TV and video cameras, image scanners, and digital cameras. Typical RGB output devices are TV sets of various technologies (CRT, LCD, plasma, OLED, quantum dots, etc.), computer and mobile phone displays, video projectors, multicolor LED displays and large screens such as the Jumbotron. Color printers, on the other hand, are not RGB devices, but subtractive color devices typically using the CMYK color model.\nAdditive colors.\nTo form a color with RGB, three light beams (one red, one green, and one blue) must be superimposed (for example by emission from a black screen or by reflection from a white screen). Each of the three beams is called a \"component\" of that color, and each of them can have an arbitrary intensity, from fully off to fully on, in the mixture.\nThe RGB color model is \"additive\" in the sense that if light beams of differing color (frequency) are superposed in space their light spectra adds up, wavelength for wavelength, to make up a resulting, total spectrum. This is in contrast to the subtractive color model, particularly the CMY Color Model, which applies to paints, inks, dyes and other substances whose color depends on \"reflecting\" certain components (frequencies) of the light under which they are seen.\nIn the additive model, if the resulting spectrum, e.g. of superposing three colors, is flat, white color is perceived by the human eye upon direct incidence on the retina. This is in stark contrast to the subtractive model, where the perceived resulting spectrum is what reflecting surfaces, such as dyed surfaces, emit. A dye filters out all colors but its own; two blended dyes filter out all colors but the common color component between them, e.g. green as the common component between yellow and cyan, red as the common component between magenta and yellow, and blue-violet as the common component between magenta and cyan. There is no common color component among magenta, cyan and yellow, thus rendering a spectrum of zero intensity: black.\nZero intensity for each component gives the darkest color (no light, considered the \"black\"), and full intensity of each gives a white; the \"quality\" of this white depends on the nature of the primary light sources, but if they are properly balanced, the result is a neutral white matching the system's white point. When the intensities for all the components are the same, the result is a shade of gray, darker, or lighter depending on the intensity. When the intensities are different, the result is a colorized hue, more or less saturated depending on the difference of the strongest and weakest of the intensities of the primary colors employed.\nWhen one of the components has the strongest intensity, the color is a hue near this primary color (red-ish, green-ish, or blue-ish), and when two components have the same strongest intensity, then the color is a hue of a secondary color (a shade of cyan, magenta, or yellow). A secondary color is formed by the sum of two primary colors of equal intensity: cyan is green+blue, magenta is blue+red, and yellow is red+green. Every secondary color is the complement of one primary color: cyan complements red, magenta complements green, and yellow complements blue. When all the primary colors are mixed in equal intensities, the result is white.\nThe RGB color model itself does not define what is meant by \"red\", \"green\", and \"blue\" colorimetrically, and so the results of mixing them are not specified as absolute, but relative to the primary colors. When the exact chromaticities of the red, green, and blue primaries are defined, the color model then becomes an absolute color space, such as sRGB or Adobe RGB.\nPhysical principles for the choice of red, green, and blue.\nThe choice of primary colors is related to the physiology of the human eye; good primaries are stimuli that maximize the difference between the responses of the cone cells of the human retina to light of different wavelengths, and that thereby make a large color triangle.\nThe normal three kinds of light-sensitive photoreceptor cells in the human eye (cone cells) respond most to yellow (long wavelength or L), green (medium or M), and violet (short or S) light (peak wavelengths near 570\u00a0nm, 540\u00a0nm and 440\u00a0nm, respectively). The difference in the signals received from the three kinds allows the brain to differentiate a wide gamut of different colors, while being most sensitive (overall) to yellowish-green light and to differences between hues in the green-to-orange region.\nAs an example, suppose that light in the orange range of wavelengths (approximately 577\u00a0nm to 597\u00a0nm) enters the eye and strikes the retina. Light of these wavelengths would activate both the medium and long wavelength cones of the retina, but not equally\u2014the long-wavelength cells will respond more. The difference in the response can be detected by the brain, and this difference is the basis of our perception of orange. Thus, the orange appearance of an object results from light from the object entering our eye and stimulating the different cones simultaneously but to different degrees.\nUse of the three primary colors is not sufficient to reproduce \"all\" colors; only colors within the color triangle defined by the chromaticities of the primaries can be reproduced by additive mixing of non-negative amounts of those colors of light.\nHistory of RGB color model theory and usage.\nThe RGB color model is based on the Young\u2013Helmholtz theory of trichromatic color vision, developed by Thomas Young and Hermann von Helmholtz in the early to mid-nineteenth century, and on James Clerk Maxwell's color triangle that elaborated that theory (c.\u20091860).\nPhotography.\nThe first experiments with RGB in early color photography were made in 1861 by Maxwell himself, and involved the process of combining three color-filtered separate takes. To reproduce the color photograph, three matching projections over a screen in a dark room were necessary.\nThe additive RGB model and variants such as orange\u2013green\u2013violet were also used in the Autochrome Lumi\u00e8re color plates and other screen-plate technologies such as the Joly color screen and the Paget process in the early twentieth century. Color photography by taking three separate plates was used by other pioneers, such as the Russian Sergey Prokudin-Gorsky in the period 1909 through 1915. Such methods lasted until about 1960 using the expensive and extremely complex tri-color carbro Autotype process.\nWhen employed, the reproduction of prints from three-plate photos was done by dyes or pigments using the complementary CMY model, by simply using the negative plates of the filtered takes: reverse red gives the cyan plate, and so on.\nTelevision.\nBefore the development of practical electronic TV, there were patents on mechanically scanned color systems as early as 1889 in Russia. The color TV pioneer John Logie Baird demonstrated the world's first RGB color transmission in 1928, and also the world's first color broadcast in 1938, in London. In his experiments, scanning and display were done mechanically by spinning colorized wheels.\nThe Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) began an experimental RGB field-sequential color system in 1940. Images were scanned electrically, but the system still used a moving part: the transparent RGB color wheel rotating at above 1,200\u00a0rpm in synchronism with the vertical scan. The camera and the cathode-ray tube (CRT) were both monochromatic. Color was provided by color wheels in the camera and the receiver. More recently, color wheels have been used in field-sequential projection TV receivers based on the Texas Instruments monochrome DLP imager.\nThe modern RGB shadow mask technology for color CRT displays was patented by Werner Flechsig in Germany in 1938.\nPersonal computers.\nPersonal computers of the late 1970s and early 1980s, such as the Apple II and VIC-20, use composite video. The Commodore 64 and the Atari 8-bit computers use S-Video derivatives. IBM introduced a 16-color scheme (4\u00a0bits\u20141\u00a0bit each for red, green, blue, and intensity) with the Color Graphics Adapter (CGA) for its IBM PC in 1981, later improved with the Enhanced Graphics Adapter (EGA) in 1984. The first manufacturer of a truecolor graphics card for PCs (the TARGA) was Truevision in 1987, but it was not until the arrival of the Video Graphics Array (VGA) in 1987 that RGB became popular, mainly due to the analog signals in the connection between the adapter and the monitor which allowed a very wide range of RGB colors. Actually, it had to wait a few more years because the original VGA cards were palette-driven just like EGA, although with more freedom than VGA, but because the VGA connectors were analog, later variants of VGA (made by various manufacturers under the informal name Super VGA) eventually added true-color. In 1992, magazines heavily advertised true-color Super VGA hardware.\nRGB devices.\nRGB and displays.\nOne common application of the RGB color model is the display of colors on a cathode-ray tube (CRT), liquid-crystal display (LCD), plasma display, or organic light emitting diode (OLED) display such as a television, a computer's monitor, or a large scale screen. Each pixel on the screen is built by driving three small and very close but still separated RGB light sources. At common viewing distance, the separate sources are indistinguishable, which the eye interprets as a given solid color. All the pixels together arranged in the rectangular screen surface conforms the color image.\nDuring digital image processing each pixel can be represented in the computer memory or interface hardware (for example, a \"graphics card\") as binary values for the red, green, and blue color components. When properly managed, these values are converted into intensities or voltages via gamma correction to correct the inherent nonlinearity of some devices, such that the intended intensities are reproduced on the display.\nThe Quattron released by Sharp uses RGB color and adds yellow as a sub-pixel, supposedly allowing an increase in the number of available colors.\nVideo electronics.\nRGB is also the term referring to a type of component video signal used in the video electronics industry. It consists of three signals\u2014red, green, and blue\u2014carried on three separate cables/pins. RGB signal formats are often based on modified versions of the RS-170 and RS-343 standards for monochrome video. This type of video signal is widely used in Europe since it is the best quality signal that can be carried on the standard SCART connector. This signal is known as RGBS (4 BNC/RCA terminated cables exist as well), but it is directly compatible with RGBHV used for computer monitors (usually carried on 15-pin cables terminated with 15-pin D-sub or 5 BNC connectors), which carries separate horizontal and vertical sync signals.\nOutside Europe, RGB is not very popular as a video signal format; S-Video takes that spot in most non-European regions. However, almost all computer monitors around the world use RGB.\nVideo framebuffer.\nA framebuffer is a digital device for computers which stores data in the so-called \"video memory\" (comprising an array of Video RAM or similar chips). This data goes either to three digital-to-analog converters (DACs) (for analog monitors), one per primary color or directly to digital monitors. Driven by software, the CPU (or other specialized chips) write the appropriate bytes into the video memory to define the image. Modern systems encode pixel color values by devoting 8\u00a0bits to each of the R, G, and B components. RGB information can be either carried directly by the pixel bits themselves or provided by a separate color look-up table (CLUT) if indexed color graphic modes are used.\nA CLUT is a specialized RAM that stores R, G, and B values that define specific colors. Each color has its own address (index)\u2014consider it as a descriptive reference number that provides that specific color when the image needs it. The content of the CLUT is much like a palette of colors. Image data that uses indexed color specifies addresses within the CLUT to provide the required R, G, and B values for each specific pixel, one pixel at a time. Of course, before displaying, the CLUT has to be loaded with R, G, and B values that define the palette of colors required for each image to be rendered. Some video applications store such palettes in PAL files (\"Age of Empires\" game, for example, uses over half-a-dozen) and can combine CLUTs on screen.\nThis indirect scheme restricts the number of available colors in an image CLUT\u2014typically 256-cubed (8\u00a0bits in three color channels with values of 0\u2013255)\u2014although each color in the RGB24 CLUT table has only 8\u00a0bits representing 256 codes for each of the R, G, and B primaries, making 16,777,216 possible colors. However, the advantage is that an indexed-color image file can be significantly smaller than it would be with only 8\u00a0bits per pixel for each primary.\nModern storage, however, is far less costly, greatly reducing the need to minimize image file size. By using an appropriate combination of red, green, and blue intensities, many colors can be displayed. Current typical display adapters use up to 24\u00a0bits of information for each pixel: 8-bit per component multiplied by three components (see the Numeric representations section below (24\u00a0bits\u00a0=\u00a02563, each primary value of 8\u00a0bits with values of 0\u2013255). With this system, 16,777,216 (2563 or 224) discrete combinations of R, G, and B values are allowed, providing millions of different (though not necessarily distinguishable) hue, saturation and lightness shades. Increased shading has been implemented in various ways, some formats such as .png and .tga files among others using a fourth grayscale color channel as a masking layer, often called RGB32.\nFor images with a modest range of brightnesses from the darkest to the lightest, 8\u00a0bits per primary color provides good-quality images, but extreme images require more bits per primary color as well as the advanced display technology. For more information see High Dynamic Range (HDR) imaging.\nNonlinearity.\nIn classic CRT devices, the brightness of a given point over the fluorescent screen due to the impact of accelerated electrons is not proportional to the voltages applied to the electron gun control grids, but to an expansive function of that voltage. The amount of this deviation is known as its gamma value (formula_1), the argument for a power law function, which closely describes this behavior. A linear response is given by a gamma value of 1.0, but actual CRT nonlinearities have a gamma value around 2.0 to 2.5.\nSimilarly, the intensity of the output on TV and computer display devices is not directly proportional to the R, G, and B applied electric signals (or file data values which drive them through digital-to-analog converters). On a typical standard 2.2-gamma CRT display, an input intensity RGB value of (0.5,\u00a00.5,\u00a00.5) only outputs about 22% of full brightness (1.0,\u00a01.0,\u00a01.0), instead of 50%. To obtain the correct response, a gamma correction is used in encoding the image data, and possibly further corrections as part of the color calibration process of the device. Gamma affects black-and-white TV as well as color. In standard color TV, broadcast signals are gamma corrected.\nRGB and cameras.\nIn color television and video cameras manufactured before the 1990s, the incoming light was separated by prisms and filters into the three RGB primary colors feeding each color into a separate video camera tube (or \"pickup tube\"). These tubes are a type of cathode-ray tube, not to be confused with that of CRT displays.\nWith the arrival of commercially viable charge-coupled device (CCD) technology in the 1980s, first, the pickup tubes were replaced with this kind of sensor. Later, higher scale integration electronics was applied (mainly by Sony), simplifying and even removing the intermediate optics, thereby reducing the size of home video cameras and eventually leading to the development of full camcorders. Current webcams and mobile phones with cameras are the most miniaturized commercial forms of such technology.\nPhotographic digital cameras that use a CMOS or CCD image sensor often operate with some variation of the RGB model. In a Bayer filter arrangement, green is given twice as many detectors as red and blue (ratio 1:2:1) in order to achieve higher luminance resolution than chrominance resolution. The sensor has a grid of red, green, and blue detectors arranged so that the first row is RGRGRGRG, the next is GBGBGBGB, and that sequence is repeated in subsequent rows. For every channel, missing pixels are obtained by interpolation in the demosaicing process to build up the complete image. Also, other processes used to be applied in order to map the camera RGB measurements into a standard color space as sRGB.\nRGB and scanners.\nIn computing, an image scanner is a device that optically scans images (printed text, handwriting, or an object) and converts it to a digital image which is transferred to a computer. Among other formats, flat, drum and film scanners exist, and most of them support RGB color. They can be considered the successors of early telephotography input devices, which were able to send consecutive scan lines as analog amplitude modulation signals through standard telephonic lines to appropriate receivers; such systems were in use in press since the 1920s to the mid-1990s. Color telephotographs were sent as three separated RGB filtered images consecutively.\nCurrently available scanners typically use CCD or contact image sensor (CIS) as the image sensor, whereas older drum scanners use a photomultiplier tube as the image sensor. Early color film scanners used a halogen lamp and a three-color filter wheel, so three exposures were needed to scan a single color image. Due to heating problems, the worst of them being the potential destruction of the scanned film, this technology was later replaced by non-heating light sources such as color LEDs.\nNumeric representations.\nR: 128\n128\nG: 200\n200\nB: 255\n255\nA typical RGB color selector. Each slider ranges from 0 to 255.\nA color in the RGB color model is described by indicating how much of each of the red, green, and blue is included. The color is expressed as an RGB triplet (\"r\",\"g\",\"b\"), each component of which can vary from zero to a defined maximum value. If all the components are at zero the result is black; if all are at maximum, the result is the brightest representable white.\nThese ranges may be quantified in several different ways:\nFor example, brightest saturated red is written in the different RGB notations as:\nIn many environments, the component values within the ranges are not managed as linear (that is, the numbers are nonlinearly related to the intensities that they represent), as in digital cameras and TV broadcasting and receiving due to gamma correction, for example. Linear and nonlinear transformations are often dealt with via digital image processing. Representations with only 8\u00a0bits per component are considered sufficient if gamma correction is used.\nFollowing is the mathematical relationship between RGB space to HSI space (hue, saturation, and intensity: HSI color space):\nformula_2\nIf formula_3, then formula_4.\nColor depth.\nThe RGB color model is one of the most common ways to encode color in computing, and several different digital representations are in use. The main characteristic of all of them is the quantization of the possible values per component (technically a \"sample\") by using only integer numbers within some range, usually from 0 to some power of two minus one (2\"n\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a01) to fit them into some bit groupings. Encodings of 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, and 16\u00a0bits per color are commonly found; the total number of bits used for an RGB color is typically called the color depth.\nGeometric representation.\nSince colors are usually defined by three components, not only in the RGB model, but also in other color models such as CIELAB and Y'UV, among others, then a three-dimensional volume is described by treating the component values as ordinary Cartesian coordinates in a Euclidean space. For the RGB model, this is represented by a cube using non-negative values within a 0\u20131 range, assigning black to the origin at the vertex (0,\u00a00,\u00a00), and with increasing intensity values running along the three axes up to white at the vertex (1,\u00a01,\u00a01), diagonally opposite black.\nAn RGB triplet (\"r\",\"g\",\"b\") represents the three-dimensional coordinate of the point of the given color within the cube or its faces or along its edges. This approach allows computations of the color similarity of two given RGB colors by simply calculating the distance between them: the shorter the distance, the higher the similarity. Out-of-gamut computations can also be performed this way.\nColors in web-page design.\nInitially, the limited color depth of most video hardware led to a limited color palette of 216 RGB colors, defined by the Netscape Color Cube. The web-safe color palette consists of the 216 (63) combinations of red, green, and blue where each color can take one of six values (in hexadecimal): #00, #33, #66, #99, #CC or #FF (based on the 0 to 255 range for each value discussed above). These hexadecimal values\u00a0= 0, 51, 102, 153, 204, 255 in decimal, which\u00a0= 0%, 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100% in terms of intensity. This seems fine for splitting up 216 colors into a cube of dimension 6. However, lacking gamma correction, the perceived intensity on a standard 2.5 gamma CRT / LCD is only: 0%, 2%, 10%, 28%, 57%, 100%. See the actual web safe color palette for a visual confirmation that the majority of the colors produced are very dark.\nWith the predominance of 24-bit displays, the use of the full 16.7\u00a0million colors of the HTML RGB color code no longer poses problems for most viewers. The sRGB color space (a \"device-independent\" color space) for HTML was formally adopted as an Internet standard in HTML 3.2, though it had been in use for some time before that. All images and colors are interpreted as being sRGB (unless another color space is specified) and all modern displays can display this color space (with color management being built in into browsers or operating systems).\nThe syntax in CSS is:\n rgb(#,#,#)\nwhere # equals the proportion of red, green, and blue respectively. This syntax can be used after such selectors as \"background-color:\" or (for text) \"color:\".\nWide gamut color is possible in modern CSS, being supported by all major browsers since 2023.\nFor example, a color on the DCI-P3 color space can be indicated as:\n color(display-p3 # # #)\nwhere # equals the proportion of red, green, and blue in 0.0 to 1.0 respectively.\nColor management.\nProper reproduction of colors, especially in professional environments, requires color management of all the devices involved in the production process, many of them using RGB. Color management results in several transparent conversions between device-independent (sRGB, XYZ, L*a*b*) and device-dependent color spaces (RGB and others, as CMYK for color printing) during a typical production cycle, in order to ensure color consistency throughout the process. Along with the creative processing, such interventions on digital images can damage the color accuracy and image detail, especially where the gamut is reduced. Professional digital devices and software tools allow for 48\u00a0bpp (bits per pixel) images to be manipulated (16\u00a0bits per channel), to minimize any such damage.\nICC profile compliant applications, such as Adobe Photoshop, use either the Lab color space or the CIE 1931 color space as a \"Profile Connection Space\" when translating between color spaces.\nRGB model and luminance\u2013chrominance formats relationship.\nAll luminance\u2013chrominance formats used in the different TV and video standards such as YIQ for NTSC, YUV for PAL, YDBDR for SECAM, and YPBPR for component video use color difference signals, by which RGB color images can be encoded for broadcasting/recording and later decoded into RGB again to display them. These intermediate formats were needed for compatibility with pre-existent black-and-white TV formats. Also, those color difference signals need lower data bandwidth compared to full RGB signals.\nSimilarly, current high-efficiency digital color image data compression schemes such as JPEG and MPEG store RGB color internally in YCBCR format, a digital luminance\u2013chrominance format based on YPBPR. The use of YCBCR also allows computers to perform lossy subsampling with the chrominance channels (typically to 4:2:2 or 4:1:1 ratios), which reduces the resultant file size.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25990", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25990", "title": "Recursion definition", "text": ""}
{"id": "25991", "revid": "50549477", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25991", "title": "Richard Garfield", "text": "American game designer (born 1963)\nRichard Channing Garfield (born June 26, 1963) is an American mathematician, inventor, and game designer. Garfield created \"\", which is considered to be the first collectible card game (CCG). \"Magic\" debuted in 1993, and its success spawned many imitations.\nGarfield oversaw the successful growth of \"Magic\" and followed it with other game designs. Included in these are \"Keyforge\", \"Netrunner\", \"BattleTech Collectible Card Game\", \"\", \"Star Wars Trading Card Game\", \"The Great Dalmuti\", Artifact, and board games including \"RoboRally, King of Tokyo,\" and \"Bunny Kingdom\". He also created a variation of the card game Hearts called Complex Hearts. Garfield first became passionate about games when he played the roleplaying game \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", so he designed \"Magic\" decks to be customizable like roleplaying characters. Garfield and \"Magic\" are both in the Adventure Gaming Hall of Fame.\nEarly life, family and education.\nGarfield was born in Philadelphia and spent his childhood in many locations throughout the world as a result of his father's work in architecture. His family eventually settled in Oregon when he was twelve. Garfield is the great-great-grandson of U.S. President James A. Garfield and his grand-uncle Samuel Fay invented the paper clip. He is also the nephew of Fay Jones, who, already an established artist, illustrated one \"Magic\" card for him.\nWhile Garfield always had an interest in puzzles and games, his passion was kick-started when he was introduced to \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". Garfield designed his first game when he was 13.\nIn 1985, Garfield received a Bachelor of Science degree in computational mathematics. After college, he joined Bell Laboratories, but soon after decided to continue his education and attended the University of Pennsylvania, studying combinatorial mathematics for his PhD. Garfield studied under Herbert Wilf and earned a Ph.D. in combinatorial mathematics from Penn in 1993. His thesis was \"On the Residue Classes of Combinatorial Families of Numbers\". Shortly thereafter, he became a Visiting Professor of mathematics at Whitman College in Walla Walla, Washington.\nGame design career.\nPrecursors and development of \"Magic: the Gathering\".\nWhile searching for a publisher for \"RoboRally\", which he designed in 1985, Wizards of the Coast began talking to Garfield through Mike Davis, but Wizards was still a new company and felt the game would be too expensive to produce. Peter Adkison of Wizards of the Coast expressed interest in a fast-playing game with minimal equipment, something that would be popular at a game convention. Adkison asked if Garfield could develop a game with lower production costs than \"RoboRally\", with the idea of making such a game more portable and easy to bring to conventions; Garfield thought of an idea that came from combining a card game with collecting baseball cards and spent a week creating a full game from that rough idea.\nGarfield had been creating card games since at least 1982, starting with a card game called \"Five Magics\" that was inspired by \"Cosmic Encounter\", and his work with this new card game built on his existing older prototypes. Garfield thus combined ideas from two previous games to invent the first trading card game, \"\". At first, Garfield and Adkison called the game \"Manaclash\" and worked on it in secret during a lawsuit filed by Palladium Games against Wizards. They were able to protect the game's intellectual property by using the shell company Garfield Games. Garfield began designing \"Magic\" as a Penn graduate student. Garfield's playtesters were mostly fellow Penn students.\nWizards of the Coast.\n\"Magic: The Gathering\" launched in 1993. Playtesters began independently developing expansion packs, which were then passed to Garfield for his final edit. In June 1994, Garfield left academia to join Wizards of the Coast as a full-time game designer. Garfield managed the hit game wisely, balancing player experience with business needs and allowing other designers to contribute creatively to the game. With his direction, Wizards established a robust tournament system for \"Magic\", something that was new to hobby gaming.\nWizards finally released Garfield's \"RoboRally\" in 1994. Wizards published Garfield's '-based CCG \"Jyhad\" in 1994, but changed the name to ' in 1995 to avoid offense to Muslims. \"Netrunner\" (1996) was Garfield's CCG based on \"Cyberpunk 2020\", where he included an element that made it an asymmetrical game, so that the two players each had entirely different cards, abilities, and goals. Wizards published the \"BattleTech Collectible Card Game\" in 1996, based on a design by Garfield. Peter Adkison was developing a \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" MMORPG based on a design from Garfield and Skaff Elias, but left Wizards in December 2000 after Hasbro sold the \"D&amp;D\" computer rights and cancelled the project.\nIn 1999, Garfield was inducted into the Adventure Gaming Hall of Fame alongside \"Magic\". He was a primary play tester for the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" 3rd edition bookset, released by Wizards in 2000. He eventually left Wizards to become an independent game designer.\nAs an independent designer.\nHe still sporadically contributes to \"\". More recently, he has created the board games \"Pecking Order\" (2006) and \"Rocketville\" (2006). The latter was published by Avalon Hill, a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast. He has shifted more of his attention to video games, having worked on the design and development of \"Schizoid\" and \"Spectromancer\" as part of Three Donkeys LLC. He has been a game designer and consultant for companies including Electronic Arts and Microsoft.\nGarfield taught a class titled \"The Characteristics of Games\" at the University of Washington. It is now taught as part of the University of Washington's Certificate in Game Design.\nGames designed.\nA partial list of games designed by Garfield:\nCard games:\nCollectible card games:\nBoard games:\nOther games:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25994", "revid": "40774701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25994", "title": "Roman legion", "text": "Largest military unit of the Roman army\nThe Roman legion (, ) was the largest military unit of the Roman army, composed of Roman citizens serving as legionaries. During the Roman Republic the manipular legion comprised 4,200 infantry and 300 cavalry. In late Republican times the legions were formed of 5,200 men and were restructured around 10 cohorts, the first cohort being double strength. This structure persisted throughout the Principate and middle Empire, before further changes in the fourth century resulted in new formations of around 1,000 men.\nSize.\nThe size of a typical legion varied throughout the history of ancient Rome, with complements ranging from 4,200 legionaries and 300 \"equites\" (drawn from the wealthier classes \u2013 in early Rome all troops provided their own equipment) in the Republic, to 5,500 in the Imperial period, when most legions were led by a Roman Imperial Legate.\nA legion had 4,800 legionaries (in 10 cohorts of 6 centuries of 80 legionaries) from the late republic to the time of Julius Caesar. It expanded to 5,280 men plus 120 auxiliaries in the Imperial period (split into 10 cohorts, nine of 480 men each, with the first cohort being almost double-strength at 800 men). These are typical field strengths while \"paper strength\" was slightly higher (e.g. 600 and 1,200 respectively for Imperial cohorts).\nIn the early Roman Kingdom the term \"legion\" may have meant the entire Roman army, but sources on this period are few and unreliable. The subsequent organisation of legions varied greatly over time but legions were typically composed of around five thousand soldiers. During much of the republican era, a legion was divided into three lines, each of ten maniples. In the late Republic and much of the imperial period (from about 100 BC), a legion was divided into ten cohorts, each of six (or five) centuries. Legions also included a small \"ala\", or cavalry unit. By the third century AD, the legion was a much smaller unit of about 1,000 to 1,500 men, and there were more of them. In the fourth century AD, East Roman border guard legions (\"limitanei\") may have become even smaller. In terms of organization and function, the republican era legion may have been influenced by the ancient Greek and Macedonian phalanx.\nFunction and constitution.\nFor most of the Roman Imperial period, the legions formed the Roman army's elite heavy infantry, recruited exclusively from Roman citizens, while the remainder of the army consisted of auxiliaries, who provided additional infantry and the vast majority of the Roman cavalry (provincials who aspired to Roman citizenship gained it when honourably discharged from the auxiliaries). The Roman army, for most of the Imperial period, consisted mostly of auxiliaries rather than legions.\nLongevity.\nMany of the legions founded before 40 BC were still active until at least the fifth century, notably Legio V Macedonica, which was founded by Augustus in 43 BC and was in Egypt in the seventh century during the Islamic conquest of Egypt.\nOn the other hand, Legio XVII (\"Seventeenth Legion\"), Legio XVIII (\"Eighteenth Legion\") and Legio XIX (\"Nineteenth Legion\"), founded by Augustus around 41 BC, were destroyed by a Germanic alliance led by Arminius in the Varian Disaster (September 9, AD 9) and never raised again by the Romans thereafter.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; (\"Quintilius Varus, give me back my legions!\")\nEvolution.\nAlmost nothing is known about the legion of the Roman Kingdom period that could have included 1000 men from each of the three original Roman tribes. The earliest surviving detailed description comes from Polybius, who was writing c.\u2009150 BC and his account most likely was influenced by the organization of the Roman army after the defeat of Hannibal in the Punic wars some 50 years earlier.\nThe legions of the Republic were only conscripted in times of conflict and usually limited to four legions, two to be commanded by each consul, though more could be levied if needed. Legionaries lacked the opportunity of a military career; they were not paid well, their primary form of income being what they could loot from the battlefield, and were simply called upon when needed and returned to their civilian lives when they were no longer required.\nIn terms of organization and function, the early Republican era military was inherited from the Etruscans and seemingly influenced by the ancient Greek and Macedonian phalanx.\nAfter a crushing defeat at the Battle of the Allia, in 387 BC the military structure was reformed. Under the Camillan system the legions were initially structured based on social class, with the poorest being the first line of the formation. The legionaries most often fought with \"hastae\" (spears) and \"scuta\" (large rectangular shields) in a checkered maniple formation with assistance from skirmishers. The exception to this was the \"triarii\", the final line of the formation who instead fought as hoplites, using Greek \"clipei\" and whose wealth could afford them \"gladii\" in the case of a broken spear.\nBy the 3rd century BC, this system was seen to be inefficient. Under the new Polybian system the ranks were no longer structured by wealth, and instead by age and experience. All legionaries had their \"hastae\" replaced by \"gladii\", along with two \"pila\", which were used as an opening volley before melee. The former classes of poor legionaries, the \"accensi\", \"rorarii,\" and \"leves\" were replaced by the \"velites\". Unit sizes were also expanded.\nNon-citizens or \"peregrini\" were also offered a position in the military as auxiliaries.\nThe Republican legion evolved from 3,000 men in the Roman Republic to over 5,200 men in the Roman Empire, consisting of centuries as the basic units. Until the middle of the first century AD, ten cohorts made up a Roman legion. This was later changed to nine cohorts of standard size (with six centuries at 80 men each) with the first cohort being of double strength (five double-strength centuries with 160 men each).\nBy the fourth century AD, the legion was a much smaller unit of about 1,000 to 1,500 men, and there were more of them. This had come about as the large formation legion and auxiliary unit, 10,000 men, was broken down into smaller units \u2013 originally temporary detachments \u2013 to cover more territory.\nIn the fourth century AD, East Roman border guard legions (\"limitanei\") may have become even smaller.\nHistory.\nRoman Kingdom (c.\u2009752 to 509 BC).\nIn the period before the raising of the \"legio\" and the early years of the Roman Kingdom and the Roman Republic, forces are described as being organised into \"centuriae\" of roughly one hundred men. These centuries were grouped together as required and answered to the leader who had hired or raised them. Such independent organisation persisted until the 2nd century BC amongst light infantry and cavalry, but was discarded completely in later periods with the supporting role taken instead by allied troops. The roles of century leader (later formalised as a centurion), second in command and standard bearer are referenced in this early period.\nRome's early period is undocumented and shrouded in myths, but those myths tell that during the rule of Servius Tullius, the census (from Latin: \"cense\u014d\" \u2013 accounting of the people) was introduced. With this all Roman able-bodied, property-owning male citizens were divided into five classes for military service based on their wealth and then organised into centuries as sub-units of the greater Roman army or \"legio\" (multitude). Joining the army was both a duty and a distinguishing mark of Roman citizenship; the wealthiest land owners performed the most years of military service. These individuals would have had the most to lose should the state have fallen.\nMid Republic (509\u2013107 BC).\nAt some point after the overthrow of the Roman monarchy the \"legio\" was subdivided into two separate legions, each one ascribed to one of the two consuls. In the first years of the Republic, when warfare was mostly concentrated on raiding, it is uncertain if the full manpower of the legions was summoned at any one time. In 494 BC, when three foreign threats emerged, the dictator Manius Valerius Maximus raised ten legions which Livy says was a greater number than had been raised previously at any one time.\nAlso, some warfare was still conducted by Roman forces outside the legionary structure, the most famous example being the campaign in 479 BC by the clan army of gens Fabia against the Etruscan city of Veii (in which the clan was annihilated). Legions became more formally organised in the 4th century BC, as Roman warfare evolved to more frequent and planned operations, and the consular army was raised to two legions each.\nIn the Republic, legions had an ephemeral existence. Except for Legio I to IV, which were the consular armies (two per consul), other units were levied by campaign. Rome's Italian allies were required to provide approximately ten cohorts (auxilia were not organised into legions) to support each Roman Legion.\nIn the middle of the Republic, legions were composed of the following units:\nEach of these three lines was subdivided into (usually ten) chief tactical units called maniples. A maniple consisted of two centuries and was commanded by the senior of the two centurions. At this time, each century of \"hastati\" and \"principes\" consisted of 60 men; a century of \"triarii\" was 30 men. These 3,000 men (twenty maniples of 120 men, and ten maniples of 60 men), together with about 1,200 velites and 300 cavalry gave the mid Republican (\"manipular\") legion a nominal strength of about 4,500 men.\nLate Republic (107\u201327 BC).\nEach century had its own standard and was made up of ten units (\"contubernia\") of eight men who shared a tent, a millstone, a mule and cooking pot.\nFull Roman citizenship was open to all the regions of Italy. At the same time, the three different types of heavy infantry were replaced by a single, standard type based on the \"principes\": armed with two heavy javelins called \"pila\" (singular \"pilum\"), the short sword called \"gladius\", chain mail (\"lorica hamata\"), helmet and rectangular shield (\"scutum\").\nThe role of allied legions would eventually be taken up by contingents of allied auxiliary troops, called \"auxilia\". \"Auxilia\" contained \"immunes\" (specialist units), engineers and pioneers, artillerymen and craftsmen, service and support personnel and irregular units made up of non-citizens, mercenaries and local militia. These were usually formed into complete units such as light cavalry, light infantry or \"velites\", and labourers. There was also a reconnaissance squad of ten or more light mounted infantry called \"speculatores\", who could also serve as messengers or even as an early form of military intelligence service.\nA typical legion of this period had 5,120 legionaries as well as a large number of camp followers, servants and slaves. Legions could contain as many as 11,000 fighting men when including the auxiliaries. During the Later Roman Empire, the legion was reduced in size to 1,000 to allow for easier provisioning and to expand the regions under surveillance. Numbers would also vary depending on casualties suffered during a campaign; Julius Caesar's legions during his campaign in Gaul often only had around 3,500 men.\nTactics were not very different from the past, but their effectiveness was largely improved because of the professional training of the soldiers.\nThroughout the history of Rome's Late Republic, the legions played an important political role. By the 1st century BC, the threat of the legions under a demagogue was recognised. Roman governors were not allowed to leave their provinces with their legions. When Julius Caesar broke this rule, leaving his province of Gaul and crossing the Rubicon into Italy, he precipitated a constitutional crisis. This crisis and the civil wars which followed brought an end to the Republic and led to the foundation of the Empire under Augustus in 27 BC.\nEarly Empire (27 BC\u2013AD 284).\nGenerals, during the recent Republican civil wars, had formed their own legions and numbered them as they wished. During this time, there was a high incidence of \"Gemina\" (twin) legions, where two legions were consolidated into a single organisation (and was later made official and put under a \"legatus\" and six \"duces\"). At the end of the civil war against Mark Antony, Augustus was left with around fifty legions, with several double counts (multiple Legio Xs for instance). For political and economic reasons, Augustus reduced the number of legions to 28 (which shrank to 25 after the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, in which three legions were completely destroyed).\nBeside streamlining the army, Augustus also regulated the soldiers' pay. At the same time, he greatly increased the number of auxiliaries to the point where they were equal in number to the legionaries. He also created the Praetorian Guard along with a permanent Roman navy where served the \"liberti\", or freed slaves.\nThe legions also became permanent at this time, and not recruited for particular campaigns. They were also allocated to static bases with permanent \"castra legionaria\" (legionary fortresses).\nAugustus' military policies proved sound and cost effective, and were generally followed by his successors. These emperors would carefully add new legions, as circumstances required or permitted, until the strength of the standing army stood at around 30 legions (hence the wry remark of the philosopher Favorinus that \"It is ill arguing with the master of 30 legions\"). With each legion having 5,120 legionaries usually supported by an equal number of auxiliary troops (according to Tacitus), the total force available to a legion commander during the Pax Romana probably ranged from 11,000 downwards, with the more prestigious legions and those stationed on hostile borders or in restive provinces tending to have more auxiliaries. By the time of the emperor Severus, 193\u2013211, the auxiliaries may have composed 55 to 60% of the army, 250,000 of 447,000. Some legions may have even been reinforced at times with units making the associated force near 15,000\u201316,000 or about the size of a modern division.\nThroughout the Imperial era, the legions played an important political role. Their actions could secure the empire for a usurper or take it away. For example, the defeat of Vitellius in the Year of the Four Emperors was decided when the Danubian legions chose to support Vespasian.\nIn the Empire, the legion was standardised, with symbols and an individual history where men were proud to serve. The legion was commanded by a \"legatus\" or \"legate\". Aged around thirty, he would usually be a senator on a three-year appointment. Immediately subordinate to the legate would be six elected \"military tribunes\" \u2013 five would be staff officers and the remaining one would be a noble heading for the Senate (originally this tribune commanded the legion). There would also be a group of officers for the medical staff, the engineers, record-keepers, the \"praefectus castrorum\" (commander of the camp) and other specialists such as priests and musicians.\nLater Empire (from 284 AD).\nIn the Later Roman Empire, the number of legions was increased and the Roman army expanded. There is no evidence to suggest that legions changed in form before the Tetrarchy, although there is evidence that they were smaller than the paper strengths usually quoted. The final form of the legion originated with the elite \"legiones palatinae\" created by Diocletian and the Tetrarchs. These were infantry units of around 1,000 men rather than the 5,000, including cavalry, of the old legions. The earliest \"legiones palatinae\" were the \"Lanciarii\", \"Joviani\", \"Herculiani\" and \"Divitenses\".\nThe 4th century saw a very large number of new, small legions created, a process which began under Constantine II. In addition to the elite \"palatini\", other legions called \"comitatenses\" and \"pseudocomitatenses\", along with the \"auxilia palatina\", provided the infantry of late Roman armies. The \"Notitia Dignitatum\" lists 25 \"legiones palatinae\", 70 \"legiones comitatenses\", 47 \"legiones pseudocomitatenses\" and 111 \"auxilia palatina\" in the field armies, and a further 47 \"legiones\" in the frontier armies. Legion names such as \"Honoriani\" and \"Gratianenses\" found in the \"Notitia\" suggest that the process of creating new legions continued through the 4th century rather than being a single event. The names also suggest that many new legions were formed from \"vexillationes\" or from old legions. In addition, there were 24 vexillationes palatini, 73 \"vexillationes comitatenses\"; 305 other units in the Eastern \"limitanei\" and 181 in the Western \"limitanei\". A rare instance of apparent direct continuity between the legions of the early Empire and those of the post-6th century army was \"Legion V Macedonica\"; created in 43 BC, recorded in the \"Notitia Dignitatum\" as a \"legione comitatense\" under the title of \"Quinta Macedonica\" and surviving in Egypt until the Arab conquest of 637 AD.\nAccording to the late Roman writer Vegetius' \"De re militari\", each century had a ballista and each cohort had an onager, giving the legion a formidable siege train of 59 ballistae and 10 onagers, each manned by 10 \"libritors\" (artillerymen) and mounted on wagons drawn by oxen or mules. In addition to attacking cities and fortifications, these would be used to help defend Roman forts and fortified camps (\"castra\") as well. They would even be employed on occasion, especially in the later Empire, as field artillery during battles or in support of river crossings.\nDespite a number of organisational changes, the legion system survived the fall of the Western Roman Empire. It was continued within the Eastern Roman Empire until the 7th century, when reforms begun by Emperor Heraclius to supply the increasing need for soldiers resulted in the Theme system. Despite this, the Eastern Roman armies continued to be influenced by the earlier Roman legions, and were maintained with similar levels of discipline, strategic prowess, and organization.\nLegionary ranks.\nAside from the rank and file legionary (who received the base wage of 10 \"ass\u0113s\" a day or 225 \"denarii\" a year), the following list describes the system of officers which developed within the legions from the late republic (100s BC) until the military reforms of Diocletian (c.\u2009290).\nCenturions.\nThe rank of centurion was an officer grade that held much responsibility. The most senior centurion in a legion was known as the \"primus pilus\" (lit. \"first maniple\"), who directly commanded the first century of the first cohort and commanded the whole first cohort when in battle. Within the second to tenth cohorts, the commander of each cohort's first century was known as a \"pilus prior\" and was in command of his entire cohort when in battle. The seniority of the pilus prior centurions was followed by the five other century commanders of the first cohort, who were known as a \"primi ordines\".\nThere is a story of one centurion, Petronius Fortunatus, making rank in four years, then spending the next forty-two years in twelve different legions never once serving in the \"primi ordines\".\nThe six centuries of a normal cohort, were, in order of precedence:\nThe centuries took their titles from the old use of the legion drawn up in three lines of battle using three classes of soldier (each century would then hold a cross-section of this theoretical line, although these century titles were now essentially nominal). Each of the three lines is then sub-divided within the century into a more forward and a more rear century.\nLegionaries.\nThe Roman army maintained a complex position and grading system for its soldiers that reflected the many and varied duties of the Roman army. There were three pay grades within the rank of legionary: standard, one and a half, and twice the basic pay rate.\nPay.\nLegionaries received 225 \"denarii\" a year (equal to 900 \"sestertii\") until Domitian, who increased it to 300 \"denarii\". In spite of the steady inflation during the 2nd century, there was no further rise until the time of Septimius Severus, who increased it to 500 \"denarii\" a year. However, the soldiers did not receive all the money in cash, as the state deducted a clothing and food tax from their pay. To this wage, a legionary on active campaign would hope to add the booty of war, from the bodies of their enemies and as plunder from enemy settlements. Slaves could also be claimed from the prisoners of war and divided amongst the legion for later sale, which would bring in a sizeable supplement to their regular pay.\nAll legionary soldiers would also receive a \"praemia\" (veterans' benefits) on completion of their term of service of 25 years or more: a sizeable sum of money (3,000 \"denarii\" from the time of Augustus) and/or a plot of good farmland (good land was in much demand); farmland given to veterans often helped in establishing control of the frontier regions and over rebellious provinces. Later, under Caracalla, the \"praemia\" increased to 5,000 \"denarii\".\nSymbols.\nFrom 104 BC onwards, each legion used an \"aquila\" (eagle) as its standard symbol. The symbol was carried by an officer known as aquilifer, and its loss was considered to be a very serious embarrassment, and often led to the disbanding of the legion itself. Normally, this was because any legion incapable of regaining its eagle in battle was so severely mauled that it was no longer effective in combat.\nIn \"Gallic War\" (Bk IV, Para. 25), Julius Caesar describes an incident at the start of his first invasion of Britain in 55 BC that illustrated how fear for the safety of the eagle could drive Roman soldiers. When Caesar's troops hesitated to leave their ships for fear of the Britons, the aquilifer of the tenth legion threw himself overboard and, carrying the eagle, advanced alone against the enemy. His comrades, fearing disgrace, 'with one accord, leapt down from the ship' and were followed by troops from the other ships.\nWith the birth of the Roman Empire, the legions created a bond with their leader, the emperor himself. Each legion had another officer, called \"imaginifer\", whose role was to carry a pike with the \"imago\" (image, sculpture) of the emperor as \"pontifex maximus\".\nEach legion, furthermore, had a \"vexillifer\" who carried a \"vexillum\" or \"signum\", with the legion name and emblem depicted on it, unique to the legion. It was common for a legion to detach some sub-units from the main camp to strengthen other corps. In these cases, the detached subunits carried only the \"vexillum\", and not the \"aquila\", and were called, therefore, \"vexillationes\". A miniature \"vexillum\", mounted on a silver base, was sometimes awarded to officers as a recognition of their service upon retirement or reassignment.\nCivilians could also be rewarded for their assistance to the Roman legions. In return for outstanding service, a citizen was given an arrow without a head. This was considered a great honour and would bring the recipient much prestige.\nDiscipline.\nThe military discipline of the legions was harsh. Regulations were strictly enforced, and a broad array of punishments could be inflicted.\nFactors in the legion's success.\nMontesquieu wrote that \"the main reason for the Romans becoming masters of the world was that, having fought successively against all peoples, they always gave up their own practices as soon as they found better ones\".\nExamples of ideas that were copied and adapted include weapons like the \"gladius\" (Iberians) and warship design (cf. Carthaginians' quinquereme), as well as military units, such as heavy mounted cavalry and mounted archers (Numidians and Parthians).\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt; "}
{"id": "25995", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25995", "title": "Reciprocating engine", "text": "Engine utilising one or more reciprocating pistons\nA reciprocating engine, more often known as a piston engine, is a heat engine that uses one or more reciprocating pistons to convert high temperature and high pressure into a rotating motion. This article describes the common features of all types. The main types are: the internal combustion engine, used extensively in motor vehicles; the steam engine, the mainstay of the Industrial Revolution; and the Stirling engine for niche applications. Internal combustion engines are further classified in two ways: either a spark-ignition (SI) engine, where the spark plug initiates the combustion; or a compression-ignition (CI) engine, where the air within the cylinder is compressed, thus heating it, so that the heated air ignites fuel that is injected then or earlier.\nCommon features in all types.\nThere may be one or more pistons. Each piston is inside a cylinder, into which a gas is introduced, either already under pressure (e.g. steam engine), or heated inside the cylinder either by ignition of a fuel air mixture (internal combustion engine) or by contact with a hot heat exchanger in the cylinder (Stirling engine). The hot gases expand, pushing the piston to the bottom of the cylinder. This position is also known as the bottom dead center (BDC), or where the piston forms the largest volume in the cylinder. The piston is returned to the cylinder top (top dead center) (TDC) by a flywheel, the power from other pistons connected to the same shaft or (in a double acting cylinder) by the same process acting on the other side of the piston. This is where the piston forms the smallest volume in the cylinder. In most types the expanded or \"exhausted\" gases are removed from the cylinder by this stroke. The exception is the Stirling engine, which repeatedly heats and cools the same sealed quantity of gas. The stroke is simply the distance between the TDC and the BDC, or the greatest distance that the piston can travel in one direction.\nIn some designs the piston may be powered in both directions in the cylinder, in which case it is said to be double-acting.\nIn most types, the linear movement of the piston is converted to a rotating movement via a connecting rod and a crankshaft or by a swashplate or other suitable mechanism. A flywheel is often used to ensure smooth rotation or to store energy to carry the engine through an un-powered part of the cycle. The more cylinders a reciprocating engine has, generally, the more vibration-free (smoothly) it can operate. The power of a reciprocating engine is proportional to the volume of the combined pistons' displacement.\nA seal must be made between the sliding piston and the walls of the cylinder so that the high pressure gas above the piston does not leak past it and reduce the efficiency of the engine. This seal is usually provided by one or more piston rings. These are rings made of a hard metal, and are sprung into a circular groove in the piston head. The rings fit closely in the groove and press lightly against the cylinder wall to form a seal, and more heavily when higher combustion pressure moves around to their inner surfaces.\nIt is common to classify such engines by the number and alignment of cylinders and total volume of displacement of gas by the pistons moving in the cylinders usually measured in cubic centimetres (cm3 or cc) or litres (l) or (L) (US: liter). For example, for internal combustion engines, single and two-cylinder designs are common in smaller vehicles such as motorcycles, while automobiles typically have between four and eight, and locomotives and ships may have a dozen cylinders or more. Cylinder capacities may range from 10\u00a0cm3 or less in model engines up to thousands of liters in ships' engines.\nThe compression ratio affects the performance in most types of reciprocating engine. It is the ratio between the volume of the cylinder, when the piston is at the bottom of its stroke, and the volume when the piston is at the top of its stroke.\nThe bore/stroke ratio is the ratio of the diameter of the piston, or \"bore\", to the length of travel within the cylinder, or \"stroke\". If this is around 1 the engine is said to be \"square\". If it is greater than 1, i.e. the bore is larger than the stroke, it is \"oversquare\". If it is less than 1, i.e. the stroke is larger than the bore, it is \"undersquare\".\nCylinders may be aligned in line, in a V configuration, horizontally opposite each other, or radially around the crankshaft. Opposed-piston engines put two pistons working at opposite ends of the same cylinder and this has been extended into triangular arrangements such as the Napier Deltic. Some designs have set the cylinders in motion around the shaft, such as the rotary engine.\nIn some steam engines, the cylinders may be of varying size with the smallest bore cylinder working the highest pressure steam. This is then fed through one or more, increasingly larger bore cylinders successively, to extract power from the steam at increasingly lower pressures. These engines are called compound engines.\nAside from looking at the power that the engine can produce, the mean effective pressure (MEP), can also be used in comparing the power output and performance of reciprocating engines of the same size. The mean effective pressure is the fictitious pressure which would produce the same amount of net work that was produced during the power stroke cycle. This is shown by:\n formula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the total piston area of the engine, formula_3 is the stroke length of the pistons, and formula_4 is the total displacement volume of the engine. Therefore:\n formula_5\nWhichever engine with the larger value of MEP produces more net work per cycle and performs more efficiently.\nOperations.\nIn steam engines and internal combustion engines, valves are required to allow the entry and exit of gases at the correct times in the piston's cycle. These are worked by cams, eccentrics or cranks driven by the shaft of the engine. Early designs used the D slide valve but this has been largely superseded by piston valve or poppet valve designs. In steam engines the point in the piston cycle at which the steam inlet valve closes is called the cutoff and this can often be controlled to adjust the torque supplied by the engine and improve efficiency. In some steam engines, the action of the valves can be replaced by an oscillating cylinder.\nInternal combustion engines operate through a sequence of strokes that admit and remove gases to and from the cylinder. These operations are repeated cyclically and an engine is said to be 2-stroke, 4-stroke or 6-stroke depending on the number of strokes it takes to complete a cycle.\nThe most common type is 4-stroke, which has following cycles.\nHistory.\nThe reciprocating engine developed in Europe during the 18th century, first as the atmospheric engine then later as the steam engine. These were followed by the Stirling engine and internal combustion engine in the 19th century. Today the most common form of reciprocating engine is the internal combustion engine running on the combustion of petrol, diesel, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) or compressed natural gas (CNG) and used to power motor vehicles and engine power plants.\nOne notable reciprocating engine from the World War II era was the 28-cylinder, Pratt &amp; Whitney R-4360 Wasp Major radial engine. It powered the last generation of large piston-engined planes before jet engines and turboprops took over from 1944 onward. It had a total engine capacity of , and a high power-to-weight ratio.\nThe largest reciprocating engine in production at present, but not the largest ever built, is the W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4-Sulzer RTA96-C turbocharged two-stroke diesel engine of 2006 built by W\u00e4rtsil\u00e4. It is used to power the largest modern container ships such as the Emma M\u00e6rsk. It is five stories high (), long, and weighs over in its largest 14 cylinders version producing more than . Each cylinder has a capacity of , making a total capacity of for the largest versions.\nEngine capacity.\nFor piston engines, an engine's capacity is the engine displacement, in other words the volume swept by all the pistons of an engine in a single movement. It is generally measured in litres (l) or cubic inches (c.i.d., cu\u00a0in, \"or\" in3) for larger engines, and cubic centimetres (abbreviated cc) for smaller engines. All else being equal, engines with greater capacities are more powerful and consumption of fuel increases accordingly (although this is not true of every reciprocating engine), although power and fuel consumption are affected by many factors outside of engine displacement.\nPower.\nReciprocating engines can be characterized by their specific power, which is typically given in kilowatts per litre of engine displacement (in the U.S. also horsepower per cubic inch). The result offers an approximation of the peak power output of an engine. This is not to be confused with fuel efficiency, since high efficiency often requires a lean fuel-air ratio, and thus lower power density. A modern high-performance car engine makes in excess of .\nOther modern non-internal combustion types.\nReciprocating engines that are powered by compressed air, steam or other hot gases are still used in some applications such as to drive many modern torpedoes or as pollution-free motive power. Most steam-driven applications use steam turbines, which are more efficient than piston engines.\nThe French-designed FlowAIR vehicles use compressed air stored in a cylinder to drive a reciprocating engine in a local-pollution-free urban vehicle.\nTorpedoes may use a working gas produced by high test peroxide or Otto fuel II, which pressurize without combustion. The Mark 46 torpedo, for example, can travel underwater at fuelled by Otto fuel without oxidant.\nReciprocating quantum heat engine.\nQuantum heat engines are devices that generate power from heat that flows from a hot to a cold reservoir.\nThe mechanism of operation of the engine can be described by the laws of quantum mechanics. Quantum refrigerators are devices that consume power with the purpose to pump heat from a cold to a hot reservoir.\nIn a reciprocating quantum heat engine, the working medium is a quantum system such as spin systems or a harmonic oscillator. The Carnot cycle and Otto cycle are the ones most studied.The quantum versions obey the laws of thermodynamics. In addition, these models can justify the assumptions of endoreversible thermodynamics. A theoretical study has shown that it is possible and practical to build a reciprocating engine that is composed of a single oscillating atom. This is an area for future research and could have applications in nanotechnology.\nMiscellaneous engines.\nThere are a large number of unusual varieties of piston engines that have various claimed advantages, many of which see little if any current use:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25996", "revid": "6010417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25996", "title": "Register", "text": "Register or registration may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25998", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25998", "title": "Radical feminism", "text": "Perspective within feminism\nRadical feminism is a perspective within feminism that calls for a radical re-ordering of society in which male supremacy is eliminated in all social and economic contexts, while recognizing that women's experiences are also affected by other social divisions such as in race, class, and sexual orientation. The ideology and movement emerged in the 1960s.\nRadical feminists view society fundamentally as a patriarchy in which men dominate and oppress women. Radical feminists seek to abolish the patriarchy in a struggle to liberate women and girls from an unjust society by challenging existing social norms and institutions. This struggle includes opposing the sexual objectification of women, raising public awareness about such issues as rape and other violence against women, challenging the concept of gender roles, and challenging what radical feminists see as a racialized and gendered capitalism that characterizes the United States, the United Kingdom, and many other countries. According to Shulamith Firestone in \"The Dialectic of Sex\" (1970): \"[T]he end goal of feminist revolution must be, unlike that of the first feminist movement, not just the elimination of male \"privilege\" but of the sex \"distinction\" itself: genital differences between human beings would no longer matter culturally.\" While radical feminists believe that differences in genitalia and secondary sex characteristics should not matter culturally or politically, they also maintain that women's special role in reproduction should be recognized and accommodated without penalty in the workplace, and some have argued compensation should be offered for this socially essential work.\nRadical feminists locate the root cause of women's oppression in patriarchal gender relations, as opposed to legal systems (as in liberal feminism) or class conflict (as in Marxist feminism). Early radical feminism, arising within second-wave feminism in the 1960s, typically viewed patriarchy as a \"transhistorical phenomenon\" prior to or deeper than other sources of oppression, \"not only the oldest and most universal form of domination but the primary form\" and the model for all others. Later politics derived from radical feminism ranged from cultural feminism to syncretic forms of socialist feminism (such as anarcha-feminism) that place issues of social class, economics, and the like on a par with patriarchy as sources of oppression.\nTheory and ideology.\nRadical feminists assert that global society functions as a patriarchy in which the class of men are the oppressors of the class of women. They propose that the oppression of women is the most fundamental form of oppression, one that has existed since the inception of humanity. As radical feminist Ti-Grace Atkinson wrote in her foundational piece \"Radical Feminism\" (1969):\nThe first dichotomous division of this mass [mankind] is said to have been on the grounds of sex: male and female\u00a0... it was because half the human race bears the burden of the reproductive process and because man, the 'rational' animal, had the wit to take advantage of that, that the childbearers, or the 'beasts of burden,' were corralled into a political class: equivocating the biologically contingent burden into a political (or necessary) penalty, thereby modifying these individuals' definition from the human to the functional, or animal.\nRadical feminists argue that, because of patriarchy, women have come to be viewed as the \"other\" to the male norm, and as such have been systematically oppressed and marginalized. They further assert that men, as a class, benefit from the systematic oppression of women. Patriarchal theory is not defined by a belief that all men always benefit from the oppression of all women. Rather, it maintains that the primary element of patriarchy is a relationship of dominance, where one party is dominant and exploits the other for the benefit of the former. Radical feminists believe that men (as a class) use social systems and other methods of control to keep women (as well as non-dominant men) suppressed. Radical feminists seek to abolish patriarchy by challenging existing social norms and institutions, and believe that eliminating patriarchy will liberate everyone from an unjust society. Ti-Grace Atkinson maintained that the need for power fuels the male class to continue oppressing the female class, arguing that \"the \"need\" men have for the role of oppressor is the source and foundation of all human oppression\".\nThe influence of radical-feminist politics on the women's liberation movement was considerable. Redstockings co-founder Ellen Willis wrote in 1984 that radical feminists \"got sexual politics recognized as a public issue\", created second-wave feminism's vocabulary, helped to legalize abortion in the US, \"were the first to demand total equality in the so-called private sphere\" (\"housework and child care\u00a0... emotional and sexual needs\"), and \"created the atmosphere of urgency\" that almost led to the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment. The influence of radical feminism can be seen in the adoption of these issues by the National Organization for Women (NOW), a feminist group that had previously been focused almost entirely on economic issues.\nMovement.\nRoots.\nRadical feminists in the United States coined the term women's liberation movement (WLM). The WLM grew largely due to the influence of the civil rights movement, that had gained momentum in the 1960s, and many of the women who took up the cause of radical feminism had previous experience with radical protest in the struggle against racism. Chronologically, it can be seen within the context of second wave feminism that started in the early 1960s. The leading figures of this second wave of feminism included Shulamith Firestone, Kathie Sarachild, Ti-Grace Atkinson, Carol Hanisch, Roxanne Dunbar, Naomi Weisstein and Judith Brown. In the late sixties various women's groups describing themselves as \"radical feminist\", such as the UCLA Women's Liberation Front (WLF), offered differing views of radical feminist ideology. UCLA's WLF co-founder Devra Weber recalls, \"the radical feminists were opposed to patriarchy, but not necessarily capitalism. In our group at least, they opposed so-called male dominated national liberation struggles\".\nRadical feminists helped to translate the radical protest for racial equality, in which many had experience, over to the struggle for women's rights. They took up the cause and advocated for a variety of women's issues, including abortion rights, the Equal Rights Amendment, access to credit, and equal pay. Many women of color were among the founders of the Women's Liberation Movement (Fran Beal, Cellestine Ware, Toni Cade Bambara); however, many women of color did not participate in the movement due to their conclusion that radical feminists were not addressing \"issues of meaning for minority women\", Black women in particular. After consciousness raising groups were formed to rally support, second-wave radical feminism began to see an increasing number of women of color participating.\nIn the 1960s, radical feminism emerged within liberal feminist and working-class feminist discussions, first in the United States, then in the United Kingdom and Australia. Those involved had gradually come to believe that it was not only the middle-class nuclear family that oppressed women, but that it was also social movements and organizations that claimed to stand for human liberation, notably the counterculture, the New Left, and Marxist political parties, all of which were male-dominated and male-oriented. In the United States, radical feminism developed as a response to some of the perceived failings of both New Left organizations such as the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS) and feminist organizations such as NOW. Initially concentrated in big cities like New York, Chicago, Boston, Washington, DC, and on the West Coast, radical feminist groups spread across the country rapidly from 1968 to 1972. Boston Female Liberation was formed at this time.\nAt the same time parallel trends of thinking developed outside the USA: The Women's Yearbook from Munich gives a good sense of early 1970s feminism in West Germany:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their Yearbook essay on behalf of the autonomous feminist movement argued that patriarchy was the oldest and most fundamental relationship of exploitation. Hence the necessity of feminists' separating from men's organizations on the Left, since they would just use women's efforts to support their own goals, in which women's liberation did not count. The editors of Frauenjahrbuch 76 also explicitly distanced themselves from the language of liberalism, arguing that \"equal rights define women's oppression as women's disadvantage.\" They explicitly labeled the equal rights version of feminism as wanting to be like men, vehemently rejecting claims that \"women should enter all the male-dominated areas of society. More women in politics! More women in the sciences, etc. . . . Women should be able to do everything that men do.\" Their position\u2014and that of the autonomous feminists represented in this 1976 yearbook\u2014instead was that: \"This principle that 'we want that too' or 'we can do it too' measures emancipation against men and again defines what we want in relationship to men. Its content is conformity to men. . . . Because in this society male characteristics fundamentally have more prestige, recognition and above all more power, we easily fall into the trap of rejecting and devaluing all that is female and admiring and emulating all that is considered male. . . . The battle against the female role must not become the battle for the male role. . . . The feminist demand, which transcends the claim for equal rights, is the claim for self-determination.\nRadical feminists introduced the use of consciousness raising (CR) groups. These groups brought together intellectuals, workers, and middle-class women in developed Western countries to discuss their experiences. During these discussions, women noted a shared and repressive system regardless of their political affiliation or social class. Based on these discussions, the women drew the conclusion that ending of patriarchy was the most necessary step towards a truly free society. These consciousness-raising sessions allowed early radical feminists to develop a political ideology based on common experiences women faced with male supremacy. Consciousness raising was extensively used in chapter sub-units of the National Organization for Women (NOW) during the 1970s. The feminism that emerged from these discussions stood first and foremost for the liberation of women, as women, from the oppression of men in their own lives, as well as men in power. Radical feminism claimed that a totalizing ideology and social formation\u2014\"patriarchy\" (government or rule by fathers)\u2014dominated women in the interests of men.\nGroups.\nWithin groups such as New York Radical Women (1967\u20131969; not connected to the present-day socialist feminist organization Radical Women), which Ellen Willis characterized as \"the first women's liberation group in New York City\", a radical feminist ideology began to emerge. It declared that \"the personal is political\" and the \"sisterhood is powerful\"; calls to women's activism coined by Kathie Sarachild and others in the group. New York Radical Women fell apart in early 1969 in what came to be known as the \"politico-feminist split\", with the \"politicos\" seeing capitalism as the main source of women's oppression, while the \"feminists\" saw women's oppression in a male supremacy that was \"a set of material, institutionalized relations, not just bad attitudes\". The feminist side of the split, whose members referred to themselves as \"radical feminists\", soon constituted the basis of a new organization, Redstockings. At the same time, Ti-Grace Atkinson led \"a radical split-off from NOW\", which became known as The Feminists. A third major stance would be articulated by the New York Radical Feminists, founded later in 1969 by Shulamith Firestone (who broke from the Redstockings) and Anne Koedt.\nDuring this period, the movement produced \"a prodigious output of leaflets, pamphlets, journals, magazine articles, newspaper and radio and TV interviews\". Many important feminist works, such as Koedt's essay \"The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm\" (1970) and Kate Millett's book \"Sexual Politics\" (1970), emerged during this time and in this milieu.\nIdeology emerges and diverges.\nAt the beginning of this period, \"heterosexuality was more or less an unchallenged assumption\". Among radical feminists, it was widely held that, thus far, the sexual freedoms gained in the sexual revolution of the 1960s, in particular, the decreasing emphasis on monogamy, had been largely gained by men at women's expense. This assumption of heterosexuality would soon be challenged by the rise of political lesbianism, closely associated with Atkinson and The Feminists.\nRedstockings and The Feminists were both radical feminist organizations, but held rather distinct views. Most members of Redstockings held to a materialist and anti-psychologistic view. They viewed men's oppression of women as ongoing and deliberate, holding individual men responsible for this oppression, viewing institutions and systems (including the family) as mere vehicles of conscious male intent, and rejecting psychologistic explanations of female submissiveness as blaming women for collaboration in their own oppression. They held to a view\u2014which Willis would later describe as \"neo-Maoist\"\u2014that it would be possible to unite all or virtually all women, as a class, to confront this oppression by personally confronting men.\nThe Feminists held a more idealistic, psychologistic, and utopian philosophy, with a greater emphasis on \"sex roles\", seeing sexism as rooted in \"complementary patterns of male and female behavior\". They placed more emphasis on institutions, seeing marriage, family, prostitution, and heterosexuality as all existing to perpetuate the \"sex-role system\". They saw all of these as institutions to be destroyed. Within the group, there were further disagreements, such as Koedt's viewing the institution of \"normal\" sexual intercourse as being focused mainly on male sexual or erotic pleasure, while Atkinson viewed it mainly in terms of reproduction. In contrast to the Redstockings, The Feminists generally considered genitally focused sexuality to be inherently male. Ellen Willis, the Redstockings co-founder, would later write that insofar as the Redstockings considered abandoning heterosexual activity, they saw it as a \"bitter price\" they \"might have to pay for [their] militance\", whereas The Feminists embraced separatist feminism as a strategy.\nThe New York Radical Feminists (NYRF) took a more psychologistic (and even biologically determinist) line. They argued that men dominated women not so much for material benefits as for the ego satisfaction intrinsic in domination. Similarly, they rejected the Redstockings view that women submitted only out of necessity or The Feminists' implicit view that they submitted out of cowardice, but instead argued that social conditioning simply led most women to accept a submissive role as \"right and natural\".\nRosemarie Tong proposes the terms \"radical-libertarian feminism\" and \"radical-cultural feminism\" to address the fundamental split within radical feminism over how to dismantle patriarchal oppression. Radical-libertarian feminists, such as Kate Millett and Shulamith Firestone, advocate for the abolition of rigid gender roles and the embrace of androgyny, arguing that women should be free to adopt both masculine and feminine traits to achieve full human potential. They emphasize sexual liberation, including diverse sexual practices, and support artificial reproduction as a means to free women from the biological burdens of childbirth. In contrast, radical-cultural feminists, like Mary Daly and Marilyn French, celebrate femaleness and the unique virtues traditionally associated with femininity, such as nurturing and community. They critique androgyny as a rejection of women's inherent strengths and promote lesbianism as a more liberating alternative to heterosexuality. Radical-cultural feminists also see natural reproduction as a source of women's power and oppose artificial reproduction, which they believe could further entrench male dominance.\nForms of action.\nThe radical feminism of the late 1960s was not only a movement of ideology and theory; it helped to inspire direct action. In 1968, feminists protested against the Miss America pageant in order to bring \"sexist beauty ideas and social expectations\" to the forefront of women's social issues. Even though bras were not burned on that day, the protest led to the phrase \"bra-burner\". \"Feminists threw their bras\u2014along with \"woman-garbage\" such as girdles, false eyelashes, steno pads, wigs, women's magazines, and dishcloths\u2014into a \"Freedom Trash Can\", but they did not set it on fire\". In March 1970, more than one hundred feminists staged an 11-hour sit-in at the \"Ladies' Home Journal\" headquarters. These women demanded that the publication replace its male editor with a female editor, and accused the \"Ladies Home Journal\", \"with their emphasis on food, family, fashion, and femininity\", of being \"instruments of women's oppression\". One protester explained the goal of the protest by saying that they \"were there to destroy a publication which feeds off of women's anger and frustration, a magazine which destroys women.\"\nRadical feminists used a variety of tactics, including demonstrations, speakouts, and community and work-related organizing, to gain exposure and adherents. In France and West Germany, radical feminists developed further forms of direct action.\nSelf-incrimination.\nOn 6 June 1971 the cover of \"Stern\" showed 28 German actresses and journalists confessing \"We Had an Abortion!\" (wir haben abgetrieben!) unleashing a campaign against the abortion ban. The journalist Alice Schwarzer had organized this avowal form of protest following a French example.\nIn 1974, Schwarzer persuaded 329 doctors to publicly admit in \"Der Spiegel\" to having performed abortions. She also found a woman willing to terminate her pregnancy on camera with vacuum aspiration, thereby promoting this method of abortion by showing it on the German political television program \"Panorama\". Cristina Perincioli described this as \"... a new tactic: the ostentatious, publicly documented violation of a law that millions of women had broken thus far, only in secret and under undignified circumstances.\" However, with strong opposition from church groups and most of the broadcasting councils governing West Germany's ARD (association of public broadcasters), the film was not aired. Instead Panorama's producers replaced the time slot with a statement of protest and the display of an empty studio.\nCircumventing the abortion ban.\nIn the 1970s, radical women's centers without a formal hierarchy sprang up in West Berlin. These Berlin-based women's centers did abortion counseling, compiled a list of Dutch abortion clinics, organized regular bus trips to them, and were utilized by women from other parts of West Germany. Police accused the organizers of an illegal conspiracy. \"The center used these arrests to publicize its strategy of civil disobedience and raised such a public outcry that the prosecutions were dropped. The bus trips continued without police interference. This victory was politically significant in two respects... while the state did not change the law, it did back off from enforcing it, deferring to women's collective power. The feminist claim to speak for women was thus affirmed by both women and the state.\"\nLeaving the Church.\nIn West Germany, 1973 saw the start of a radical feminist group campaign to withdraw from membership in the Catholic Church as a protest against its anti-abortion position and activities. \"Can we continue to be responsible for funding a male institution that ... condemns us as ever to the house, to cooking and having children, but above all to having children\". In Germany those baptized in one of the officially recognized churches have to document that they have formally left the church in order not to be responsible for paying a church tax.\nProtest of biased coverage of lesbians.\nIn November 1972, two women in a sexual relationship, Marion Ihns and Judy Andersen, were arrested and charged with hiring a man to kill Ihns's abusive husband. Pretrial publicity, particularly that by \"Bild\", Germany's largest tabloid, was marked by anti-lesbian sensationalism. In response, lesbian groups and women's centers in Germany joined in fervent protest. The cultural clash continued through the trial which eventually resulted in the conviction of the women in October 1974 and life sentences for both. However, a petition brought by 146 female journalists and 41 male colleagues to the German Press Council resulted in its censure of the Axel Springer Company, \"Bild\"'s publisher. At one point in the lead up to the trial \"Bild\" had run a seventeen consecutive day series on \"The Crimes of Lesbian Women\".\nGenital self-exams.\nThese helped women to gain knowledge about how their own bodies functioned so they would no longer need to rely solely on the medical profession. An outgrowth of this movement was the founding of the Feminist Women's Health Center (FFGZ) in Berlin in 1974.\nSocial organization and aims.\nRadical feminists have generally formed small activist or community associations around either consciousness raising or concrete aims. Many radical feminists in Australia participated in a series of squats to establish various women's centers, and this form of action was common in the late 1970s and early 1980s. By the mid-1980s many of the original consciousness raising groups had dissolved, and radical feminism was more and more associated with loosely organized university collectives. Radical feminism can still be seen, particularly within student activism and among working-class women. In Australia, many feminist social organizations had accepted government funding during the 1980s, and the election of a conservative government in 1996 crippled these organizations. A radical feminist movement also emerged among Jewish women in Israel beginning in the early 1970s.\nWhile radical feminists aim to dismantle patriarchal society, their immediate aims are generally concrete. Common demands include expanding reproductive rights. According to writer Lisa Tuttle in \"The Encyclopedia of Feminism\" it was \"defined by feminists in the 1970s as a basic human right, it includes the right to abortion and birth control, but implies much more. To be realised, reproductive freedom must include not only a woman's right to choose childbirth, abortion, sterilisation or birth control, but also her right to make those choices freely, without pressure from individual men, doctors, governmental or religious authorities. It is a key issue for women, since without it the other freedoms we appear to have, such as the right to education, jobs and equal pay, may prove illusory. Provisions of childcare, medical treatment, and society's attitude towards children are also involved.\"\nViews on the sex industry.\nRadical feminists have written about a wide range of issues regarding the sex industry\u2014which they tend to oppose\u2014including but not limited to what many see as: the harm done to women during the production of pornography, the social harm from consumption of pornography, the coercion and poverty that leads women to become prostitutes, the long-term detrimental effects of prostitution, the raced and classed nature of prostitution, and male dominance over women in prostitution and pornography.\nFeminists who oppose the acceptance and endorsement of prostitution by rebranding it as \"sex work\" are sometimes disparagingly labeled as \"sex worker-exclusionary radical feminists\" or \"SWERFs\". These argue that the term \"sex work\" contains political assumptions, rather than being a neutral term. They argue the term endorses the idea that sex is labour for women and leisure for men, according men the social and economic power to act as a ruling class in the matter of intercourse, and also implies that women's bodies exist as a resource to be used by other people.\nProstitution.\nRadical feminists argue that most women who become prostitutes are forced into it by a pimp, human trafficking, poverty, drug addiction, or trauma such as child sexual abuse. Women from the lowest socioeconomic classes\u2014impoverished women, women with a low level of education, women from the most disadvantaged racial and ethnic minorities\u2014are over-represented in prostitution all over the world. Catharine MacKinnon asked: \"If prostitution is a free choice, why are the women with the fewest choices the ones most often found doing it?\" Radical feminist Melissa Farley conducted a 2004 study of 854 people involved in prostitution internationally, finding that 89% of respondents stated they wanted to escape prostitution but could not, 72% were currently or formerly homeless, and 68% met criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.\nMacKinnon argues that \"In prostitution, women have sex with men they would never otherwise have sex with. The money thus acts as a form of force, not as a measure of consent. It acts like physical force does in rape.\" They believe that no person can be said to truly consent to their own oppression and no-one should have the right to consent to the oppression of others. Kathleen Barry argues that consent is not a \"good divining rod as to the existence of oppression, and consent to violation is a fact of oppression\". Andrea Dworkin wrote in 1992:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prostitution in and of itself is an abuse of a woman's body. Those of us who say this are accused of being simple-minded. But prostitution is very simple.[...] In prostitution, no woman stays whole. It is impossible to use a human body in the way women's bodies are used in prostitution and to have a whole human being at the end of it, or in the middle of it, or close to the beginning of it. It's impossible. And no woman gets whole again later, after.\nDworkin argued that \"prostitution and equality for women cannot exist simultaneously\" and to eradicate prostitution \"we must seek ways to use words and law to end the abusive selling and buying of girls' and women's bodies for men's sexual pleasure\".\nRadical feminist thinking has analyzed prostitution as a cornerstone of patriarchal domination and sexual subjugation of women that impacts negatively not only on the women and girls in prostitution but on all women as a group, because prostitution continually affirms and reinforces patriarchal definitions of women as having a primary function to serve men sexually. They say it is crucial that society does not replace one patriarchal view on female sexuality\u2014that women should not have sex/a relationship outside marriage and that casual sex is shameful for a woman\u2014with another similarly oppressive and patriarchal view\u2014acceptance of prostitution, a sexual practice based on a highly patriarchal construct of sexuality: that the sexual pleasure of a woman is irrelevant, that her only role during sex is to submit to the man's sexual demands and to do what he tells her, that sex should be controlled by the man, and that the woman's response and satisfaction are irrelevant. Radical feminists argue that sexual liberation for women cannot be achieved so long as we normalize unequal sexual practices where a man dominates a woman. \"Feminist consciousness raising remains the foundation for collective struggle and the eventual liberation of women\".\nRadical feminists strongly object to the patriarchal ideology that has been one of the justifications for the existence of prostitution, namely that prostitution is a \"necessary evil\", because men cannot control themselves, and that it is therefore \"necessary\" that a small number of women be \"sacrificed\" to be abused by men, to protect \"chaste\" women from rape and harassment. These feminists argue that far from decreasing rape rates, prostitution actually leads to an increase in sexual violence against women, by sending the message that it is acceptable for a man to treat a woman as a sexual instrument over which he has total control. For instance, Melissa Farley argues that Nevada's high rate of rapes is exacerbated by the patriarchal atmosphere encouraged by legal prostitution.\nIndigenous women are particularly targeted for prostitution. In Canada, New Zealand, Mexico, and Taiwan, studies have shown that indigenous women are at the bottom of the race and class hierarchy of prostitution, often subjected to the worst conditions, most violent demands and sold at the lowest price. It is common for indigenous women to be over-represented in prostitution when compared with their total population. This is as a result of the combined forces of colonialism, physical displacement from ancestral lands, destruction of indigenous social and cultural order, misogyny, globalization/neoliberalism, race discrimination and extremely high levels of violence perpetrated against them.\nPornography.\nRadical feminists, notably Catharine MacKinnon, charge that the production of pornography entails physical, psychological, and/or economic coercion of the women who perform and model in it. This is said to be true even when the women are presented as enjoying themselves.\nRadical feminists point to the testimony of well-known participants in pornography, such as Traci Lords and Linda Boreman, and argue that most female performers are coerced into pornography, either by somebody else or by an unfortunate set of circumstances. The feminist anti-pornography movement was galvanized by the publication of \"Ordeal\", in which Linda Boreman (who under the name of \"Linda Lovelace\" had starred in \"Deep Throat\") stated that she had been beaten, raped, and pimped by her husband Chuck Traynor, and that Traynor had forced her at gunpoint to make scenes in \"Deep Throat\", as well as forcing her, by use of both physical violence against Boreman as well as emotional abuse and outright threats of violence, to make other pornographic films. Dworkin, MacKinnon, and Women Against Pornography issued public statements of support for Boreman, and worked with her in public appearances and speeches. She later became a born-again Christian and a spokeswoman for the anti-pornography movement.\nRadical feminists hold the view that pornography contributes to sexism, arguing that in pornographic performances the actresses are reduced to mere receptacles\u2014objects\u2014for sexual use and abuse by men. They argue that the narrative is usually formed around men's pleasure as the only goal of sexual activity, and that the women are shown in a subordinate role. Some opponents believe pornographic films tend to show women as being extremely passive, or that the acts which are performed on the women are typically abusive and solely for the pleasure of their sex partner. On-face ejaculation and anal sex are increasingly popular among men, following trends in porn. MacKinnon and Dworkin defined pornography as \"the graphic sexually explicit subordination of women through pictures or words that also includes women dehumanized as sexual objects, things, or commodities...\"\nRadical feminists say that consumption of pornography is a cause of rape and other forms of violence against women. Robin Morgan summarizes this idea with her oft-quoted statement, \"Pornography is the theory, and rape is the practice.\" They charge that pornography eroticizes the domination, humiliation, and coercion of women, and reinforces sexual and cultural attitudes that are complicit in rape and sexual harassment. In her book \"Only Words\" (1993), MacKinnon argues that pornography \"deprives women of the right to express verbal refusal of an intercourse\".\nMacKinnon argued that pornography leads to an increase in sexual violence against women through fostering rape myths. Such rape myths include the belief that women really want to be raped and that they mean yes when they say no. She held that \"rape myths perpetuate sexual violence indirectly by creating distorted beliefs and attitudes about sexual assault and shift elements of blame onto the victims\". Additionally, according to MacKinnon, pornography desensitizes viewers to violence against women, and this leads to a progressive need to see more violence in order to become sexually aroused, an effect she claims is well documented.\nGerman radical feminist Alice Schwarzer is one proponent of the view that pornography offers a distorted sense of men and women's bodies, as well as the actual sexual act, often showing performers with synthetic implants or exaggerated expressions of pleasure, engaging in fetishes that are presented as popular and normal.\nRadical lesbian feminism.\nRadical lesbians are distinguished from other radical feminists through their ideological roots in political lesbianism. Radical lesbians see lesbianism as an act of resistance against the political institution of heterosexuality, which they view as violent and oppressive towards women. Julie Bindel has written that her lesbianism is \"intrinsically bound up\" with her feminism.\nDuring the Women's Liberation Movement of the 1970s, straight women within the movement were challenged on the grounds that their heterosexual identities helped to perpetuate the very patriarchal systems that they were working to undo. According to radical lesbian writer Jill Johnston, a large fraction of the movement sought to reform sexist institutions while \"leaving intact the staple nuclear unit of oppression: heterosexual sex\". Others saw lesbianism as a strong political tool to help end male dominance and as central to the women's movement.\nRadical lesbians criticized the women's liberation movement for its failure to criticize the \"psychological oppression\" of heteronormativity, which they believed to be \"the sexual foundation of the social institutions\". They argued that heterosexual love relationships perpetuated patriarchal power relations through \"personal domination\" and therefore directly contradicted the values and goals of the movement. As one radical lesbian wrote, \"no matter what the feminist does, the physical act [of heterosexuality] throws both women and man back into role playing... all of her politics are instantly shattered\". They argued that the women's liberation movement would not be successful without challenging heteronormativity.\nRadical lesbians believed lesbianism actively threatened patriarchal systems of power. They defined lesbians not only by their sexual orientation, but by their liberation and independence from men. Lesbian activists Sidney Abbott and Barbara Love argued that \"the lesbian \"has\" freed herself from male domination\" through disconnecting from them not only sexually, but also \"financially and emotionally\". They argued that lesbianism fosters the utmost independence from gendered systems of power, and from the \"psychological oppression\" of heteronormativity.\nRejecting norms of gender, sex and sexuality was central to radical lesbian feminism. Radical lesbians believed that \"lesbian identity was a 'woman-identified' identity'\", meaning it should be defined by and with reference to women, rather than in relation to men.\nIn their manifesto \"The Woman-Identified Woman\", the lesbian radical feminist group Radicalesbians underlined their belief in the necessity of creating a \"new consciousness\" that rejected traditional normative definitions of womanhood and femininity which centered on powerlessness. Their redefinition of womanhood and femininity stressed the freeing of lesbian identity from harmful and divisive stereotypes. As Abbott and Love argued in \"Is Women's Liberation a Lesbian Plot?\" (1971):\nAs long as the word 'dyke' can be used to frighten women into a less militant stand, keep women separate from their sisters, and keep them from giving primacy to anything other than men and family\u2014then to that extent they are dominated by male culture.\nRadicalesbians reiterated this thought, writing, \"in this sexist society, for a woman to be independent means she can't be a woman, she must be a dyke\". The rhetoric of a \"woman-identified-woman\" has been criticized for its exclusion of heterosexual women. According to some critics, \"[lesbian feminism's use of] woman-identifying rhetoric should be considered a rhetorical failure. Critics also argue that the intensity of radical lesbian feminist politics, on top of the preexisting stigma around lesbianism, gave a bad face to the feminist movement and provided fertile ground for tropes like the \"man-hater\" or \"bra burner\".\nViews on transgender topics.\nSince the 1970s, there has been a debate among radical feminists about transgender identities. Some radical feminists, such as Catharine MacKinnon, John Stoltenberg, Andrea Dworkin, Monique Wittig, and Finn Mackay have supported recognition of trans women as women, which they describe as \"trans-inclusive\" feminism, while others like Mary Daly, Janice Raymond, Robin Morgan, Germaine Greer, Sheila Jeffreys, Julie Bindel, and Robert Jensen, have argued that the transgender movement perpetuates patriarchal gender norms and is incompatible with radical feminist ideology.\nThose who exclude trans women from womanhood or women's spaces commonly refer to themselves as \"gender critical\" and are referred to by others as trans-exclusionary. Radical feminists who hold gender-critical views are often referred to as \"trans-exclusionary radical feminists\" or \"TERFs\", an acronym to which they object, say is inaccurate (citing, for example, their inclusion of trans men as women), and argue is a slur or even hate speech.\nGender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminists in particular say that the difference in behavior between men and women is the result of socialization, and the idea that someone would have an inborn sense of femininity or masculinity runs contrary to the theory of gender socialization. Lierre Keith describes femininity as \"a set of behaviors that are, in essence, ritualized submission\", and hence, gender is not an identity but a caste position, and the philosophies of gender identity (specifically the feminine essence philosophy) are an obstacle to the abolition of gender and a reversion to a sex-based society. Julie Bindel argued in 2008 that Iran carries out the highest number of sex-change operations in the world, because \"surgery is an attempt to keep gender stereotypes intact\", and that \"it is precisely this idea that certain distinct behaviours are appropriate for males and females that underlies feminist criticism of the phenomenon of 'transgenderism'.\" According to the BBC in 2014, there are no reliable figures regarding gender reassignment operations in Iran.\nIn 1978, the Lesbian Organization of Toronto voted to become womyn-born womyn only and wrote:\nA woman's voice was almost never heard as a woman's voice\u2014it was always filtered through men's voices. So here a guy comes along saying, \"I'm going to be a girl now and speak for girls.\" And we thought, \"No you're not.\" A person cannot just join the oppressed by fiat.\nIn \"\" (1979), the lesbian radical feminist Janice Raymond argued that \"All transsexuals rape women's bodies by reducing\nthe real female form to an artifact, appropriating this body for themselves. However, the transsexually constructed lesbian-feminist violates women's sexuality and spirit, as well. Rape, although it is usually done by force, can also be accomplished by deception. It is significant that in the case of the transsexually constructed lesbian-feminist, often he is able to gain entrance and a dominant position in women's spaces because the women involved do not know he is a transsexual and he just does not happen to mention it.\" In \"The Whole Woman\" (1999), Germaine Greer wrote that largely male governments \"recognise as women men who believe that they are women\u00a0... because [those governments] see women not as another sex but as a non-sex\"; she continued that if uterus-and-ovaries transplants were a mandatory part of sex-change operations, the latter \"would disappear overnight\". A 2021 survey of trans women found that 90% believed a uterus transplant would improve their quality of life, and 88% believed the ability to menstruate would enhance their perception of their femininity. Barring technical obstacles, this casts very significant doubt on the claim that sex reasignment surgery would stop if uterus-and-ovaries transplants were necessary for it.\nSheila Jeffreys argued in 1997 that \"the vast majority of transsexuals still subscribe to the traditional stereotype of women\" and that by transitioning they are \"constructing a conservative fantasy of what women should be\u00a0... an essence of womanhood which is deeply insulting and restrictive.\" In \"Gender Hurts\" (2014), she referred to sex reassignment surgery as \"self-mutilation\", and used pronouns that refer to sex assigned at birth. Jeffreys argued that feminists need to know \"the biological sex of those who claim to be women and promote prejudicial versions of what constitutes womanhood\", and that the \"use by men of feminine pronouns conceals the masculine privilege bestowed upon them by virtue of having been placed in and brought up in the male sex caste\".\nBy contrast, trans-inclusive radical feminists claim that a biology-based or sex-essentialist ideology itself upholds patriarchal constructions of womanhood. Others assert that trans women also contributed to the feminist movement, and Susan Stryker stated that \"transsexual women were active in the radical feminist movement of the late 1960s, but were almost entirely erased from its history after 1973\" due to pushback from gender-critical feminists. Andrea Dworkin argued as early as 1974 that transgender people and gender identity research have the potential to radically undermine patriarchal sex essentialism:\n...work with transsexuals, and studies of formation of gender identity in children provide basic information which challenges the notion that there are two discrete biological sexes. That information threatens to transform the traditional biology of sex difference into the radical biology of sex similarity. That is not to say that there is one sex, but that there are many. The evidence which is germane here is simple. The words \"male\" and \"female\", \"man\" and \"woman\", are used only because as yet there are no others.\nIn the late 2010s, interest in the issue of trans-inclusive feminism rose as trans acceptance gained headway. In 2015, radical feminist Catharine MacKinnon said:\nMale dominant society has defined women as a discrete biological group forever. If this was going to produce liberation, we'd be free\u00a0... To me, women is a political group. I never had much occasion to say that, or work with it, until the last few years when there has been a lot of discussion about whether trans women are women\u00a0... I always thought I don't care how someone becomes a woman or a man; it does not matter to me. It is just part of their specificity, their uniqueness, like everyone else's. Anybody who identifies as a woman, wants to be a woman, is going around being a woman, as far as I'm concerned, is a woman.\nReception.\nGail Dines, an English radical feminist, spoke in 2011 about the appeal of radical feminism to young women: \"After teaching women for 20-odd years, if I go in and I teach liberal feminism, I get looked [at] blank\u00a0... I go in and teach radical feminism, bang, the room explodes.\"\nCriticism.\nEarly in the radical feminism movement, some radical feminists theorized that \"other kinds of hierarchy grew out of and were modeled on male supremacy and so, were in effect, specialized forms of male supremacy\". Therefore, the fight against male domination took priority because \"the liberation of women would mean the liberation of all\". This view is contested, particularly by intersectional feminism and black feminism. Critics argue that this ideology accepts the notion that identities are singular and disparate, rather than multiple and intersecting. For example, understanding women's oppression as disparate assumes that \"men, in creating and maintaining these systems, are acting purely as men, in accordance with peculiarly male characteristics or specifically male supremacist objectives\".\nEllen Willis' 1984 essay \"Radical Feminism and Feminist Radicalism\" says that within the New Left, radical feminists were accused of being \"bourgeois\", \"antileft\", or even \"apolitical\", whereas they saw themselves as \"radicalizing the left by expanding the definition of radical\". Early radical feminists were mostly white and middle-class, resulting in \"a very fragile kind of solidarity\". This limited the validity of generalizations based on radical feminists' experiences of gender relations, and prevented white and middle-class women from recognizing that they benefited from race and class privilege according to Willis. Many early radical feminists broke ties with \"male-dominated left groups\", or would work with them only in \"ad hoc\" coalitions. Willis, although very much a part of early radical feminism and continuing to hold that it played a necessary role in placing feminism on the political agenda, criticized it as unable \"to integrate a feminist perspective with an overall radical politics\", while viewing this limitation as inevitable in the context of the time.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nRosenstock, Nancy (2022). Inside the Second Wave of Feminism. Chicago: Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-1-64259-704-2."}
{"id": "26000", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26000", "title": "Ray tracing (graphics)", "text": "Rendering method\nIn 3D computer graphics, ray tracing is a technique for modeling light transport for use in a wide variety of rendering algorithms for generating digital images.\nOn a spectrum of computational cost and visual fidelity, ray tracing-based rendering techniques, such as ray casting, recursive ray tracing, distribution ray tracing, photon mapping and path tracing, are generally slower and higher fidelity than scanline rendering methods. Thus, ray tracing was first deployed in applications where taking a relatively long time to render could be tolerated, such as CGI images, and film and television visual effects (VFX), but was less suited to real-time applications such as video games, where speed is critical in rendering each frame.\nSince 2018, however, hardware acceleration for real-time ray tracing has become standard on new commercial graphics cards, and graphics APIs have followed suit, allowing developers to use hybrid ray tracing and rasterization-based rendering in games and other real-time applications with a lesser hit to frame render times.\nRay tracing is capable of simulating a variety of optical effects, such as reflection, refraction, soft shadows, scattering, depth of field, motion blur, caustics, ambient occlusion and dispersion phenomena (such as chromatic aberration). It can also be used to trace the path of sound waves in a similar fashion to light waves, making it a viable option for more immersive sound design in video games by rendering realistic reverberation and echoes. In fact, any physical wave or particle phenomenon with approximately linear motion can be simulated with ray tracing.\nRay tracing-based rendering techniques that involve sampling light over a domain generate rays or using denoising techniques.\nHistory.\nThe idea of ray tracing comes from as early as the 16th century, when it was described by Albrecht D\u00fcrer, who is credited for its invention. \nD\u00fcrer described multiple techniques for projecting 3-D scenes onto an image plane. Some of these project chosen geometry onto the image plane, as is done with rasterization today. Others determine what geometry is visible along a given ray, as is done with ray tracing.\nUsing a computer for ray tracing to generate shaded pictures was first accomplished by Arthur Appel in 1968. Appel used ray tracing for primary visibility (determining the closest surface to the camera at each image point) by tracing a ray through each point to be shaded into the scene to identify the visible surface. The closest surface intersected by the ray was the visible one. This non-recursive ray tracing-based rendering algorithm is today called \"ray casting\". His algorithm then traced secondary rays to the light source from each point being shaded to determine whether the point was in shadow or not.\nLater, in 1971, Goldstein and Nagel of MAGI (Mathematical Applications Group, Inc.) published \"3-D Visual Simulation\", wherein ray tracing was used to make shaded pictures of solids. At the ray-surface intersection point found, they computed the surface normal and, knowing the position of the light source, computed the brightness of the pixel on the screen. Their publication describes a short (30-second) film \"made using the University of Maryland's display hardware outfitted with a 16mm camera. The film showed the helicopter and a simple ground-level gun emplacement. The helicopter was programmed to undergo a series of maneuvers including turns, take-offs, and landings, etc., until it eventually is shot down and crashed.\" A \"CDC 6600\" computer was used. MAGI produced an animation video called \"MAGI/SynthaVision Sampler\" in 1974.\nAnother early instance of ray casting came in 1976, when Scott Roth created a flip book animation in Bob Sproull's computer graphics course at Caltech. The scanned pages are shown as a video in the accompanying image. Roth's computer program noted an edge point at a pixel location if the ray intersected a bounded plane different from that of its neighbors. Of course, a ray could intersect multiple planes in space, but only the surface point closest to the camera was noted as visible. The platform was a DEC PDP-10, a Tektronix storage-tube display, and a printer which would create an image of the display on rolling thermal paper. Roth extended the framework, introduced the term \"ray casting\" in the context of computer graphics and solid modeling, and in 1982 published his work while at GM Research Labs.\nTurner Whitted was the first to show recursive ray tracing for mirror reflection and for refraction through translucent objects, with an angle determined by the solid's index of refraction, and to use ray tracing for anti-aliasing. Whitted also showed ray traced shadows. He produced a recursive ray-traced film called \"The Compleat Angler\" in 1979 while an engineer at Bell Labs. Whitted's deeply recursive ray tracing algorithm reframed rendering from being primarily a matter of surface visibility determination to being a matter of light transport. His paper inspired a series of subsequent work by others that included distribution ray tracing and finally unbiased path tracing, which provides the \"rendering equation\" framework that has allowed computer-generated imagery to be faithful to reality.\nFor decades, global illumination in major films using computer-generated imagery was approximated with additional lights. Ray tracing-based rendering eventually changed that by enabling physically-based light transport. Early feature films rendered entirely using path tracing include \"Monster House\" (2006), \"Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs\" (2009), and \"Monsters University\" (2013).\nAlgorithm overview.\nOptical ray tracing describes a method for producing visual images constructed in 3-D computer graphics environments, with more photorealism than either ray casting or scanline rendering techniques. It works by tracing a path from an imaginary eye through each pixel in a virtual screen, and calculating the color of the object visible through it.\nScenes in ray tracing are described mathematically by a programmer or by a visual artist (normally using intermediary tools). Scenes may also incorporate data from images and models captured by means such as digital photography.\nTypically, each ray must be tested for intersection with some subset of all the objects in the scene. Once the nearest object has been identified, the algorithm will estimate the incoming light at the point of intersection, examine the material properties of the object, and combine this information to calculate the final color of the pixel. Certain illumination algorithms and reflective or translucent materials may require more rays to be re-cast into the scene.\nIt may at first seem counterintuitive or \"backward\" to send rays \"away\" from the camera, rather than \"into\" it (as actual light does in reality), but doing so is many orders of magnitude more efficient. Since the overwhelming majority of light rays from a given light source do not make it directly into the viewer's eye, a \"forward\" simulation could potentially waste a tremendous amount of computation on light paths that are never recorded.\nTherefore, the shortcut taken in ray tracing is to presuppose that a given ray intersects the view frame. After either a maximum number of reflections or a ray traveling a certain distance without intersection, the ray ceases to travel and the pixel's value is updated.\nCalculate rays for rectangular viewport.\nOn input we have (in calculation we use vector normalization and cross product):\nThe idea is to find the position of each viewport pixel center formula_9 which allows us to find the line going from eye formula_10 through that pixel and finally get the ray described by point formula_10 and vector formula_12 (or its normalization formula_13). First we need to find the coordinates of the bottom left viewport pixel formula_14 and find the next pixel by making a shift along directions parallel to viewport (vectors formula_15 , formula_16) multiplied by the size of the pixel. Below we introduce formulas which include distance formula_17 between the eye and the viewport. However, this value will be reduced during ray normalization formula_13 (so you might as well accept that formula_19 and remove it from calculations).\nPre-calculations: let's find and normalize vector formula_20 and vectors formula_21 which are parallel to the viewport (all depicted on above picture)\nformula_22\nformula_23\nnote that viewport center formula_24, next we calculate viewport sizes formula_25 divided by 2 including inverse aspect ratio formula_26\nformula_27\nand then we calculate next-pixel shifting vectors formula_28 along directions parallel to viewport (formula_29), and left bottom pixel center formula_30\nformula_31\nCalculations: note formula_32 and ray formula_33 so\nformula_34\nformula_35\nDetailed description of ray tracing computer algorithm and its genesis.\nWhat happens in nature (simplified).\nIn nature, a light source emits a ray of light which travels, eventually, to a surface that interrupts its progress. One can think of this \"ray\" as a stream of photons traveling along the same path. In a perfect vacuum this ray will be a straight line (ignoring relativistic effects). Any combination of four things might happen with this light ray: absorption, reflection, refraction and fluorescence. A surface may absorb part of the light ray, resulting in a loss of intensity of the reflected and/or refracted light. It might also reflect all or part of the light ray, in one or more directions. If the surface has any transparent or translucent properties, it refracts a portion of the light beam into itself in a different direction while absorbing some (or all) of the spectrum (and possibly altering the color). Less commonly, a surface may absorb some portion of the light and fluorescently re-emit the light at a longer wavelength color in a random direction, though this is rare enough that it can be discounted from most rendering applications. Between absorption, reflection, refraction and fluorescence, all of the incoming light must be accounted for, and no more. A surface cannot, for instance, reflect 66% of an incoming light ray, and refract 50%, since the two would add up to be 116%. From here, the reflected and/or refracted rays may strike other surfaces, where their absorptive, refractive, reflective and fluorescent properties again affect the progress of the incoming rays. Some of these rays travel in such a way that they hit our eye, causing us to see the scene and so contribute to the final rendered image.\nRay casting algorithm.\nThe idea behind ray casting, the predecessor to recursive ray tracing, is to trace rays from the eye, one per pixel, and find the closest object blocking the path of that ray. Think of an image as a screen-door, with each square in the screen being a pixel. This is then the object the eye sees through that pixel. Using the material properties and the effect of the lights in the scene, this algorithm can determine the shading of this object. The simplifying assumption is made that if a surface faces a light, the light will reach that surface and not be blocked or in shadow. The shading of the surface is computed using traditional 3-D computer graphics shading models. One important advantage ray casting offered over older scanline algorithms was its ability to easily deal with non-planar surfaces and solids, such as cones and spheres. If a mathematical surface can be intersected by a ray, it can be rendered using ray casting. Elaborate objects can be created by using solid modeling techniques and easily rendered.\nVolume ray casting algorithm.\nIn the method of volume ray casting, each ray is traced so that color and/or density can be sampled along the ray and then be combined into a final pixel color.\nThis is often used when objects cannot be easily represented by explicit surfaces (such as triangles), for example when rendering clouds or 3-D medical scans. \nSDF ray marching algorithm.\nIn SDF ray marching, or sphere tracing, each ray is traced in multiple steps to approximate an intersection point between the ray and a surface defined by a signed distance function (SDF). The SDF is evaluated for each iteration in order to be able take as large steps as possible without missing any part of the surface. A threshold is used to cancel further iteration when a point is reached that is close enough to the surface. This method is often used for 3-D fractal rendering.\nRecursive ray tracing algorithm.\nEarlier algorithms traced rays from the eye into the scene until they hit an object, but determined the ray color without recursively tracing more rays. Recursive ray tracing continues the process. When a ray hits a surface, additional rays may be cast because of reflection, refraction, and shadow.:\nThese recursive rays add more realism to ray-traced images.\nAdvantages over other rendering methods.\nRay tracing-based rendering's popularity stems from its basis in a realistic simulation of light transport, as compared to other rendering methods, such as rasterization, which focuses more on the realistic simulation of geometry. Effects such as reflections and shadows, which are difficult to simulate using other algorithms, are a natural result of the ray tracing algorithm. The computational independence of each ray makes ray tracing amenable to a basic level of parallelization, but the divergence of ray paths makes high utilization under parallelism quite difficult to achieve in practice.\nDisadvantages.\nA serious disadvantage of ray tracing is performance, though it can in theory be faster than traditional scanline rendering, depending on scene complexity vs. number of pixels on-screen. Until the late 2010s, ray tracing in real time was usually considered impossible on consumer hardware for nontrivial tasks. Scanline algorithms and other algorithms use data coherence to share computations between pixels, while ray tracing normally starts the process anew, treating each eye ray separately. However, this separation offers other advantages, such as the ability to shoot more rays as needed to perform spatial anti-aliasing and improve image quality where needed.\nWhitted-style recursive ray tracing handles interreflection and optical effects such as refraction, but is not generally photorealistic. Improved realism occurs when the rendering equation is fully evaluated, as the equation conceptually includes every physical effect of light flow. However, this is infeasible given the computing resources required, and the limitations on geometric and material modeling fidelity. Path tracing is an algorithm for evaluating the rendering equation and thus gives a higher-fidelity simulations of real-world lighting.\nReversed direction of traversal of scene by the rays.\nThe process of shooting rays from the eye to the light source to render an image is sometimes called \"backwards ray tracing\", since it is the opposite direction photons actually travel. However, there is confusion with this terminology. Early ray tracing was always done from the eye, and early researchers such as James Arvo used the term \"backwards ray tracing\" to mean shooting rays from the lights and gathering the results. Therefore, it is clearer to distinguish \"eye-based\" versus \"light-based\" ray tracing.\nWhile the direct illumination is generally best sampled using eye-based ray tracing, certain indirect effects can benefit from rays generated from the lights. Caustics are bright patterns caused by the focusing of light off a wide reflective region onto a narrow area of (near-)diffuse surface. An algorithm that casts rays directly from lights onto reflective objects, tracing their paths to the eye, will better sample this phenomenon. This integration of eye-based and light-based rays is often expressed as bidirectional path tracing, in which paths are traced from both the eye and lights, and the paths subsequently joined by a connecting ray after some length.\nPhoton mapping is another method that uses both light-based and eye-based ray tracing; in an initial pass, energetic photons are traced along rays from the light source so as to compute an estimate of radiant flux as a function of 3-dimensional space (the eponymous photon map itself). In a subsequent pass, rays are traced from the eye into the scene to determine the visible surfaces, and the photon map is used to estimate the illumination at the visible surface points. The advantage of photon mapping versus bidirectional path tracing is the ability to achieve significant reuse of photons, reducing computation, at the cost of statistical bias.\nAn additional problem occurs when light must pass through a very narrow aperture to illuminate the scene (consider a darkened room, with a door slightly ajar leading to a brightly lit room), or a scene in which most points do not have direct line-of-sight to any light source (such as with ceiling-directed light fixtures or torchieres). In such cases, only a very small subset of paths will transport energy; Metropolis light transport is a method which begins with a random search of the path space, and when energetic paths are found, reuses this information by exploring the nearby space of rays.\nTo the right is an image showing a simple example of a path of rays recursively generated from the camera (or eye) to the light source using the above algorithm. A diffuse surface reflects light in all directions.\nFirst, a ray is created at an eyepoint and traced through a pixel and into the scene, where it hits a diffuse surface. From that surface, the algorithm recursively generates a reflection ray, which is traced through the scene, where it hits another diffuse surface. Finally, another reflection ray is generated and traced through the scene, where it hits the light source and is absorbed. The color of the pixel now depends on the colors of the first and second diffuse surfaces and the color of the light emitted from the light source. For example, if the light source emitted white light and the two diffuse surfaces were blue, then the resulting color of the pixel is blue.\nExample.\nAs a demonstration of the principles involved in ray tracing, consider how one would find the intersection between a ray and a sphere. This is merely the math behind the line\u2013sphere intersection and the subsequent determination of the color of the pixel being calculated. There is, of course, far more to the general process of ray tracing, but this demonstrates an example of the algorithms used.\nIn vector notation, the equation of a sphere with center formula_36 and radius formula_37 is\nformula_38\nAny point on a ray starting from point formula_39 with direction formula_40 (here formula_40 is a unit vector) can be written as\nformula_42\nwhere formula_43 is its distance between formula_44 and formula_39. In our problem, we know formula_36, formula_37, formula_39 (e.g. the position of a light source) and formula_40, and we need to find formula_43. Therefore, we substitute for formula_44:\nformula_52\nLet formula_53 for simplicity; then\nformula_54\nformula_55\nformula_56\nKnowing that d is a unit vector allows us this minor simplification:\nformula_57\nThis quadratic equation has solutions\nformula_58\nThe two values of formula_59 found by solving this equation are the two ones such that formula_60 are the points where the ray intersects the sphere.\nAny value which is negative does not lie on the ray, but rather in the opposite half-line (i.e. the one starting from formula_39 with opposite direction).\nIf the quantity under the square root (the discriminant) is negative, then the ray does not intersect the sphere.\nLet us suppose now that there is at least a positive solution, and let formula_59 be the minimal one. In addition, let us suppose that the sphere is the nearest object on our scene intersecting our ray, and that it is made of a reflective material. We need to find in which direction the light ray is reflected. The laws of reflection state that the angle of reflection is equal and opposite to the angle of incidence between the incident ray and the normal to the sphere.\nThe normal to the sphere is simply\nformula_63\nwhere formula_64 is the intersection point found before. The reflection direction can be found by a reflection of formula_40 with respect to formula_66, that is\n formula_67\nThus the reflected ray has equation\n formula_68\nNow we only need to compute the intersection of the latter ray with our field of view, to get the pixel which our reflected light ray will hit. Lastly, this pixel is set to an appropriate color, taking into account how the color of the original light source and that of the sphere are combined by the reflection.\nAdaptive depth control.\nAdaptive depth control means that the renderer stops generating reflected/transmitted rays when the computed intensity becomes less than a certain threshold. There must always be a set maximum depth or else the program would generate an infinite number of rays. But it is not always necessary to go to the maximum depth if the surfaces are not highly reflective. To test for this the ray tracer must compute and keep the product of the global and reflection coefficients as the rays are traced.\nExample: let Kr = 0.5 for a set of surfaces. Then from the first surface the maximum contribution is 0.5, for the reflection from the second: 0.5 \u00d7 0.5 = 0.25, the third: 0.25 \u00d7 0.5 = 0.125, the fourth: 0.125 \u00d7 0.5 = 0.0625, the fifth: 0.0625 \u00d7 0.5 = 0.03125, etc. In addition we might implement a distance attenuation factor such as 1/D2, which would also decrease the intensity contribution.\nFor a transmitted ray we could do something similar but in that case the distance traveled through the object would cause even faster intensity decrease. As an example of this, Hall &amp; Greenberg found that even for a very reflective scene, using this with a maximum depth of 15 resulted in an average ray tree depth of 1.7.\nBounding volumes.\nEnclosing groups of objects in sets of bounding volume hierarchies (BVH) decreases the amount of computations required for ray tracing. A cast ray is first tested for an intersection with the bounding volume, and then if there is an intersection, the volume is recursively divided until the ray hits the object. The best type of bounding volume will be determined by the shape of the underlying object or objects. For example, if the objects are long and thin, then a sphere will enclose mainly empty space compared to a box. Boxes are also easier to generate hierarchical bounding volumes.\nNote that using a hierarchical system like this (assuming it is done carefully) changes the intersection computational time from a linear dependence on the number of objects to something between linear and a logarithmic dependence. This is because, for a perfect case, each intersection test would divide the possibilities by two, and result in a binary tree type structure. Spatial subdivision methods, discussed below, try to achieve this. Furthermore, this acceleration structure makes the ray-tracing computation output-sensitive. I.e. the complexity of the ray intersection calculations depends on the number of objects that actually intersect the rays and not (only) on the number of objects in the scene.\nKay &amp; Kajiya give a list of desired properties for hierarchical bounding volumes:\nInteractive ray tracing.\nThe first implementation of an interactive ray tracer was the LINKS-1 Computer Graphics System built in 1982 at Osaka University's School of Engineering, by professors Ohmura Kouichi, Shirakawa Isao and Kawata Toru with 50 students. It was a massively parallel processing computer system with 514 microprocessors (257 Zilog Z8001s and 257 iAPX 86s), used for 3-D computer graphics with high-speed ray tracing. According to the Information Processing Society of Japan: \"The core of 3-D image rendering is calculating the luminance of each pixel making up a rendered surface from the given viewpoint, light source, and object position. The LINKS-1 system was developed to realize an image rendering methodology in which each pixel could be parallel processed independently using ray tracing. By developing a new software methodology specifically for high-speed image rendering, LINKS-1 was able to rapidly render highly realistic images.\" It was used to create an early 3-D planetarium-like video of the heavens made completely with computer graphics. The video was presented at the Fujitsu pavilion at the 1985 International Exposition in Tsukuba.\" It was the second system to do so after the Evans &amp; Sutherland Digistar in 1982. The LINKS-1 was claimed by the designers to be the world's most powerful computer in 1984.\nThe next interactive ray tracer, and the first known to have been labeled \"real-time\" was credited at the 2005 SIGGRAPH computer graphics conference as being the REMRT/RT tools developed in 1986 by Mike Muuss for the BRL-CAD solid modeling system. Initially published in 1987 at USENIX, the BRL-CAD ray tracer was an early implementation of a parallel network distributed ray tracing system that achieved several frames per second in rendering performance. This performance was attained by means of the highly optimized yet platform independent LIBRT ray tracing engine in BRL-CAD and by using solid implicit CSG geometry on several shared memory parallel machines over a commodity network. BRL-CAD's ray tracer, including the REMRT/RT tools, continue to be available and developed today as open source software.\nSince then, there have been considerable efforts and research towards implementing ray tracing at real-time speeds for a variety of purposes on stand-alone desktop configurations. These purposes include interactive 3-D graphics applications such as demoscene productions, computer and video games, and image rendering. Some real-time software 3-D engines based on ray tracing have been developed by hobbyist demo programmers since the late 1990s.\nIn 1999 a team from the University of Utah, led by Steven Parker, demonstrated interactive ray tracing live at the 1999 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics. They rendered a 35 million sphere model at 512 by 512 pixel resolution, running at approximately 15 frames per second on 60 CPUs.\nThe Open RT project included a highly optimized software core for ray tracing along with an OpenGL-like API in order to offer an alternative to the current rasterization based approach for interactive 3-D graphics. Ray tracing hardware, such as the experimental Ray Processing Unit developed by Sven Woop at the Saarland University, was designed to accelerate some of the computationally intensive operations of ray tracing.\nThe idea that video games could ray trace their graphics in real time received media attention in the late 2000s. During that time, a researcher named Daniel Pohl, under the guidance of graphics professor Philipp Slusallek and in cooperation with the Erlangen University and Saarland University in Germany, equipped \"Quake III\" and \"Quake IV\" with an engine he programmed himself, which Saarland University then demonstrated at CeBIT 2007. Intel, a patron of Saarland, became impressed enough that it hired Pohl and embarked on a research program dedicated to ray traced graphics, which it saw as justifying increasing the number of its processors' cores. On June 12, 2008, Intel demonstrated a special version of \"\", titled \"Quake Wars: Ray Traced\", using ray tracing for rendering, running in basic HD (720p) resolution. \"ETQW\" operated at 14\u201329 frames per second on a 16-core (4 socket, 4 core) Xeon Tigerton system running at 2.93\u00a0GHz.\nAt SIGGRAPH 2009, Nvidia announced OptiX, a free API for real-time ray tracing on Nvidia GPUs. The API exposes seven programmable entry points within the ray tracing pipeline, allowing for custom cameras, ray-primitive intersections, shaders, shadowing, etc. This flexibility enables bidirectional path tracing, Metropolis light transport, and many other rendering algorithms that cannot be implemented with tail recursion. OptiX-based renderers are used in Autodesk Arnold, Adobe AfterEffects, Bunkspeed Shot, Autodesk Maya, 3ds max, and many other renderers.\nIn 2014, a demo of the PlayStation 4 game \"The Tomorrow Children\", developed by Q-Games and Japan Studio, demonstrated new lighting techniques developed by Q-Games, notably cascaded voxel cone ray tracing, which simulates lighting in real-time and uses more realistic reflections rather than screen space reflections.\nNvidia introduced their GeForce RTX and Quadro RTX GPUs in September 2018, based on the Turing architecture that allows for hardware-accelerated ray tracing. The Nvidia hardware uses a separate functional block, publicly called an \"RT core\". This unit is somewhat comparable to a texture unit in size, latency, and interface to the processor core. The unit features BVH traversal, compressed BVH node decompression, ray-AABB intersection testing, and ray-triangle intersection testing. The GeForce RTX, in the form of models 2080 and 2080 Ti, became the first consumer-oriented brand of graphics card that can perform ray tracing in real time, and, in November 2018, Electronic Arts' \"Battlefield V\" became the first game to take advantage of its ray tracing capabilities, which it achieves via Microsoft's new API, DirectX Raytracing. AMD, which already offered interactive ray tracing on top of OpenCL through its Radeon ProRender, unveiled in October 2020 the Radeon RX 6000 series, its second generation Navi GPUs with support for hardware-accelerated ray tracing at an online event. Subsequent games that render their graphics by such means appeared since, which has been credited to the improvements in hardware and efforts to make more APIs and game engines compatible with the technology. Current home gaming consoles implement dedicated ray tracing hardware components in their GPUs for real-time ray tracing effects, which began with the ninth-generation consoles PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X and Series S.\nOn 4 November, 2021, Imagination Technologies announced their IMG CXT GPU with hardware-accelerated ray tracing. On January 18, 2022, Samsung announced their Exynos 2200 AP SoC with hardware-accelerated ray tracing. On June 28, 2022, Arm announced their Immortalis-G715 with hardware-accelerated ray tracing. On November 16, 2022, Qualcomm announced their Snapdragon 8 Gen 2 with hardware-accelerated ray tracing. \nOn September 12, 2023 Apple introduced hardware-accelerated ray tracing in its chip designs, beginning with the A17 Pro chip for iPhone 15 Pro models. Later the same year, Apple released M3 family of processors with HW enabled ray tracing support. Currently, this technology is accessible across iPhones, iPads, and Mac computers via the Metal API. Apple reports up to a 4x performance increase over previous software-based ray tracing on the phone and up to 2.5x faster comparing M3 to M1 chips. The hardware implementation includes acceleration structure traversal and dedicated ray-box intersections, and the API supports RayQuery (Inline Ray Tracing) as well as RayPipeline features.\nComputational complexity.\nVarious complexity results have been proven for certain formulations of the ray tracing problem. In particular, if the decision version of the ray tracing problem is defined as follows \u2013 given a light ray's initial position and direction and some fixed point, does the ray eventually reach that point, then the referenced paper proves the following results:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26001", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26001", "title": "Registers", "text": ""}
{"id": "26002", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26002", "title": "Ron Carter", "text": "American musician and composer (born 1937)\nRonald Levin Carter (born May 4, 1937) is an American jazz double bassist. His appearances on 2,221 recording sessions make him the most-recorded jazz bassist in history. He has won three Grammy Awards, and is also a cellist who has recorded numerous times on the instrument. In addition to a solo career of more than 60 years, Carter is well-known for playing on numerous iconic Blue Note albums in the 1960s, as well as being the anchor of trumpeter Miles Davis's \"Second Great Quintet\" from 1963-1968.\nBeginning with \"Where?\" in 1961, Carter's studio albums as leader also include \"Uptown Conversation\" (1969), \"Blues Farm\" (1973), \"All Blues\" (1973), \"Spanish Blue\" (1974), \"Anything Goes\" (1975), \"Yellow &amp; Green\" (1976), \"Pastels\" (1976), \"Piccolo\" (1977), \"Third Plane\" (1977), \"Peg Leg\" (1978), \"A Song for You\" (1978), \"Etudes\" (1982), \"The Golden Striker\" (2003), \"Dear Miles\" (2006), and \"Ron Carter's Great Big Band\" (2011).\nEarly life.\nCarter was born in Ferndale, Michigan. At the age of 10, he started playing the cello, switching to bass while at Cass Technical High School. He earned a B.A. in music from the Eastman School of Music (1959) and a master's degree in music from the Manhattan School of Music (1961). While at Eastman, Carter began the shift from classical to jazz when he, Pee Wee Ellis and other friends put together a house band to play at the Pythodd Room, a club on Clarissa Street in segregated Rochester, where he met players on the Chitlin Circuit who encouraged him to go to New York City.\nCarter's first jobs as a jazz musician were playing bass with Chico Hamilton in 1959, followed by freelance work with Jaki Byard, Cannonball Adderley, Randy Weston, Bobby Timmons, and Thelonious Monk. One of his first recorded appearances was on Hamilton alumnus Eric Dolphy's \"Out There\", recorded on August 15, 1960, and featuring George Duvivier on bass, Roy Haynes on drums, and Carter on cello. The album's advanced harmonies and concepts were in step with the third stream movement. In early October 1960, Carter recorded \"How Time Passes\" with Don Ellis, and on June 20, 1961, he recorded \"Where?\", his first album as a leader, featuring Dolphy on alto sax, flute, and bass clarinet; Mal Waldron on piano; Charlie Persip on drums; and Duvivier playing basslines on tracks where Carter played cello.\nCareer.\n1960s\u20131980s.\nCarter was a member of the second Miles Davis Quintet in the mid-1960s, which also included Herbie Hancock, Wayne Shorter, and drummer Tony Williams. Carter joined Davis's group in 1963, appearing on the album \"Seven Steps to Heaven\" and the follow-up \"E.S.P.\", the latter being the first album to feature only the full quintet. It also featured three of Carter's compositions (the only time he contributed compositions to Davis's group). He stayed with Davis until 1968 (when he was replaced by Dave Holland), and participated in a couple of studio sessions with Davis in 1969 and 1970. Although he played electric bass occasionally during this era of early jazz-rock fusion, he has subsequently stopped playing that instrument, and in the 2000s plays only double bass.\nCarter also performed on some of Hancock, Williams and Shorter's recordings during the 1960s for Blue Note. He was a sideman on many Blue Note recordings of the era, playing with Sam Rivers, Freddie Hubbard, Duke Pearson, Lee Morgan, McCoy Tyner, Andrew Hill, Horace Silver, and others. He also played on soul-pop star Roberta Flack's album \"First Take\" and Gil Scott Heron's \"Pieces of a Man\", including the iconic bass-line on \"The Revolution Will Not Be Televised\".\nAfter leaving Davis, Carter was for several years a mainstay of CTI Records, making albums under his own name and also appearing on many of the label's records with a diverse range of other musicians. Notable musical partnerships in the 1970s and 1980s included Joe Henderson, Houston Person, Hank Jones, Gabor Szabo and Cedar Walton. During the 1970s he was a member of the New York Jazz Quartet. In 1986, Carter played double bass on \"Big Man on Mulberry Street\" on Billy Joel's album \"The Bridge\". In 1987, Carter won a Grammy for \"an instrumental composition for the film\" \"Round Midnight\".\n1990s\u20132000s.\nIn 1994, he won his second Grammy Award for Best Jazz Instrumental Group for a tribute album to Miles Davis. He appeared on the alternative hip hop group A Tribe Called Quest's influential album \"The Low End Theory\" on a track called \"Verses from the Abstract\". Carter also recorded as a member of the jazz combo the Classical Jazz Quartet. In 1994, Carter appeared on the Red Hot Organization's compilation album, \"\". The album, meant to raise awareness and funds in support of the AIDS epidemic in relation to the African-American community, was heralded as \"Album of the Year\" by \"TIME\". In 2001, Carter collaborated with Black Star and John Patton to record \"Money Jungle\" for the Red Hot Organization's compilation album, \"Red Hot + Indigo\", a tribute to Duke Ellington.\nBeginning in the 1990s, Carter became a Distinguished Professor Emeritus of the music department of City College of New York, having taught there for 20 years, and received an honorary doctorate from the Berklee College of Music in spring 2005. He joined the faculty of the Juilliard School in New York City in 2008, teaching bass in the school's Jazz Studies program. Carter made an appearance in Robert Altman's 1996 film, \"Kansas City\", at the center of which is a jazz club called the Hey Hey Club. The film's end credits feature Carter and fellow bassist Christian McBride duetting on \"Solitude\" at the club, owned by a black gangster called Seldom Seen, who was played by a \"show-stealing\" Harry Belafonte. (In a 2023 tribute, Carter would reveal how it came about that Belafonte had been his landlord.)\nCarter sits on the advisory committee of the board of directors of The Jazz Foundation of America and on the Honorary Founder's Committee. Carter has worked with the Jazz Foundation since its inception to save the homes and the lives of America's elderly jazz and blues musicians including musicians that survived Hurricane Katrina.\nCarter appeared as himself in an episode of the HBO series \"Treme\" entitled \"What Is New Orleans\". His authorized biography, \"Ron Carter: Finding the Right Notes\" (), by Dan Ouellette, was published by ArtistShare in 2008.\n2010s and later.\nIn 2010, Carter was honored with France's premier cultural award, the medallion and title of Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres. Carter was elected to the \"DownBeat\" Jazz Hall of Fame in 2012.\nIn August 2021, Carter was the featured guest in a 47-minute video interview with YouTuber and musician Rick Beato. In November 2021, the Japanese government honored Carter with The Order of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Rosette. Japanese officials credited Carter with helping to popularize jazz in Japan and facilitating cultural exchange. In April 2022 Carter sat in with Bob Weir at Radio City Music Hall. In May 2022, Carter celebrated his birthday by releasing a Tiny Desk Concert recorded at the Blue Note Jazz Club featuring Russell Malone and Donald Vega.\nCarter continues to record as a sideman, most recently appearing on Daniele Cordisco's 2023 album \"Bitter Head.\" In August 2024 he was inducted into the Alabama Jazz Hall of Fame\nDocumentary films.\n\"Ron Carter: Finding the Right Notes\" is a documentary film about Carter's career, produced and directed by Peter Schnall. It was released in November of 2022 on PBS.\nPersonal life.\nCarter was married to Janet Hasbrouck Carter, a champion of African and African-American art; she died in 2000. He had two sons, Ron Carter Jr and Myles Carter who was a painter and graffiti artist. Myles\u2019 death, from a stroke, is discussed in \"Ron Carter: Finding the Right Notes\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26003", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26003", "title": "Radian", "text": "SI derived unit of angle\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe radian, denoted by the symbol rad, is the unit of angle in the International System of Units (SI) and is the standard unit of angular measure used in many areas of mathematics. It is defined such that one radian is the angle subtended at the center of a plane circle by an arc that is equal in length to the radius. The unit is defined in the SI as the coherent unit for plane angle, as well as for phase angle. Angles without explicitly specified units are generally assumed to be measured in radians, especially in mathematical writing.\nDefinition.\nOne radian is defined as the angle at the center of a circle in a plane that is subtended by an arc whose length equals the radius of the circle. More generally, the magnitude in radians of a subtended angle is equal to the ratio of the arc length to the radius of the circle; that is, \"\u03b8\" = \"s\"/\"r\", where \u03b8 is the magnitude in radians of the subtended angle, s is arc length, and r is radius. A right angle is exactly \u03c0/2 radians.\nOne complete revolution, expressed as an angle in radians, is the length of the circumference divided by the radius, which is , or 2\"\u03c0\". Thus, 2\"\u03c0\"\u00a0radians is equal to 360\u00a0degrees. The relation 2\"\u03c0\" rad = 360\u00b0 can be derived using the formula for arc length, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Since radian is the measure of an angle that is subtended by an arc of a length equal to the radius of the circle, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This can be further simplified to &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Multiplying both sides by 360\u00b0 gives 360\u00b0 \n 2\"\u03c0\" rad.\nUnit symbol.\nThe International Bureau of Weights and Measures and International Organization for Standardization specify rad as the symbol for the radian. Alternative symbols that were in use in 1909 are c (the superscript letter c, for \"circular measure\"), the letter r, or a superscript R, but these variants are infrequently used, as they may be mistaken for a degree symbol (\u00b0) or a radius (r). Hence an angle of 1.2 radians would be written today as 1.2\u00a0rad; archaic notations include 1.2\u00a0r, 1.2rad, 1.2c, or 1.2R.\nIn mathematical writing, the symbol \"rad\" is often omitted. When quantifying an angle in the absence of any symbol, radians are assumed, and when degrees are meant, the degree sign \u00b0 is used.\nDimensional analysis.\nPlane angle may be defined as \"\u03b8\" = \"s\"/\"r\", where \u03b8 is the magnitude in radians of the subtended angle, s is circular arc length, and r is radius. One radian corresponds to the angle for which \"s\" = \"r\", hence 1 radian = 1\u00a0m/m = 1. However, rad is only to be used to express angles, not to express ratios of lengths in general. A similar calculation using the area of a circular sector \"\u03b8\" = 2\"A\"/\"r\"2 gives 1 radian as 1\u00a0m2/m2 = 1. The key fact is that the radian is a dimensionless unit equal to 1. In SI 2019, the SI radian is defined accordingly as 1 rad = 1. It is a long-established practice in mathematics and across all areas of science to make use of rad = 1.\nGiacomo Prando writes \"the current state of affairs leads inevitably to ghostly appearances and disappearances of the radian in the dimensional analysis of physical equations\". For example, an object hanging by a string from a pulley will rise or drop by \"y\" = \"r\u03b8\" centimetres, where r is the magnitude of the radius of the pulley in centimetres and \u03b8 is the magnitude of the angle through which the pulley turns in radians. When multiplying r by \u03b8, the unit radian does not appear in the product, nor does the unit centimetre\u2014because both factors are magnitudes (numbers). Similarly in the formula for the angular velocity of a rolling wheel, \"\u03c9\" = \"v\"/\"r\", radians appear in the units of \u03c9 but not on the right hand side. Anthony French calls this phenomenon \"a perennial problem in the teaching of mechanics\". Oberhofer says that the typical advice of ignoring radians during dimensional analysis and adding or removing radians in units according to convention and contextual knowledge is \"pedagogically unsatisfying\".\nIn 1993 the American Association of Physics Teachers Metric Committee specified that the radian should explicitly appear in quantities only when different numerical values would be obtained when other angle measures were used, such as in the quantities of angle measure (rad), angular speed (rad/s), angular acceleration (rad/s2), and torsional stiffness (N\u22c5m/rad), and not in the quantities of torque (N\u22c5m) and angular momentum (kg\u22c5m2/s).\nAt least a dozen scientists between 1936 and 2022 have made proposals to treat the radian as a base unit of measurement for a base quantity (and dimension) of \"plane angle\". Quincey's review of proposals outlines two classes of proposal. The first option changes the unit of a radius to meters per radian, but this is incompatible with dimensional analysis for the area of a circle, \u03c0\"r\"2. The other option is to introduce a dimensional constant. According to Quincey this approach is \"logically rigorous\" compared to SI, but requires \"the modification of many familiar mathematical and physical equations\". A dimensional constant for angle is \"rather strange\" and the difficulty of modifying equations to add the dimensional constant is likely to preclude widespread use.\nIn particular, Quincey identifies Torrens' proposal to introduce a constant \u03b7 equal to 1 inverse radian (1\u00a0rad\u22121) in a fashion similar to the introduction of the constant \"\u03b5\"0. With this change the formula for the angle subtended at the center of a circle, \"s\" = \"r\u03b8\", is modified to become \"s\" = \"\u03b7r\u03b8\", and the Taylor series for the sine of an angle \u03b8 becomes:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the angle in radians.\nThe capitalized function Sin is the \"complete\" function that takes an argument with a dimension of angle and is independent of the units expressed, while sin is the traditional function on pure numbers which assumes its argument is a dimensionless number in radians. The capitalised symbol formula_3 can be denoted formula_4 if it is clear that the complete form is meant.\nCurrent SI can be considered relative to this framework as a natural unit system where the equation \"\u03b7\" = 1 is assumed to hold, or similarly, 1 rad = 1. This \"radian convention\" allows the omission of \u03b7 in mathematical formulas.\nDefining radian as a base unit may be useful for software, where the disadvantage of longer equations is minimal. For example, the Boost units library defines angle units with a codice_1 dimension, and Mathematica's unit system similarly considers angles to have an angle dimension.\nConversions.\nBetween degrees.\nAs stated, one radian is equal to &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Thus, to convert from radians to degrees, multiply by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\n formula_5\nFor example:\n formula_6\n formula_7\n formula_8\nConversely, to convert from degrees to radians, multiply by formula_9.\n formula_10\nFor example:\n formula_11\n formula_12\nRadians can be converted to turns (one turn is the angle corresponding to a revolution) by dividing the number of radians by 2\u03c0.\nBetween gradians.\nOne revolution corresponds to an angle of formula_13 radians, which equals one turn, and to 400 gradians (400\u00a0gons or 400g). To convert from radians to gradians multiply by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and to convert from gradians to radians multiply by formula_14. For example,\n formula_15\n formula_16\nUsage.\nMathematics.\nIn calculus and most other branches of mathematics beyond practical geometry, angles are measured in radians. This is because radians have a mathematical naturalness that leads to a more elegant formulation of some important results.\nResults in analysis involving trigonometric functions can be elegantly stated when the functions' arguments are expressed in radians. For example, the use of radians leads to the simple limit formula\n formula_17\nwhich is the basis of many other identities in mathematics, including\n formula_18\n formula_19\nBecause of these and other properties, the trigonometric functions appear in solutions to mathematical problems that are not obviously related to the functions' geometrical meanings (for example, the solutions to the differential equation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the evaluation of the integral &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and so on). In all such cases, it is appropriate that the arguments of the functions are treated as (dimensionless) numbers\u2014without any reference to angles.\nThe trigonometric functions of angles also have simple and elegant series expansions when radians are used. For example, when \"x\" is the angle expressed in radians, the Taylor series for sin\u00a0\"x\" becomes:\n formula_20\nIf \"y\" were the angle \"x\" but expressed in degrees, i.e. \"y\" = \u03c0\"x\" / 180, then the series would contain messy factors involving powers of \u03c0/180:\n formula_21\nIn a similar spirit, if angles are involved, mathematically important relationships between the sine and cosine functions and the exponential function (see, for example, Euler's formula) can be elegantly stated when the functions' arguments are angles expressed in radians (and messy otherwise). More generally, in complex-number theory, the arguments of these functions are (dimensionless, possibly complex) numbers\u2014without any reference to physical angles at all.\nPhysics.\nThe radian is widely used in physics when angular measurements are required. For example, angular velocity is typically expressed in the unit radian per second (rad/s). One revolution per second corresponds to 2\u03c0 radians per second.\nSimilarly, the unit used for angular acceleration is often radian per second per second (rad/s2).\nFor the purpose of dimensional analysis, the units of angular velocity and angular acceleration are s\u22121 and s\u22122 respectively.\nLikewise, the phase angle difference of two waves can also be expressed using the radian as the unit. For example, if the phase angle difference of two waves is (\"n\" \u00d7 2\u03c0) radians, where \"n\" is an integer, they are considered to be in phase, whilst if the phase angle difference of two waves is (\"n\" \u00d7 2\u03c0 + \u03c0) radians, with \"n\" an integer, they are considered to be in antiphase.\nA unit of reciprocal radian or inverse radian (rad\u22121) is involved in derived units such as meter per radian (for angular wavelength) or newton-metre per radian (for torsional stiffness).\nPrefixes and variants.\nMetric prefixes for submultiples are used with radians. A milliradian (mrad) is a thousandth of a radian (0.001\u00a0rad), i.e. 1 rad = 103 mrad. There are 2\u03c0 \u00d7 1000 milliradians (\u2248 6283.185\u00a0mrad) in a circle. So a milliradian is just under of the angle subtended by a full circle. This unit of angular measurement of a circle is in common use by telescopic sight manufacturers using (stadiametric) rangefinding in reticles. The divergence of laser beams is also usually measured in milliradians.\nThe angular mil is an approximation of the milliradian used by NATO and other military organizations in gunnery and targeting. Each angular mil represents of a circle and is % or 1.875% smaller than the milliradian. For the small angles typically found in targeting work, the convenience of using the number 6400 in calculation outweighs the small mathematical errors it introduces. In the past, other gunnery systems have used different approximations to ; for example Sweden used the \"streck\" and the USSR used . Being based on the milliradian, the NATO mil subtends roughly 1\u00a0m at a range of 1000\u00a0m (at such small angles, the curvature is negligible).\nPrefixes smaller than milli- are useful in measuring extremely small angles. Microradians (\u03bcrad, ) and nanoradians (nrad, ) are used in astronomy, and can also be used to measure the beam quality of lasers with ultra-low divergence. More common is the arc second, which is \u00a0rad (around 4.8481\u00a0microradians).\nHistory.\nPre-20th century.\nThe idea of measuring angles by the length of the arc was in use by mathematicians quite early. For example, al-Kashi (c. 1400) used so-called \"diameter parts\" as units, where one diameter part was radian. They also used sexagesimal subunits of the diameter part. Newton in 1672 spoke of \"the angular quantity of a body's circular motion\", but used it only as a relative measure to develop an astronomical algorithm.\nThe concept of \"the\" radian measure is normally credited to Roger Cotes, who died in 1716. By 1722, his cousin Robert Smith had collected and published Cotes' mathematical writings in a book, \"Harmonia mensurarum\". In a chapter of editorial comments, Smith gave what is probably the first published calculation of one radian in degrees, citing a note of Cotes that has not survived. Smith described the radian in everything but name \u2013 \"Now this number is equal to 180 degrees as the radius of a circle to the semicircumference, this is as 1 to 3.141592653589\" \u2013, and recognized its naturalness as a unit of angular measure.\nIn 1765, Leonhard Euler implicitly adopted the radian as a unit of angle. Specifically, Euler defined angular velocity as \"The angular speed in rotational motion is the speed of that point, the distance of which from the axis of gyration is expressed by one.\" Euler was probably the first to adopt this convention, referred to as the radian convention, which gives the simple formula for angular velocity \"\u03c9\" = \"v\"/\"r\". As discussed in \"\", the radian convention has been widely adopted, while dimensionally consistent formulations require the insertion of a dimensional constant, for example \"\u03c9\" = \"v\"/(\"\u03b7r\").\nPrior to the term \"radian\" becoming widespread, the unit was commonly called \"circular measure\" of an angle. The term \"radian\" first appeared in print on 5 June 1873, in examination questions set by James Thomson (brother of Lord Kelvin) at Queen's College, Belfast. He had used the term as early as 1871, while in 1869, Thomas Muir, then of the University of St Andrews, vacillated between the terms \"rad\", \"radial\", and \"radian\". In 1874, after a consultation with James Thomson, Muir adopted \"radian\". The name \"radian\" was not universally adopted for some time after this. \"Longmans' School Trigonometry\" still called the radian \"circular measure\" when published in 1890.\nIn 1893 Alexander Macfarlane wrote \"the true analytical argument for the circular ratios is not the ratio of the arc to the radius, but the ratio of twice the area of a sector to the square on the radius.\" However, the paper was withdrawn from the published proceedings of mathematical congress held in connection with World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago (acknowledged at page 167), and privately published in his \"Papers on Space Analysis\" (1894). Macfarlane reached this idea or ratios of areas while considering the basis for hyperbolic angle which is analogously defined.\nAs an SI unit.\nAs Paul Quincey et al. write, \"The status of angles within the International System of Units (SI) has long been a source of controversy and confusion.\" In 1960, the General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) established the SI and the radian was classified as a \"supplementary unit\" along with the steradian. This special class was officially regarded \"either as base units or as derived units\", as the CGPM could not reach a decision on whether the radian was a base unit or a derived unit. Richard Nelson writes \"This ambiguity [in the classification of the supplemental units] prompted a spirited discussion over their proper interpretation.\" In May 1980 the Consultative Committee for Units (CCU) considered a proposal for making radians an SI base unit, using a constant \"\u03b1\"0 = 1 rad, but turned it down to avoid an upheaval to current practice.\nIn October 1980 the CGPM decided that supplementary units were dimensionless derived units for which the CGPM allowed the freedom of using them or not using them in expressions for SI derived units, on the basis that \"[no formalism] exists which is at the same time coherent and convenient and in which the quantities plane angle and solid angle might be considered as base quantities\" and that \"[the possibility of treating the radian and steradian as SI base units] compromises the internal coherence of the SI based on only seven base units\". In 1995 the CGPM eliminated the class of supplementary units and defined the radian and the steradian as \"dimensionless derived units, the names and symbols of which may, but need not, be used in expressions for other SI derived units, as is convenient\". Mikhail Kalinin writing in 2019 has criticized the 1980 CGPM decision as \"unfounded\" and says that the 1995 CGPM decision used inconsistent arguments and introduced \"numerous discrepancies, inconsistencies, and contradictions in the wordings of the SI\".\nAt the 2013 meeting of the CCU, Peter Mohr gave a presentation on alleged inconsistencies arising from defining the radian as a dimensionless unit rather than a base unit. CCU President Ian M. Mills declared this to be a \"formidable problem\" and the \"CCU Working Group on Angles and Dimensionless Quantities in the SI\" was established. The CCU met in 2021, but did not reach a consensus. A small number of members argued strongly that the radian should be a base unit, but the majority felt the status quo was acceptable or that the change would cause more problems than it would solve. A task group was established to \"review the historical use of SI supplementary units and consider whether reintroduction would be of benefit\", among other activities.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26004", "revid": "5290085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26004", "title": "Redshift (disambiguation)", "text": "Redshift is a phenomenon in physics, especially astrophysics.\nRedshift or red shift may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScience and technology.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26005", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26005", "title": "Rutherford B. Hayes/Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "26006", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26006", "title": "Rom", "text": "Rom, or ROM may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26007", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26007", "title": "Mass racial violence in the United States", "text": "In the broader context of racism in the United States, mass racial violence in the United States consists of ethnic conflicts and race riots, along with such events as:\n- White-on-Black racial disturbances which occurred during demonstrations and protests, such as at the Marquette Park Illinois march of August 1966 and during the 1969 Greensboro uprising in North Carolina;\n- African American ghetto riots (1964\u20131969), including riots during the long, hot summer of 1967 and the King assassination riots of 1968, which caused deaths and injuries, looting, and long-lasting damage in African American communities.\nHistory.\nRacial and ethnic cleansing.\nRacial and ethnic cleansing was committed on a large scale after the end of the American revolution during the early period of time in the history of the United States, particularly against American Indians, who were forced off their lands and relocated to reservations. Along with them, Chinese Americans in the Pacific Northwest and African Americans throughout the United States (particularly in the American south) were rounded up and expunged from towns under threat of mob rule, the white mobs frequently intended to harm their African American targets.\nGenocide of California's Indigenous peoples.\nFollowing California's transition to statehood, the California state government, incited, aided and financed miners, settlers, ranchers and people's militias to enslave, kidnap, or murder a major proportion of California's Indigenous people, who were sometimes contemptuously referred to as \"Diggers\", for their practice of digging up roots to eat. California governor Peter Hardeman Burnett predicted in 1851: \"That a war of extermination will continue to be waged between the two races until the Indian race becomes extinct, must be expected. While we cannot anticipate the result with but painful regret, the inevitable destiny of the race is beyond the power and wisdom of man to avert.\"\nCalifornia state forces, private militias, Federal reservations, and sections of the US Army all participated in the campaign that caused the deaths of many California Indians with the state and federal governments paying millions of dollars to militias to murder Indians, while many starved on Federal Reservations because of their caloric distribution reducing from 480\u2013910 to 160\u2013390 and between 1,680 and 3,741 California Indians were killed by the U.S. Army themselves. Between 1850 and 1852 the state appropriated almost one million dollars for the activities of militias, and between 1854 and 1859 the state appropriated another $500,000, almost half of which was reimbursed by the federal government. Guenter Lewy, famous for the phrase \"In the end, the sad fate of America's Indians represents not a crime but a tragedy, involving an irreconcilable collision of cultures and values\" wrote that what happened in California may constitute genocide: \"some of the massacres in California, where both the perpetrators and their supporters openly acknowledged a desire to destroy the Indians as an ethnic entity, might indeed be regarded under the terms of the convention as exhibiting genocidal intent.\"\nBy one estimate, at least 4,500 California Indians were killed between 1849 and 1870. Contemporary historian Benjamin Madley has documented the numbers of California Indians killed between 1846 and 1873; he estimates that during this period at least 9,400 to 16,000 California Indians were killed by non-Indians. Most of the deaths took place in what he defined as more than 370 massacres (defined as the \"intentional killing of five or more disarmed combatants or largely unarmed noncombatants, including women, children, and prisoners, whether in the context of a battle or otherwise\"). Professor Ed Castillo, of Sonoma State University, estimates that more were killed: \"The handiwork of these well armed death squads combined with the widespread random killing of Indians by individual miners resulted in the death of 100,000 Indians in the first two years of the gold rush.\"\nNumerous books have been written on the subject of the California Indian genocide, such as \"Genocide and Vendetta: The Round Valley Wars in Northern California\" by Lynwood Carranco and Estle Beard, \"Murder State: California's Native American Genocide, 1846\u20131873\" by Brendan C. Lindsay, and \"An American Genocide: The United States and the California Indian Catastrophe, 1846\u20131873\" by Benjamin Madley among others. Madley's book caused California governor Jerry Brown to recognize the genocide. In a speech before representatives of Native American peoples in June, 2019, California governor Gavin Newsom apologized for the genocide. Newsom said, \"That's what it was, a genocide. No other way to describe it. And that's the way it needs to be described in the history books.\"\nAnti-immigrant violence.\nRiots which are defined by \"race\" have taken place between ethnic groups in the United States since at least the 18th century and they may have also occurred before it. During the early-to-mid- 19th centuries, violent rioting occurred between Protestant \"Nativists\" and recently arrived Irish Catholic immigrants.\nThe San Francisco Vigilance Movements of 1851 and 1856 have been described as responses to rampant crime and government corruption. But, since the late 19th century, historians have noted that the vigilantes had a nativist bias; they systematically attacked Irish immigrants, and later, they attacked Mexicans and Chileans who came as miners during the California Gold Rush, as well as Chinese immigrants. During the early 20th century, whites committed acts of racial or ethnic violence against Filipinos, Japanese, and Armenians, all of whom had arrived in California during waves of immigration.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Italian immigrants were subjected to racial violence. In 1891, eleven Italians were lynched by a mob of thousands in New Orleans. In the 1890s, a total of twenty Italians were lynched in the South.\nReconstruction era (1863\u20131877).\nAs the American Civil War ended, antislavery political forces demanded rights for ex-slaves. This led to the passage of the 14th and 15th amendments, which theoretically granted African-American and other minority males equality and voting rights. Although the federal government originally stationed troops in the South in order to protect these new freedoms, this time of progress was cut short.\nBy 1877, the North had lost its political will in the South and while slavery was gone, Jim Crow laws erased most of the freedoms which were guaranteed by the 14th and 15th amendments. Through violent economic tactics and legal technicalities, were gradually removed from the voting process.\nLynching era and race riots (1878\u20131939).\nLynching is defined as \"a form of violence in which a mob, under the pretext of administering justice without a trial, executes a presumed offender, often after inflicting torture and corporal mutilation on him or her.\" It was a particularly ritualistic form of murder, and it frequently involved the majority of the members of the local White community. Lynchings were sometimes announced in advance and they were frequently turned into spectacle lynchings which audiences could witness. The number of lynchings in the United States dropped from the 1880s to the 1920s, but there were still an average of about 30 lynchings per year during the 1920s. A study of 100 lynchings which was conducted from 1929 to 1940 revealed that at least one third of the victims were innocent of the crimes of which they were accused.\nLabor and immigrant conflicts were sources of tensions that served as catalysts for the East St. Louis riot of 1917. White rioters killed an between 39 and 150 Black residents of East St. Louis, after Black residents had killed two White policemen, mistaking the car which they were riding in for another car which was full of White occupants who previously drove through a Black neighborhood and randomly fired their guns into a crowd of Black people. Other White-on-Black race riots included the Atlanta riots (1906), the Omaha and Chicago riots (1919), some of a series of riots which occurred in the volatile post-World War I environment, and the Tulsa massacre (1921).\nThe Chicago race riot of 1919 grew out of tensions which existed on the Southside, where Irish Americans and Black residents were crowded into substandard housing and competed with each other for jobs at the stockyards. The Irish Americans had lived in the city for a longer period of time, and they also organized themselves around athletic and political clubs. Violence broke out across the city in late July. White mobs, many of which were organized around Irish athletic clubs, pulled Black people off trolley cars, attacked Black businesses, and beat victims. City officials closed the street car system, but the rioting continued. A total of 23 Black people and 15 White people were killed.\nThe 1921 Tulsa race massacre took place in Greenwood, which was a prosperous Black neighborhood in Tulsa, Oklahoma, home to around 10,000 Black residents and frequently called America's Black Wall Street. The race riot was precipitated by 19-year-old Dick Rowland, a shoeshine accused of attacking 17-year-old White elevator operator Sarah Page at a department store, being arrested on May 31, 1921. On June 1, a confrontation between Black and White groups outside the courthouse led to a shootout which killed 10 Whites and 2 Blacks. The Black group then retreated back to the Greenwood District. Subsequently, a White mob attacked Black businesses, homes, and residents in the Greenwood District. The attack left over 35 city blocks burned, over 800 people injured, and between 100 and 300 people were killed. Over 6,000 Black residents were also arrested by the Oklahoma National Guard, and taken to several internment centers.\nCivil rights era (1940\u20131971).\nThough the Roosevelt administration, under tremendous pressure, produced anti-racist propaganda and helped push for African American employment in some cases, African Americans were still experiencing immense violence, particularly in the South. In March 1956, United States Senator Sam Ervin of North Carolina created the Southern Manifesto, which promised to fight to keep Jim Crow alive by all legal means.\nThis continuation of support for Jim Crow and segregation laws led to protests in which many African-Americans were violently injured out in the open at lunchroom counters, buses, polling places and local public areas. These protests did not eviscerate racism, but they prevented racism from being expressed out in the open and forced it to be expressed in more coded or metaphorical linguistic terms.\nBy the 1960s, decades of racial, economic, and political forces, which generated inner city poverty, resulted in race riots within minority areas in cities across the United States. The beating and rumored death of cab driver John Smith by police, sparked the 1967 Newark riots. This event became, per capita, one of the deadliest civil disturbances of the 1960s. The long and short term causes of the Newark riots are explored in depth in the documentary film \"Revolution '67\" and many news reports of the times. The riots in Newark spread across the United States in most major cities and over 100 deaths were reported. Many inner city neighborhoods in these cities were destroyed. The April 1968 assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. in Memphis, Tennessee and the June assassination of Robert F. Kennedy in Los Angeles also led to nationwide rioting with similar mass deaths. During the same time period, and since then, numerous violent acts committed against African-American churches have been reported.\nModern era (1972\u2013present).\nToday racial violence has changed dramatically, because openly violent acts of racism are less prevalent, but acts of police brutality and the mass incarceration of racial minorities are continuing to be major issues within the United States. The war on drugs has been noted as a direct cause of the dramatic increase in the number of incarcerations in the nation's prison system, which has risen from 300,000 in 1980 to more than 2,000,000 in 2000, though it does not account for the disproportionately high African American homicide and crime rates, which peaked before the war on drugs began.\nDuring the 1980s and '90s a number of riots occurred that were related to longstanding racial tensions between police and minority communities. The 1980 Miami riots were catalyzed by the killing of an African-American motorist by four white Miami-Dade Police officers. They were subsequently acquitted on charges of manslaughter and evidence tampering. Similarly, the six-day 1992 Los Angeles riots erupted after the acquittal of four white LAPD officers who had been filmed beating Rodney King, an African-American motorist. Khalil Gibran Muhammad, the Director of the Harlem-based Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture has identified more than 100 instances of mass racial violence in the United States since 1935 and has noted that almost every instance was precipitated by a police incident.\nThe Cincinnati riots of 2001 were caused by the killing of 19-year-old African-American Timothy Thomas by white police officer Stephen Roach, who was subsequently acquitted on charges of negligent homicide. The 2014 Ferguson unrest occurred against a backdrop of racial tension between police and the Black community of Ferguson, Missouri in the wake of the police shooting of Michael Brown; similar incidents elsewhere such as the killing of Trayvon Martin sparked smaller and isolated protests. According to the Associated Press' annual poll of United States news directors and editors, the top news story of 2014 was police killings of unarmed Black people, including Brown, as well as the investigations and the protests afterward. During the 2017 Unite the Right rally, an attendee drove his car into a crowd of people protesting the rally, killing 32-year-old Heather D. Heyer and injuring 19 others, and was indicted on federal hate crime charges.\nIn 2020, the police killing of Breonna Taylor and the murders of Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd sparked riots in America racial unrest over systemic racism and police brutality against African Americans. Riots during the summer resulted in destruction of property, mass looting, monument removals, and incidences of violence by counter-protesters and police across the United States. The Trump administration condemned violence during the movement and responded by threatening to quell demonstrations, for which it drew criticism. In June, president Donald Trump threatened to use the military to disperse protesters by invoking the Insurrection Act of 1807. Federal law enforcement agencies were eventually deployed to assist local authorities and protect public property in Washington, D.C.\nBetween May 31st and June 1st, a young white woman accused an African American man of grabbing her arm in an elevator. The man, Dick Rowland, was arrested and police launched an investigation. A mob of armed white men gathered outside the Tulsa County Courthouse, where gunfire ensued. During the violence, 1,250 homes were destroyed and roughly 6,000 African-Americans were imprisoned after the Oklahoma National Guard was called in. The state of Oklahoma reports that twenty-six African-Americans died along with 10 whites.\nA wave of civil unrest, violence, and vandalism by local White mobs against Blacks, as well Greek, Jewish, Chinese and Puerto Rican targets in the community.\nIn late June a fistfight broke out between an African American man and a white man at an amusement park on Belle Isle. The fistfight spread and escalated into three days of intense fighting, which ended when 6,000 United States Army troops were brought in to impose a curfew. The riot resulted in the deaths of twenty-five African-Americans and nine whites, and seven hundred being injured.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26010", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26010", "title": "Robert Johnson", "text": "American blues musician and songwriter (1911\u20131938)\nRobert Leroy Johnson (May 8, 1911\u00a0\u2013 August 16, 1938) was an American blues musician and songwriter. His singing, guitar playing and songwriting on his landmark 1936 and 1937 recordings have influenced later generations of musicians. Although his recording career spanned only seven months, he is recognized as a master of the blues, particularly the Delta blues style, and as one of the most influential musicians of the 20th century. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame describes him as perhaps \"the first ever rock star\".\nAs a traveling performer who played mostly on street corners, in juke joints, and at Saturday night dances, Johnson had little commercial success or public recognition in his lifetime. He had only two recording sessions both produced by Don Law, one in San Antonio in 1936, and one in Dallas in 1937, that produced 29 distinct songs (with 13 surviving alternate takes). These songs, recorded solo in improvised studios, were the sum of his recorded output. Most were released as 10-inch, 78 rpm singles from 1937\u20131938, with a few released after his death. Other than these recordings, very little was known of his life outside of the small musical circuit in the Mississippi Delta where he spent most of his time. Much of his story has been reconstructed by researchers. Johnson's poorly documented life and death have given rise to legends. The one most often associated with him is that he sold his soul to the devil at a local crossroads in return for musical success.\nHis music had a small, but influential, following during his life and in the decades after his death. In late 1938, John Hammond sought him out for a concert at Carnegie Hall, \"From Spirituals to Swing\", only to discover that Johnson had recently died. Hammond was a producer for Columbia Records which bought Johnson's original recordings from Brunswick Records which owned them. The musicologist Alan Lomax went to Mississippi in 1941 to record Johnson, also not knowing of his death. In 1961, Columbia released an album of Johnson's recordings titled \"King of the Delta Blues Singers\", produced by legendary producer and music historian Frank Driggs. It is credited with finally bringing Johnson's work to a wider audience. The album would become influential, especially in the nascent British blues movement; Eric Clapton called Johnson \"the most important blues singer that ever lived\". Bob Dylan, Keith Richards, and Robert Plant have cited both Johnson's lyrics and musicianship as key influences on their own work. Many of Johnson's songs have been covered over the years, becoming hits for other artists, and his guitar licks and lyrics have been borrowed by many later musicians.\nRenewed interest in Johnson's work and life led to a burst of scholarship starting in the 1960s. Much of what is known about him was reconstructed by researchers such as Gayle Dean Wardlow and Bruce Conforth, especially in their 2019 award-winning biography of Johnson: \"Up Jumped the Devil: The Real Life of Robert Johnson\" (Chicago Review Press). Two films, the 1991 documentary \"The Search for Robert Johnson\" by John Hammond Jr., and a 1997 documentary, \"Can't You Hear the Wind Howl?: The Life &amp; Music of Robert Johnson\", which included reconstructed scenes with Keb' Mo' as Johnson, attempted to document his life, and demonstrated the difficulties arising from the scant historical record and conflicting oral accounts. Over the years, the significance of Johnson and his music has been recognized by the Rock and Roll, Grammy, and Blues Halls of Fame, and by the National Recording Preservation Board.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nRobert Leroy Johnson was born in Hazlehurst, Mississippi, possibly on May 8, 1911, to Julia Major Dodds (born October 1874) and Noah Johnson (born December 1884). Julia was married to Charles Dodds (born February 1865), a relatively prosperous landowner and furniture maker, with whom she had ten children. Charles Dodds had been forced by a lynch mob to leave Hazlehurst following a dispute with white landowners. Julia left Hazlehurst with baby Robert, but in less than two years she took the boy to Memphis to live with her husband, who had changed his name to Charles Spencer. Robert spent the next 8\u20139 years growing up in Memphis and attending the Carnes Avenue Colored School where he received lessons in arithmetic, reading, language, music, geography, and physical exercise. It was in Memphis that he acquired his love for, and knowledge of, the blues and popular music. His education and city upbringing placed him apart from most of his contemporary blues musicians.\nRobert rejoined his mother around 1919\u20131920 after she married an illiterate sharecropper named Will \"Dusty\" Willis. They originally settled on a plantation in Lucas Township in Crittenden County, Arkansas, but soon moved across the Mississippi River to Commerce in the Mississippi Delta, near Tunica and Robinsonville. They lived on the Abbay &amp; Leatherman Plantation. Julia's new husband was 24 years her junior. Robert was remembered by some residents as \"Little Robert Dusty\", but he was registered at Tunica's Indian Creek School as Robert Spencer. In the 1920 census, he is listed as Robert Spencer, living in Lucas, Arkansas, with Will and Julia Willis. Robert was at school in 1924 and 1927. The quality of his signature on his marriage certificate suggests that he was relatively well educated for a man of his background. A school friend, Willie Coffee, who was interviewed and filmed in later life, recalled that as a youth Robert was already noted for playing the harmonica and jaw harp. Coffee recalled that Robert was absent for long periods, which suggests that he may have been living and studying in Memphis.\nOnce Julia informed Robert about his biological father, Robert adopted the surname Johnson, using it on the certificate of his marriage to fourteen-year-old Virginia Travis in February 1929. She died in childbirth shortly after. Surviving relatives of Virginia told the blues researcher Robert \"Mack\" McCormick that this was a divine punishment for Robert's decision to sing secular songs, known as \"selling your soul to the Devil\". McCormick believed that Johnson himself accepted the phrase as a description of his resolve to abandon the settled life of a husband and farmer to become a full-time blues musician.\nAround this time, the blues musician Son House moved to Robinsonville, where his musical partner Willie Brown lived. Late in life, House remembered Johnson as a little boy who was a competent harmonica player but an embarrassingly bad guitarist. Soon after, Johnson left Robinsonville for the area around Martinsville, close to his birthplace, possibly searching for his natural father. Here he mastered the guitar style of House and learned other styles from Isaiah \"Ike\" Zimmerman. Zimmerman was rumored to have learned supernaturally to play guitar by visiting graveyards at midnight.\nWhen Johnson next appeared in Robinsonville, he seemed to have miraculously developed a mature guitar technique. House was interviewed at a time when the legend of Johnson's pact with the devil was well known among blues researchers. He was asked whether he attributed Johnson's technique to this pact, and his equivocal answers have been taken as confirmation.\nWhile living in Martinsville, Johnson fathered a child with Vergie Mae Smith. He married Caletta Craft in May 1931. In 1932, the couple settled for a while in Clarksdale, Mississippi, in the Delta, but Johnson soon left for a career as a \"walking\" or itinerant musician, and Caletta died in early 1933.\nItinerant musician.\nFrom 1932 until his death in 1938, Johnson moved frequently between the cities of Memphis and Helena, and the smaller towns of the Mississippi Delta and neighboring regions of Mississippi and Arkansas. On occasion, he traveled much further. The blues musician Johnny Shines accompanied him to Chicago, Texas, New York, Canada, Kentucky, and Indiana. Henry Townsend worked with him in St. Louis. In many places he stayed with members of his large extended family or with female friends. He did not marry again but formed some long-term relationships with women to whom he would return periodically. In other places he stayed with whatever woman he was able to seduce at his performance. In each location, Johnson's hosts were largely ignorant of his life elsewhere. He used different names in different places, employing at least eight distinct surnames.\nBiographers have looked for consistency from musicians who knew Johnson in different contexts: Shines, who traveled extensively with him; Robert Lockwood Jr., who knew him as his mother's partner; David \"Honeyboy\" Edwards, whose cousin Willie Mae Powell had a relationship with Johnson. From a mass of partial, conflicting, and inconsistent eyewitness accounts, biographers have attempted to summarize Johnson's character. \"He was well mannered, he was soft spoken, he was indecipherable\". \"As for his character, everyone seems to agree that, while he was pleasant and outgoing in public, in private he was reserved and liked to go his own way\". \"Musicians who knew Johnson testified that he was a nice guy and fairly average\u2014except, of course, for his musical talent, his weakness for whiskey and women, and his commitment to the road\".\nWhen Johnson arrived in a new town, he would play for tips on street corners or in front of the local barbershop or a restaurant. Musical associates have said that in live performances Johnson often did not focus on his dark and complex original compositions, but instead pleased audiences by performing more well-known pop standards of the day\u00a0\u2013 and not necessarily blues. With an ability to pick up tunes at first hearing, he had no trouble giving his audiences what they wanted, and certain of his contemporaries later remarked on his interest in jazz and country music. He also had an uncanny ability to establish a rapport with his audience; in every town in which he stopped, he would establish ties to the local community that would serve him well when he passed through again a month or a year later.\nShines was 20 when he met Johnson in 1936. He estimated Johnson was maybe a year older than himself (Johnson was actually four years older). Shines is quoted describing Johnson in Samuel Charters's \"Robert Johnson\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Robert was a very friendly person, even though he was sulky at times, you know. And I hung around Robert for quite a while. One evening he disappeared. He was kind of a peculiar fellow. Robert'd be standing up playing some place, playing like nobody's business. At about that time it was a hustle with him as well as a pleasure. And money'd be coming from all directions. But Robert'd just pick up and walk off and leave you standing there playing. And you wouldn't see Robert no more maybe in two or three weeks... So Robert and I, we began journeying off. I was just, matter of fact, tagging along.\nDuring this time Johnson established what would be a relatively long-term relationship with Estella Coleman, a woman about 15 years his senior and the mother of the blues musician Robert Lockwood Jr. Johnson reportedly cultivated a woman to look after him in each town he played in. He reputedly asked homely young women living in the country with their families whether he could go home with them, and in most cases, he was accepted, until a boyfriend arrived or Johnson was ready to move on.\nIn 1941, Alan Lomax learned from Muddy Waters that Johnson had performed in the area around Clarksdale, Mississippi. By 1959, the historian Samuel Charters could add only that Will Shade, of the Memphis Jug Band, remembered Johnson had once briefly played with him in West Memphis, Arkansas. In the last year of his life, Johnson is believed to have traveled to St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, and New York City. In 1938, Columbia Records producer John H. Hammond, who owned some of Johnson's records, directed record producer Don Law to seek out Johnson to book him for the first \"From Spirituals to Swing\" concert at Carnegie Hall in New York. On learning of Johnson's death, Hammond replaced him with Big Bill Broonzy, but he played two of Johnson's records from the stage.\nRecording sessions.\nIn Jackson, Mississippi, around 1936, Johnson sought out H. C. Speir, who ran a general store and also acted as a talent scout. Speir put Johnson in touch with Ernie Oertle, who, as a salesman for the ARC group of labels, introduced Johnson to Don Law to record his first sessions in San Antonio, Texas. The recording session was held on November 23\u201325, 1936, in room 414 of the Gunter Hotel in San Antonio. In the ensuing three-day session, Johnson played 16 selections and recorded alternate takes for most of them. Among the songs Johnson recorded in San Antonio were \"I Believe I'll Dust My Broom\", \"Sweet Home Chicago\", and \"Cross Road Blues\", which later became blues standards. The first to be released was \"Terraplane Blues\", backed with \"Last Fair Deal Gone Down\", which sold as many as 10,000 copies.\nJohnson traveled to Dallas, Texas, for another recording session with Don Law in a makeshift studio at the Vitagraph (Warner Bros.) Building, on June 19\u201320, 1937. Johnson recorded almost half of the 29 songs that make up his entire discography in Dallas and eleven records from this session were released within the following year. Most of Johnson's \"somber and introspective\" songs and performances come from his second recording session. Johnson did two takes of most of these songs, and recordings of those takes survived. Because of this, there is more opportunity to compare different performances of a single song by Johnson than for any other blues performer of his era. In contrast to most Delta players, Johnson had absorbed the idea of fitting a composed song into the three minutes of a 78-rpm side.\nDeath.\nJohnson died on August 16, 1938, at the age of 27, near Greenwood, Mississippi, of unknown causes. Johnson's death was not reported publicly. Almost 30 years later, Gayle Dean Wardlow, a Mississippi-based musicologist researching Johnson's life, found Johnson's death certificate, which listed only the date and location, with no official cause of death. No formal autopsy had been done. Instead, a \"pro forma\" examination was done to file the death certificate, and no immediate cause of death was determined. It is likely he had congenital syphilis and it was suspected later by medical professionals that this may have been a contributing factor in his death. However, 30 years of local oral tradition had, like the rest of his life story, built a legend which has filled in gaps in the scant historical record.\nSeveral differing accounts have described the events preceding his death. Johnson had been playing for a few weeks at a country dance at the Three Forks Club in Itta Bena, about from Greenwood. According to one theory, Johnson was murdered by the jealous husband of a woman with whom he had flirted. In an account by the blues musician David 'Honeyboy' Edwards, Johnson had been flirting with a married woman at a dance, and she gave him a bottle of whiskey poisoned by her husband. When Johnson took the bottle, Edwards knocked it out of his hand, admonishing him to never drink from a bottle that he had not personally seen opened. Johnson replied, \"Don't ever knock a bottle out of my hand\". Soon after, he was offered another (poisoned) bottle and accepted it. Johnson is reported to have begun feeling ill the evening after and had to be helped back to his room in the early morning hours. Over the next three days his condition steadily worsened. Witnesses reported that he died in a convulsive state of severe pain. The musicologist Robert \"Mack\" McCormick claimed to have tracked down the man who murdered Johnson and to have obtained a confession from him in a personal interview, but he declined to reveal the man's name.\nWhile strychnine has been suggested as the poison that killed Johnson, at least one scholar has disputed the notion. Tom Graves, in his book \"Crossroads: The Life and Afterlife of Blues Legend Robert Johnson\", relies on expert testimony from toxicologists to argue that strychnine has such a distinctive odor and taste that it cannot be disguised, even in strong liquor. Graves also claims that a significant amount of strychnine would have to be consumed in one sitting to be fatal, and that death from the poison would occur within hours, not days.\nIn their 2019 book \"Up Jumped the Devil\", Bruce Conforth and Gayle Dean Wardlow suggest that the poison was naphthalene, from dissolved mothballs. This was \"a common way of poisoning people in the rural South\", but was rarely fatal. However, Johnson had been diagnosed with an ulcer and with esophageal varices, and the poison was sufficient to cause them to hemorrhage. He died after two days of severe abdominal pain, vomiting, and bleeding from the mouth.\nThe Leflore County registrar, Cornelia Jordan, years later and after conducting an investigation into Johnson's death for the state director of vital statistics, R. N. Whitfield, wrote a clarifying note on the back of Johnson's death certificate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I talked with the white man on whose place this negro died and I also talked with a negro woman on the place. The plantation owner said the negro man, seemingly about 26 years old, came from Tunica two or three weeks before he died to play banjo at a negro dance given there on the plantation. He stayed in the house with some of the negroes saying he wanted to pick cotton. The white man did not have a doctor for this negro as he had not worked for him. He was buried in a homemade coffin furnished by the county. The plantation owner said it was his opinion that the man died of syphilis.\nIn 2006, a medical practitioner, David Connell, suggested, on the basis of photographs showing Johnson's \"unnaturally long fingers\" and \"one bad eye\", that Johnson may have had Marfan syndrome, which could have both affected his guitar playing and contributed to his death due to aortic dissection.\nGravesite.\nThe true location of Johnson's grave is unknown; three different markers have been erected at possible sites in church cemeteries outside Greenwood.\nJohn Hammond Jr., in the documentary \"The Search for Robert Johnson\" (1991), suggests that owing to poverty and lack of transportation Johnson is most likely to have been buried in a pauper's grave (or \"potter's field\") very near where he died.\nDevil legend.\nAccording to legend, as a young man living on a plantation in rural Mississippi, Johnson had a tremendous desire to become a great blues musician. One of the legends often told says that Johnson was instructed to take his guitar to a crossroad near Dockery Plantation at midnight. (There are claims for other sites as the location of the crossroads.) There he was met by a large being (the Devil) who took the guitar and tuned it. The Devil played a few songs and then returned the guitar to Johnson, giving him mastery of the instrument. This story of a deal with the Devil at the crossroads mirrors the legend of Faust. In exchange for his soul, Johnson was able to create the blues for which he became famous.\nThis story was originally associated with Delta blues musician Tommy Johnson, to whom Robert Johnson was unrelated. Tommy Johnson, who grew up near the Dockery Plantation and learned the blues from Charlie Patton and Willie Brown, first claimed to have sold his soul to the devil at a crossroads in exchange for his mastery of the guitar.\nVarious accounts.\nThis legend was developed over time and has been chronicled by Gayle Dean Wardlow, Edward Komara and Elijah Wald, who sees the legend as largely dating from Johnson's rediscovery by white fans more than two decades after his death. Son House once told the story to Pete Welding as an explanation of Johnson's astonishingly rapid mastery of the guitar. Other interviewers failed to elicit any confirmation from House and there were two full years between House's observation of Johnson as first a novice and then a master.\nFurther details were absorbed from the imaginative retellings by Greil Marcus and Robert Palmer. Most significantly, the detail was added that Johnson received his gift from a large black man at a crossroads. There is dispute as to how and when the crossroads detail was attached to the Robert Johnson story. All the published evidence, including a full chapter on the subject in the biography \"Crossroads\", by Tom Graves, suggests an origin in the story of the blues musician Tommy Johnson. This story was collected from his musical associate Ishman Bracey and his elder brother Ledell in the 1960s. One version of Ledell Johnson's account was published in David Evans's 1971 biography of Tommy Johnson, and was repeated in print in 1982 alongside House's story in the widely read \"Searching for Robert Johnson\", by Peter Guralnick.\nIn another version, Ledell placed the meeting not at a crossroads but in a graveyard. This resembles the story told to Steve LaVere that Ike Zimmerman of Hazlehurst, Mississippi, learned to play the guitar at midnight while sitting on tombstones. Zimmerman is believed to have influenced the playing of the young Johnson. Recent research by the blues scholar Bruce Conforth, in \"Living Blues\" magazine, makes the story clearer. Johnson and Ike Zimmerman did practice in a graveyard at night, because it was quiet and no one would disturb them, but it was not the Hazlehurst cemetery as had been believed: Zimmerman was not from Hazlehurst but nearby Beauregard, and he did not practice in one graveyard, but in several in the area. Johnson spent about a year living with and learning from Zimmerman, who ultimately accompanied Johnson back to the Delta to look after him.\nWhile Dockery, Hazlehurst and Beauregard have each been claimed as the locations of the mythical crossroads, there are also tourist attractions claiming to be \"The Crossroads\" in both Clarksdale and Memphis. Residents of Rosedale, Mississippi, claim Johnson sold his soul to the devil at the intersection of Highways 1 and 8 in their town, while the 1986 movie \"Crossroads\" was filmed in Beulah, Mississippi. The blues historian Steve Cheseborough wrote that it may be impossible to discover the exact location of the mythical crossroads, because \"Robert Johnson was a rambling guy\".\nInterpretations.\nSome scholars have argued that the devil in these songs may refer not only to the Christian figure of Satan but also to the trickster god of African origin, Legba, himself associated with crossroads. Folklorist Harry M. Hyatt wrote that, during his research in the South from 1935 to 1939, when African-Americans born in the 19th or early 20th century said they or anyone else had \"sold their soul to the devil at the crossroads\", they had a different meaning in mind. Hyatt claimed there was evidence indicating African religious retentions surrounding Legba and the making of a \"deal\" (not selling the soul in the same sense as in the Faustian tradition cited by Graves) with the so-called devil at the crossroads.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis view that the devil in Johnson's songs is derived from an African deity was disputed by the blues scholar David Evans in an essay published in 1999, \"Demythologizing the Blues\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe musicologist Alan Lomax dismissed the myth, stating, \"In fact, every blues fiddler, banjo picker, harp blower, piano strummer and guitar framer was, in the opinion of both himself and his peers, a child of the Devil, a consequence of the black view of the European dance embrace as sinful in the extreme\".\nBoth Lomax's and Evans's accounts themselves have been disputed and dismissed by Black scholars and authors including Amiri Baraka and Cornel West. West defines Blues as a creation of a people \"who are willing to look unflinchingly at catastrophic conditions\", as children of God responding to those conditions. Baraka's words are more directly critical of white writers who study African-American Blues artform and culture from a Western viewpoint, stating that \"They have to do that to make themselves superior in some kind of way: that everything has come from Europe, which is not true\". Baraka cites that rather than being formed out of any Western context, Blues derives from an African context of its own. The call-and-response singing Lomax argues is different from Blues has been widely cited as being a central aspect of Blues music.\nMusical style.\nJohnson is considered a master of the blues, particularly of the Delta blues style. Keith Richards, of the Rolling Stones, said in 1990, \"You want to know how good the blues can get? Well, this is it\". But according to Elijah Wald, in his book \"Escaping the Delta\", Johnson in his own time was most respected for his ability to play in a wide range of styles, from raw country slide guitar to jazz and pop licks, and for his ability to pick up guitar parts almost instantly upon hearing a song. His first recorded song, \"Kind Hearted Woman Blues\", in contrast to the prevailing Delta style of the time, more resembled the style of Chicago or St. Louis, with \"a full-fledged, abundantly varied musical arrangement\". The song was part of a cycle of spin-offs and response songs that began with Leroy Carr's \"Mean Mistreater Mama\" (1934). According to Wald, it was \"the most musically complex in the cycle\" and stood apart from most rural blues as a thoroughly composed lyric, rather than an arbitrary collection of more or less unrelated verses. Unusual for a Delta player of the time, a recording exhibits what Johnson could do entirely outside of a blues style. \"They're Red Hot\", from his first recording session, shows that he was also comfortable with an \"uptown\" swing or ragtime sound similar to that of the Harlem Hamfats, but as Wald remarked, \"no record company was heading to Mississippi in search of a down-home Ink Spots... [H]e could undoubtedly have come up with a lot more songs in this style if the producers had wanted them.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo the uninitiated, Johnson's recordings may sound like just another dusty Delta blues musician wailing away. But a careful listen reveals that Johnson was a revisionist in his time... Johnson's tortured soul vocals and anxiety-ridden guitar playing aren't found in the cotton-field blues of his contemporaries.\n \u2014Marc Myers\nVoice.\nAn important aspect of Johnson's singing was his use of microtonality. These subtle inflections of pitch help explain why his singing conveys such powerful emotion. Eric Clapton described Johnson's music as \"the most powerful cry that I think you can find in the human voice\". In two takes of \"Me and the Devil Blues\" he shows a high degree of precision in the complex vocal delivery of the last verse: \"The range of tone he can pack into a few lines is astonishing.\" The song's \"hip humor and sophistication\" is often overlooked. \"[G]enerations of blues writers in search of wild Delta primitivism\", wrote Wald, have been inclined to overlook or undervalue aspects that show Johnson as a polished professional performer.\nJohnson is also known for using the guitar as \"the other vocalist in the song\", a technique later perfected by B.B. King and his personified guitar named Lucille: \"In Africa and in Afro-American tradition, there is the tradition of the talking instrument, beginning with the drums... the one-strand and then the six-strings with bottleneck-style performance; it becomes a competing voice... or a complementary voice... in the performance\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen Johnson started singing, he seemed like a guy who could have sprung from the head of Zeus in full armor. I immediately differentiated between him and anyone else I had ever heard. The songs weren't customary blues songs. They were so utterly fluid. At first they went by quick, too quick to even get. They jumped all over the place in range and subject matter, short punchy verses that resulted in some panoramic story-fires of mankind blasting off the surface of this spinning piece of plastic.\n \u2014Bob Dylan\nInstrument.\nJohnson mastered the guitar, being considered today one of the all-time greats on the instrument. His approach was complex and musically advanced. When Keith Richards was first introduced to Johnson's music by his bandmate Brian Jones, he asked, \"Who is the other guy playing with him?\", not realizing it was Johnson playing one guitar. \"I was hearing two guitars, and it took a long time to actually realise he was doing it all by himself\", said Richards, who later stated that \"Robert Johnson was like an orchestra all by himself\". \"As for his guitar technique, it's politely reedy but ambitiously eclectic\u2014moving effortlessly from hen-picking and bottleneck slides to a full deck of chucka-chucka rhythm figures\".\nLyrics.\nIn \"The Story with Dick Gordon\", Bill Ferris, of American Public Media, said, \"Robert Johnson I think of in the same way I think of the British Romantic poets, Keats and Shelley, who burned out early, who were geniuses at wordsmithing poetry... The Blues, if anything, are deeply sexual. You know, 'my car doesn't run, I'm gonna check my oil... 'if you don't like my apples, don't shake my tree'. Every verse has sexuality associated with it\".\nInfluences.\nJohnson fused approaches specific to Delta blues to those from the broader music world. The slide guitar work on \"Ramblin' on My Mind\" is pure Delta and Johnson's vocal there has \"a touch of... Son House rawness\", but the train imitation on the bridge is not at all typical of Delta blues\u2014it is more like something out of minstrel show music or vaudeville. Johnson did record versions of \"Preaching the Blues\" and \"Walking Blues\" in the older bluesman's vocal and guitar style (House's chronology has been questioned by Guralnick). As with the first take of \"Come On in My Kitchen\", the influence of Skip James is evident in James's \"Devil Got My Woman\", but the lyrics rise to the level of first-rate poetry, and Johnson sings with a strained voice found nowhere else in his recorded output.\nThe sad, romantic \"Love in Vain\" successfully blends several of Johnson's disparate influences. The form, including the wordless last verse, follows Leroy Carr's last hit \"When the Sun Goes Down\"; the words of the last sung verse come directly from a song Blind Lemon Jefferson recorded in 1926. Johnson's last recording, \"Milkcow's Calf Blues\" is his most direct tribute to Kokomo Arnold, who wrote \"Milkcow Blues\" and influenced Johnson's vocal style.\n\"From Four Until Late\" shows Johnson's mastery of a blues style not usually associated with the Delta. He croons the lyrics in a manner reminiscent of Lonnie Johnson, and his guitar style is more that of a ragtime-influenced player like Blind Blake. Lonnie Johnson's influence is even clearer in two other departures from the usual Delta style: \"Malted Milk\" and \"Drunken Hearted Man\". Both copy the arrangement of Lonnie Johnson's \"Life Saver Blues\". The two takes of \"Me and the Devil Blues\" show the influence of Peetie Wheatstraw, calling into question the interpretation of this piece as \"the spontaneous heart-cry of a demon-driven folk artist\".\nLegacy.\nEarly recognition and reviews.\nFamed producer John Hammond was an early advocate of Johnson's music. Using the pen-name Henry Johnson, he wrote his first article on Robert Johnson for the \"New Masses\" magazine in March 1937, around the time of the release of Johnson's first record. In it, he described Johnson as \"the greatest Negro blues singer who has cropped up in recent years... Johnson makes Leadbelly sound like an accomplished poseur.\" The following year, Hammond hoped to get Johnson to perform at a December 1938 \"From Spirituals to Swing\" concert in New York City, as he was unaware that Johnson had died in August. Instead, Hammond played two of his recordings, \"Walkin' Blues\" and \"Preachin' Blues (Up Jumped the Devil)\", for the audience and \"praised Johnson lavishly from the stage\". Music historian Ted Gioia noted \"Here, if only through the medium of recordings, Hammond used his considerable influence at this historic event to advocate a position of preeminence for the late Delta bluesman\". Music educator James Perone also saw that the event \"underscored Robert Johnson's specific importance as a recording artist\". In 1939, Columbia issued a final single, pairing \"Preachin' Blues\" with \"Love in Vain\".\nIn 1940, nine of Johnson's songs were included on a \"List of American Folk Songs on Commercial Records\" prepared by musicologist Alan Lomax for a U.S. government conference. Lomax's notations for the entries range from \"elaborate sex symbolism\" (\"Terraplane Blues\"), \"very nice love song\" (\"I'm a Steady Rollin' Man\"), to \"traces of voodoo\" (\"Stones in My Passway\", \"Hellhound on My Trail\", \"Cross Road Blues\"). In 1942, commentary on Johnson's \"Terraplane Blues\" and \"Last Fair Deal Gone Down\" appeared in \"The Jazz Record Book\", edited by Charles Edward Smith. The authors described Johnson's vocals as \"imaginative\" and \"thrilling\" and his guitar playing as \"exciting as almost anything in the folk blues field\". Music writer Rudi Blesh included a review of Johnson's \"Hellhound on My Trail\" in his 1946 book \"Shining Trumpets: a History of Jazz\". He noted the \"personal and creative way\" Johnson approached the song's harmony. Jim Wilson, then a writer for the \"Detroit Free Press\", also mentioned his unconventional use of harmony. In a 1949 review, he compared elements of John Lee Hooker's recent debut \"Boogie Chillen\": \"His [Hooker's] dynamic rhythms and subtle nuances on the guitar and his startling disregard for familiar scale and harmony patterns show similarity to the work of Robert Johnson, who made many fine records in this vein\".\nSamuel Charters drew further attention to Johnson in a five-page section in his 1959 book, \"The Country Blues\". He focused on the two Johnson recordings that referred to images of the devil or hell\u00a0\u2013 \"Hellhound on My Trail\" and \"Me and the Devil Blues\"\u00a0\u2013 to suggest that Johnson was a deeply troubled individual. Charters also included Johnson's \"Preachin' Blues\" on the album published alongside his book. Columbia Records issued the first album of Johnson's recordings, \"King of the Delta Blues Singers\" two years later.\nMusicianship.\nJohnson is mentioned as one of the Delta artists who was a strong influence on blues singers in post-war styles. However, it is Johnson's guitar technique that is often identified as his greatest contribution. Blues historian Edward Komara wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The execution of a driving bass beat on a plectrum instrument like the guitar (instead of the piano) is Johnson's most influential accomplishment... This is the aspect of his music that most changed the Delta blues practice and is most retained in the blues guitar tradition.\nThis technique has been called a \"boogie bass pattern\" or \"boogie shuffle\" and is described as a \"fifth\u2013sixth [degrees of a major scale] oscillation above the root chord\". Sometimes, it has been attributed to Johnnie Temple, because he was the first to record a song in 1935 using it. However, Temple confirmed that he had learned the technique from Johnson: \"He was the first one I ever heard use it... It was similar to a piano boogie bass [which] I learned from R. L. [Johnson] in '32 or '33\". Johnny Shines added: \"Some of the things that Robert did with the guitar affected the way everybody played. In the early thirties, boogie was rare on the guitar, something to be heard\". Conforth and Wardlow call it \"one of the most important riffs in blues music\" and music historian Peter Guralnick believes Johnson \"popularized a mode [walking bass style on guitar] which would rapidly become the accepted pattern\". Although author Elijah Wald recognizes Johnson's contribution in popularizing the innovation, he discounts its importance and adds, \"As far as the evolution of black music goes, Robert Johnson was an extremely minor figure, and very little that happened in the decades following his death would have been affected if he had never played a note\".\nContemporaries.\nJohnson's contemporaries, including Johnny Shines, Johnnie Temple, Henry Townsend, Robert Lockwood Jr., Calvin Frazier, and David \"Honeyboy\" Edwards were among those who kept his music alive through performing his songs and using his guitar techniques. Fellow Mississippi native Elmore James is the best known and is responsible for popularizing Johnson's \"Dust My Broom\". In 1951, he recast the song as a Chicago-style blues, with electric slide guitar and a backing band. According to blues historian Gerard Herhaft:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Johnson's influence upon Elmore James's music always remained powerful: his falsetto voice, almost shrill, and the intensive use of the \"walking\" bass notes of the boogie-woogie, several pieces of James' repertoire were borrowed from Johnson (e.g, \"Dust My Broom\", \"Rambling on My Mind\", and \"Crossroads\").\nJames' version is identified as \"one of the first recorded examples of what was to become the classic Chicago shuffle beat\". The style often associated with Chicago blues was used extensively by Jimmy Reed beginning with his first record \"High and Lonesome\" in 1953. Sometimes called \"the trademark Reed shuffle\" (although also associated his second guitarist, Eddie Taylor), it is the figure Johnson used updated for electric guitar.\nBlues standards.\nSeveral of Johnson's songs became blues standards, which is used to describe blues songs that have been widely performed and recorded over a period of time and are seen as having a lasting quality. Perone notes \"That such a relatively high percentage of the songs attributed to him became blues standards also keeps the legacy of Robert Johnson alive\". Those most often identified are \"Sweet Home Chicago\" and \"Dust My Broom\", but also include \"Crossroads\" and \"Stop Breaking Down\". As with many blues songs, there are melodic and lyrical precedents. While \"Sweet Home Chicago\" borrows from Kokomo Arnold's 1933 \"Old Original Kokomo Blues\", \"Johnson's lyrics made the song a natural for Chicago bluesmen, and it's his version that survived in the repertoires of performers like Magic Sam, Robert Lockwood, and Junior Parker\".\nIn the first decades after Johnsons' death, these songs, with some variations in the titles and lyrics, were recorded by Tommy McClennan (1939), Walter Davis (1941), Sonny Boy Williamson I (1945), Arthur Crudup (1949), Texas Alexander (1950), Elmore James (1951\u20131959), Baby Boy Warren (1954), Roosevelt Sykes (1955), Junior Parker (1958), and Forest City Joe (1959). Pearson and McCulloch believe that \"Sweet Home Chicago\" and \"Dust My Broom\" in particular connect Johnson to \"the rightful inheritors of his musical ideas\u2014big-city African American artists whose high-powered, electrically amplified blues remain solidly in touch with Johnson's musical legacy\" at the time of Columbia's first release of a full album of his songs in 1961.\nIn Jim O'Neal's statement when Johnson was inducted into the Blues Foundation Blues Hall of Fame, he identified \"Hell Hound on My Trail\", \"Sweet Home Chicago\", \"Dust My Broom\", \"Love in Vain\", and \"Crossroads\" as Johnson's classic recordings. Over the years, these songs have been individually inducted into the Blues Hall's \"Classic of Blues Recording\u00a0\u2013 Single or Album Track\" category, as well as \"Come On in My Kitchen\" and \"Terraplane Blues\".\nRock music.\nIn the mid-1950s, rock and roll pioneer Chuck Berry adapted the boogie pattern on guitar for his songs \"Roll Over Beethoven\" and \"Johnny B. Goode\". Author Dave Rubin commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;his [Berry's] utilization of the bass-string cut-boogie patterns popularized by Robert Johnson on songs like \"Sweet Home Chicago\"... subtly altered the swing feel of the boogie blues into a more driving, straight 4/4 meter while still maintaining a limber lilt that is often missing in the countless imitations that followed.\nThe pattern \"became one of the signature figures in early electric guitar-based rock and roll, such as that of Chuck Berry and the numerous rock musicians of the 1960s who were influenced by Berry\", according to Perone. Although music historian Larry Birnbaum also sees the connection, he wrote that Johnson's \"contributions to the origins of rock 'n' roll are negligible\". The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducted Johnson as an early influence in its first induction ceremony, in 1986, almost a half century after his death. It also included four of his songs it deemed to have shaped the genre: \"Sweet Home Chicago\", \"Cross Road Blues\", \"Hellhound on My Trail\", and \"Love in Vain\". Marc Meyers, of the \"Wall Street Journal\", commented, \"His 'Stop Breakin' Down Blues' from 1937 is so far ahead of its time that the song could easily have been a rock demo cut in 1954\".\nSeveral rock artists describe Johnson as an influence:\nProblems of biography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe thing about Robert Johnson was that he only existed on his records. He was pure legend.\n\u2013Martin Scorsese, \"Love in Vain: A Vision of Robert Johnson\"\nUntil the 2019 publication of Bruce Conforth and Gayle Dean Wardlow's biography, \"Up Jumped the Devil: The Real Life of Robert Johnson\", little of Johnson's early life was known. Two marriage licenses for Johnson have been located in county records offices. The ages given in these certificates point to different birth dates, but Conforth and Wardlow suggest that Johnson lied about his age in order to obtain a marriage license. Carrie Thompson claimed that her mother, who was also Robert's mother, remembered his birth date as May8, 1911. He was not listed among his mother's children in the 1910 census giving further credence to a 1911 birthdate. Although the 1920 census gives his age as 7, suggesting he was born in 1912 or 1913, the entry showing his attendance at Indian Creek School, in Tunica, Mississippi listed him as being 14 years old.\nFive significant dates from his career are documented: Monday, Thursday and Friday, November 23, 26 and 27, 1936, at a recording session in San Antonio, Texas; and Saturday and Sunday, June 19 and 20, 1937, at a recording session in Dallas. His death certificate, discovered in 1968, lists the date and location of his death.\nRecord collectors admired Johnson's records from the time of their first release, and efforts were made to discover information about him, with virtually no success. A relatively full account of Johnson's brief musical career emerged in the 1960s, largely from accounts by Son House, Johnny Shines, David \"Honeyboy\" Edwards and Robert Jr. Lockwood. In 1961, the sleeve notes to the album \"King of the Delta Blues Singers\" included reminiscences by Don Law who had recorded Johnson in 1936. Law added to the mystique surrounding Johnson, representing him as very young and extraordinarily shy.\nThe blues researcher Mack McCormick began researching Johnson's family background in 1972, but died in 2015 without publishing his findings. McCormick's research eventually became as much a legend as Johnson himself. In 1982, McCormick permitted Peter Guralnick to publish a summary in \"Living Blues\" (1982), later reprinted in book form as \"Searching for Robert Johnson\". Later researchers sought to confirm this account or to add minor details. A revised summary acknowledging major contributors was written by Stephen LaVere for the booklet accompanying \"Robert Johnson, The Complete Recordings\" box set (1990). The documentary film \"The Search for Robert Johnson\" contains accounts by McCormick and Wardlow of what informants have told them: long interviews of David \"Honeyboy\" Edwards and Johnny Shines and short interviews of surviving friends and family. Another film, \"Can't You Hear the Wind Howl?: The Life &amp; Music of Robert Johnson\", combines documentary segments with recreated scenes featuring Keb' Mo' as Johnson with narration by Danny Glover. Shines, Edwards and Robert Jr. Lockwood contribute interviews. These published biographical sketches achieve coherent narratives, partly by ignoring reminiscences and hearsay accounts which contradict or conflict with their accounts.\nPhotographs.\nUntil the 1980s, it was believed that no images of Johnson had survived. However, three images of Johnson were located in 1972 and 1973, in the possession of his half-sister Carrie Thompson. Two of these, known as the \"dime-store photo\" (December 1937 or January 1938) and the \"studio portrait\" (summer 1936), were copyrighted by Stephen LaVere (who had obtained them from the Thompson family) in 1986 and 1989, respectively, with an agreement to share any ensuing royalties 50% with the Johnson estate, at that time administered by Thompson. The \"dime-store photo\" was first published, almost in passing, in an issue of Rolling Stone magazine in 1986, and the studio portrait in a 1989 article by Stephen Calt and Gayle Dean Wardlow in \"78 Quarterly\". Both were subsequently featured prominently in the printed materials associated with the 1990 CBS box set of the \"complete\" Johnson recordings, as well as being widely republished since that time. Because Mississippi courts in 1998 determined that Robert Johnson's heir was Claud Johnson, a son born out of wedlock, the estate share of all monies paid to LaVere by CBS and others ended up going to Claud Johnson, and attempts by the heirs of Carrie Thompson to obtain a ruling that the photographs were her personal property and not part of the estate were dismissed. In his book \"Searching for Robert Johnson\", Peter Guralnick stated that the blues archivist Mack McCormick showed him a photograph of Johnson with his nephew Louis, taken at the same time as the famous \"pinstripe suit\" photograph, showing Louis dressed in his United States Navy uniform; this picture, along with the \"studio portrait\", were both lent by Carrie Thompson to McCormick in 1972. McCormick never returned the photograph of Johnson in his uniform, keeping it in his archive until his death. McCormick's daughter donated the archive to the Smithsonian Institution in 2020 and encouraged museum staff to facilitate the return of the photograph to Johnson's descendants; as of 2023, \"The Washington Post\" reported that the museum had agreed to return the photograph and was awaiting instructions from the Johnson family. This photograph has never been made public.\nAnother photograph, purporting to show Johnson posing with the blues musician Johnny Shines, was published in the November 2008 issue of \"Vanity Fair\" magazine. Its authenticity was claimed by the forensic artist Lois Gibson and by Johnson's estate in 2013, but has been disputed by some music historians, including Elijah Wald, Bruce Conforth and Gayle Dean Wardlow, who considered that the clothing suggests a date after Johnson's death and that the photograph may have been reversed and retouched. Further, both \"Honeyboy\" Edwards and Robert Jr. Lockwood failed to identify either man in the photo. Facial recognition software concluded that neither man was Johnson or Shines. Finally, Gibson claimed the photo was from 1933 to 1934 but it is known that Johnson did not meet Shines until early 1937. In December 2015, a fourth photograph was published, purportedly showing Johnson, his wife Calletta Craft, Estella Coleman, and Robert Lockwood Jr. This photograph was also declared authentic by Lois Gibson, but her identification of Johnson has been dismissed by other facial recognition experts and blues historians. There are a number of reasons why the photograph is unlikely to be Johnson: it has been proven that Craft died before Johnson met Coleman, the clothing could not be prior to the late 1940s, the furniture is from the 1950s, the Coca-Cola bottle cannot be from prior to 1950, etc.\nA third photograph of Johnson, this time smiling, was published in 2020. It is believed to have been taken in Memphis on the same occasion as the verified photograph of him with a guitar and cigarette (part of the \"dime-store\" set), and is in the possession of Annye Anderson, Johnson's step-sister (Anderson is the daughter of Charles Dodds, later Spencer, who was married to Robert's mother but was not his father). As a child, Anderson grew up in the same family as Johnson and has claimed to have been present, aged 10 or 11, on the occasion the photograph was taken. This photograph was published in \"Vanity Fair\" in May 2020, as the cover image for a book, \"Brother Robert: Growing Up with Robert Johnson\", written by Anderson in collaboration with author Preston Lauterbach, and is considered to be authentic by Johnson scholar Elijah Wald.\nDescendants.\nJohnson left no will. In 1998, the Mississippi Supreme Court ruled that Claud Johnson, a retired truck driver living in Crystal Springs, Mississippi, was the son of Robert Johnson and his only heir. The court heard that he had been born to Virgie Jane Smith (later Virgie Jane Cain), who had a relationship with Robert Johnson in 1931. The relationship was attested to by a friend, Eula Mae Williams, but other relatives descended from Robert Johnson's half-sister, Carrie Harris Thompson, contested Claud Johnson's claim. The effect of the judgment was to allow Claud Johnson to receive over $1 million in royalties. Claud Johnson died, aged 83, on June 30, 2015, leaving six children.\nDiscography.\nEleven 78-rpm records by Johnson were released by Vocalion Records in 1937 and 1938, with additional pressings by ARC budget labels. In 1939, a twelfth was issued posthumously. Johnson's estate holds the copyrights to his songs. In 1961, Columbia Records released \"King of the Delta Blues Singers\", an album representing the first modern-era release of Johnson's performances, which started the \"re-discovery\" of Johnson as blues artist. In 1970, Columbia issued a second volume, \"King of the Delta Blues Singers, Vol. II\".\n\"The Complete Recordings\", a two-disc set, released on August 28, 1990, contains almost everything Johnson recorded, with all 29 recordings, and 12 alternate takes. Another alternate take of \"Traveling Riverside Blues\" was released by Sony on the CD reissue of \"King of the Delta Blues Singers\". To celebrate the 100th anniversary of Johnson's birth, May 8, 2011, Sony Legacy released \"Robert Johnson: The Centennial Collection\", a re-mastered 2-CD set of all 42 of his recordings and two brief fragments, one of Johnson practicing a guitar figure and the other of Johnson saying, presumably to engineer Don Law, \"I wanna go on with our next one myself\". One reviewer commented that the sound quality of the 2011 release was a slight improvement on the 1990 release.\nIn popular culture.\nHe is often considered the first member of the so-called \"27 Club\", a group of musicians who have died at that age.\nRobert Johnson was played by La Monde Byrd in \"Supernatural\" season 2 episode 8, \"Crossroad Blues\".\nIn 1994, Johnson was featured on a U.S. postage stamp.\nIn 2001, Elton John and Bernie Taupin name-checked Johnson in \"The Wasteland\", a track from their \"Songs From the West Coast\" album.\nThe Tim McGraw song \"How Bad Do You Want It\" off the 2004 album \"Live Like You Were Dying\", opens with the lines \"Robert Johnson went to the crossroads, so the legend goes/He left with his guitar, but the Devil took his soul, the Devil took his soul\".\nIn season 2 episode 6 of the NBC sci-fi time-travel series \"Timeless\", \"King of The Delta Blues\", the protagonists travel back to San Antonio in 1936 when Robert Johnson (portrayed by Kamahl Naiqui) and Don Law (played by Gavin Stenhouse) were recording Johnson's first album in a hotel room. The episode incorporates a bit of Johnson's singing and playing.\n\"Me and the Devil Blues\", a Japanese manga series that takes its title from the song of the same name by Robert Johnson, chronicles a fictional version of Johnson's life, as a man called \"RJ\" who sells his soul to the devil for a talent for playing the blues.\nThe 2021 song \"Speechless\" by Nas includes the lyrics \"I went back into my past and then I sped it up/Robert Johnson, Winehouse and Morrison found where heaven was...\"\nIn 2024, an episode of the British TV crime drama \"McDonald &amp; Dodds\" featured the murder of a blues enthusiast involved in seeking to identify the crossroads at which Robert Johnson had supposedly met the Devil. Entitled \"Jinksy Sings the Blues\", it was Episode 2 of Series 4 and was broadcast in the UK on 28 July 2024.\nIn 2025, the character Sammie \"Preacher Boy\" Moore in the movie \"Sinners\" was loosely based on Robert Johnson.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26011", "revid": "25046916", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26011", "title": "Receptive aphasia", "text": "Language disorder involving inability to understand language\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nWernicke's aphasia, also known as receptive aphasia, sensory aphasia, fluent aphasia, or posterior aphasia, is a type of aphasia in which individuals have difficulty understanding written and spoken language. Patients with Wernicke's aphasia demonstrate fluent speech, which is characterized by typical speech rate, intact syntactic abilities and effortless speech output. Writing often reflects speech in that it tends to lack content or meaning. In most cases, motor deficits (i.e. hemiparesis) do not occur in individuals with Wernicke's aphasia. Therefore, they may produce a large amount of speech without much meaning. Individuals with Wernicke's aphasia often suffer of anosognosia \u2013 they are unaware of their errors in speech and do not realize their speech may lack meaning. They typically remain unaware of even their most profound language deficits.\nLike many acquired language disorders, Wernicke's aphasia can be experienced in many different ways and to many different degrees. Patients diagnosed with Wernicke's aphasia can show severe language comprehension deficits; however, this is dependent on the severity and extent of the lesion. Severity levels may range from being unable to understand even the simplest spoken and/or written information to missing minor details of a conversation. Many diagnosed with Wernicke's aphasia have difficulty with repetition in words and sentences and/or working memory.\nWernicke's aphasia was named after German physician Carl Wernicke, who is credited with discovering the area of the brain responsible for language comprehension (Wernicke's area) and discovery of the condition which results from a lesion to this brain area (Wernicke's aphasia). Although Wernicke's area (left posterior superior temporal cortex) is known as the language comprehension area of the brain, defining the exact region of the brain is a more complicated issue. A 2016 study aimed to determine the reliability of current brain models of the language center of the brain. After asking a group of neuroscientists what portion of the brain they consider to be Wernicke's area, results suggested that the classic \"Wernicke-Lichtheim-Geschwind\" model is no longer adequate for defining the language areas of the brain. This is because this model was created using an old understanding of human brain anatomy and does not take into consideration the cortical and subcortical structures responsible for language or the connectivity of brain areas necessary for production and comprehension of language. While there is not a well defined area of the brain for language comprehension, Wernicke's aphasia is a known condition causing difficulty with understanding language. \nA better way to describe aphasia is fluent or non-fluent rather than \"expressive\" or \"receptive\" given the typical presence of both expressive and receptive language deficits in all subtypes of aphasia.\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe following are common symptoms seen in patients with Wernicke's aphasia:\nDistinction from other types of aphasia/other conditions\nCauses.\nThe most common cause of Wernicke's aphasia is stroke. Strokes may occur when blood flow to the brain is completely interrupted or severely reduced. This has a direct effect on the amount of oxygen and nutrients being able to supply the brain, which causes brain cells to die within minutes.\nThe most common stroke that causes Wernicke's Aphasia is an ischemic stroke affecting the posterior temporal lobe of the dominant hemisphere of the brain.\n\"The middle cerebral arteries supply blood to the cortical areas involved in speech, language and swallowing. The left middle cerebral artery provides Broca's area, Wernicke's area, Heschl's gyrus, and the angular gyrus with blood\". Therefore, in patients with Wernicke's aphasia, there is typically an occlusion to the left middle cerebral artery.\nAs a result of the occlusion in the left middle cerebral artery, Wernicke's aphasia is most commonly caused by a lesion in the posterior superior temporal gyrus (Wernicke's area). This area is posterior to the primary auditory cortex (PAC) which is responsible for decoding individual speech sounds. Wernicke's primary responsibility is to assign meaning to these speech sounds. The extent of the lesion will determine the severity of the patients deficits related to language. Damage to the surrounding areas (perisylvian region) may also result in Wernicke's aphasia symptoms due to variation in individual neuroanatomical structure and any co-occurring damage in adjacent areas of the brain.\nAnother common cause of Wernicke's aphasia is encephalitis, specifically around the posterior superior temporal gyrus. Encephalitis is the inflammation of the brain, which can be a result of infection, autoimmune disorders, or chronic substance abuse, among others.\nOther causes of Wernicke's Aphasia include brain trauma, cerebral tumors, central nervous system (CNS) infections, and degenerative brain disorders.\nIn the case of brain tumors, infections, or degenerative brain disorders, examples in which damage to the brain can be ongoingly progressive, it is likely that the aphasia will coincidingly progress as well, and symptoms will worsen if the cause is not treated.\nDiagnosis.\nAphasia is usually first recognized by the physician who treats the person for his or her brain injury. Most individuals will undergo a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT) scan to confirm the presence of a brain injury and to identify its precise location. In circumstances where a person is showing possible signs of aphasia, the physician will refer him or her to a speech-language pathologist (SLP) for a comprehensive speech and language evaluation. SLPs will examine the individual's ability to express him or herself through speech, understand language in written and spoken forms, write independently, and perform socially.\nThe American Speech, Language, Hearing Association (ASHA) states a comprehensive assessment should be conducted in order to analyze the patient's communication functioning on multiple levels; as well as the effect of possible communication deficits on activities of daily living. Typical components of an aphasia assessment include: case history, self report, oral-motor examination, language skills, identification of environmental and personal factors, and the assessment results. A comprehensive aphasia assessment includes both formal and informal measures.\nFormal assessments include:\nInformal assessments, which aid in the diagnosis of patients with suspected aphasia, include:\nDiagnostic information should be scored and analyzed appropriately. Treatment plans and individual goals should be developed based on diagnostic information, as well as patient and caregiver needs, desires, and priorities.\nTreatment.\nThere is currently no standardized treatment for Wernicke's Aphasia, meaning treatment varies from patient to patient depending on the severity of the lesion and the resulting deficits. In some patients, the first step of action is to attempt to treat the possible causes for the aphasia, such as removing a brain tumor, or treating a nervous system infection. This may not lessen the symptoms for the patient as damage to the brain is often already done, but it typically stops the aphasia from worsening. For the majority of patients with any kind of aphasia, speech and language therapy is the primary treatment. This focuses on improving language skills and learning how to communicate in various ways to allow their needs to be met. Since Wernicke's patients face comprehension deficits, they are often unaware of their condition and may pose unique challenges for their treatment because of this lack of awareness or concern for their deficit. Treatment plans are usually devised by a team of healthcare workers including a speech therapist, neuropsychologist, and a neurologist.\nAccording to Bates et al. (2005), \"the primary goal of rehabilitation is to prevent complications, minimize impairments, and maximize function\". The topics of intensity and timing of intervention are widely debated across various fields. Results are contradictory: some studies indicate better outcomes with early intervention, while other studies indicate starting therapy too early may be detrimental to the patient's recovery. Recent research suggests, that therapy be functional and focus on communication goals that are appropriate for the patient's individual lifestyle.\nSpecific treatment considerations for working with individuals with Wernicke's aphasia (or those who exhibit deficits in auditory comprehension) include using familiar materials, using shorter and slower utterances when speaking, giving direct instructions, and using repetition as needed.\nRole of neuroplasticity in recovery.\nNeuroplasticity is defined as the brain's ability to reorganize itself, lay new pathways, and rearrange existing ones, as a result of experience. Neuronal changes after damage to the brain such as collateral sprouting, increased activation of the homologous areas, and map extension demonstrate the brain's neuroplastic abilities. According to Thomson, \"Portions of the right hemisphere, extended left brain sites, or both have been shown to be recruited to perform language functions after brain damage. All of the neuronal changes recruit areas not originally or directly responsible for large portions of linguistic processing. Principles of neuroplasticity have been proven effective in neurorehabilitation after damage to the brain. These principles include: incorporating multiple modalities into treatment to create stronger neural connections, using stimuli that evoke positive emotion, linking concepts with simultaneous and related presentations, and finding the appropriate intensity and duration of treatment for each individual patient.\nAuditory comprehension treatment.\nAuditory comprehension is a primary focus in treatment for Wernicke's aphasia, as it is the main deficit related to this diagnosis. Therapy activities may include:\nWord retrieval.\nAnomia is consistently seen in aphasia, so many treatment techniques aim to help patients with word finding problems. One example of a semantic approach is referred to as semantic feature analyses. The process includes naming the target object shown in the picture and producing words that are semantically related to the target. Through production of semantically similar features, participants develop more skills in naming stimuli due to the increase in lexical activation.\nRestorative therapy approach.\nNeuroplasticity is a central component to restorative therapy to compensate for brain damage. This approach is especially useful in Wernicke's aphasia patients that have had a stroke to the left brain hemisphere.\n\"Schuell's stimulation approach\" is a main method in traditional aphasia therapy that follows principles to retrieve function in the auditory modality of language and influence surrounding regions through stimulation. The guidelines to have the most effective stimulation are as follows:\nAuditory stimulation of language should be intensive and always present when other language modalities are stimulated.\nSchuell's stimulation utilizes stimulation through therapy tasks beginning at a simplified task and progressing to become more difficult including:\nSocial approach to treatment.\nThe social approach involves a collaborative effort on behalf of patients and clinicians to determine goals and outcomes for therapy that could improve the patient's quality of life. A conversational approach is thought to provide opportunities for development and the use of strategies to overcome barriers to communication. The main goals of this treatment method are to improve the patient's conversational confidence and skills in natural contexts using conversational coaching, supported conversations, and partner training.\nAdditionally, it is important to include the families of patients with aphasia in treatment programs. Clinicians can teach family members how to support one another, and how to adjust their speaking patterns to facilitate their loved one's treatment and rehabilitation.\nSpeech devices, while not a treatment that can improve a patient's language skills, help the patient communicate with caregivers through the use of pictures or speech.\nClinical trials.\nMore recently, researchers are developing medical treatments for aphasia using clinical trials for pharmacological and non-pharmacological approaches. Some medications include drugs affecting the catecholaminergic system, nootropic drugs, and medications used to treat Alzheimer's disease. The non-pharmacological approaches include transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcranial direct stimulation.\nPrognosis.\nPrognosis is strongly dependent on the location and extent of the lesion (damage) to the brain. Many personal factors also influence how a person will recover, which include age, previous medical history, level of education, gender, and motivation. All of these factors influence the brain's ability to adapt to change, restore previous skills, and learn new skills. It is important to remember that all the presentations of Receptive Aphasia may vary. The presentation of symptoms and prognosis are both dependent on personal components related to the individual's neural organization before the stroke, the extent of the damage, and the influence of environmental and behavioral factors after the damage occurs. The quicker a diagnosis of a stroke is made by a medical team, the more positive the patient's recovery may be. A medical team will work to control the signs and symptoms of the stroke and rehabilitation therapy will begin to manage and recover lost skills. The rehabilitation team may consist of a certified speech-language pathologist, physical therapist, occupational therapist, and the family or caregivers. The length of therapy will be different for everyone, but research suggests that intense therapy over a short amount of time can improve outcomes of speech and language therapy for patients with aphasia. Research is not suggesting the only way therapy should be administered, but gives insight on how therapy affects the patient's prognosis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26022", "revid": "45093283", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26022", "title": "Rehoboam", "text": "Biblical figure; first monarch of the Kingdom of Judah\nRehoboam (; , , transl.\u2009\"an enlarged people\"; , ; ) was, according to the Hebrew Bible, the first king of the Kingdom of Judah after the Northern and Southern kingdoms were divided. He was a son of and the successor to Solomon and a grandson of David.\nIn the account of I Kings and II Chronicles, Rehoboam saw his rule limited to only the Kingdom of Judah in the south following a rebellion by the ten northern tribes of Israel in 932/931 BCE, which led to the formation of the independent Kingdom of Israel under the rule of Jeroboam in the north.\nExtrabiblical evidence for Judah\u2019s stability under Rehoboam is limited, with indications that the biblical accounts of Rehoboam and Jeroboam may be retrojections.\nBackground.\nAccording to the \"Jewish Encyclopedia\", \"Solomon's wisdom and power were not sufficient to prevent the rebellion of several of his border cities. Damascus under Rezon secured its independence [from] Solomon; and Jeroboam, a superintendent of works, his ambition stirred by the words of the prophet Ahijah, fled to Egypt. Thus, before the death of Solomon, the apparently unified kingdom of David began to disintegrate. With Damascus independent and a powerful man of Ephraim, the most prominent of the Ten Tribes, awaiting his opportunity, the future of Solomon's kingdom became dubious\".\nAccording to First Book of Kings 11:1\u201313, Solomon had broken the mandate of the Torah by marrying foreign wives and being influenced by them, worshipping and building shrines to the Moabite and Ammonite gods:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So the Lord became angry with Solomon because his heart had turned from the Lord God of Israel ... Therefore the Lord said to Solomon, \"Because you have done this, and have not kept My covenant and My statutes, which I have commanded you, I will surely tear the kingdom away from you and give it to your servant. Nevertheless, I will not do it in your days, for the sake of your father David; I will tear it out of the hand of your son.\"\nRehoboam's mother, Naamah, was an Ammonitess, and thus one of the foreign wives whom Solomon married. In the Revised Version of the Bible she is referred to as \"the Ammonitess\".\nReign.\nAccession to the throne.\nConventional biblical chronology dates the start of Rehoboam's reign to the mid-10th century BC. His reign is described in 1 Kings 12 and 1 Kings 14:21\u201331 and in 2 Chronicles in the Hebrew Bible. Rehoboam was 41 years old (16 in Chapter 12 of 3 Kings in the Septuagint) when he ascended the throne.\nThe ten northern tribes assembled at Shechem to proclaim Rehoboam King of Israel. At the assembly, the tribes requested certain reforms in the policy followed by Rehoboam's father, Solomon. The reforms requested would materially reduce the royal exchequer and hence its power to continue the magnificence of Solomon's court. The older men counselled Rehoboam at least to speak to the people in a civil manner (it is not clear whether they counselled him to accept the demands). However, the new king sought the advice from the young men with which he had grown up, who advised the king to show no weakness to the people, and to tax them even more, which Rehoboam did.\nAlthough the ostensible reason was the heavy burden laid upon Israel because of Solomon's great outlay for buildings and for luxury of all kinds, the other reasons include the historical opposition between the north and the south. The two sections had acted independently until David, by his victories, succeeded in uniting all the tribes, though the Ephraimitic jealousy was ever ready to develop into open revolt. Religious considerations were also operative. The building of the Temple was a severe blow for the various sanctuaries scattered through the land, and the priests of the high places probably supported the revolt. Josephus (Ant., VIII., viii. 3) has the rebels exclaim: \"We leave to Rehoboam the Temple his father built.\"\nJeroboam and the people rebelled, with the ten northern tribes breaking away and forming a separate kingdom. The new breakaway kingdom continued to be called Kingdom of Israel and was also known as Samaria, or Ephraim or the northern kingdom. The realm Rehoboam was left with was called Kingdom of Judah.\nDuring Rehoboam's 17-year reign, he retained Jerusalem as Judah's capital but\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judah did what was evil in the sight of the Lord, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they committed, more than all that their fathers had done. For they also built for themselves high places and pillars, and Ashe\u2032rim on every high hill and under every green tree, and there were also male cult prostitutes in the land. They did according to all the abominations of the nations which the Lord drove out before the people of Israel.\u2014\u200a\nCivil war.\nRehoboam went to war against the new Kingdom of Israel with a force of 180,000 soldiers. However, he was advised against fighting his brethren and so returned to Jerusalem. The narrative reports that Israel and Judah were in a state of war throughout his 17-year reign.\nEgyptian invasion.\nIn the fifth year of Rehoboam's reign, Shishak, king of Egypt, brought a huge army and took many cities. According to Joshua, son of Nadav, the mention in 2 Chronicles 11, 6 sqq., that Rehoboam built fifteen fortified cities, indicates that the attack was not unexpected. The account in Chronicles states that Shishak marched with 1,200 chariots, 60,000 horsemen and troops who came with him from Egypt: Libyans, Sukkites, and Kushites. Shishak's armies captured all of the fortified towns leading to Jerusalem between Gezer and Gibeon. When they laid siege to Jerusalem, Rehoboam gave Shishak all of the treasures of the temple as a tribute. The Egyptian campaign cut off trade with south Arabia via Elath and the Negev that had been established during Solomon's reign. Judah became a vassal state of Egypt.\nThis invasion is confirmed by records from the Bubastite Portal in Karnak and another archaeological find. Shishak is generally identified with the Egyptian pharaoh Shoshenq I, who invaded Judah. One of the most difficult issues in identifying Shishak with Shoshenq I is the biblical statement that \"King Shishak of Egypt attacked Jerusalem. He seized the treasures of the Lord's temple and the royal palace\", whereas the Bubastite Portal lists do not include Jerusalem or any city from central Judea among the surviving names in the list of Shoshenq's conquests.\nSuccession.\nRehoboam had 18 wives and 60 concubines. They bore him 28 sons and 60 daughters. His wives included his cousin Mahalath, the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, and Abihail, the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse. His sons with Mahalath were Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham. After Mahalath he married his cousin Maacah, daughter (or grand-daughter) of Absalom, David's son. His sons with Maacah were Abijam, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith. The names of his other wives, sons and all his daughters are not given.\nRehoboam reigned for 17 years. When he died, he was buried beside his ancestors in Jerusalem. He was succeeded by his son Abijah.\nHistoricity.\nExtrabiblical evidence for a stable monarchy in Judah during Rehoboam\u2019s reign is scarce, with minimal interest from Shoshenq I and little indication of significant political or economic activity in the region. The similar names of Jeroboam and Rehoboam, along with historical inconsistencies and narrative elements, suggest that their biblical portrayal may be a constructed retrojection.\nRabbinic literature.\nIt was difficult to maintain the Messianic claims of the house of David due to that Rehoboam, the son of King Solomon, was born of an Ammonite woman (I Kings, xiv. 21\u201331); but it was adduced as an illustration of divine Providence which selected the \"two doves,\" Ruth, the Moabite, and Naamah, the Ammonitess, for honourable distinction (B. \u1e32. 38b). Naamah was one of Solomon's wives and mother of Rehoboam (I Kings xiv. 21, 31; II Chron. xii. 13). In the second Greek account (I Kings xii. 24), Naamah is said to have been the daughter of Hanun (\u1f0c\u03bd\u03b1), son of Nahash, a king of Ammon (II Sam. x. 1\u20134). Naamah is praised, in B. \u1e32. 38b, for her righteousness, on account of which Moses had previously been warned by God not to make war upon the Ammonites (comp. Deut. ii. 19), as Naamah was to descend from them.\nRehoboam was the son of an Ammonite woman; and when David praised God because it was permissible to marry Ammonites and Moabites, he held the child upon his knees, giving thanks for himself as well as for Rehoboam, since this permission was of advantage to them both (Yeb. 77a). Rehoboam was stricken with a running sore as a punishment for the curse which David had invoked upon Joab (II Sam. iii. 29) when he prayed that Joab's house might forever be afflicted with leprosy and running sores (Sanh. 48b).\nAll the treasures which Israel had brought from Egypt were kept until the Egyptian king Shishak (I Kings xiv. 25, 26) took them from Rehoboam (Pes. 119a).\nIn Christianity.\nRehoboam appears in the genealogy of Jesus, in the Gospel of Matthew.\nIn popular culture.\nRehoboam is portrayed by Gino Leurini in \"The Queen of Sheba\" (1952) and by Dexter Fletcher in \"Solomon\" (1997).\nIn Season 3 of the HBO show Westworld, the artificial intelligence entity dictating the fate of humans through algorithmic analysis is named \u201cRehoboam\u201d. It is the successor to a prior version called \u201cSolomon\u201d (which was the successor to \u201cDavid\u201d.) Like the historical Rehoboam, this artificial intelligence version coincided with the demise of the rule of its line.\nIn the third episode of season 7 of The Simpsons, titled \"Home Sweet Homediddly-Dum-Doodily\", where the Flanders' adopt the Simpson children, and perform emergency baptisms after learning the children are unbaptized, Ned Flanders quizzes the Simpson children on their Bible knowledge, during which he references the \u201cSerpent of Rehoboam\u201d.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26023", "revid": "150280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26023", "title": "RS-232", "text": "Standard for serial communication\nIn telecommunications, RS-232 or Recommended Standard 232 is a standard introduced in 1960 for serial communication transmission of data. It formally defines signals connecting between a \"DTE\" (\"data terminal equipment\") such as a computer terminal or PC, and a \"DCE\" (\"data circuit-terminating equipment\" or \"data communication equipment\"), such as a modem. The standard defines the electrical characteristics and timing of signals, the meaning of signals, and the physical size and pinout of connectors. The current version of the standard is \"TIA-232-F Interface Between Data Terminal Equipment and Data Circuit-Terminating Equipment Employing Serial Binary Data Interchange\", issued in 1997. \nThe RS-232 standard is commonly used with serial ports and serial cables. It is widely used in industrial communication devices.\nA serial port complying with the RS-232 standard was once a standard feature of many types of computers. Personal computers used them for connections not only to modems, but also to printers, computer mice, data storage, uninterruptible power supplies, and other peripheral devices.\nCompared with later interfaces such as RS-422, RS-485 and Ethernet, RS-232 has lower transmission speed, shorter maximum cable length, larger voltage swing, larger standard connectors, no multipoint capability and limited multidrop capability. In modern personal computers, USB has displaced RS-232 from most of its peripheral interface roles. Thanks to their simplicity and past ubiquity, however, RS-232 interfaces are still used\u2014particularly in industrial CNC machines, networking equipment and scientific instruments where a short-range, point-to-point, low-speed wired data connection is fully adequate.\nScope of the standard.\nThe Electronic Industries Association (EIA) standard RS-232-C as of 1969 defines:\nThe standard does not define such elements as the character encoding (i.e. ASCII, EBCDIC, or others), the framing of characters (start or stop bits, etc.), transmission order of bits, or error detection protocols. The character format and transmission bit rate are set by the serial port hardware, typically a UART, which may also contain circuits to convert the internal logic levels to RS-232 compatible signal levels. The standard does not define bit rates for transmission, except that it says it is intended for bit rates lower than 20,000 bits per second.\nHistory.\nRS-232 was first introduced in 1960 by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA) as a \"Recommended Standard\". The original DTEs were electromechanical teletypewriters, and the original DCEs were (usually) modems. When electronic terminals (smart and dumb) began to be used, they were often designed to be interchangeable with teletypewriters, and so supported RS-232.\nRevisions A through C.\nThroughout the 1960s, the 232 Standard underwent a few iterations following the major innovations in computer and networking technology.\nIn October 1963, the EIA published its first revision, EIA RS-232-A. This revision introduced iterative improvements including different connector types and different voltage ranges.\nIn October 1965, the EIA published EIA RS-232-B. This revision increased the capacitance specifications to allow longer cable lengths and increase signal timing. It also dropped the voltage from 25 Vpp to 15 Vpp.\nIn August of 1969, the EIA published EIA RS-232-C: \"Interface Between Data Terminal Equipment and Data Communication Equipment Employing Serial Binary Data Interchange\". This revision dropped the voltage down to 12 Vpp and introduced the use of Data Communication Equipment (DCE) modems with the standard.\nRS-232 Modernization and Revision D.\nAs technology progressed, the RS-232 standard was starting to become obsolete.\nIn 1975, modifications to the RS-232 standard resulted in the creation of its supposed successor, the EIA RS-422 standard. However, as the RS-422 standard was being developed, the RS-232 standard was gaining popularity for use in computing, so the standard was updated to accommodate legacy systems and its continued usage.\nIn 1981, the EIA dropped the Recommended Standard (RS) nomenclature for all of their published standards and republished the 232 standard as EIA-232-C.\nIn 1986, the EIA published ANSI/EIA-232-D. The revision included major changes including incorporating the DB-25 connector as part of the standard (it was only referenced in the appendix of RS-232-C), and setting the circuit capacitance limit to 2.5\u00a0nF.\nTelecommunications Industry Association and Revision E.\nIn 1988, the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) was founded, as part of a merger of several organizations under the EIA.\nIn 1991, the TIA and the EIA, together, released ANSI/EIA/TIA-232-E-1991: \"Interface Between Data Terminal Equipment and Data Communications Equipment Employing Serial Binary Data Interchange\", adding the smaller standard D-shell 26-pin \"Alt A\" connector, and made other changes to improve compatibility with ITU-T/CCITT V.24 (circuit identification), ITU-T/CCITT V.28 (signal voltage and timing characteristics) and ISO 2110.\nEIA Name Change and Revision F.\nIn 1997, the Electronic Industries Association reorganized under the Electronics Industries Alliance, with the Telecommunications Industry Association serving as its subsidiary. That October, the TIA published \"TIA ANSI/TIA/EIA-232-F: Interface between Data Terminal Equipment and Data Circuit-Terminating Equipment Employing Serial Binary Data Interchange\".\nIn 2002, the EIA delegated the standard entirely to the TIA, and Revision F was republished under TIA ANSI/TIA-232-F (R 2002), by the TR-30 Multi-Media Access, Protocols and Interfaces committee.\nPost EIA Dissolution.\nFollowing the dissolution of the Electronic Industries Alliance, the TIA reaffirmed the standard as TIA TIA-232-F (R 2012) in 2012 with no official changes or revisions. No official changes have been made to the standard since.\nLimitations of the standard.\nBecause RS-232 is used beyond the original purpose of interconnecting a terminal with a modem, successor standards have been developed to address the limitations. Issues with the RS-232 standard include:\nBecause the standard did not foresee the requirements of devices such as computers, printers, test instruments, POS terminals, and so on, designers implementing an RS-232 compatible interface on their equipment often interpreted the standard idiosyncratically. The resulting common problems were non-standard pin assignment of circuits on connectors, and incorrect or missing control signals. The lack of adherence to the standards produced a thriving industry of breakout boxes, patch boxes, test equipment, books, and other aids for the connection of disparate equipment. A common deviation from the standard was to drive the signals at a reduced voltage. Some manufacturers therefore built transmitters that supplied +5\u00a0V and \u22125\u00a0V and labeled them as \"RS-232 compatible\".\nRole in modern personal computers.\nIn the book \"PC 97 Hardware Design Guide\", Microsoft deprecated support for the RS-232 compatible serial port of the original IBM PC design. Today, RS-232 has mostly been replaced in personal computers by USB for local communications. Advantages compared to RS-232 are that USB is faster, uses lower voltages, and has connectors that are simpler to connect and use. Disadvantages of USB compared to RS-232 are that USB is more susceptible to electromagnetic interference (EMI) and that maximum cable length defined by standards is much shorter (15 meters for RS-232 versus 3\u20135 meters for USB, depending on the USB version and use of active cables). RS-232 cable lengths of 2000 meters are possible with appropriate line drivers.\nIn fields such as laboratory automation or surveying, RS-232 devices continue to be used. Some types of programmable logic controllers, variable-frequency drives, servo drives, and computerized numerical control equipment are programmable via RS-232. Computer manufacturers have responded to this demand by re-introducing the DE-9M connector on their computers or by making adapters available.\nRS-232 ports are also commonly used to communicate to headless systems such as servers, where no monitor or keyboard is installed, during boot when an operating system is not yet running and therefore no network connection is possible. A computer with an RS-232 serial port can communicate with the serial port of an embedded system (such as a router) as an alternative to monitoring over Ethernet.\nPersonal computers (and other devices) also made use of the standard so that they could connect to existing equipment. For many years, an RS-232-compatible port was a standard feature for serial communications, such as modem connections, on many computers (with the computer acting as the DTE). It remained in widespread use into the late 1990s. In personal computer peripherals, it has largely been supplanted by other interface standards, such as USB. RS-232 is still used to connect older designs of peripherals, industrial equipment (such as PLCs), console ports, and special purpose equipment.\nPhysical interface.\nIn RS-232, user data is sent as a time-series of bits. Both synchronous and asynchronous transmissions are supported by the standard. In addition to the data circuits, the standard defines a number of control circuits used to manage the connection between the DTE and DCE. Each data or control circuit only operates in one direction, that is, signaling from a DTE to the attached DCE or the reverse. Because transmit data and receive data are separate circuits, the interface can operate in a full duplex manner, supporting concurrent data flow in both directions. The standard does not define character framing within the data stream or character encoding.\nVoltage levels.\nThe RS-232 standard defines the voltage levels that correspond to logical one and logical zero levels for the data transmission and the control signal lines. Valid signals are either in the range of +3 to +15\u00a0volts or the range \u22123 to \u221215 volts with respect to the \"Common Ground\" (GND) pin; consequently, the range between \u22123 and +3\u00a0volts is not a valid RS-232 level. For data transmission lines (TxD, RxD, and their secondary channel equivalents), logic one is represented as a negative voltage and the signal condition is called \"mark\". Logic zero is signaled with a positive voltage and the signal condition is termed \"space\". Control signals have the opposite polarity: the asserted or active state is positive voltage and the de-asserted or inactive state is negative voltage. Examples of control lines include request to send (RTS), clear to send (CTS), data terminal ready (DTR), and data set ready (DSR).\nThe standard specifies a maximum open-circuit voltage of 25\u00a0volts: signal levels of \u00b15\u00a0V, \u00b110\u00a0V, \u00b112\u00a0V, and \u00b115\u00a0V are all commonly seen depending on the voltages available to the line driver circuit. Many RS-232 driver chips have inbuilt charge pump circuitry to produce the required voltages from a 3 or 5\u00a0volt supply. RS-232 drivers and receivers must be able to withstand indefinite short circuits to the ground or to any voltage level up to \u00b125\u00a0volts. The slew rate, or how fast the signal changes between levels, is also controlled.\nBecause the voltage levels are higher than logic levels typically used by integrated circuits, special intervening driver circuits are required to translate logic levels. These also protect the device's internal circuitry from short circuits or transients that may appear on the RS-232 interface, and provide sufficient current to comply with the slew rate requirements for data transmission.\nBecause both ends of the RS-232 circuit depend on the ground pin being zero volts, problems will occur when connecting machinery and computers where the voltage between the ground pin on one end, and the ground pin on the other is not zero. This may also cause a hazardous ground loop. Use of a common ground limits RS-232 to applications with relatively short cables. If the two devices are far enough apart or on separate power systems, the local ground connections at either end of the cable will have differing voltages; this difference will reduce the noise margin of the signals. Balanced, differential serial connections such as RS-422 or RS-485 can tolerate larger ground voltage differences because of the differential signaling.\nUnused interface signals terminated to the ground will have an undefined logic state. Where it is necessary to permanently set a control signal to a defined state, it must be connected to a voltage source that asserts the logic 1 or logic 0 levels, for example with a pull-up resistor. Some devices provide test voltages on their interface connectors for this purpose.\nConnectors.\nRS-232 devices may be classified as Data Terminal Equipment (DTE) or Data Circuit-terminating Equipment (DCE); this defines at each device which wires will be sending and receiving each signal. According to the standard, male connectors have DTE pin functions, and female connectors have DCE pin functions. Other devices may have any combination of connector gender and pin definitions. Many terminals were manufactured with female connectors but were sold with a cable with male connectors at each end; the terminal with its cable satisfied the recommendations in the standard.\nThe standard recommends the D-subminiature 25-pin connector up to revision C, and makes it mandatory as of revision D. Most devices only implement a few of the twenty signals specified in the standard, so connectors and cables with fewer pins are sufficient for most connections, more compact, and less expensive. Personal computer manufacturers replaced the DB-25M connector with the smaller DE-9M connector. This connector, with a different pinout (see Serial port pinouts), is prevalent for personal computers and associated devices.\nPresence of a 25-pin D-sub connector does not necessarily indicate an RS-232-C compliant interface. For example, on the original IBM PC, a male D-sub was an RS-232-C DTE port (with a non-standard current loop interface on reserved pins), but the female D-sub connector on the same PC model was used for the parallel \"Centronics\" printer port. Some personal computers put non-standard voltages or signals on some pins of their serial ports.\nCables.\nThe standard does not define a maximum cable length, but instead defines the maximum capacitance that a compliant drive circuit must tolerate. A widely used rule of thumb indicates that cables more than long will have too much capacitance, unless special cables are used. By using low-capacitance cables, communication can be maintained over larger distances up to about . For longer distances, other signal standards, such as RS-422, are better suited for higher speeds.\nSince the standard definitions are not always correctly applied, it is often necessary to consult documentation, test connections with a breakout box, or use trial and error to find a cable that works when interconnecting two devices. Connecting a fully standard-compliant DCE device and DTE device would use a cable that connects identical pin numbers in each connector (a so-called \"straight cable\"). \"Gender changers\" are available to solve gender mismatches between cables and connectors. Connecting devices with different types of connectors requires a cable that connects the corresponding pins according to the table below. Cables with 9 pins on one end and 25 on the other are common. Manufacturers of equipment with 8P8C connectors usually provide a cable with either a DB-25 or DE-9 connector (or sometimes interchangeable connectors so they can work with multiple devices). Poor-quality cables can cause false signals by crosstalk between data and control lines (such as Ring Indicator).\nIf a given cable will not allow a data connection, especially if a gender changer is in use, a null modem cable may be necessary. Gender changers and null modem cables are not mentioned in the standard, so there is no officially sanctioned design for them.\nData and control signals.\nThe following table lists commonly used RS-232 signals (called \"circuits\" in the specifications) and their pin assignments on the recommended DB-25 connectors (see Serial port pinouts for other commonly used connectors not defined by the standard).\nThe signals are named from the standpoint of the DTE. The ground pin is a common return for the other connections, and establishes the \"zero\" voltage to which voltages on the other pins are referenced. The DB-25 connector includes a second \"protective ground\" on pin 1; this is connected internally to equipment frame ground, and should not be connected in the cable or connector to signal ground.\nRing Indicator.\n\"Ring Indicator\" (RI) is a signal sent from the DCE to the DTE device. It indicates to the terminal device that the phone line is ringing. In many computer serial ports, a hardware interrupt is generated when the RI signal changes state. Having support for this hardware interrupt means that a program or operating system can be informed of a change in state of the RI pin, without requiring the software to constantly \"poll\" the state of the pin. RI does not correspond to another signal that carries similar information the opposite way.\nOn an external modem the status of the Ring Indicator pin is often coupled to the \"AA\" (auto answer) light, which flashes if the RI signal has detected a ring. The asserted RI signal follows the ringing pattern closely, which can permit software to detect distinctive ring patterns.\nThe Ring Indicator signal is used by some older uninterruptible power supplies (UPSs) to signal a power failure state to the computer.\nCertain personal computers can be configured for wake-on-ring, allowing a computer that is suspended to answer a phone call.\nRTS, CTS, and RTR.\nThe Request to Send (RTS) and Clear to Send (CTS) signals were originally defined for use with half-duplex (one direction at a time) modems such as the Bell 202. These modems disable their transmitters when not required and must transmit a synchronization preamble to the receiver when they are re-enabled. The DTE asserts RTS to indicate a desire to transmit to the DCE, and in response the DCE asserts CTS to grant permission, once synchronization with the DCE at the far end is achieved. Such modems are no longer in common use. There is no corresponding signal that the DTE could use to temporarily halt incoming data from the DCE. Thus RS-232's use of the RTS and CTS signals, per the older versions of the standard, is asymmetric.\nThis scheme is also employed in present-day RS-232 to RS-485 converters. RS-485 is a multiple-access bus on which only one device can transmit at a time, a concept that is not provided for in RS-232. The RS-232 device asserts RTS to tell the converter to take control of the RS-485 bus so that the converter, and thus the RS-232 device, can send data onto the bus.\nModern communications environments use full-duplex (both directions simultaneously) modems. In that environment, DTEs have no reason to deassert RTS. However, due to the possibility of changing line quality, delays in processing of data, etc., there is a need for symmetric, bidirectional flow control.\nA symmetric alternative providing flow control in both directions was developed and marketed in the late 1980s by various equipment manufacturers. It redefined the RTS signal to mean that the DTE is ready to receive data from the DCE. This scheme was eventually codified in version RS-232-E (actually TIA-232-E by that time) by defining a new signal, \"RTR (Ready to Receive)\", which is CCITT V.24 circuit 133. TIA-232-E and the corresponding international standards were updated to show that circuit 133, when implemented, shares the same pin as RTS (Request to Send), and that when 133 is in use, RTS is assumed by the DCE to be asserted at all times.\nIn this scheme, commonly called \"RTS/CTS flow control\" or \"RTS/CTS handshaking\" (though the technically correct name would be \"RTR/CTS\"), the DTE asserts RTS whenever it is ready to receive data from the DCE, and the DCE asserts CTS whenever it is ready to receive data from the DTE. Unlike the original use of RTS and CTS with half-duplex modems, these two signals operate independently from one another. This is an example of hardware flow control. However, \"hardware flow control\" in the description of the options available on an RS-232-equipped device does not always mean RTS/CTS handshaking.\nEquipment using this protocol must be prepared to buffer some extra data, since the remote system may have begun transmitting just before the local system de-asserts RTR.\n3-wire and 5-wire RS-232.\nA minimal \"3-wire\" RS-232 connection consisting only of transmit data, receive data, and ground, is commonly used when the full facilities of RS-232 are not required. Even a two-wire connection (data and ground) can be used if the data flow is one way (for example, a digital postal scale that periodically sends a weight reading, or a GPS receiver that periodically sends position, if no configuration via RS-232 is necessary). When only hardware flow control is required in addition to two-way data, the RTS and CTS lines are added in a 5-wire version.\nSeldom-used features.\nThe EIA-232 standard specifies connections for several features that are not used in most implementations. Their use requires 25-pin connectors and cables.\nSignal rate selection.\nThe DTE or DCE can specify use of a \"high\" or \"low\" signaling rate. The rates, as well as which device will select the rate, must be configured in both the DTE and DCE. The prearranged device selects the high rate by setting the Data Signal Rate Selector (DSRS, pin 23) signal to ON. Sometimes called Data Rate Select (DRS), this signal should not be confused with the more commonly used Data Set Ready (DSR, pin 6).\nLoopback testing.\nMany DCE devices have a loopback capability used for testing. When enabled, signals are echoed back to the sender rather than being sent on to the receiver. If supported, the DTE can signal the local DCE (the one it is connected to) to enter loopback mode by setting Local Loop (LL, pin 18) to ON, or the remote DCE (the one the local DCE is connected to) to enter loopback mode by setting Remote Loop (RL, pin 21) to ON. The latter tests the communications link, as well as both DCEs. When the DCE is in test mode, it signals the DTE by setting Test Indicator (TI, pin 25) to ON.\nA commonly used version of loopback testing does not involve any special capability of either end. A hardware loopback is simply a wire connecting complementary pins together in the same connector (see \"loopback\").\nLoopback testing is often performed with a specialized DTE called a bit error rate tester (or BERT).\nTiming signals.\nSome synchronous devices provide a clock signal to synchronize data transmission, especially at higher data rates. Two timing signals are provided by the DCE. Pin 15 is the transmitter clock (TCK), or send timing (ST); the DTE puts the next bit on the transmit data line (pin 2) when this clock transitions from OFF to ON (so it is stable during the ON to OFF transition when the DCE registers the bit). Pin 17 is the receiver clock (RCK), or receive timing (RT); the DTE reads the next bit from the receive data line (pin 3) when this clock transitions from ON to OFF.\nAlternatively, the DTE can provide a clock signal, called transmitter timing (TT, pin 24) for transmitted data. Data is changed when the clock transitions from OFF to ON, and read during the ON to OFF transition. TT can be used to overcome the problem of propagation delay in a long cable. ST must traverse a cable of unknown length and delay, clock a bit out of the DTE after another unknown delay, and return it to the DCE over the same unknown cable delay. When sending data at high speed, the data bit may not arrive in time for the ON to OFF transition of ST.\nSince the relation between the transmitted bit and TT can be fixed in the DTE design, and since both signals traverse the same cable length, using TT eliminates the issue. TT may be generated by looping ST back with an appropriate phase change to align it with the transmitted data. ST loop back to TT lets the DTE use the DCE as the frequency reference, and correct the clock to data timing.\nSynchronous clocking is required for such protocols as SDLC, HDLC, and X.25.\nSecondary channel.\nA secondary data channel, identical in capability to the primary channel, can optionally be implemented by the DTE and DCE devices. Pin assignments are as follows:\nRelated standards.\nOther serial signaling standards may not interoperate with standard-compliant RS-232 ports. For example, using the TTL levels of near +5\u00a0V and 0\u00a0V puts the mark level in the undefined area of the standard. Such levels are sometimes used with NMEA 0183-compliant GPS receivers and depth finders. A chip such as MAX232 is required to convert the voltage levels.\nA 20\u00a0mA current loop uses the absence of 20\u00a0mA current for high, and the presence of current in the loop for low; this signaling method is often used for long-distance and optically isolated links. Connection of a current-loop device to a compliant RS-232 port requires a level translator. Current-loop devices can supply voltages in excess of the must-withstand voltage limits of a compliant device. The original IBM PC serial port card implemented a 20\u00a0mA current-loop interface, which was never emulated by other suppliers of plug-compatible equipment.\nOther serial interfaces similar to RS-232:\nThe International Telecommunication Union publishes standard ITR-R V.24 (formerly CCITT standard V.24), \"List of Definitions for Interchange Circuits between Data Terminal Equipment (DTE) and Data Circuit-Terminating Equipment (DCE)\" with circuit definitions compatible to those in EIA RS 232. V.24 does not specify signal levels or timing. Electrical parameters for signals are specified in ITU-R-V.28.\nDevelopment tools.\nWhen developing or troubleshooting systems using RS-232, close examination of hardware signals can be important to find problems. This can be done using simple devices with LEDs that indicate the logic levels of data and control signals. \"Y\" cables may be used to allow using another serial port to monitor all traffic on one direction. A serial line analyzer is a device similar to a logic analyzer but specialized for RS-232's voltage levels, connectors, and, where used, clock signals; it collects, stores, and displays the data and control signals, allowing developers to view them in detail. Some simply display the signals as waveforms; more elaborate versions include the ability to decode characters in ASCII or other common codes and to interpret common protocols used over RS-232 such as SDLC, HDLC, DDCMP, and X.25. Serial line analyzers are available as standalone units, as software and interface cables for general-purpose logic analyzers and oscilloscopes, and as programs that run on common personal computers and devices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26024", "revid": "6056090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26024", "title": "RMS", "text": "RMS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26026", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26026", "title": "Reloading", "text": ""}
{"id": "26028", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26028", "title": "Relationship", "text": "Relationship most often refers to:\nRelationship or Relationships may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26032", "revid": "32788837", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26032", "title": "Running", "text": "Method of terrestrial locomotion allowing rapid movement on foot\nRunning is a method of terrestrial locomotion by which humans and other animals move quickly on foot. Running is a gait with an aerial phase in which all feet are above the ground (though there are exceptions). This is in contrast to walking, a slower form of movement where at least one foot is always in contact with the ground, the legs are kept mostly straight, and the center of gravity vaults over the stance leg or legs in an inverted pendulum fashion. A feature of a running body from the viewpoint of spring-mass mechanics is that changes in kinetic and potential energy within a stride co-occur, with energy storage accomplished by springy tendons and passive muscle elasticity. The term \"running\" can refer to a variety of speeds ranging from jogging to sprinting.\nRunning in humans is associated with improved health and life expectancy.\nIt is hypothesized that the ancestors of humankind developed the ability to run for long distances about 2.6\u00a0million years ago, probably to hunt animals. Competitive running grew out of religious festivals in various areas. Records of competitive racing date back to the Tailteann Games in Ireland between 1171 BCE and 632 BCE, while the first recorded Olympic Games took place in 776 BCE. Running has been described as the world's most accessible sport.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nIt is thought that human running evolved at least four and a half million years ago out of the ability of the ape-like Australopithecus, an early ancestor of humans, to walk upright on two legs.\nEarly humans most likely developed into endurance runners from the practice of persistence hunting of animals, the activity of following and chasing until a prey is too exhausted to flee, succumbing to \"chase myopathy\" (Sears 2001), and that human features such as the nuchal ligament, abundant sweat glands, the Achilles tendons, big knee joints and muscular glutei maximi, were changes caused by this type of activity (Bramble &amp; Lieberman 2004, et al.). The theory as first proposed used comparative physiological evidence and the natural habits of animals when running, indicating the likelihood of this activity as a successful hunting method. Further evidence from observation of modern-day hunting practices also indicated this likelihood (Carrier et al. 1984). According to Sears (p.\u00a012) scientific investigation (Walker &amp; Leakey 1993) of the Nariokotome skeleton provided further evidence for the Carrier theory.\nCompetitive running grew out of religious festivals in various areas such as Greece, Egypt, Asia, and the East African Rift in Africa. The Tailteann Games, an Irish sporting festival in honor of the goddess Tailtiu, dates back to 1829 BCE and is one of the earliest records of competitive running. The origins of the Olympics and Marathon running are shrouded by myth and legend, though the first recorded games took place in 776 BCE. Running in Ancient Greece can be traced back to these games of 776 BCE.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...I suspect that the sun, moon, earth, stars, and heaven, which are still the gods of many barbarians, were the only gods known to the aboriginal Hellenes. Seeing that they were always moving and running, from their running nature they were called gods or runners (Thus, Theontas)...\u2014\u200a\nThe culture of running was not limited to men in Ancient Greece and is demonstrated by the mythical Atalanta. Her suitors were required to beat her in a race or forfeit their lives. As she was unbeatable, all failed except for Hippomenes who was aided by the goddess Venus. He distracted Atalanta during the race by throwing golden apples, given to him by Venus, which she stooped to pick up. The details of the event illuminate the running technique which was considered effective in the contemporary culture. In \"Metamorphoses\" the Roman writer Ovid gives Venus's spoken account of the start of the race: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The trumpet sounded the start: The pair, each crouching low, shot forward, skimming the sand with flying feet, so lightly they could run on waves and never wet their sandals, they could run on fields of grain and never bend them. He heard them cheering: Go Hippomenes, lean to the work, use all your strength: go, go, you are sure to win! \nSuch involvement of women in running found concrete representation in the Heraean Games. These were a series of events which took place immediately before the Ancient Olympic Games and which only women could compete in. Writing in the early 20th Century, the historian E. Norman Gardinier states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the festival there were races for maidens of various ages. Their course was 500 feet, or one-sixth less than the men's stadium. The maidens ran with their hair down their backs, a short tunic reaching just below the knee, and their right shoulder bare to the breast. The victors received crowns of olive and a share of the heifer sacrificed to Hera. They had, too, the right of setting up their statues in the Heraeum.\nDescription.\nRunning gait can be divided into two phases regarding the lower extremity: stance and swing. These can be further divided into absorption, propulsion, initial swing, and terminal swing. Due to the continuous nature of running gait, no certain point is assumed to be the beginning. However, for simplicity, it will be assumed that absorption and footstrike mark the beginning of the running cycle in a body already in motion.\nFootstrike.\nFootstrike occurs when a plantar portion of the foot makes initial contact with the ground. Common footstrike types include forefoot, midfoot, and heel strike types. These are characterized by initial contact of the ball of the foot, ball and heel of the foot simultaneously and heel of the foot respectively. During this time, the hip joint is undergoing extension from being in maximal flexion from the previous swing phase. For proper force absorption, the knee joint should be flexed upon the footstrike, and the ankle should be slightly in front of the body. Footstrike begins the absorption phase as forces from initial contact are attenuated throughout the lower extremity. Absorption of forces continues as the body moves from footstrike to midstance due to vertical propulsion from the toe-off during a previous gait cycle.\nMidstance.\nMidstance is when the lower extremity limb of focus is in knee flexion directly underneath the trunk, pelvis, and hips. At this point, propulsion begins to occur as the hips undergo hip extension, the knee joint undergoes extension, and the ankle undergoes plantar flexion. Propulsion continues until the leg is extended behind the body and toe-off occurs. This involves a maximal hip extension, knee extension, and plantar flexion for the subject, resulting in the body being pushed forward from this motion, and the ankle/foot leaves the ground as the initial swing begins.\nPropulsion phase.\nResearch, especially in the footstrike debate, has primarily focused on identifying and preventing injuries during the absorption phases of running. The propulsion phase, which occurs from midstance to toe-off, is crucial for understanding how the body moves forward. \nIn a full stride length model, elements of both the terminal swing and footstrike contribute to propulsion. \nThe setup for propulsion begins at the end of the terminal swing when the hip joint flexes, allowing the hip extensors to generate force as they accelerate through the maximal range of motion.\nAs the hip extensors transition from inhibitory to primary muscle movers, the lower extremity moves back towards the ground, aided by the stretch reflex and gravity. The footstrike and absorption phases follow, leading to two possible outcomes.\nWith a heel strike, this phase may be just a continuation of momentum from the stretch reflex, gravity, and light hip extension, offering little force absorption through the ankle joint. On the other hand, a mid/forefoot strike helps in shock absorption, supporting plantar flexion from midstance to toe-off.\nThe actual propulsion begins when the lower extremity enters midstance. The hip extensors continue contracting, assisted by gravity and the stretch reflex from maximal hip flexion during the terminal swing. Hip extension pulls the ground underneath the body, propelling the runner forward.\nDuring midstance, the knee should be slightly flexed due to elastic loading from the absorption and footstrike phases, preserving forward momentum. The ankle joint is in dorsiflexion at this point, either elastically loaded from a mid/forefoot strike or preparing for stand-alone concentric plantar flexion.\nThe final propulsive movements during toe-off involve all three joints: ankle, knee, and hip. The plantar flexors push off from the ground, returning from dorsiflexion in midstance. This can occur either by releasing the elastic load from an earlier mid/forefoot strike or through concentric contraction from a heel strike.\nWith a forefoot strike, the ankle and knee joints release their stored elastic energy from the footstrike/absorption phase. The quadriceps group/knee extensors fully extend the knee, pushing the body off the ground. Simultaneously, the knee flexors and stretch reflex pull the knee back into flexion, initiating the initial swing phase. The hip extensors extend to the maximum, contributing to forces pulling and pushing off the ground, as well as initiating knee flexion and the initial swing phase.\nSwing phase.\nInitial swing is the response of both stretch reflexes and concentric movements to the propulsion movements of the body. Hip flexion and knee flexion occur, beginning the return of the limb to the starting position and setting up for another foot strike. The initial swing ends at midswing when the limb is again directly underneath the trunk, pelvis, and hip with the knee joint flexed and hip flexion continuing. Terminal swing then begins as hip flexion continues to the point of activation of the stretch reflex of the hip extensors. The knee begins to extend slightly as it swings to the anterior portion of the body. The foot then makes contact with the ground with a foot strike, completing the running cycle of one side of the lower extremity.\nEach limb of the lower extremity works opposite to the other. When one side is in toe-off/propulsion, the other hand is in the swing/recovery phase preparing for footstrike. Following toe-off and the beginning of the initial swing of one side, there is a flight phase where neither extremity is in contact with the ground due to the opposite side finishing terminal swing. As the footstrike of the one hand occurs, the initial swing continues. The opposing limbs meet with one in midstance and midswing, beginning the propulsion and terminal swing phases.\nUpper extremity function.\nThe upper extremity function serves mainly in providing balance in conjunction with the opposing side of the lower extremity. The movement of each leg is paired with the opposite arm, which serves to counterbalance the body, particularly during the stance phase. The arms move most effectively (as seen in elite athletes) with the elbow joint at approximately 90 degrees or less, the hands swinging from the hips up to mid-chest level with the opposite leg, the Humerus moving from being parallel with the trunk to approximately 45 degrees shoulder extension (never passing the trunk in flexion) and with as little movement in the transverse plane as possible. The trunk also rotates in conjunction with arm swing. It mainly serves as a balance point from which the limbs are anchored. Thus trunk motion should remain mostly stable with little motion except for slight rotation, as excessive movement would contribute to transverse motion and wasted energy.\nFootstrike debate.\nRecent research into various forms of running has focused on the differences in the potential injury risks and shock absorption capabilities between heel and mid/forefoot footstrikes. It has been shown that heel striking is generally associated with higher rates of injury and impact due to inefficient shock absorption and inefficient biomechanical compensations for these forces. This is due to pressures from a heel strike traveling through bones for shock absorption rather than being absorbed by muscles. Since bones cannot disperse forces easily, the forces are transmitted to other parts of the body, including ligaments, joints, and bones in the rest of the lower extremities up to the lower back. This causes the body to use abnormal compensatory motions in an attempt to avoid serious bone injuries. These compensations include internal rotation of the tibia, knee, and hip joints. Excessive compensation over time has been linked to a higher risk of injuries in those joints and the muscles involved in those motions. Conversely, a mid/forefoot strike has been associated with greater efficiency and lower injury risk due to the triceps surae being used as a lever system to absorb forces with the muscles eccentrically rather than through the bone. Landing with a mid/forefoot strike has also been shown to properly attenuate shock and allow the triceps surae to aid in propulsion via reflexive plantarflexion after stretching to absorb ground contact forces. Thus a mid/forefoot strike may aid in propulsion.\nHowever, even among elite athletes, there are variations in self-selected footstrike types. This is especially true in longer distance events, where there is a prevalence of heel strikers. There does tend however to be a greater percentage of mid/forefoot striking runners in the elite fields, particularly in the faster racers and the winning individuals or groups. While one could attribute the faster speeds of elite runners compared to recreational runners with similar footstrikes to physiological differences, the hip, and joints have been left out of the equation for proper propulsion. This raises the question of how heel-striking elite distance runners can keep up such high paces with a supposedly inefficient and injurious foot strike technique.\nStride length, hip and knee function.\nBiomechanical factors associated with elite runners include increased hip function, use, and stride length over recreational runners. An increase in running speeds causes increased ground reaction forces, and elite distance runners must compensate for this to maintain their pace over long distances.\nThese forces are attenuated through increased stride length via increased hip flexion and extension through decreased ground contact time and more energy being used in propulsion. With increased propulsion in the horizontal plane, less impact occurs from the decreased force in the vertical plane. Increased hip flexion allows for increased use of the hip extensors through midstance and toe-off, allowing for more force production.\nThe difference even between world-class and national-level 1500-m runners has been associated with more efficient hip joint function. The increase in velocity likely comes from the increased range of motion in hip flexion and extension, allowing for greater acceleration and speed. The hip extensors and extension have been linked to more powerful knee extension during toe-off, contributing to propulsion.\nStride length must be appropriately increased with some degree of knee flexion maintained through the terminal swing phases, as excessive knee extension during this phase along with footstrike has been associated with higher impact forces due to braking and an increased prevalence of heel striking. Elite runners tend to exhibit some degree of knee flexion at footstrike and midstance, which first serves to eccentrically absorb impact forces in the quadriceps muscle group. Secondly it allows for the knee joint to contract concentrically and provides significant aid in propulsion during toe-off as the quadriceps group is capable of producing large amounts of force.\nRecreational runners have been shown to increase stride length through increased knee extension rather than increased hip flexion, as exhibited by elite runners, which provides an intense braking motion with each step and decreases the rate and efficiency of knee extension during toe-off, slowing down speed. Knee extension, however, contributes to additional stride length and propulsion during toe-off and is seen more frequently in elite runners as well.\nGood technique.\nUpright posture and slight forward lean.\nLeaning forward places a runner's center of mass over the front part of the foot, which avoids landing on the heel and facilitates the use of the spring mechanism of the foot. Additionally, it facilitates avoiding the braking effect that occurs when a runner lands their foot in front of the center of mass. Although maintaining an upright posture is crucial, runners should also keep their frame relaxed and engage their core to keep their posture stable. This helps prevent injury as long as the body is neither rigid nor tense. The most common running mistakes are tilting the chin up and scrunching shoulders.\nStride rate and types.\nDuring running, the speed at which the runner moves may be calculated by multiplying the cadence (steps per minute) by the stride length. Running is often measured in terms of pace, expressed in units of minutes per mile or minutes per kilometer (the inverse of speed, in mph or km/h).\nSome coaches advocate training at a combination of specific paces related to one's fitness to stimulate various physiological improvements.\nLeft and right balance.\nIt is common for a runner to have an asymmetric gait pattern which has a dominant side. The leg on this side applies slightly more power than the other leg and has a slightly longer stride length. However, if the dominant leg is excessively stronger than the non-dominant leg, which is excessively weaker, then this can lead to problems with the person\u2019s running technique, reduce efficiency, and increase the risk of injury. It can therefore be advantageous to even up the strength of the legs in order to achieve a more balanced gait overall. \nThis may be achieved in several ways. The gait can be altered so that the non-dominant leg is used as the dominant leg for a period of time i.e. by making its stride length slightly longer than that of the other leg and by applying the additional power needed to achieve this. The gait can then be periodically alternated so that both legs are used alternatively as the dominant leg. For example, during a run the left leg is used as the dominant leg with a slightly longer stride length than the right. Then, after a period of time, there is a change so that the right leg is used as the dominant leg with a slightly longer stride length than the left. And so forth in a pattern of alternation. This more even use of the legs overall means that any strength imbalances that have developed are reduced. This can also be achieved by running around in a circle, first in one direction and then in the other. This is standardly practiced by runners who use oval running tracks. For example, when running anti-clockwise the inside left stride is shorter and the outside right stride is longer. In order to prevent a large muscle imbalance developing, runners also practice running clockwise so that, conversely, the right inside stride length is shorter and the left longer. This develops both the left and right sides more evenly. Exercises which work the legs in a unilateral manner are also used. Using the legs one at a time, with the same range of movement for each, helps to ensure a more even strength ratio existing between them. For example, doing one legged squats on the left leg, before switching to do them on the right leg, ensures each leg performs the same amount of work and thereby evens up their strength levels. Standardly, higher performance runners have more of an even balance between the relative strengths of their legs.\nHealth benefits.\nCardiovascular.\nWhile there exists the potential for injury while running (just as there is in any sport), there are many benefits. Some of these benefits include potential weight loss, improved cardiovascular and respiratory health (reducing the risk of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases), improved cardiovascular fitness, reduced total blood cholesterol, strengthening of bones (and potentially increased bone density), possible strengthening of the immune system and an improved self-esteem and emotional state. Running, like all forms of regular exercise, can effectively slow or reverse the effects of aging. Even people who have already experienced a heart attack are 20% less likely to develop serious heart problems if engaging more frequently in running or any type of aerobic activity.\nAlthough an optimal amount of vigorous aerobic exercise such as running might bring benefits related to lower cardiovascular disease and life extension, an excessive dose (e.g., marathons) might have an opposite effect associated with cardiotoxicity.\nMetabolic.\nRunning can assist people in losing weight, staying in shape and improving body composition. Research suggests that the person of average weight will burn approximately 100 calories per mile run. Running increases one's metabolism, even after running; one will continue to burn an increased level of calories for a short time after the run. Different speeds and distances are appropriate for different individual health and fitness levels. For new runners, it takes time to get into shape. The key is consistency and a slow increase in speed and distance. While running, it is best to pay attention to how one's body feels. If a runner is gasping for breath or feels exhausted while running, it may be beneficial to slow down or try a shorter distance for a few weeks. If a runner feels that the pace or distance is no longer challenging, then the runner may want to speed up or run farther.\nMental.\nRunning can also have psychological benefits, as many participants in the sport report feeling an elated, euphoric state, often referred to as a \"runner's high\". Running is frequently recommended as therapy for people with clinical depression and people coping with addiction. A possible benefit may be the enjoyment of nature and scenery, which also improves psychological well-being (see Ecopsychology \u00a7 Practical benefits).\nIn animal models, running has been shown to increase the number of newly created neurons within the brain. This finding could have significant implications in aging as well as learning and memory. A recent study published in \"Cell Metabolism\" has also linked running with improved memory and learning skills.\nRunning is a great technique to lower inflammation, stress, anxiety, and depression. People with seasonal affective disorder benefit from running outside in warm, sunny weather. Running can improve mental alertness and sleep. Both research and clinical experience have shown that exercise can be a treatment for serious depression and anxiety even some physicians prescribe exercise to most of their patients. Running can have a longer-lasting effect than anti-depressants. The non-threatening environment offered by running generates a sense of achievement and belonging which helps with mental illness.\nInjuries.\nHigh impact.\nMany injuries are associated with running because of its high-impact nature. Change in running volume may lead to development of patellofemoral pain syndrome, iliotibial band syndrome, patellar tendinopathy, plica syndrome, and medial tibial stress syndrome. Change in running pace may cause Achilles tendinitis, gastrocnemius injuries, and plantar fasciitis. Repetitive stress on the same tissues without enough time for recovery or running with improper form can lead to many of the above. Runners generally attempt to minimize these injuries by warming up before exercise, focusing on proper running form, performing strength training exercises, eating a well balanced diet, allowing time for recovery, and \"icing\" (applying ice to sore muscles or taking an ice bath).\nSome runners may experience injuries when running on concrete surfaces. The problem with running on concrete is that the body adjusts to this flat surface running, and some of the muscles will become weaker, along with the added impact of running on a harder surface. Therefore, it can be beneficial to change terrain occasionally \u2013 such as trail, beach, or grass running. This is more unstable ground and allows the legs to strengthen different muscles. Runners should be wary of twisting their ankles on such terrain. Running downhill also increases knee stress and should, therefore, be avoided. Reducing the frequency and duration can also prevent injury.\nBarefoot running has been promoted as a means of reducing running related injuries, but this remains controversial and a majority of professionals advocate the wearing of appropriate shoes as the best method for avoiding injury. However, a study in 2013 concluded that wearing neutral shoes is not associated with increased injuries.\nChafing.\nAnother common, running-related injury is chafing, caused by repetitive rubbing of one piece of skin against another, or against an article of clothing. One common location for chafe to occur is the runner's upper thighs. The skin feels coarse and develops a rash-like look. A variety of deodorants and special anti-chafing creams are available to treat such problems. Chafe is also likely to occur on the nipple. There are a variety of home remedies that runners use to deal with chafing while running such as band-aids and using grease to reduce friction. Prevention is key which is why form fitting clothes are important.\nIliotibial band syndrome.\nAn iliotibial band is a muscle and tendon that is attached to the hip and runs the length of the thigh to attach to the upper part of the tibia, and the band is what helps the knee to bend. This is an injury that is located at the knee and shows symptoms of swelling outside the knee. Iliotibial band syndrome is also known as \"runner's knee\" or \"jogger's knee\" because it can be caused by jogging or running. Once pain or swelling is noticeable it is important to put ice on it immediately and it is recommended to rest the knee for better healing. Most knee injuries can be treated by light activity and much rest for the knee. In more serious cases, arthroscopy is the most common to help repair ligaments but severe situations reconstructive surgery would be needed. A survey was taken in 2011 with knee injuries being 22.7% of the most common injuries.\nMedial tibial stress syndrome.\nA more known injury is medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS) which is the accurate name for shin splints. This is caused during running when the muscle is being overused along the front of the lower leg with symptoms that affect of the muscle. Shin splints have sharp, splinter-like pain, that is typically X-rayed by doctors but is not necessary for shin splints to be diagnosed. To help prevent shin splints it is commonly known to stretch before and after a workout session, and also avoid heavy equipment especially during the first couple of workout sessions. Also to help prevent shin splints do not increase the intensity of a workout more than 10% a week. To treat shin splints it is important to rest with the least amount of impact on your legs and apply ice to the area. A survey showed that shin splints make up 12.7% of the most common injuries in running, with blisters being the top percentage at 30.9%.\nEvents.\nRunning is both a competition and a type of training for sports that have running or endurance components. As a sport, it is split into events divided by distance and sometimes includes permutations such as the obstacles in steeplechase and hurdles. Running races are contests to determine which of the competitors is able to run a certain distance in the shortest time. Today, competitive running events make up the core of the sport of athletics. Events are usually grouped into several classes, each requiring substantially different athletic strengths and involving different tactics, training methods, and types of competitors.\nRunning competitions have probably existed for most of humanity's history and were a key part of the ancient Olympic Games as well as the modern Olympics. The activity of running went through a period of widespread popularity in the United States during the running boom of the 1970s. Over the next two decades, as many as 25\u00a0million Americans were doing some form of running or jogging \u2013 accounting for roughly one tenth of the population. Today, road racing is a popular sport among non-professional athletes, who included over 7.7\u00a0million people in America alone in 2002.\nLimits of speed.\nFootspeed, or sprint speed, is the maximum speed at which a human can run. It is affected by many factors, varies greatly throughout the population, and is important in athletics and many sports. Air resistance for top sprinters can take up to 5% of their energy. \nThe fastest human footspeed on record is , seen during a 100-meter sprint (average speed between the 60th and the 80th meter) by Usain Bolt.\nTypes.\nTrack running events are individual or relay events with athletes racing over specified distances on an oval running track. The events are categorized as sprints, middle and long-distance, and hurdling.\nRoad running takes place on a measured course over an established road (as opposed to track and cross country running). These events normally range from distances of 5 kilometers to longer distances such as half marathons and marathons, and they may involve scores of runners or wheelchair entrants.\nCross country running takes place over the open or rough terrain. The courses used for these events may include grass, mud, woodlands, hills, flat ground and water. It is a popular participatory sport and is one of the events which, along with track and field, road running, and racewalking, makes up the umbrella sport of athletics.\nThe majority of popular races do not incorporate a significant change in elevation as a key component of a course. There are several, disparate variations that feature significant inclines or declines. These fall into two main groups.\nThe naturalistic group is based on outdoor racing over geographical features. Among these are the cross country-related sports of fell running (a tradition associated with Northern Europe) and trail running (mainly ultramarathon distances), the running/climbing combination of skyrunning (organised by the International Skyrunning Federation with races across North America, Europe and East Asia) and the mainly trail- and road-centred mountain running (governed by the World Mountain Running Association and based mainly in Europe).\nThe second variety of vertical running is based on human structures, such as stairs and man-made slopes. The foremost type of this is tower running, which sees athletes compete indoors, running up steps within very tall structures such as the Eiffel Tower or Empire State Building.\nDistances.\nSprints.\nSprints are short running events in athletics and track and field. Races over short distances are among the oldest running competitions. The first 13 editions of the Ancient Olympic Games featured only one event \u2013 the stadion race, which was a race from one end of the stadium to the other. There are three sprinting events which are currently held at the Olympics and outdoor World Championships: the 100 metres, 200 metres, and 400 metres. These events have their roots in races of imperial measurements which were later altered to metric: the 100\u00a0m evolved from the 100-yard dash, the 200\u00a0m distances came from the furlong (or 1/8 of a mile), and the 400\u00a0m was the successor to the 440-yard dash or quarter-mile race.\nAt the professional level, sprinters begin the race by assuming a crouching position in the starting blocks before leaning forward and gradually moving into an upright position as the contest progresses and momentum is gained. Athletes remain in the same lane on the running track throughout all sprinting events, with the sole exception of the 400\u00a0m indoors. Races up to 100\u00a0m are largely focused upon acceleration to an athlete's maximum speed. All sprints beyond this distance increasingly incorporate an element of endurance. Human physiology dictates that a runner's near-top speed cannot be maintained for more than thirty seconds or so as lactic acid builds up, and leg muscles begin to be deprived of oxygen.\nThe 60 metres is a common indoor event and it an indoor world championship event. Other less-common events include the 50 metres, 55 metres, 300 metres and 500 metres which are used in some high and collegiate competitions in the United States. The 150 metres, is rarely competed: Pietro Mennea set a world best in 1983, Olympic champions Michael Johnson and Donovan Bailey went head-to-head over the distance in 1997, and Usain Bolt improved Mennea's record in 2009.\nMiddle distance.\nMiddle-distance running events are track races longer than sprints up to 3000 metres. The standard middle distances are the 800 metres, 1500 metres and mile run, although the 3000 metres may also be classified as a middle-distance event. The 880-yard run, or half-mile, was the forebear to the 800\u00a0m distance and it has its roots in competitions in the United Kingdom in the 1830s. The 1500\u00a0m came about as a result of running three laps of a 500\u00a0m track, which was commonplace in continental Europe in the 1900s.\nLong distance.\nExamples of longer-distance running events are long-distance track races, half marathons, marathons, ultramarathons, and multiday races.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26034", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26034", "title": "Ren\u00e9 Magritte", "text": "Belgian painter (1898\u20131967)\nRen\u00e9 Fran\u00e7ois Ghislain Magritte (; 21 November 1898 \u2013 15 August 1967) was a Belgian surrealist artist known for his depictions of familiar objects in unfamiliar, unexpected contexts, which often provoked questions about the nature and boundaries of reality and representation. His imagery has influenced pop art, minimalist art, and conceptual art.\nEarly life.\nRen\u00e9 Magritte was born in Lessines, in the province of Hainaut in Belgium, in 1898. He was the oldest son of L\u00e9opold Magritte, a tailor and textile merchant, and R\u00e9gina (n\u00e9e Bertinchamps), who was a milliner before she got married. Little is known about Magritte's early life. He began lessons in drawing in 1910.\nOn 24 February 1912, his mother died by suicide, drowning herself in the River Sambre at Ch\u00e2telet. It was not her first suicide attempt. Her body was not discovered until 12 March, 16 days later. According to a legend, 13-year-old Magritte was present when her body was retrieved from the water, but recent research has discredited this story, which may have originated with the family nurse. Supposedly, when his mother was found, her dress was covering her face, an image that has been suggested as the source of several of Magritte's paintings in 1927\u201328 of people with cloth obscuring their faces, including \"Les Amants\".\nCareer.\nMagritte's earliest paintings, which date to about 1915, were Impressionistic. In 1916\u201318, he studied at the in Brussels, under Constant Montald, but found the instruction uninspiring. He also took classes at the Acad\u00e9mie Royale from the painter and poster designer Gisbert Combaz. The paintings he produced between 1918 and 1924 were influenced by Futurism and the figurative Cubism of Metzinger.\nFrom December 1920 to September 1921, Magritte served in the Belgian infantry in the Flemish town of Beverlo near Leopoldsburg. In 1922, he married Georgette Berger, whom he had met as a child in 1913. Also in 1922, the poet Marcel Lecomte showed Magritte a reproduction of Giorgio de Chirico's \"The Song of Love\" (painted in 1914). The work brought Magritte to tears; he described this as \"one of the most moving moments of my life: my eyes \"saw\" thought for the first time\". The paintings of the Belgian symbolist painter William Degouve de Nuncques have also been noted as an influence on Magritte, specifically \"The Blind House\" (1892) and Magritte's variations or series on \"The Empire of Lights\".\nIn 1922\u201323, Magritte worked as a draughtsman in a wallpaper factory, and he was a poster and advertisement designer until 1926, when a contract with Galerie Le Centaure in Brussels made it possible for him to paint full-time. In 1926, Magritte produced his first surreal painting, \"The Lost Jockey\" (\"Le jockey perdu\"), and in 1927 he held his first solo exhibition in Brussels. It was poorly reviewed.\nDepressed by the failure, he moved to Paris, where he became friends with Andr\u00e9 Breton and became involved in the Surrealist group. An illusionistic, dream-like quality is characteristic of Magritte's version of Surrealism. He became a leading member of the movement and remained in Paris for three years. In 1929, he was put under contract at Goemans Gallery in Paris along with Jean Arp and Yves Tanguy.\nOn 15 December 1929, Magritte participated in the last publication, No. 12, of \"La R\u00e9volution surr\u00e9aliste\", with his essay \"Les mots et les images\", where words play with images in sync with his work \"The Treachery of Images\".\nGalerie Le Centaure closed at the end of 1929, ending Magritte's contract income. Having made little impact in Paris, Magritte returned to Brussels in 1930 and resumed working in advertising. He and his brother, Paul, formed an agency, which earned him a living wage. In 1932, Magritte joined the Communist Party, which he periodically left and rejoined for several years. Between 1930 and 1932, Magritte had no exhibitions and sold no work. During this period, he was financially supported by a monthly stipend arranged by Belgian playwright Claude Spaak, the husband of Catherine Spaak. In 1934, Suzanne Spaak's sister, Alice Lorge, purchased Magritte's \"La Magie Noire\". This was the first of a series of 11 paintings that featured Magritte\u2019s wife, Georgette Berger, in a classical nude pose. Claude Spaak also commissioned portraits of his wife and children from Magritte. \nIn 1936, Magritte had his first solo exhibition in the United States at the Julien Levy Gallery in New York, followed by an exposition at the London Gallery in 1938.\nBetween 1934 and 1937, Magritte drew film posters under the pseudonym 'Emair' for the German sound film distributor Tobis Klangfilm. The Leuven City Archive preserves seven posters designed by Magritte.\nDuring the early stages of his career, the British surrealist patron Edward James allowed Magritte to stay rent-free in his London home, where Magritte studied architecture and painted. James is featured in two of Magritte's 1937 paintings, \"Le Principe du Plaisir\" (\"The Pleasure Principle\") and \"La Reproduction Interdite\", also known as \"Not to Be Reproduced\".\nDuring the German occupation of Belgium in World War II, he remained in Brussels, which led to a break with Breton. He briefly adopted a colorful, painterly style in 1943\u201344, an interlude known as his \"Renoir period\", as a reaction to his feelings of alienation and abandonment that came with living in German-occupied Belgium.\nIn 1946, renouncing the violence and pessimism of his earlier work, he joined several other Belgian artists in signing the manifesto \"Surrealism in Full Sunlight\". During 1947\u201348, Magritte's \"Vache period\", he painted in a provocative and crude Fauve style. During this time, he supported himself by producing fake Picassos, Braques, and de Chiricos\u2014a fraudulent repertoire he later expanded into the printing of forged banknotes during the lean postwar period. This venture was undertaken alongside his brother, Paul, and fellow Surrealist and \"surrogate son\" Marcel Mari\u00ebn, to whom had fallen the task of selling the forgeries. At the end of 1948, Magritte returned to the style and themes of his pre-war surrealistic art.\nIn France, Magritte's work has been showcased in a number of retrospective exhibitions, most recently at the Centre Georges Pompidou (2016\u201317). In the U.S., his work has been featured in three retrospective exhibitions: at the Museum of Modern Art in 1965, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1992, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art again in 2013. The 2018 exhibition, \"The Fifth Season\" at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, focused on the work of his later years.\nPolitically, Magritte stood to the left, and retained close ties to the Communist Party, even in the postwar years. But he was critical of the functionalist cultural policy of the Communist left, saying, \"Class consciousness is as necessary as bread; but that does not mean that workers must be condemned to bread and water and that wanting chicken and champagne would be harmful. [...] For the Communist painter, the justification of artistic activity is to create pictures that can represent mental luxury.\" While remaining committed to the political left, he thus advocated a certain autonomy of art. Spiritually, Magritte was an agnostic.\nPopular interest in Magritte's work rose considerably in the 1960s, and his imagery has influenced pop, minimalist, and conceptual art. In 2005, he was 9th in the Walloon version of \"De Grootste Belg\" (\"The Greatest Belgian\"); in the Flemish version he was 18th.\nPersonal life.\nMagritte married Georgette Berger in June 1922. Georgette was the daughter of a butcher in Charleroi, and first met Magritte when she was 13 and he was 15. They met again seven years later in Brussels in 1920 and Georgette, who had also studied art, became Magritte's model, muse, and wife.\nIn 1936, Magritte's marriage became troubled when he met a young performance artist, Sheila Legge, and began an affair with her. Magritte arranged for his friend, Paul Colinet, to entertain and distract Georgette, but this led to an affair between Georgette and Colinet. Magritte and his wife did not reconcile until 1940.\nMagritte died of pancreatic cancer on 15 August 1967, aged 68, and was interred in Schaerbeek Cemetery, Evere, Brussels.\nPhilosophical and artistic gestures.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is a union that suggests the essential mystery of the world. Art for me is not an end in itself, but a means of evoking that mystery.\n Ren\u00e9 Magritte on putting seemingly unrelated objects together in juxtaposition \nMagritte's work frequently displays a collection of ordinary objects in an unusual context, giving new meanings to familiar things. The use of objects as other than what they seem typifies his work \"The Treachery of Images\" (\"La trahison des images\"), which shows a pipe that looks as though it is a model for a tobacco store advertisement. Magritte painted below the pipe \"Ceci n'est pas une pipe\" (\"This is not a pipe\"), which seems a contradiction but is actually true: the painting is not a pipe, it is an \"image\" of a pipe. It does not \"satisfy emotionally\"; asked about this image, Magritte said that of course it was not a pipe\u2014just try to fill it with tobacco.\nMagritte's work has been described by Suzi Gablik as \"a systematic attempt to disrupt any dogmatic view of the physical world\". Therefore, when Magritte painted rocks\u2014which are commonly understood to be heavy, inanimate objects\u2014he often painted them floating cloud-like in the sky, or painted scenes of people and their environment turned to stone.\nAmong Magritte's works are a number of surrealist versions of other famous paintings, such as \"Perspective I\" and \"Perspective II\", which are copies of David's \"Portrait of Madame R\u00e9camier\" and Manet's \"The Balcony\", respectively, with the human subjects replaced by coffins. Elsewhere, Magritte challenges the difficulty of artwork to convey meaning with a recurring motif of an easel, as in his \"The Human Condition\" series (1933, 1935) or \"The Promenades of Euclid\" (1955), wherein the spires of a castle are \"painted\" upon the ordinary streets the canvas overlooks. In a letter to Breton, he wrote of \"The Human Condition\" that it was irrelevant if the scene behind the easel differed from what was depicted upon it, \"but the main thing was to eliminate the difference between a view seen from outside and from inside a room\". The windows in some of these pictures are framed with heavy drapes, suggesting a theatrical motif.\nMagritte's style of surrealism is more representational than the \"automatic\" style of artists such as Joan Mir\u00f3. His use of ordinary objects in unfamiliar spaces is joined to his desire to create poetic imagery. He called painting \"the art of putting colors side by side in such a way that their real aspect is effaced, so that familiar objects\u2014the sky, people, trees, mountains, furniture, the stars, solid structures, graffiti\u2014become united in a single poetically disciplined image. The poetry of this image dispenses with any symbolic significance, old or new.\"\nMagritte described his paintings as \"visible images which conceal nothing; they evoke mystery and, indeed, when one sees one of my pictures, one asks oneself this simple question, 'What does that mean?'. It does not mean anything, because mystery means nothing either, it is unknowable.\"\nMagritte's constant play with reality and illusion has been attributed to the early death of his mother. Psychoanalysts who have examined bereaved children have hypothesized that Magritte's back-and-forth play with reality and illusion reflects his \"constant shifting back and forth from what he wishes\u2014'mother is alive'\u2014to what he knows\u2014'mother is dead'\".\nMore recently, Patricia Allmer has demonstrated the influence of fairground attractions on Magritte's art, from carousels and circuses to panoramas and stage magic.\nArtists influenced by Magritte.\nContemporary artists have been greatly influenced by Magritte's examination of the fickleness of images. Artists influenced by Magritte include John Baldessari, Ed Ruscha, Andy Warhol, Jasper Johns, Jan Verdoodt, Martin Kippenberger, Duane Michals, Storm Thorgerson, and Luis Rey. Some of their works integrate direct references and others offer contemporary viewpoints on his abstract fixations.\nMagritte's use of simple graphic and everyday imagery has been compared to that of pop artists. His influence in the development of pop art has been widely recognized, although Magritte himself discounted the connection. He considered the pop artists' representation of \"the world as it is\" as \"their error\", and contrasted their attention to the transitory with his concern for \"the feeling for the real, insofar as it is permanent.\" The 2006\u201307 LACMA exhibition \"Magritte and Contemporary Art: The Treachery of Images\" examined the relationship between Magritte and contemporary art.\nLegacy.\nThe 1960s brought a great increase in public awareness of Magritte's work. Thanks to his \"sound knowledge of how to present objects in a manner both suggestive and questioning\", his works have been frequently adapted or plagiarized in advertisements, posters, book covers and the like. Examples include album covers such as \"Beck-Ola\" by The Jeff Beck Group (reproducing Magritte's \"The Listening Room\"), Alan Hull's 1973 album \"Pipedream\", which uses \"The Philosopher's Lamp\", Jackson Browne's 1974 album \"Late for the Sky\", with artwork inspired by \"The Empire of Light\", Oregon's album \"Oregon\" referring to \"Carte Blanche\", the Firesign Theatre's album \"Just Folks... A Firesign Chat\" based on \"The Mysteries of the Horizon\", and Styx's album \"The Grand Illusion\" incorporating an adaptation of the painting \"The Blank Signature (Le Blanc Seing)\". The Nigerian rapper Jesse Jagz's 2014 album \"\" has cover art inspired by Magritte. In 2015 the band Punch Brothers used \"The Lovers\" as the cover of its album \"The Phosphorescent Blues\".\nThe logo of Apple Corps, The Beatles' company, is inspired by Magritte's \"Le Jeu de Mourre\", a 1966 painting. Paul Simon's song \"Rene and Georgette Magritte with Their Dog after the War\", inspired by a photograph of Magritte by Lothar Wolleh, appears on the 1983 album \"Hearts and Bones\". John Cale wrote a song titled \"Magritte\" that appears on the 2003 album \"HoboSapiens\". Tom Stoppard wrote a 1970 Surrealist play called \"After Magritte\". John Berger scripted the book \"Ways of Seeing\" using images and ideologies regarding Magritte. Douglas Hofstadter's 1979 book \"G\u00f6del, Escher, Bach\" uses Magritte works for many of its illustrations. \"The Treachery of Images\" was used in a major plot in L. J. Smith's 1994 novel \"The Forbidden Game\". Magritte's imagery has inspired filmmakers ranging from the surrealist Marcel Mari\u00ebn to mainstream directors such as Jean-Luc Godard, Alain Robbe-Grillet, Bernardo Bertolucci, Nicolas Roeg, John Boorman, and Terry Gilliam.\nAccording to the 1998 documentary \"The Fear of God: 25 Years of \"The Exorcist\"\", the poster shot for the film \"The Exorcist\" was inspired by Magritte's \"The Empire of Light\".\nMagritte's work was influential in the entire 1992 movie Toys but especially on a break-in scene featuring Robin Williams and Joan Cusack in a music video hoax. Many of Magritte's works were used directly in that scene. In the 1999 movie \"The Thomas Crown Affair,\" Magritte's \"The Son of Man\" prominently features in the plot.\nGary Numan's 1979 album \"The Pleasure Principle\" is a reference to Magritte's painting of the same name.\nIn the early 2000s, two LPs were released that had album cover art referencing \"The Lovers\": \"Casually Dressed &amp; Deep in Conversation\" by Funeral for a Friend and \"Frances the Mute\" by The Mars Volta.\nIn John Green's 2012 novel \"The Fault in Our Stars\", the main character Hazel Grace Lancaster wears a tee shirt with Magritte's \"The Treachery of Images.\" Just before leaving her mother to visit her favorite author, she explains the drawing to her confused mother and says the author's novel has \"several Magritte references\", clearly hoping the author will be pleased by the shirt.\nThe music video of Markus Schulz's \"Koolhaus\" under his Dakota guise is inspired by Magritte's works.\nA location in Brussels has been named \"Ceci n'est pas une rue\" (This is not a street).\nBelgian actor Pierre Gervais is to play Magritte in the 2025 television series This is Not a Murder Mystery.\nMagritte Museum and other collections.\nThe Magritte Museum opened to the public on 30 May 2009 in Brussels. Housed in the five-level neo-classical Hotel Altenloh, on the Place Royale, it displays some 200 original Magritte paintings, drawings, and sculptures, including \"The Return\", \"Scheherazade\" and \"The Empire of Light\". This multidisciplinary permanent installation is the biggest Magritte archive anywhere and most of the work is directly from the collection of the artist's widow, Georgette Magritte, and from Irene Hamoir Scutenaire, his primary collector. Additionally, the museum includes Magritte's experiments with photography from 1920 on and the short Surrealist films he made from 1956 on.\nAnother museum is at 135 Rue Esseghem in Brussels, Magritte's former home, where he lived with his wife from 1930 to 1954. \"Olympia\" (1948), a nude portrait of Magritte's wife reportedly worth about US$1.1 million, was stolen from this museum on the morning of 24 September 2009 by two armed men. It was returned to the museum in January 2012 in exchange for a 50,000-Euro payment from the museum's insurer. The thieves reportedly agreed to the deal because they could not sell the painting on the black market due to its fame.\nThe Menil Collection in Houston, Texas, holds one of the most significant collections of dada and surrealist work in the United States, including dozens of oil paintings, gouaches, drawings, and bronzes by Magritte. John de Menil and Dominique de Menil initiated and funded the catalogue raisonn\u00e9 of Magritte's oeuvre, published between 1992 and 1997 in five volumes, with an addendum in 2012. Major oil paintings in the Menil Collection include \"The Meaning of Night\" (1927), \"The Eternally Obvious\" (1930), \"The Rape\" (1934), \"The Listening Room\" (1952), and \"Golconda\" (1953). They are typically exhibited a few at a time on a rotating basis with other surrealist works in the collection.\nSelected list of works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26035", "revid": "1723027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26035", "title": "Rudolf Diesel", "text": "German inventor and engineer (1858\u20131913)\nRudolf Christian Karl Diesel (, ; 18 March 1858 \u2013 29 September 1913) was a German inventor and mechanical engineer, best known for inventing the Diesel engine, which burns Diesel fuel; both are named after him.\nEarly life and education.\nDiesel was born on 18 March 1858 at 38 Rue Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth in Paris, France, the second of three children of Elise (n\u00e9e Strobel) and Theodor Diesel. His parents were Bavarian immigrants living in Paris. Theodor Diesel, a bookbinder by trade, left his hometown of Augsburg, Bavaria, in 1848. He met his wife, a daughter of a Nuremberg merchant, in Paris in 1855 and became a leather goods manufacturer there. \nShortly after his birth, Diesel was given away to a Vincennes farmer family, where he spent his first nine months. When he was returned to his family, they moved into a flat at 49 Rue de la Fontaine-au-Roi. At the time, the Diesel family suffered from financial difficulties, thus young Rudolf Diesel had to work in his father's workshop and deliver leather goods to customers using a barrow. He attended a Protestant-French school and soon became interested in social questions and technology. Being a very good student, 12-year-old Diesel received the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 pour l'Instruction El\u00e9mentaire bronze medal and had plans to enter Ecole Primaire Sup\u00e9rieure in 1870.\nAt the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War the same year, his family were deported to England, settling in London, where Diesel attended an English-speaking school. Before the war's end, however, Diesel's mother sent 12-year-old Rudolf to Augsburg to live with his aunt and uncle, Barbara and Christoph Barnickel, to become fluent in German and to visit the \"K\u00f6nigliche Kreis-Gewerbeschule\" (Royal County Vocational College), where his uncle taught mathematics. He was enrolled at the \"Technische Hochschule\" (Technical High School).\nAt the age of 14, Diesel wrote a letter to his parents saying that he intended to become an engineer. After finishing his basic education at the top of his class in 1873, he enrolled at the newly founded Industrial School of Augsburg. Two years later, he received a merit scholarship from the Royal Bavarian Polytechnic of Munich, which he accepted against the wishes of his parents, who wanted him to begin working instead.\nCareer.\nOne of Diesel's professors in Munich was Carl von Linde. Diesel was unable to graduate with his class in July 1879 because he fell ill with typhoid fever. While waiting for the next examination date, he gained practical engineering experience at the Sulzer Brothers Machine Works in Winterthur, Switzerland. Diesel graduated in January 1880 with highest academic honours and returned to Paris, where he assisted Linde with the design and construction of a modern refrigeration and ice plant. Diesel became the director of the plant a year afterwards.\nIn 1883, Diesel married Martha Flasche, and continued to work for Linde, gaining numerous patents in both Germany and France.\nIn early 1890, Diesel moved to Berlin with his wife and children, Rudolf Jr, Heddy, and Eugen, to assume management of Linde's corporate research and development department and to join several other corporate boards. Since he was not allowed to use for his own purposes the patents he developed while an employee of Linde's, he expanded beyond the field of refrigeration. He first worked with steam, his research into thermal efficiency and fuel efficiency leading him to build a steam engine using ammonia vapor. During tests, however, the engine exploded and almost killed him. His research into high-compression cylinder pressures tested the strength of iron and steel cylinder heads. One exploded during a test run. He spent many months in a hospital, followed by health and eyesight problems. It was during this year that Diesel began conceptualising the idea of a diesel engine.\nEver since attending lectures of von Linde, Diesel worked on designing an internal combustion engine that could approach the maximum theoretical thermal efficiency of the Carnot cycle. In 1892, after working on this idea for several years, he considered his theory to be completed. In the same year, Diesel was given the German patent DRP 67207. In 1893, he published a treatise entitled \"Theory and Construction of a Rational Heat-engine to Replace the Steam Engine and The Combustion Engines Known Today\", that he had been working on since early 1892. This treatise formed the basis for his work on and development of the diesel engine. By summer 1893, Diesel had realised that his initial theory was erroneous, leading him to file another patent application for the corrected theory in 1893.\nDiesel understood thermodynamics and the theoretical and practical constraints on fuel efficiency. He knew that as much as 90% of the energy available in the fuel is wasted in a steam engine. His work in engine design was driven by the goal of much higher efficiency ratios. \nAs opposed to outside ignition applied against internal air and fuel mixture, air was compressed internally within the cylinder whilst heating, in order for the fuel to establish contact the air immediately before the compression period would end, thus igniting on its own. Therefore, the engine was smaller and weighed less than most contemporary steam engines, not to mention the fact that further fuel sources weren't required. Fuel efficiency was measured 75% above the 10% theoretical efficiency for steam engines.\nIn his engine, fuel was injected at the end of the compression stroke and was ignited by the high temperature resulting from the compression. From 1893 to 1897, Heinrich von Buz, director of Maschinenfabrik Augsburg in Augsburg, provided Rudolf Diesel the opportunity to test and develop his ideas. Diesel also received support from the Krupp firm.\nDiesel's design utilised compression ignition as opposed to using spark plugs similar to gas engines, with the ability to be run on biodiesel, if not petroleum-originating fuels. Compression engines are circa 30% more efficient over conventional gas burning engines, being mixed through forced compressed air within the combustion chamber, leading to a higher internal temperature, expanding at a higher rate and placing further pressure over the pistons that rotate the crankshaft towards a quicker rate.\nBiodiesel often composed of synthesis gas originating from waste cellulose gasification, as well as extraction of lipids from algae, most frequently used by consisting vegetable oils and algae together under methanol transesterification. Numerous firms have developed different techniques in order to achieve such.\nThe first successful diesel engine Motor 250/400 was officially tested in 1897, featuring a 25 horsepower four-stroke, single vertical cylinder compression. Having just revolutionised the engine manufacturing industry, it became an immediate success, with royalties amassing great wealth for Diesel. The engine is currently on display at the German Technical Museum in Munich.\nBesides Germany, Diesel obtained patents for his design in other countries, including the United States (1895,1898).\nDisappearance and death.\nOn the evening of 29 September 1913, Diesel boarded the Great Eastern Railway steamer SS \"Dresden\" in Antwerp on his way to a meeting of the Consolidated Diesel Manufacturing company in London. He took dinner on board the ship and then retired to his cabin at about 10 p.m., leaving word to be called the next morning at 6:15\u00a0a.m., but he was never seen alive again. In the morning his cabin was empty and his bed had not been slept in, although his nightshirt was neatly laid out and his watch had been left where it could be seen from the bed. His hat and neatly folded overcoat were discovered beneath the afterdeck railing.\nShortly after Diesel's disappearance, his wife Martha opened a bag that her husband had given to her just before his ill-fated voyage, with directions that it should not be opened until the following week. She discovered 20,000 German marks in cash (US$120,000 today) and financial statements indicating that their bank accounts were virtually empty. In a diary Diesel brought with him on the ship, for the date 29 September 1913, a cross was drawn, possibly indicating death. \nTen days after he was last seen, the crew of the Dutch pilot boat \"Coertsen\" came upon the corpse of a man floating in the Eastern Scheldt. The body was in such an advanced state of decomposition that it was unrecognisable, and they did not retain it aboard because of heavy weather. Instead, the crew retrieved personal items (pill case, wallet, I.D. card, pocketknife, eyeglass case) from the clothing of the dead man, and returned the body to the sea. On 13 October, these items were identified by Rudolf's son, Eugen Diesel, as belonging to his father. Five months later, in March 1914, Diesel\u2019s wife, Martha, seemed to go missing in Germany. Martha ultimately died in Brandenburg on 16 April 1944, at age 85.\nThere are various theories to explain Diesel's death. Some, such as Diesel's biographers Grosser (1978) and Sittauer (1978) have argued that he died by suicide. Another line of thought suggests that he was murdered, given his refusal to grant the German forces the exclusive rights to using his invention; indeed, Diesel had boarded \"Dresden\" with the intent of meeting with representatives of the Royal Navy to discuss the possibility of powering British submarines by diesel engine. Another theory is that his apparent death was a ruse staged by the British government to cover his defection to the British cause, and that he then went to Canada, worked for the Vickers shipyard in Montreal and was responsible for a sudden acceleration in its ability to produce a successful Diesel engine for submarines. Given the limited evidence at hand, his disappearance and death remain unsolved.\nIn 1950, Magokichi Yamaoka, the founder of Yanmar, the diesel engine manufacturer in Japan, visited West Germany and learned that there was no tomb or monument for Diesel. Yamaoka and people associated with Diesel began to make preparations to honour him. In 1957, on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of Diesel's birth and the 60th anniversary of the diesel engine development, Yamaoka dedicated the Rudolf Diesel Memorial Garden () in Wittelsbacher Park in Augsburg, Bavaria, where Diesel had undertaken his early technical education and original engine development.\nLegacy.\nHe was inducted into the Automotive Hall of Fame in 1978.\nAfter Diesel's death, his engine underwent much development and became a very important replacement for the steam piston engine in many applications. Because the Diesel engine required a more robust construction than a gasoline engine, it saw limited use in aviation. However, the Diesel engine became widespread in many other applications, such as stationary engines, agricultural machines and off-highway machinery in general, submarines, ships, and much later, locomotives, trucks, and in modern automobiles.\nDiesel engines have the benefit of running more fuel-efficiently than any other internal combustion engines suited for motor vehicles, allowing more heat to be converted to mechanical work.\nDiesel was interested in using coal dust or vegetable oil as fuel, and in fact, his engine was run on peanut oil. Although these fuels were not better replacements, in 2008 the rise in fuel prices coupled with concerns about remaining petroleum reserves, led to the more widespread use of vegetable oil and biodiesel.\nThe primary fuel used in Diesel engines is the eponymous diesel fuel, derived from the refinement of crude oil. Diesel is safer to store than gasoline, because its flash point is approximately higher, and it will not explode.\nUse of vegetable oils as diesel engine fuel.\nIn a book titled \"Diesel Engines for Land and Marine Work\", Diesel said that \"In 1900 a small Diesel engine was exhibited by the Otto company which, on the suggestion of the French Government, was run on arachide [peanut] oil, and operated so well that very few people were aware of the fact. The motor was built for ordinary oils, and without any modification was run on vegetable oil. I have recently repeated these experiments on a large scale with full success and entire confirmation of the results formerly obtained.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
