{"id": "25423", "revid": "23483242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25423", "title": "Rock music", "text": "Broad genre of popular music\nRock music is a genre of popular music that originated in the United States as \"rock and roll\" in the late 1940s and early 1950s, developing into a range of styles from the mid-1960s, primarily in the United States and United Kingdom. It has its roots in rock and roll, a style that drew from the black musical genres of blues and rhythm and blues, as well as from country music. Rock also drew strongly from genres such as electric blues and folk, and incorporated influences from jazz and other styles. Rock is typically centered on the electric guitar, usually as part of a rock group with electric bass guitar, drums, and one or more singers.\nUsually, rock is song-based music with a time signature and using a verse\u2013chorus form; however, the genre has become extremely diverse. Like pop music, lyrics often stress romantic love but also address a wide variety of other themes that are frequently social or political. Rock was the most popular genre of music in the U.S. and much of the western world from the 1960s up to the 2010s.\nRock musicians in the mid-1960s began to advance the album ahead of the single as the dominant form of recorded music expression and consumption, with the Beatles at the forefront of this development. Their contributions lent the genre a cultural legitimacy in the mainstream and initiated a rock-informed album era in the music industry for the next several decades. By the late 1960s \"classic rock\" period, a few distinct rock music subgenres had emerged, including hybrids like blues rock, folk rock, country rock, southern rock, raga rock, and jazz rock, which contributed to the development of psychedelic rock, influenced by the countercultural psychedelic and hippie scene. New genres that emerged included progressive rock, which extended artistic elements, heavy metal, which emphasized an aggressive thick sound, and glam rock, which highlighted showmanship and visual style. In the second half of the 1970s, punk rock reacted by producing stripped-down, energetic social and political critiques. Punk was an influence in the 1980s on new wave, post-punk and eventually alternative rock.\nFrom the 1990s, alternative rock began to dominate rock music and break into the mainstream in the form of grunge, Britpop, and indie rock. Further subgenres have since emerged, including pop-punk, electronic rock, rap rock, and rap metal. Some movements were conscious attempts to revisit rock's history, including the garage rock and post-punk revival in the 2000s. Since the 2010s, rock has lost its position as the pre-eminent popular music genre in world culture, but remains commercially successful. The increased influence of hip-hop and electronic dance music can be seen in rock music, notably in the techno-pop scene of the early 2010s and the pop-punk-hip-hop revival of the 2020s.\nRock has also embodied and served as the vehicle for cultural and social movements, leading to major subcultures including mods and rockers in the U.K., the hippie movement and the wider western counterculture movement that spread out from San Francisco in the U.S. in the 1960s, the latter of which continues to this day. Similarly, 1970s punk culture spawned the goth, punk, and emo subcultures. Inheriting the folk tradition of the protest song, rock music has been associated with political activism, as well as changes in social attitudes to race, sex, and drug use, and is often seen as an expression of youth revolt against adult conformity. At the same time, it has been commercially highly successful, leading to accusations of selling out.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCharacteristics.\nThe sound of rock is traditionally centered on the amplified electric guitar, which emerged in its modern form in the 1950s with the popularity of rock and roll. It was also greatly influenced by the sounds of electric blues guitarists. The sound of an electric guitar in rock music is typically supported by an electric bass guitar, which pioneered jazz music in the same era, and by percussion produced from a drum kit that combines drums and cymbals. This trio of instruments has often been complemented by the inclusion of other instruments, particularly keyboards such as the piano, the Hammond organ, and the synthesizer. The basic rock instrumentation was derived from the basic electric blues band instrumentation (prominent lead guitar, second chordal instrument, bass, and drums). A group of musicians performing rock music is termed as a rock band or a rock group. Furthermore, it typically consists of between three (the power trio) and five members. Classically, a rock band takes the form of a quartet whose members cover one or more roles, including vocalist, lead guitarist, rhythm guitarist, bass guitarist, drummer, and often keyboard player or another instrumentalist.\n&lt;score raw=\"1\" sound=\"1\"&gt;\n\\version \"2.22.0\"\n\\score {\n \\repeat volta 2 {\n \\tempo 4 = 80-160\n \\bar \". A simple drum pattern common in rock music\nRock music is traditionally built on a foundation of simple syncopated rhythms in a meter, with a repetitive snare drum back beat on beats two and four. Melodies often originate from older musical modes such as the Dorian and Mixolydian, as well as major and minor modes. Harmonies range from the common triad to parallel perfect fourths and fifths and dissonant harmonic progressions. Since the late 1950s, and particularly from the mid-1960s onwards, rock music often used the verse\u2013chorus structure derived from blues and folk music, but there has been considerable variation from this model. Critics have stressed the eclecticism and stylistic diversity of rock. Because of its complex history and its tendency to borrow from other musical and cultural forms, it has been argued that \"it is impossible to bind rock music to a rigidly delineated musical definition.\" In 1981, music journalist Robert Christgau said, \"the best rock jolts folk-art virtues\u2014directness, utility, natural audience\u2014into the present with shots of modern technology\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRock and roll was conceived as an outlet for adolescent yearnings ... To make rock and roll is also an ideal way to explore intersections of sex, love, violence, and fun, to broadcast the delights and limitations of the regional, and to deal with the depredations and benefits of mass culture itself.\n\u2014Rock music critic Robert Christgau in \"\" in 1981\nUnlike many earlier styles of popular music, rock lyrics have dealt with a wide range of themes, including romantic love, sex, rebellion against the establishment, social concerns, and life styles. These themes were inherited from a variety of sources such as the Tin Pan Alley pop tradition, folk music, and rhythm and blues. Christgau characterizes rock lyrics as a \"cool medium\" with simple diction and repeated refrains, and asserts that rock's primary \"function\" \"pertains to music, or, more generally, noise.\" The predominance of white, male, and often middle class musicians in rock music has often been noted, and rock has been seen as an appropriation of Black musical forms for a young, white and largely male audience. As a result, it has also been seen to articulate the concerns of this group in both style and lyrics. Christgau, writing in 1972, said in spite of some exceptions, \"rock and roll usually implies an identification of male sexuality and aggression\".\nSince the term \"rock\" started being used in preference to \"rock and roll\" from the late 1960s, it has usually been contrasted with pop music, with which it has shared many characteristics; however, rock is often distanced from pop; the former has an emphasis on musicianship, live performance, and a focus on serious and progressive themes as part of an ideology of authenticity that is frequently combined with an awareness of the genre's history and development. According to Simon Frith, rock was \"something more than pop, something more than rock and roll\" and \"rock musicians combined an emphasis on skill and technique with the romantic concept of art as artistic expression, original and sincere\".\nIn the new millennium, the term \"rock\" has occasionally been used as a blanket term including forms like pop music, reggae music, soul music, and even hip hop, which it has been influenced with but often contrasted through much of the latter's history. Christgau has used the term broadly to refer to popular and semipopular music that caters to his sensibility as \"a rock-and-roller\", including a fondness for a good beat, a meaningful lyric with some wit, and the theme of youth, which holds an \"eternal attraction\" so objective \"that all youth music partakes of sociology and the field report.\"\n1940s\u20131950s: Birth of rock and roll.\nRock and roll.\nThe foundations of rock music are in rock and roll, which originated in the United States during the late 1940s and early 1950s; the genre spread to much of the rest of the world. Its origins lay in a melding of various black musical genres of the time, including rhythm and blues and gospel music, with country and western.\nDebate surrounds the many recordings which have been suggested as \"the first rock and roll record\". Contenders include \"Strange Things Happening Every Day\" by Sister Rosetta Tharpe (1944); \"That's All Right\" by Arthur Crudup (1946), which was later covered by Elvis Presley in 1954; \"The House of Blue Lights\" by Ella Mae Morse and Freddie Slack (1946); Wynonie Harris' \"Good Rocking Tonight\" (1948); Goree Carter's \"Rock Awhile\" (1949); Jimmy Preston's \"Rock the Joint\" (1949), also covered by Bill Haley &amp; His Comets in 1952; and \"Rocket 88\" by Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats (in fact, Ike Turner and his band the Kings of Rhythm), recorded by Sam Phillips for Chess Records in 1951.\nIn 1951, Cleveland, Ohio, disc jockey Alan Freed began playing rhythm and blues music (then termed \"race music\") for a multi-racial audience, and is credited with first using the phrase \"rock and roll\" to describe the music. Four years later, Bill Haley's \"Rock Around the Clock\" (1954) became the first rock and roll song to top \"Billboard\" magazine's main sales and airplay charts, and opened the door worldwide for this new wave of popular culture. Other artists with early rock and roll hits included Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, Fats Domino, Little Richard, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Gene Vincent. Soon rock and roll was the major force in American record sales and crooners, such as Eddie Fisher, Perry Como, and Patti Page, who had dominated the previous decade of popular music, found their access to the pop charts significantly curtailed.\nRock and roll has led to a number of distinct subgenres, including rockabilly, combining rock and roll with \"hillbilly\" country music, which was usually played and recorded in the mid-1950s by white singers such as Carl Perkins, Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison, Buddy Holly and with the greatest commercial success, Elvis Presley. Hispanic and Latino American movements in rock and roll, which would eventually lead to the success of Latin rock and Chicano rock within the US, began to rise in the Southwest; with rock and roll standard musician Ritchie Valens and even those within other heritage genres, such as Al Hurricane along with his brothers Tiny Morrie and Baby Gaby as they began combining rock and roll with country-western within traditional New Mexico music. In addition, the 1950s saw the growth in popularity of the electric guitar, and the development of a specifically rock and roll style of playing through such exponents as Chuck Berry, Link Wray, and Scotty Moore. The use of distortion, pioneered by Western swing guitarists such as Junior Barnard and Eldon Shamblin was popularized by Chuck Berry in the mid-1950s. The use of power chords, pioneered by Francisco T\u00e1rrega and Heitor Villa-Lobos in the 19th century and later on by Willie Johnson and Pat Hare in the early 1950s, was popularized by Link Wray in the late 1950s.\nCommentators have perceived a decline of rock and roll in the late 1950s and early 1960s. By 1959, the death of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper and Ritchie Valens in a plane crash, the departure of Elvis for the army, the retirement of Little Richard to become a preacher, prosecutions of Jerry Lee Lewis and Chuck Berry and the breaking of the payola scandal (which implicated major figures, including Alan Freed, in bribery and corruption in promoting individual acts or songs), gave a sense that the rock and roll era established at that point had come to an end.\nGlobal spread.\nRock quickly spread out from its origins in the US, associated with the rapid Americanization that was taking place globally in the aftermath of the Second World War. Cliff Richard is credited with one of the first rock and roll hits outside of North America with \"Move It\" (1959), effectively ushering in the sound of British rock. Several artists, most prominently Tommy Steele from the UK, found success with covers of major American rock and roll hits before the recordings could spread internationally, often translating them into local languages where appropriate. Steele in particular toured Britain, Scandinavia, Australia, the USSR and South Africa from 1955 to 1957, influencing the globalisation of rock. Johnny O'Keefe's 1958 record \"Wild One\" was one of the earliest Australian rock and roll hits. By the late 1950s, as well as in the American-influenced Western world, rock was popular in communist states such as Yugoslavia, and the USSR, as well as in regions such as South America.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, U.S. blues music and blues rock artists, who had been surpassed by the rise of rock and roll in the US, found new popularity in the UK, visiting with successful tours. Lonnie Donegan's 1955 hit \"Rock Island Line\" was a major influence and helped to develop the trend of skiffle music groups throughout the country, many of which, including John Lennon's Quarrymen (later the Beatles), moved on to play rock and roll. While former rock and roll market in the US was becoming dominated by lightweight pop and ballads, British rock groups at clubs and local dances were developing a style more strongly influenced by blues-rock pioneers, and were starting to play with an intensity and drive seldom found in white American acts; this influence would go on to shape the future of rock music through the British Invasion.\n1960s: British invasion and broadening sound.\nThe first four years of the 1960s have often been seen as an era of hiatus for rock and roll. However, some authors have emphasised innovations and trends in this period without which future developments would not have been possible. While early rock and roll, particularly through the advent of rockabilly, saw the greatest commercial success for male and white performers, in this era the genre was dominated by black and female artists. Rock and roll had not disappeared entirely from music at the end of the 1950s and some of its energy can be seen in the various dance crazes of the early 1960s, started by Chubby Checker's record \"The Twist\" (1960). Some music historians have also pointed to important and innovative technical developments that built on rock and roll in this period, including the electronic treatment of sound by such innovators as Joe Meek, and the elaborate production methods of the Wall of Sound pursued by Phil Spector.\nInstrumental rock and surf.\nThe instrumental rock and roll of performers such as Duane Eddy, Link Wray and the Ventures was further developed by Dick Dale, who added distinctive \"wet\" reverb, rapid alternate picking, and Middle Eastern and Mexican influences. He produced the regional hit \"Let's Go Trippin'\" in 1961 and launched the surf music craze, following up with songs like \"Misirlou\" (1962). Like Dale and his Del-Tones, most early surf bands were formed in Southern California, including the Bel-Airs, the Challengers, and Eddie &amp; the Showmen. The Chantays scored a top ten national hit with \"Pipeline\" in 1963 and probably the best-known surf tune was 1963's \"Wipe Out\", by the Surfaris, which hit number 2 and number 10 on the \"Billboard\" charts in 1965. Surf rock was also popular in Europe during this time, with the British group the Shadows scoring hits in the early 1960s with instrumentals such as \"Apache\" (1960) and \"Kon-Tiki\" (1961), while Swedish surf group the Spotnicks saw success in both Sweden and Britain.\nSurf music achieved its greatest commercial success as vocal pop music, particularly the work of the Beach Boys, formed in 1961 in Southern California. Their early albums featured both instrumental surf rock (including covers of music by Dick Dale) and vocal songs, drawing on rock and roll and doo wop and the close harmonies of vocal pop acts like the Four Freshmen. The Beach Boys first chart hit, \"Surfin'\" (1961), reached the \"Billboard\" top 100 and helped make the surf music craze a national phenomenon. The surf music craze and the careers of almost all surf acts were effectively ended by 1965 after the arrival of the British Invasion.\nBritish Invasion.\nBy the end of 1962, what would become the British rock scene had started with beat groups like the Beatles, Gerry &amp; the Pacemakers and the Searchers from Liverpool and Freddie and the Dreamers, Herman's Hermits and the Hollies from Manchester. They drew on a wide range of American influences including 1950s rock and roll, soul, rhythm and blues, and surf music, initially reinterpreting standard American tunes and playing for dancers. Bands like the Animals from Newcastle and Them from Belfast, and those from London like the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds, were more directly influenced by rhythm and blues and later blues music. Soon these groups were composing their own material, combining US forms of music and infusing it with a high energy beat. Beat bands tended towards \"bouncy, irresistible melodies\", while early British blues acts tended towards less sexually innocent, more aggressive songs, often adopting an anti-establishment stance. There was, however, particularly in the early stages, considerable musical crossover between the two tendencies. By 1963, led by the Beatles, beat groups had begun to achieve national success in Britain, soon to be followed into the charts by the more rhythm and blues focused acts.\n\"I Want to Hold Your Hand\" was the Beatles' first number one hit on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100, spending seven weeks at the top and a total of 15 weeks on the chart. Their first appearance on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" on 9 February 1964, drawing an estimated 73\u00a0million viewers (at the time a record for an American television program) is considered a milestone in American pop culture. During the week of 4 April 1964, the Beatles held 12 positions on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 singles chart, including the entire top five. The Beatles went on to become the biggest selling rock band of all time and they were followed into the US charts by numerous British bands. During the next two years, British acts dominated their own and the US charts with Peter and Gordon, the Animals, Manfred Mann, Petula Clark, Freddie and the Dreamers, Wayne Fontana and the Mindbenders, Herman's Hermits, the Rolling Stones, the Troggs, and Donovan all having one or more number one singles. Other major acts that were part of the invasion included the Kinks, the Who, and the Dave Clark Five.\nThe British Invasion helped internationalize the production of rock and roll, opening the door for subsequent British (and Irish) performers to achieve international success. In America it arguably spelled the end of instrumental surf music, vocal girl groups and (for a time) the teen idols, that had dominated the American charts in the late 1950s and 1960s. It dented the careers of established R&amp;B acts like Fats Domino and Chubby Checker and even temporarily derailed the chart success of surviving rock and roll acts, including Elvis. The British Invasion also played a major part in the rise of a distinct genre of rock music, and cemented the primacy of the rock group, based on guitars and drums and producing their own material as singer-songwriters. Following the example set by the Beatles' 1965 LP \"Rubber Soul\" in particular, other British rock acts released rock albums intended as artistic statements in 1966, including the Rolling Stones' \"Aftermath\", the Beatles' own \"Revolver\", and the Who's \"A Quick One\", as well as American acts in the Beach Boys (\"Pet Sounds\") and Bob Dylan (\"Blonde on Blonde\").\nBlues rock.\nAlthough the first impact of the British Invasion on American popular music was through beat and R&amp;B based acts, the impetus was soon taken up by a second wave of bands that drew their inspiration more directly from American blues, including the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds. British blues musicians of the late 1950s and early 1960s had been inspired by the acoustic playing of figures such as Lead Belly, who was a major influence on the Skiffle craze, and Robert Johnson. Increasingly they adopted a loud amplified sound, often centered on the electric guitar, based on the Chicago blues, particularly after the tour of Britain by Muddy Waters in 1958, which prompted Cyril Davies and guitarist Alexis Korner to form the band Blues Incorporated. The band involved and inspired many of the figures of the subsequent British blues boom, including members of the Rolling Stones and Cream, combining blues standards and forms with rock instrumentation and emphasis.\nThe other key focus for British blues was John Mayall; his band, the Bluesbreakers, included Eric Clapton (after Clapton's departure from the Yardbirds) and later Peter Green. Particularly significant was the release of \"Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton (Beano)\" album (1966), considered one of the seminal British blues recordings and the sound of which was much emulated in both Britain and the United States. Eric Clapton went on to form supergroups Cream, Blind Faith, and Derek and the Dominos, followed by an extensive solo career that helped bring blues rock into the mainstream. Green, along with the Bluesbreaker's rhythm section Mick Fleetwood and John McVie, formed Peter Green's Fleetwood Mac, who enjoyed some of the greatest commercial success in the genre. In the late 1960s Jeff Beck, also an alumnus of the Yardbirds, moved blues rock in the direction of heavy rock with his band, the Jeff Beck Group. The last Yardbirds guitarist was Jimmy Page, who went on to form \"The New Yardbirds\" which rapidly became Led Zeppelin. Many of the songs on their first three albums, and occasionally later in their careers, were expansions on traditional blues songs.\nIn the United States, blues rock had been pioneered in the early 1960s by guitarist Lonnie Mack; however, the genre began to take off in the mid-1960s as acts developed a sound similar to British blues musicians. Key acts included Paul Butterfield (whose band acted like Mayall's Bluesbreakers in Britain as a starting point for many successful musicians), Canned Heat, the early Jefferson Airplane, Janis Joplin, Johnny Winter, the J. Geils Band, and Jimi Hendrix with his power trios, the Jimi Hendrix Experience (which included two British members, and was founded in Britain), and Band of Gypsys, whose guitar virtuosity and showmanship would be among the most emulated of the decade. Blues rock bands from the southern states, like the Allman Brothers Band, Lynyrd Skynyrd, and ZZ Top, incorporated country elements into their style to produce the distinctive genre Southern rock.\nBlues rock bands often emulated jazz, playing long, involved improvisations, which would later be a major element of progressive rock. From about 1967 bands like Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience had moved away from purely blues-based music into psychedelia. By the 1970s, blues rock had become heavier and more riff-based, exemplified by the work of Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple, and the lines between blues rock and hard rock \"were barely visible\", as bands began recording rock-style albums. The genre was continued in the 1970s by figures such as George Thorogood and Pat Travers, but, particularly on the British scene (except perhaps for the advent of groups such as Status Quo and Foghat who moved towards a form of high energy and repetitive boogie rock), the subgenre became focused on heavy metal, and blues rock began to slip out of the mainstream.\nGarage rock.\nGarage rock was a raw form of rock music, particularly prevalent in North America in the mid-1960s and so called because of the perception that it was rehearsed in the suburban family garage. Garage rock songs often revolved around the traumas of high school life, with songs about \"lying girls\" and unfair social circumstances being particularly common. The lyrics and delivery tended to be more aggressive than was common at the time, often with growled or shouted vocals that dissolved into incoherent screaming. They ranged from crude one-chord music (like the Seeds) to near-studio musician quality (including the Knickerbockers, the Remains, and the Fifth Estate). There were also regional variations in many parts of the country with flourishing scenes particularly in California and Texas.\nThe style had been evolving from regional scenes as early as 1958. \"Tall Cool One\" (1959) by the Wailers (from Tacoma, Washington) and the 1963 version of \"Louie Louie\" by the Kingsmen (Portland, Oregon) are mainstream examples of the genre in its formative stages. By 1963, garage band singles were creeping into the national charts in greater numbers, including Paul Revere and the Raiders (Boise), the Trashmen (Minneapolis) and the Rivieras (South Bend, Indiana). Other influential garage bands, such as the Sonics (Tacoma, Washington), never reached the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nThe British Invasion greatly influenced garage bands, providing them with a national audience, leading many (often surf or hot rod groups) to adopt a British influence, and encouraging more groups to form. Several garage bands in the United States and Canada produced regional hits during the era. Despite scores of bands being signed to major or large regional labels, most were commercial failures. Garage rock peaked both commercially and artistically around 1966, and by 1968 the style largely disappeared from the national charts and at the local level. New styles had evolved to replace garage rock.\nFolk rock.\nBy the 1960s, the scene that had developed out of the American folk music revival had grown to a major movement, using traditional music and new compositions in a traditional style, usually on acoustic instruments. In America the genre was pioneered by figures such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger and often identified with progressive or labor politics. In the early sixties figures such as Joan Baez and Bob Dylan had come to the fore in this movement as singer-songwriters. Dylan had begun to reach a mainstream audience with hits including \"Blowin' in the Wind\" (1963) and \"Masters of War\" (1963), which brought \"protest songs\" to a wider public, but, although beginning to influence each other, rock and folk music had remained largely separate genres, often with mutually exclusive audiences.\nEarly attempts to combine elements of folk and rock included the Animals' \"House of the Rising Sun\" (1964), which was the first commercially successful folk song to be recorded with rock and roll instrumentation and the Beatles \"I'm a Loser\" (1964), arguably the first Beatles song to be influenced directly by Dylan. The folk rock movement is usually thought to have taken off with the Byrds' recording of Dylan's \"Mr. Tambourine Man\" which topped the charts in 1965. With members who had been part of the caf\u00e9-based folk scene in Los Angeles, the Byrds adopted rock instrumentation, including drums and 12-string Rickenbacker guitars, which became a major element in the sound of the genre. Later that year Dylan adopted electric instruments, much to the outrage of many folk purists, with his \"Like a Rolling Stone\" becoming a US hit single. According to Ritchie Unterberger, Dylan (even before his adoption of electric instruments) influenced rock musicians like the Beatles, demonstrating \"to the rock generation in general that an album could be a major standalone statement without hit singles\", such as on \"The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan\" (1963).\nFolk rock particularly took off in California, where it led acts like the Mamas &amp; the Papas and Crosby, Stills, and Nash to move to electric instrumentation, and in New York, where it spawned performers including the Lovin' Spoonful and Simon and Garfunkel, with the latter's acoustic \"The Sounds of Silence\" (1965) being remixed with rock instruments to be the first of many hits. These acts directly influenced British performers like Donovan and Fairport Convention. In 1969 Fairport Convention abandoned their mixture of American covers and Dylan-influenced songs to play traditional English folk music on electric instruments. This British folk-rock was taken up by bands including Pentangle, Steeleye Span and the Albion Band, which in turn prompted Irish groups like Horslips and Scottish acts like the JSD Band, Spencer's Feat and later Five Hand Reel, to use their traditional music to create a brand of Celtic rock in the early 1970s.\nFolk-rock reached its peak of commercial popularity in the period 1967\u201368, before many acts moved off in a variety of directions, including Dylan and the Byrds, who began to develop country rock. However, the hybridization of folk and rock has been seen as having a major influence on the development of rock music, bringing in elements of psychedelia, and helping to develop the ideas of the singer-songwriter, the protest song, and concepts of \"authenticity\".\nPsychedelic rock.\nPsychedelic music's LSD-inspired vibe began in the folk scene. The first group to advertise themselves as psychedelic rock were the 13th Floor Elevators from Texas. The Beatles introduced many of the major elements of the psychedelic sound to audiences in this period, such as guitar feedback, the Indian sitar and backmasking sound effects. Psychedelic rock particularly took off in California's emerging music scene as groups followed the Byrds' shift from folk to folk rock from 1965. The psychedelic lifestyle, which revolved around hallucinogenic drugs, had already developed in San Francisco and particularly prominent products of the scene were Big Brother and the Holding Company, the Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane. The Jimi Hendrix Experience's lead guitarist, Jimi Hendrix did\nextended distorted, feedback-filled jams which became a key feature of psychedelia. Psychedelic rock reached its apogee in the last years of the decade. 1967 saw the Beatles release their definitive psychedelic statement in \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\", including the track \"Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds\"; the Rolling Stones responded later that year with \"Their Satanic Majesties Request\", and Pink Floyd debuted with \"The Piper at the Gates of Dawn\". Key recordings included Jefferson Airplane's \"Surrealistic Pillow\" and the Doors' self-titled debut album. These trends peaked in the 1969 Woodstock festival, which saw performances by most of the major psychedelic acts.\n\"Sgt. Pepper\" was later regarded as a starting point for the album era, during which rock music transitioned from the singles format to albums and achieved cultural legitimacy in the mainstream. Led by the Beatles in the mid-1960s, rock musicians advanced the LP as the dominant form of recorded music expression and consumption, initiating a rock-informed album era in the music industry for the next several decades.\n1970s\u20131980s: Further diversification.\nCommercial trends.\nReflecting on developments that occurred in rock music in the early 1970s, Robert Christgau wrote in \"\" (1981):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The decade is, of course, an arbitrary schema itself\u2014time doesn't just execute a neat turn toward the future every ten years. But like a lot of artificial concepts\u2014money, say\u2014the category does take on a reality of its own once people figure out how to put it to work. \"The '60s are over,\" a slogan one only began to hear in 1972 or so, mobilized all those eager to believe that idealism had become passe, and once they were mobilized, it had. In popular music, embracing the '70s meant both an elitist withdrawal from the messy concert and counterculture scene and a profiteering pursuit of the lowest common denominator in FM radio and album rock.\nRock saw greater commodification during this decade, turning into a multibillion-dollar industry and doubling its market while, as Christgau noted, suffering a significant \"loss of cultural prestige\". \"Maybe the Bee Gees became more popular than the Beatles, but they were never more popular than Jesus\", he said. \"Insofar as the music retained any mythic power, the myth was self-referential \u2013 there were lots of songs about the rock and roll life but very few about how rock could change the world, except as a new brand of painkiller ... In the '70s the powerful took over, as rock industrialists capitalized on the national mood to reduce potent music to an often reactionary species of entertainment\u2014and to transmute rock's popular base from the audience to market.\"\nProgressive rock.\nProgressive rock, a term sometimes used interchangeably with art rock, moved beyond established musical formulas by experimenting with different instruments, song types, and forms. From the mid-1960s, the Left Banke, the Beatles, the Rolling Stones and the Beach Boys, had pioneered the inclusion of harpsichords, wind, and string sections on their recordings to produce a form of Baroque rock and can be heard in singles like Procol Harum's \"A Whiter Shade of Pale\" (1967), with its Bach-inspired introduction. The Moody Blues used a full orchestra on their album \"Days of Future Passed\" (1967) and subsequently created orchestral sounds with synthesizers. Classical orchestration, keyboards, and synthesizers were a frequent addition to the established rock format of guitars, bass, and drums in subsequent progressive rock.\nInstrumentals were common, while songs with lyrics were sometimes conceptual, abstract, or based in fantasy and science fiction. The Pretty Things' \"SF Sorrow\" (1968), the Kinks' \"Arthur (Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire)\" (1969), and the Who's \"Tommy\" (1969) introduced the format of rock operas and opened the door to concept albums, often telling an epic story or tackling a grand overarching theme. King Crimson's 1969 debut album, \"In the Court of the Crimson King\", which mixed powerful guitar riffs and mellotron with jazz and symphonic music, is often taken as the key recording in progressive rock, helping the widespread adoption of the genre in the early 1970s among existing blues-rock and psychedelic bands, as well as newly formed acts. The vibrant Canterbury scene saw acts following Soft Machine from psychedelia, through jazz influences, toward more expansive hard rock, including Caravan, Hatfield and the North, Gong, and National Health. The French group Magma around drummer Christian Vander almost single-handedly created the new music genre zeuhl with their first albums in the early 1970s.\nPink Floyd also moved away from psychedelia after the departure of Syd Barrett in 1968, with \"The Dark Side of the Moon\" (1973) becoming one of the best-selling albums of all time. There was an emphasis on instrumental virtuosity, with Yes showcasing the skills of both guitarist Steve Howe and keyboard player Rick Wakeman, while Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer (ELP) were a supergroup who produced some of the genre's most technically demanding work. Jethro Tull and Genesis both pursued very different, but distinctly English, brands of music. Renaissance, formed in 1969 by ex-Yardbirds Jim McCarty and Keith Relf, evolved into a high-concept band featuring the three-octave voice of Annie Haslam. Most British bands depended on a relatively small cult following, but a handful, including Pink Floyd, Genesis, and Jethro Tull, managed to produce top ten singles at home and break the American market. The American brand of progressive rock varied from the eclectic and innovative Frank Zappa, Captain Beefheart and Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears, to more pop rock orientated bands like Boston, Foreigner, Kansas, Journey, and Styx. These, beside British bands Supertramp and ELO, all demonstrated a prog rock influence and ranked among the most commercially successful acts of the 1970s, heralding the era of \"pomp\" or \"arena rock\".\nThe instrumental strand of the genre resulted in albums like Mike Oldfield's \"Tubular Bells\" (1973), the first record for the Virgin Records label, which became a worldwide hit and a mainstay of the genre. Instrumental rock was particularly significant in continental Europe, allowing bands like Kraftwerk, Tangerine Dream, Can, Focus and Faust to circumvent the language barrier. Their synthesiser-heavy \"krautrock\", along with the work of Brian Eno (for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music), would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock.\nWith the advent of punk rock and technological changes in the late 1970s, progressive rock was increasingly dismissed as pretentious and overblown. Many bands broke up, but some, including Genesis, ELP, Yes, and Pink Floyd, regularly scored top ten albums with successful accompanying worldwide tours. Some bands which emerged in the aftermath of punk, such as Siouxsie and the Banshees, Ultravox, and Simple Minds, showed the influence of progressive rock, as well as their more usually recognized punk influences.\nJazz rock.\nIn the late 1960s, jazz-rock emerged as a distinct subgenre out of the blues-rock, psychedelic, and progressive rock scenes, mixing the power of rock with the musical complexity and improvisational elements of jazz. AllMusic states that the term jazz-rock \"may refer to the loudest, wildest, most electrified fusion bands from the jazz camp, but most often it describes performers coming from the rock side of the equation.\" Jazz-rock \"...generally grew out of the most artistically ambitious rock subgenres of the late '60s and early '70s\", including the singer-songwriter movement. Many early US rock and roll musicians had begun in jazz and carried some of these elements into the new music. In Britain, the subgenre of blues rock, and many of its leading figures, like Ginger Baker and Jack Bruce of the band Cream, had emerged from the British jazz scene. Often highlighted as the first true jazz-rock recording is the only album by the relatively obscure New York\u2013based the Free Spirits with \"Out of Sight and Sound\" (1966). The first group of bands to self-consciously use the label were R&amp;B oriented white rock bands that made use of jazzy horn sections, like Electric Flag, Blood, Sweat &amp; Tears and Chicago, to become some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nBritish acts to emerge in the same period from the blues scene, to make use of the tonal and improvisational aspects of jazz, included Nucleus and the Graham Bond and John Mayall spin-off Colosseum. From the psychedelic rock and the Canterbury scenes came Soft Machine, who, it has been suggested, produced one of the artistically successfully fusions of the two genres. Perhaps the most critically praised fusion came from the jazz side of the equation, with Miles Davis, particularly influenced by the work of Hendrix, incorporating rock instrumentation into his sound for the album \"Bitches Brew\" (1970). It was a major influence on subsequent rock-influenced jazz artists, including Herbie Hancock, Chick Corea and Weather Report. The genre began to fade in the late 1970s, as a mellower form of fusion began to take its audience, but acts like Steely Dan, Frank Zappa and Joni Mitchell recorded significant jazz-influenced albums in this period, and it has continued to be a major influence on rock music.\nRoots rock.\nRoots rock is the term now used to describe a move away from the psychedelic scene to a more basic form of rock and roll that incorporated its original influences, particularly blues, country and folk music, leading to the creation of country rock and Southern rock. In 1966, Bob Dylan went to Nashville to record the album \"Blonde on Blonde\". This, and subsequent more clearly country-influenced albums, such as \"Nashville Skyline\", have been seen as creating the genre of country folk, a route pursued by a number of largely acoustic folk musicians. Other acts that followed the back-to-basics trend were the Canadian group the Band and the California-based Creedence Clearwater Revival, both of which mixed basic rock and roll with folk, country and blues, to be among the most successful and influential bands of the late 1960s. The same movement saw the beginning of the recording careers of Californian solo artists like Ry Cooder, Bonnie Raitt and Lowell George, and influenced the work of established performers such as the Rolling Stones' \"Beggar's Banquet\" (1968) and the Beatles' \"Let It Be\" (1970). Reflecting on this change of trends in rock music over the past few years, Christgau wrote in his June 1970 \"Consumer Guide\" column that this \"new orthodoxy\" and \"cultural lag\" abandoned improvisatory, studio-ornamented productions in favor of an emphasis on \"tight, spare instrumentation\" and song composition: \"Its referents are '50s rock, country music, and rhythm-and-blues, and its key inspiration is the Band.\"\nIn 1968, Gram Parsons recorded \"Safe at Home\" with the International Submarine Band, arguably the first true country rock album. Later that year he joined the Byrds for \"Sweetheart of the Rodeo\" (1968), generally considered one of the most influential recordings in the genre. The Byrds continued in the same vein, but Parsons left to be joined by another ex-Byrds member Chris Hillman in forming the Flying Burrito Brothers who helped establish the respectability and parameters of the genre, before Parsons departed to pursue a solo career. Bands in California that adopted country rock included Hearts and Flowers, Poco, New Riders of the Purple Sage, the Beau Brummels, and the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band. Some performers also enjoyed a renaissance by adopting country sounds, including: the Everly Brothers; one-time teen idol Rick Nelson who became the frontman for the Stone Canyon Band; former Monkee Mike Nesmith who formed the First National Band; and Neil Young. The Dillards were, unusually, a country act, who moved towards rock music. The greatest commercial success for country rock came in the 1970s, with artists including the Doobie Brothers, Emmylou Harris, Linda Ronstadt and the Eagles (made up of members of the Burritos, Poco, and Stone Canyon Band), who emerged as one of the most successful rock acts of all time, producing albums that included \"Hotel California\" (1976).\nThe founders of Southern rock are usually thought to be the Allman Brothers Band, who developed a distinctive sound, largely derived from blues rock, but incorporating elements of boogie, soul, and country in the early 1970s. The most successful act to follow them were Lynyrd Skynyrd, who helped establish the \"Good ol' boy\" image of the subgenre and the general shape of 1970s' guitar rock. Their successors included the fusion/progressive instrumentalists Dixie Dregs, the more country-influenced Outlaws, funk/R&amp;B-leaning Wet Willie and (incorporating elements of R&amp;B and gospel) the Ozark Mountain Daredevils. After the loss of original members of the Allmans and Lynyrd Skynyrd, the genre began to fade in popularity in the late 1970s, but was sustained the 1980s with acts like .38 Special, Molly Hatchet and the Marshall Tucker Band.\nGlam rock.\nGlam rock emerged from the English psychedelic and art rock scenes of the late 1960s; it can be seen as both an extension of (and reaction against) those trends. Musically diverse, varying between the simple rock and roll revivalism of figures like Alvin Stardust to the complex art rock of Roxy Music, and can be seen as much as a fashion as a musical subgenre. Visually, it was a mesh of various styles, ranging from 1930s Hollywood glamor, through 1950s pin-up sex appeal, pre-war Cabaret theatrics, Victorian literary and symbolist styles, science fiction, to ancient and occult mysticism and mythology; manifesting itself in outrageous clothes, makeup, hairstyles, and platform-soled boots. Glam is most noted for its sexual and gender ambiguity and representations of androgyny, beside extensive use of theatrics. It was prefigured by the showmanship and gender-identity manipulation of American acts such as the Cockettes and Alice Cooper.\nThe origins of glam rock are associated with Marc Bolan, who had renamed his folk duo to T. Rex and taken up electric instruments by the end of the 1960s. Often cited as the moment of inception is his appearance on the BBC music show \"Top of the Pops\" in March 1971 wearing glitter and satins, to perform what would be his second UK Top 10 hit (and first UK Number 1 hit), \"Hot Love\". From 1971, already a minor star, David Bowie developed his Ziggy Stardust persona, incorporating elements of professional make up, mime and performance into his act. These performers were soon followed in the style by acts including Roxy Music, Sweet, Slade, Mott the Hoople, Mud and Alvin Stardust. While highly successful in the single charts in the United Kingdom, very few of these musicians were able to make a serious impact in the United States; Bowie was the major exception becoming an international superstar and prompting the adoption of glam styles among acts like Lou Reed, New York Dolls and Jobriath, often known as \"glitter rock\" and with a darker lyrical content than their British counterparts. In the UK the term glitter rock was most often used to refer to the extreme version of glam pursued by Gary Glitter and his support musicians the Glitter Band, who between them achieved eighteen top ten singles in the UK between 1972 and 1976. A second wave of glam rock acts, including Suzi Quatro, Roy Wood's Wizzard and Sparks, dominated the British single charts from about 1974 to 1976. Existing acts, some not usually considered central to the genre, also adopted glam styles, including Rod Stewart, Elton John, Queen and, for a time, even the Rolling Stones. It was also a direct influence on acts that rose to prominence later, including Kiss and Adam Ant, and less directly on the formation of gothic rock and glam metal as well as on punk rock, which helped end the fashion for glam from about 1976. Glam has since enjoyed sporadic modest revivals through bands such as the Darkness and in R&amp;B crossover act Prince.\nChicano rock.\nAfter the early successes of Latin rock in the 1960s, Chicano musicians like Carlos Santana and Al Hurricane continued to have successful careers throughout the 1970s. Santana opened the decade with success in his 1970 single \"Black Magic Woman\" on the \"Abraxas\" album. From 1973 to 1978 he released a series of four albums that all achieved gold status: \"Welcome\", \"Borboletta\", \"Amigos\", and \"Festiv\u00e1l\". Al Hurricane continued to mix his rock music with New Mexico music, though he was also experimenting more heavily with jazz, which led to successful singles, especially on his \"Vestido Mojado\" album. Los Lobos gained popularity at this time, with their first album \"Los Lobos del Este de Los Angeles\" in 1977.\nSoft rock, hard rock, and early heavy metal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA strange time, 1971\u2014although rock's balkanization into genres was well underway, it was often hard to tell one catch-phrase from the next. \"Art-rock\" could mean anything from the Velvets to the Moody Blues, and although Led Zeppelin was launched and Black Sabbath celebrated, \"heavy metal\" remained an amorphous concept.\n\u2014Rock music critic Robert Christgau\nFrom the late 1960s, it became common to divide mainstream rock music into soft and hard rock. Soft rock was often derived from folk rock, using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies. Major artists included Carole King, Cat Stevens and James Taylor. It reached its commercial peak in the mid- to late 1970s with acts like Billy Joel, America and the reformed Fleetwood Mac, whose \"Rumours\" (1977) was the best-selling album of the decade. In contrast, hard rock was more often derived from blues-rock and was played louder and with more intensity. It often emphasised the electric guitar, both as a rhythm instrument using simple repetitive riffs and as a solo lead instrument, and was more likely to be used with distortion and other effects. Key acts included British Invasion bands like the Kinks, as well as psychedelic era performers like Cream, Jimi Hendrix and the Jeff Beck Group. Hard rock-influenced bands that enjoyed international success in the late 1970s included Queen, Thin Lizzy, Aerosmith, AC/DC, and Van Halen.\nAlso from the late 1960s, the term \"heavy metal\" began to be used to describe some hard rock played with even more volume and intensity, first as an adjective and by the early 1970s as a noun. The term was first used in music in Steppenwolf's \"Born to Be Wild\" (1967); the term began to be associated with bands like San Francisco's Blue Cheer, Cleveland's James Gang and Michigan's Grand Funk Railroad. By 1970, three key British bands had developed the characteristic sounds and styles which would help shape the subgenre. Led Zeppelin added elements of fantasy to their riff laden blues-rock, Deep Purple brought in symphonic and medieval interests from their progressive rock phase and Black Sabbath introduced facets of the gothic and modal harmony, helping to produce a \"darker\" sound. These elements were taken up by a \"second generation\" of hard rock and heavy metal bands into the late 1970s, including: Judas Priest, UFO, Mot\u00f6rhead and Rainbow from Britain; Kiss, Ted Nugent, and Blue \u00d6yster Cult from the US; Rush from Canada and Scorpions from Germany, all marking the expansion in popularity of the subgenre. Despite a lack of airplay and very little presence on the singles charts, late 1970s heavy metal built a considerable following, particularly among adolescent working-class males in North America and Europe.\nIn the 1980s, bands such as Bon Jovi, Guns N' Roses, Metallica, M\u00f6tley Cr\u00fce and Def Leppard saw mainstream success, with hard rock and a fusion of hard rock and heavy metal with pop. During the 1990s, hard rock saw a slight decline in popularity, save for some major hits like Guns N' Roses' \"November Rain\", and Metallica's \"Enter Sandman\".\nChristian rock.\nRock music has sometimes been criticized by some Christian leaders, who have condemned it as immoral, anti-Christian, and even satanic. However, Christian rock began to develop in the late 1960s, particularly out of the Jesus movement beginning in Southern California, and it emerged as a subgenre in the 1970s with artists like Larry Norman, usually seen as the first major \"star\" of Christian rock. The genre was mostly a phenomenon in the United States. Many Christian rock performers have ties to the contemporary Christian music scene. Starting in the 1980s, Christian pop performers, as well as hard rock bands like Stryper, have had some mainstream success. Starting in the 1990s, there were increasing numbers of acts who attempted to avoid the Christian band label, preferring to be seen as groups who were also Christians, including P.O.D.\nHeartland rock.\nAmerican working-class oriented heartland rock, characterized by a straightforward musical style and a concern with the lives of ordinary, blue-collar American people, developed in the second half of the 1970s. The term heartland rock was first used to describe Midwestern arena rock groups like Kansas, REO Speedwagon and Styx, but which came to be associated with a more socially concerned form of roots rock more directly influenced by folk, country and rock and roll. It has been seen as an American Midwest and Rust Belt counterpart to West Coast country rock and the Southern rock of the American South. Led by figures who had initially been identified with punk and new wave, it was most strongly influenced by acts such as Bob Dylan, the Byrds, Creedence Clearwater Revival and Van Morrison, and the basic rock of 1960s garage and the Rolling Stones.\nExemplified by the commercial success of singer songwriters Bruce Springsteen, Bob Seger, and Tom Petty, it was partly a reaction to post-industrial urban decline in the East and Mid-West, often dwelling on issues of social disintegration and isolation, beside a form of good-time rock and roll revivalism. The genre reached its commercial peak in the mid-1980s, with Springsteen's \"Born in the USA\" (1984) topping the charts worldwide and spawning a series of top ten singles, together with the arrival of artists including John Mellencamp, Steve Earle and more gentle singer-songwriters such as Bruce Hornsby.\nHeartland rock faded away as a recognized genre by the early 1990s, as rock music in general, and blue-collar and white working class themes in particular, lost influence with younger audiences, and as heartland's artists turned to more personal works.\nPunk rock.\nPunk rock was developed between 1974 and 1976 in the United States and the United Kingdom. Rooted in garage rock and other forms of what is now known as protopunk music, punk rock bands eschewed the perceived excesses of mainstream 1970s rock. They created fast, hard-edged music, typically with short songs, stripped-down instrumentation, and often political, anti-establishment lyrics. Punk embraces a DIY (do it yourself) ethic, with many bands self-producing their recordings and distributing them through informal channels.\nBy late 1976, acts such as the Ramones and Patti Smith, in New York City, and the Sex Pistols and the Clash, in London, were recognized as the vanguard of a new musical movement. The following year saw punk rock spreading around the world. Punk quickly became a major cultural phenomenon in the UK. The Sex Pistols' live TV skirmish with Bill Grundy on 1 December 1976 was the watershed moment in British punk's transformation into a major media phenomenon, even as some stores refused to stock the records and radio airplay was hard to come by. In May 1977, the Sex Pistols achieved new heights of controversy (and number two on the singles chart) with the song \"God Save the Queen\", which referenced Queen Elizabeth II during her Silver Jubilee. For the most part, punk took root in local scenes that tended to reject association with the mainstream. An associated punk subculture emerged, expressing youthful rebellion and characterized by distinctive clothing styles and a variety of ideologies.\nBy the beginning of the 1980s, faster, more aggressive styles such as hardcore and Oi! had emerged, which evolved into strains of hardcore punk such as D-beat (a distortion-heavy subgenre influenced by the UK band Discharge), anarcho-punk (e.g. Crass), grindcore (e.g. Napalm Death), and crust punk. Musicians identifying with or inspired by punk also pursued a broad range of other variations, giving rise to new wave, post-punk and the alternative rock movement.\nNew wave.\nAlthough punk rock was a significant social and musical phenomenon, it achieved less in the way of record sales (being distributed by small specialty labels such as Stiff Records), or American radio airplay (as the radio scene continued to be dominated by mainstream formats such as disco and album-oriented rock). Punk rock had attracted devotees from the art and collegiate world and soon bands sporting a more literate, arty approach, such as Talking Heads and Devo, began to infiltrate the punk scene; in some quarters the description \"new wave\" began to be used to differentiate these less overtly punk bands. Record executives, who had been mostly mystified by the punk movement, recognized the potential of the more accessible new wave acts and began aggressively signing and marketing any band that could claim a remote connection to punk or new wave. Many of these bands, such as the Cars and the Go-Go's, can be seen as pop bands marketed as new wave; other existing acts, including the Police, the Pretenders and Elvis Costello, used the new wave movement as the springboard for relatively long and critically successful careers, while \"skinny tie\" bands like the Knack played chart-topping power pop, and the photogenic Blondie began as a punk act and moved into lighter and more eclectic territories.\nBetween 1979 and 1985, influenced by Kraftwerk, Yellow Magic Orchestra, David Bowie and Gary Numan, British new wave went in the direction of such New Romantics as Spandau Ballet, Ultravox, Japan, Duran Duran, A Flock of Seagulls, Culture Club, Talk Talk and the Eurythmics, sometimes using the synthesizer to replace all other instruments. This period coincided with the rise of MTV and led to a great deal of exposure for this brand of synth-pop, creating what has been characterised as a second British Invasion. Some more traditional rock bands were also successful, such as Dire Straits, whose \"Money for Nothing\" gently poked fun at MTV, but in general guitar-oriented rock was commercially eclipsed.\nPost-punk.\nIf hardcore most directly pursued the stripped down aesthetic of punk, and new wave came to represent its commercial wing, post-punk emerged in the late 1970s and early 1980s as its more artistic and challenging side. In addition to punk bands, major influences included the Velvet Underground, the Stooges and Captain Beefheart. Early contributors to the genre included U.S. bands Pere Ubu, Devo, the Residents, and Talking Heads.\nThe first wave of British post-punk included Gang of Four, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Joy Division, who placed less emphasis on art than their US counterparts and more on the dark emotional qualities of their music. Bands like Siouxsie and the Banshees, Bauhaus, the Cure, and the Sisters of Mercy, moved increasingly in this direction to found gothic rock, which had become the basis of a major sub-culture by the early 1980s. Similar emotional territory was pursued by Australian acts like the Birthday Party and Nick Cave. Members of Bauhaus and Joy Division explored new stylistic territory as Love and Rockets and New Order respectively. Another early post-punk movement was the industrial music developed by British bands Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire, and New York-based Suicide, using a variety of electronic and sampling techniques that emulated the sound of industrial production and which would develop into a variety of forms of post-industrial music in the 1980s.\nThe second generation of British post-punk bands that broke through in the early 1980s, including the Fall, the Pop Group, the Mekons, Echo and the Bunnymen and the Teardrop Explodes, tended to move away from dark sonic landscapes. Arguably the most successful band to emerge from post-punk was Ireland's U2, who incorporated elements of religious imagery together with political commentary into their often anthemic music, and by the late 1980s had become one of the biggest bands in the world. Although many post-punk bands continued to record and perform, it declined as a movement in the mid-1980s as acts disbanded or moved off to explore other musical areas, but it has continued to influence the development of rock music and has been seen as a major element in the creation of the alternative rock movement.\nEmergence of alternative rock.\nThe term alternative rock was coined in the early 1980s to describe rock artists who did not fit into the mainstream genres of the time. Bands dubbed \"alternative\" had no unified style, but were all seen as distinct from mainstream music. Alternative bands were linked by their collective debt to punk rock, through new wave, post-punk or hardcore. Important alternative rock bands of the 1980s in the US included R.E.M., H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, Jane's Addiction, Sonic Youth, and the Pixies; in the UK, popular bands the Cure, New Order, the Jesus and Mary Chain, and the Smiths. Artists were largely confined to independent record labels, building an extensive underground music scene based on college radio, fanzines, touring, and word-of-mouth. They rejected the dominant synth-pop of the early 1980s, marking a return to group-based guitar rock.\nFew of these early bands achieved mainstream success, although exceptions to this rule include R.E.M., the Smiths, and the Cure. Despite a general lack of spectacular album sales, the original alternative rock bands exerted a considerable influence on the generation of musicians who came of age in the 1980s and ended up breaking through to mainstream success in the 1990s. Styles of alternative rock in the US during the 1980s included jangle pop, associated with the early recordings of R.E.M., which incorporated the ringing guitars of mid-1960s pop and rock, and college rock, used to describe alternative bands that began in the college circuit and college radio, including acts such as 10,000 Maniacs and the Feelies. In the UK, by the end of the 1980s, indie or dream pop bands like Primal Scream and the Wedding Present, and what were dubbed shoegaze bands like My Bloody Valentine, Slowdive, and Ride entered. Particularly vibrant was the Madchester scene, producing such bands as Happy Mondays and the Stone Roses. The next decade would see the success of grunge in the US and Britpop in the UK, bringing alternative rock into the mainstream.\n1990s\u20132000s: Alternative goes mainstream.\nGrunge.\nIn the latter half of the 1980s, bands in Washington state (particularly in the Seattle area) formed a new style of rock that contrasted with the mainstream music of the time. The developing genre came to be known as \"grunge\", a term descriptive of the dirty sound of the music and the unkempt appearance of most musicians, who rebelled against the over-groomed images of other artists. Grunge made heavy use of guitar distortion, fuzz, and feedback. The lyrics were typically apathetic and angst-filled, and often concerned themes such as social alienation and entrapment, although it was also known for its dark humor and parodies of commercial rock.\nBands such as Green River, Soundgarden, and Melvins pioneered the genre, with Mudhoney becoming the most successful by the end of the decade. Grunge remained largely a local phenomenon until 1991, when Nirvana's album \"Nevermind\" became a huge success, containing the anthemic song \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\". \"Nevermind\" was more melodic than its predecessors; by signing to Geffen Records the band was one of the first to employ traditional corporate promotion and marketing mechanisms such as an MTV video, in store displays and the use of radio \"consultants\" who promoted airplay at major mainstream rock stations. During 1991 and 1992, other grunge albums such as Pearl Jam's \"Ten\", Soundgarden's \"Badmotorfinger\", and Alice in Chains' \"Dirt\", along with the \"Temple of the Dog\" album featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, became among the 100 top-selling albums. Major record labels signed most of the remaining grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of acts moved to the city in the hope of success. However, after the death of Kurt Cobain and the subsequent break-up of Nirvana in 1994, the genre began to decline, partly to be overshadowed by Britpop and more commercial sounding post-grunge.\nBritpop.\nBritpop emerged from the British alternative rock scene of the early 1990s and was characterised by bands particularly influenced by British guitar music of the 1960s and 1970s. The Smiths were a major influence, as were bands of the Madchester scene, which had dissolved in the early 1990s. Britpop was varied in style, but often used catchy tunes and hooks, beside lyrics with particularly British concerns and the adoption of the iconography of the 1960s British Invasion, including the symbols of British identity previously used by the mods. It was launched around 1993 with releases by groups such as Suede and Blur, who were soon joined by others including Oasis, Pulp, Supergrass, and Elastica, who produced a series of successful albums and singles. For a while the contest between Blur and Oasis was built by the popular press into the \"Battle of Britpop\", initially won by Blur, but with Oasis achieving greater long-term and international success, directly influencing later Britpop bands, such as Ocean Colour Scene and Kula Shaker. Britpop groups brought British alternative rock into the mainstream and formed the backbone of a larger British cultural trend known as Cool Britannia. The movement had largely fallen apart by the end of the decade.\nPost-grunge.\nThe term post-grunge was coined for the bands that followed the emergence into the mainstream of the Seattle grunge bands and emulated their music, but with a more radio-friendly commercially oriented sound. Often they worked through the major labels and incorporated influences from hard rock, pop rock, or alternative metal. The term post-grunge originally was meant to be pejorative, suggesting that grunge bands that emerged when grunge was mainstream were simply musically derivative, or a cynical response to an \"authentic\" rock movement. From 1995, former Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl's new band, the Foo Fighters, helped popularize the post-grunge genre.\nSome post-grunge bands, like Candlebox, were from Seattle, but the subgenre was marked by a broadening of the geographical base of grunge, with bands like York, Pennsylvania's Live and Georgia's Collective Soul, and beyond the US to Australia's Silverchair and Britain's Bush, who all cemented post-grunge as one of the most commercially viable subgenres of the mid-1990s. Bands like Creed and Nickelback took post-grunge into the late 1990s and 2000s with considerable commercial success, abandoning most of the angst and anger of the original movement for more conventional anthems, narratives and romantic songs, and were followed in this vein by newer acts including Shinedown, Seether, 3 Doors Down and Puddle of Mudd.\nPop-punk.\nThe origins of 1990s pop-punk can be seen in the more song-oriented bands of the 1970s punk movement like Buzzcocks and the Clash, commercially successful new wave acts such as the Jam and the Undertones, and the more hardcore-influenced elements of alternative rock in the 1980s. Pop-punk tends to use power-pop melodies and chord changes with speedy punk tempos and loud guitars. Punk music provided the inspiration for some California-based bands on independent labels in the early 1990s, including Rancid and Green Day. In 1994, Green Day moved to a major label and produced the album \"Dookie\", which found a new, largely teenage, audience and proved a surprise diamond-selling success, leading to a series of hit singles, including two number ones in the US. They were soon followed by the eponymous debut from Weezer, which spawned three top ten singles in the US. This success opened the door for the multi-platinum sales of metallic punk band the Offspring with \"Smash\" (1994). This first wave of pop punk reached its commercial peak with Green Day's \"Nimrod\" (1997) and the Offspring's \"Americana\" (1998).\nA second wave of pop-punk was spearheaded by Blink-182, with their breakthrough album \"Enema of the State\" (1999), followed by bands such as Good Charlotte, Simple Plan and Sum 41, who made use of humour in their videos and had a more radio-friendly tone to their music, while retaining the speed, some of the attitude and even the look of 1970s punk. Later pop-punk bands, including All Time Low, the All-American Rejects and Fall Out Boy, had a sound that has been described as closer to 1980s hardcore, while still achieving commercial success.\nIndie rock.\nIn the 1980s the terms indie rock and alternative rock were used interchangeably. By the mid-1990s, as elements of the movement began to attract mainstream interest, particularly grunge and then Britpop, post-grunge and pop-punk, the term alternative began to lose its meaning. Those bands following the less commercial contours of the scene were increasingly referred to by the label indie. Linked by an ethos more than a musical approach, the indie rock movement encompassed a wide range of styles, from hard-edged, grunge-influenced bands like the Cranberries and Superchunk, through do-it-yourself experimental bands like Pavement, to punk-folk singers such as Ani DiFranco. It has been noted that indie rock has a relatively high proportion of female artists compared with preceding rock genres, a tendency exemplified by the development of feminist-informed Riot grrrl music. Many countries have developed an extensive local indie scene, flourishing with bands with enough popularity to survive inside the respective country, but virtually unknown outside them.\nBy the end of the 1990s many recognisable subgenres, most with their origins in the late 1980s alternative movement, were included under the umbrella of indie. Lo-fi eschewed polished recording techniques for a D.I.Y. ethos and was spearheaded by Beck, Sebadoh and Pavement. The work of Talk Talk and Slint helped inspire both post rock, an experimental style influenced by jazz and electronic music (exemplified by acts such as Bark Psychosis, Tortoise, Stereolab, and Laika), as well as leading to more dense and complex, guitar-based math rock, developed by acts like Polvo and Chavez. Space rock looked back to progressive roots, with drone heavy and minimalist acts like Spacemen 3, the two bands created out of its split, Spectrum and Spiritualized, and later groups including Flying Saucer Attack, Godspeed You! Black Emperor and Quickspace. In contrast, sadcore emphasised pain and suffering through melodic use of acoustic and electronic instrumentation in the music of bands like American Music Club and Red House Painters, while the revival of baroque pop reacted against lo-fi and experimental music by placing an emphasis on melody and classical instrumentation, with artists like Arcade Fire, Belle and Sebastian and Rufus Wainwright.\nAlternative metal, rap rock, rap metal and nu metal.\nAlternative metal emerged from the hardcore scene of alternative rock in the US in the later 1980s, but gained a wider audience after grunge broke into the mainstream in the early 1990s. Early alternative metal bands mixed a wide variety of genres with hardcore and heavy metal sensibilities, with acts like Jane's Addiction and Primus using progressive rock, Soundgarden and Corrosion of Conformity using garage punk, the Jesus Lizard and Helmet mixing noise rock, Ministry and Nine Inch Nails influenced by industrial music, Monster Magnet moving into psychedelia, Pantera, Sepultura and White Zombie creating groove metal, while Biohazard, Limp Bizkit and Faith No More turned to hip hop and rap.\nHip hop had gained attention from rock acts in the early 1980s, including the Clash with \"The Magnificent Seven\" (1980) and Blondie with \"Rapture\" (1980). Early crossover acts included Run DMC and the Beastie Boys. Rappers who sampled rock songs included Ice-T, the Fat Boys, LL Cool J, Public Enemy and Whodini. The mixing of thrash metal and rap was pioneered by Anthrax on their 1987 comedy-influenced single \"I'm the Man\".\nIn 1990, Faith No More broke into the mainstream with their single \"Epic\", often seen as the first truly successful combination of heavy metal with rap. This paved the way for the success of existing bands like 24-7 Spyz and Living Colour, and new acts including Rage Against the Machine and Red Hot Chili Peppers, who all fused rock and hip hop among other influences. Among the first wave of performers to gain mainstream success as rap rock were 311, Bloodhound Gang, and Kid Rock. A more metallic sound\u00a0\u2013 \"nu metal\"\u00a0\u2013 was pursued by bands including Limp Bizkit, Korn and Slipknot. Later in the decade this style, which contained a mix of grunge, punk, metal, rap and turntable scratching, spawned a wave of successful bands like Linkin Park, P.O.D. and Staind, who were often classified as rap metal or nu metal, the first of which are the best-selling band of the genre.\nIn 2001, nu metal reached its peak with albums like Staind's \"Break the Cycle\", P.O.D's \"Satellite\", Slipknot's \"Iowa\" and Linkin Park's \"Hybrid Theory\". New bands also emerged like Disturbed, Godsmack and Papa Roach, whose major label debut \"Infest\" became a platinum hit. By 2002, nu metal bands were played more infrequently on rock radio stations and MTV began focusing on pop punk and emo. Since then, many bands have changed to a more conventional hard rock, heavy metal, or electronic music sound.\nPost-Britpop.\nFrom about 1997, emerging bands began to avoid the Britpop label while still producing music derived from it. Many of these bands tended to mix elements of British traditional rock (or British trad rock), particularly the Beatles, Rolling Stones and Small Faces, with American influences, including post-grunge. Drawn from across the United Kingdom, the themes of their music tended to be less parochially centered on British, English and London life and more introspective than had been the case with Britpop at its height. Several alternative bands that had enjoyed some success during the mid-1990s, but did not find major commercial success until the late 1990s, included the Verve and Radiohead. The Verve's album \"Urban Hymns\" (1997) was a worldwide hit, and Radiohead achieved near-universal critical acclaim with their experimental third album \"OK Computer\" (1997).\nPost-Britpop bands have been seen as presenting the image of the rock star as an ordinary person and their increasingly melodic music was criticised for being bland or derivative. Post-Britpop bands like Travis from \"The Man Who\" (1999), Stereophonics from \"Performance and Cocktails\" (1999), Feeder from \"Echo Park\" (2001), and particularly Snow Patrol from \"Final Straw\" (2003), Keane from their debut album \"Hopes and Fears\" (2004), and Coldplay from their debut album \"Parachutes\" (2000), achieved wider international success than many of the Britpop groups that had preceded them, and were some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1990s and early 2000s.\nPost-hardcore and emo.\nPost-hardcore developed in the US, particularly in Chicago and Washington, D.C., in the 1980s, with bands that were inspired by the do-it-yourself ethics and guitar-heavy music of hardcore punk, but influenced by post-punk, adopting longer song formats, more complex musical structures and sometimes more melodic vocal styles.\nEmo also emerged from the hardcore scene in 1980s Washington, D.C., initially as \"emocore\", used as a term to describe bands who favored expressive vocals over the more common abrasive, barking style. Emo broke into mainstream culture in the early 2000s with the platinum-selling success of Jimmy Eat World's \"Bleed American\" (2001) and Dashboard Confessional's \"The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most\" (2003). The new emo had a much more mainstream sound than in the 1990s and a far greater appeal among adolescents than its earlier incarnations. At the same time, use of the term emo expanded beyond the musical genre, becoming associated with fashion, a hairstyle and any music that expressed emotion. By 2003 post-hardcore bands had also caught the attention of major labels and began to enjoy mainstream success in the album charts. A number of these bands were seen as a more aggressive offshoot of emo and given the often vague label of screamo.\nGarage rock and post-punk revivals.\nIn the early 2000s, a new group of bands that played a stripped down and back-to-basics version of guitar rock, emerged into the mainstream. They were variously characterised as part of a garage rock, post-punk or new wave revival. Because the bands came from across the globe, cited diverse influences (from traditional blues, through new wave to grunge), and adopted differing styles of dress, their unity as a genre has been disputed. There had been attempts to revive garage rock and elements of punk in the 1980s and 1990s; by 2000, scenes had grown up in several countries.\nThe commercial breakthrough from these scenes was led by four bands: the Strokes, who emerged from the New York club scene with their debut album \"Is This It\" (2001); the White Stripes, from Detroit, with their third album \"White Blood Cells\" (2001); the Hives from Sweden after their compilation album \"Your New Favourite Band\" (2001); and the Vines from Australia with \"Highly Evolved\" (2002). They were dubbed by the media as \"the saviours of rock 'n' roll\". A second wave of bands that gained international recognition due to the movement included Yeah Yeah Yeahs, the Killers, Interpol and Kings of Leon from the US, the Libertines, Arctic Monkeys, Bloc Party, Editors, Kaiser Chiefs and Franz Ferdinand from the UK, and Jet and Wolfmother from Australia.\nDigital electronic rock.\nIn the 2000s, as computer technology became more accessible and music software advanced, it became possible to create high quality music using little more than a single laptop computer. This resulted in a massive increase in the amount of home-produced electronic music available to the general public via the expanding internet. These techniques also began to be used by existing bands and by developing genres that mixed rock with digital techniques and sounds, including electroclash, dance-punk and new rave.\nMetalcore.\nMetalcore originated in the late 1980s combining elements of extreme metal and hardcore punk. Metalcore is noted for its use of breakdowns, which are slow, intense passages conducive to moshing, while other defining instrumentation includes heavy and percussive pedal point guitar riffs and double bass drumming. In the late 1980s to early 1990s, pioneering bands such as Integrity, Earth Crisis and Converge were founded. During the 1990s, the genre diversified, with the Dillinger Escape Plan, Botch and Coalesce pioneering mathcore.\nIn the 2010s and through to the 2020s, the genre saw even greater commercial success, with Bring Me the Horizon's album \"\" (2020) and Architects' \"For Those That Wish to Exist\" (2021) both reaching number one in the UK album charts.\n2010s\u2013present: Commercial stagnation and revival scenes.\nDuring the 2010s, rock music declined from its position as the major popular music genre, now sharing with electronic dance and hip hop, the latter of which had surpassed it as the most consumed musical genre in the United States by 2017. The rise of streaming and the advent of technology, which changed approaches toward music creation, were cited as major factors. Ken Partridge of Genius suggested that the stagnation of rock music and rising popularity of hip-hop is the result of changing social attitudes during the 2010s. Bill Flanagan, in a 2016 opinion piece for \"The New York Times\", compared the state of rock during this period to the state of jazz in the early 1980s: \"Its form is mostly fixed.\"\nThe rock bands which had chart success in the 2010s were mostly associated with the trends that had been popular in the 2000s and earlier decades rather than reflecting new scenes and sounds. Some pop rock and hard rock bands continued to see commercial success during this period, including Ghost, Maroon 5, Twenty One Pilots, Fall Out Boy, Imagine Dragons, Halestorm, Panic! at the Disco, Greta Van Fleet, and the Black Keys. In 2013, Queens of the Stone Age's album \"...Like Clockwork\" topped the charts in several countries.\nPsychedelic and progressive revivals.\nPsychedelic and progressive styles in rock have seen a resurgence in popularity during the 2010s and 2020s. Some of the most notable acts in neo-psychedelia originated in Australia, such as King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard and Kevin Parker's Tame Impala. The latter released well received albums such as \"Lonerism\" (2012) and \"Currents\" (2015). This new Australian psychedelic music not only built on the psychedelic and progressive rock acts of the 1960s and 1970s, but also incorporated musical influences from heavy metal, EDM, and world music. A 2014 article in \"The Guardian\" described Australia as a place where \"independently minded rock bands are free to develop at their own pace\".\nPsychedelic trends in rock have also seen a revival in Europe, which has been described as \"really good\" for new psychedelic music, with many American stoner rock bands choosing to tour in Europe as opposed to North America.\nPost-punk and pop-punk revivals.\nIn the late 2010s and early 2020s, a new wave of post-punk bands from Britain and Ireland emerged. Artists that have been identified as part of this wave include Squid, Fontaines D.C. and Idles. Post-punk artists that attained prominence in the 2010s and early 2020s from other countries besides the UK included Geese (United States), K\u00e6lan Mikla (Iceland), and Viagra Boys (Sweden), as well as the so-called \"Russian doomer music\" scene consisting of post-punk, coldwave and darkwave bands from post-Soviet countries like Russia and Belarus, most prominently Molchat Doma (Belarus).\nAt the start of the 2020s, pop and rap music artists released successful pop-punk-influenced recordings, including Machine Gun Kelly's 2020 album \"Tickets to My Downfall\", which topped the \"Billboard\" 200, and Olivia Rodrigo's number-one hit single \"Good 4 U\" (2021).\nClassic rock revival.\nDuring the mid-to-late 2010s, some bands gained notoriety for emulating rock styles of the late 1960s and 1970s popular on classic rock radio. \"Guitar World\" described this back-to-basics revival as \"hard-hitting, swaggering, riff-driven rock 'n' roll built around a core vocal-guitar-bass-drum configuration\". Groups considered to be a part of this trend include Greta Van Fleet, Rival Sons, and Larkin Poe.\nSocial impact.\nDifferent subgenres of rock were adopted by, and became central to, the identity of a large number of sub-cultures. In the 1950s and 1960s, respectively, British youths adopted the Teddy Boy and rocker subcultures, which revolved around US rock and roll. The counterculture of the 1960s was associated with much of the rock music of the era. The mid- to late 1970s punk subculture began in the US and spread worldwide. The goth and emo subcultures that grew later presented distinctive visual styles.\nWhen an international rock culture developed, it supplanted cinema as the major source of fashion influence. However, followers of rock music have often mistrusted the world of fashion, which has been seen as elevating image above substance. Rock fashions have been seen as combining elements of different cultures and periods, as well as expressing divergent views on sexuality and gender, and rock music in general has been noted and criticised for facilitating greater sexual freedom. Rock has also been associated with various forms of drug use, including the amphetamines taken by mods in the early to mid-1960s, the LSD, mescaline and other hallucinogenic drugs linked with psychedelic rock in the mid- to late 1960s and early 1970s; and sometimes cannabis, cocaine and heroin, all of which have been eulogised in song.\nRock has been credited with changing attitudes to race by opening up African-American culture to white audiences. However, at the same time, rock has been accused of appropriating and exploiting that culture. Rock music has absorbed many influences and introduced Western audiences to different musical traditions, and inherited the folk tradition of protest song, making political statements on subjects such as war, religion, poverty, civil rights, justice and the environment. Activism reached a mainstream peak with the \"Do They Know It's Christmas?\" single (1984) and Live Aid concert for Ethiopia in 1985, which, while raising awareness of world poverty and funds for aid, have also been criticised (along with similar events), for providing a stage for self-aggrandisement and increased profits for the rock stars involved.\nSince its early development, rock music has been associated with rebellion against social and political norms, most in early rock and roll's rejection of an adult-dominated culture, the counterculture's rejection of consumerism and conformity and punk's rejection of all forms of social convention; however, it can also be seen as providing a means of commercial exploitation of such ideas and of diverting youth away from political action.\nRole of women.\nAccording to Schaap and Berkers, playing in a band is a peer group experience \"shaped by existing sex-segregated friendship networks\". They write: \"Several scholars have argued that men exclude women from bands or from the bands' rehearsals, recordings, performances, and other social activities ... Women are mainly regarded as passive and private consumers of allegedly slick, prefabricated\u00a0\u2013 hence, inferior\u00a0\u2013 pop music, excluding them from participating as high status rock musicians\".\nIn the early decades of rock music, rebellion \"was largely a male rebellion; the women\u2014often, in the 1950s and 60s, girls in their teens\u2014in rock usually sang songs as personae, utterly dependent on their macho boyfriends.\" Philip Auslander says that \"although there were many women in rock by the late 1960s, most performed only as singers, a traditionally feminine position in popular music.\" Some women played instruments in American all-female garage rock bands, but none of these bands achieved more than regional success. When Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973, \"no other prominent female musician worked in rock simultaneously as a singer, instrumentalist, songwriter, and bandleader\".\nAn all-female band is a musical group that is exclusively composed of female musicians. This is distinct from a girl group, in which the female members are vocalists, though this terminology is not universally followed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25424", "revid": "4082870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25424", "title": "Retronym", "text": "Word altered to differentiate from a new use\nA retronym is a newer name for something that differentiates it from something else that is newer, similar, or seen in everyday life; thus, avoiding confusion between the two.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"retronym\", a neologism composed of the combining forms \"retro-\" (from Latin , \"before\") + \"-nym\" (from Greek , \"name\"), was coined by Frank Mankiewicz in 1980 and popularized by William Safire in \"The New York Times Magazine\".\nIn 2000, \"The American Heritage Dictionary\" (4th edition) became the first major dictionary to include the word \"retronym\".\nExamples.\nThe global war from 1914 to 1918 was referred to at the time as the \"Great War\". However, after the subsequent global war erupted in 1939, the phrase \"Great War\" was gradually deprecated. The first came to be known as \"World War I\" and the second as \"World War II\".\nThe first bicycles with two wheels of equal size were called \"safety bicycles\" because they were easier to handle than the then-dominant style that had one large wheel and one small wheel, which then became known as an \"ordinary\" bicycle. Since the end of the 19th century, most bicycles have been expected to have two equal-sized wheels, and the other type has been renamed \"penny-farthing\" or \"high-wheeler\" bicycle.\nThe Atari Video Computer System platform was rebranded the \"Atari 2600\" (after its product code, CX-2600) in 1982 following the launch of its successor, the Atari 5200, and all hardware and software related to the platform were released under this new branding from that point on. Prior to that time, Atari often used the initialism \"VCS\" in official literature and other media, but colloquially the Video Computer System was often simply called \"the Atari.\"\nThe television series \"Star Trek\" became known as \"Star Trek: The Original Series\" to distinguish it from its franchise. \nThe first film in the Star Wars franchise released in 1977 was simply titled \"Star Wars\". It was given the subtitle \"Episode IV: A New Hope\" for its 1981 theatrical re-release, shortly after the release of its sequel \"The Empire Strikes Back\" in 1980. Initially, this subtitle was limited to the opening text crawl, as all three films in the original Star Wars trilogy (\"Star Wars\", \"The Empire Strikes Back\", and \"Return of the Jedi\") were still sold under their original theatrical titles on home media formats (such as VHS and Laserdisc). It was not until their 2004 DVD releases that the titles of the individual three films were changed to follow the same titling pattern as the Star Wars prequel trilogy (e.g. \"Star Wars Episode IV - A New Hope\").\nIn the 1990s, when the Internet became widely popular and email accounts' instant delivery common, mail carried by the postal service came to be called \"snail mail\" for its slower delivery compared to email.\nAdvances in technology and science are often responsible for the coinage of retronyms. For example, the term acoustic guitar was coined with the advent of the electric guitar, analog watch was introduced to distinguish from the digital watch, push bike was created to distinguish from the motorized bicycle, and feature phone was coined to distinguish from the smartphone. Likewise, visible light refers to electromagnetic radiation on the narrow visible spectrum, and water ice was coined to distinguish the solid state of water (including exotic forms) from the solid state of other volatiles such as carbon dioxide and argon.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25425", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25425", "title": "Roman alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "25427", "revid": "4842600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25427", "title": "Rush Limbaugh", "text": "American political commentator (1951\u20132021)\nRush Hudson Limbaugh III ( ; January 12, 1951 \u2013 February 17, 2021) was an American conservative political commentator who was the host of \"The Rush Limbaugh Show\", which first aired in 1984 and was nationally syndicated on AM and FM radio stations from 1988 until his death in 2021.\nLimbaugh became one of the most prominent conservative voices in the United States during the 1990s and hosted a national television show from 1992 to 1996. He was among the most highly paid figures in American radio history; in 2018 \"Forbes\" listed his earnings at $84.5 million. In December 2019, \"Talkers Magazine\" estimated that Limbaugh's show attracted a cumulative weekly audience of 15.5 million listeners to become the most-listened-to radio show in the United States. Limbaugh also wrote seven books; his first two, \"The Way Things Ought to Be\" (1992) and \"See, I Told You So\" (1993), made \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list.\nLimbaugh garnered controversy from his statements on race, LGBT matters, feminism, sexual consent, and climate change. In 1993, he was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame and in 1998 the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame. During the 2020 State of the Union Address, President Donald Trump awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nEarly life.\nLimbaugh was born on January 12, 1951, in Cape Girardeau, Missouri, to parents Rush Hudson Limbaugh II and Mildred Carolyn (n\u00e9e\u00a0Armstrong) Limbaugh. He and his younger brother David were born into the prominent political Limbaugh family; his father was a lawyer and a United States fighter pilot who served in the China Burma India Theater of World War II. His mother was from Searcy, Arkansas. The name \"Rush\" was originally chosen for his grandfather to honor the maiden name of a family member, Edna Rush.\nLimbaugh was partly of German ancestry. The family includes many lawyers, including his grandfather, father and brother; his uncle, Stephen N. Limbaugh Sr., was a federal judge in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri. His cousin, Stephen N. Limbaugh Jr., is a judge in the same court, appointed by George W. Bush. Limbaugh's grandfather, Rush Limbaugh Sr., was a Missouri prosecutor, judge, special commissioner, member of the Missouri House of Representatives in the 1930s, and longtime president of the Missouri Historical Society.\nIn 1969, Limbaugh graduated from Cape Girardeau Central High School, where he played football and was a Boys State delegate. At age 16, he worked his first radio job at KGMO, a local radio station. He used the airname Rusty Sharpe having found \"Sharpe\" in a telephone book. Limbaugh later cited Chicago DJ Larry Lujack as a major influence on him, saying Lujack was \"the only person I ever copied.\" In deference to his parents' desire that he attend college, he enrolled at Southeast Missouri State University but dropped out after two semesters. According to his mother, \"he flunked everything [...] he just didn't seem interested in anything except radio.\" Biographer Zev Chafets asserts that Limbaugh's life was in large part dedicated to gaining his father's respect.\nCareer.\n1971\u20131988: Early radio career.\nIn February 1971, after dropping out of college, the 20-year-old Limbaugh accepted an offer to DJ at WIXZ, a Top 40 station in McKeesport, Pennsylvania. He adopted the airname \"Bachelor Jeff\" Christie and worked afternoons before moving to morning drive. The station's general manager compared Limbaugh's style at this time to \"early Imus\". In 1973, after eighteen months at WIXZ, Limbaugh was fired from the station due to \"personality conflict\" with the program director. He then started a nighttime position at KQV in Pittsburgh, succeeding Jim Quinn. In late 1974, Limbaugh was dismissed after new management put pressure on the program director to fire him. Limbaugh recalled the general manager telling him that he would never land success as an air personality and suggested a career in radio sales. After rejecting his only offer at the time, a position in Neenah, Wisconsin, Limbaugh returned to living with his parents in Cape Girardeau. During his time in Pittsburgh, he became a lifelong fan of the Steelers NFL team.\nIn 1975, Limbaugh began an afternoon show at the Top 40 station KUDL in Kansas City, Missouri. He soon became the host of a public affairs talk program that aired on weekend mornings which allowed him to develop his style and present more controversial ideas. In 1977, he was let go from the station but remained in Kansas City to start an evening show at KFIX. The stint was short-lived, however, and disagreements with management led to his dismissal weeks later. By this time, Limbaugh had become disillusioned with radio and felt pressure to pursue a different career. He looked back on himself as \"a moderate failure [...] as a deejay\". In 1979, he accepted a part-time role in group sales for the Kansas City Royals baseball team which developed into a full-time position as director of group sales and special events. He worked from the Royals Stadium. There he developed a friendship with then-Royals star third baseman and future Hall of Famer George Brett. The two men remained close friends. Limbaugh said that business trips to Europe and Asia during this time developed his conservative views as he considered countries in those geographic areas to have lower standards of living than the United States.\nIn November 1983, Limbaugh returned to radio at KMBZ (AM) in Kansas City for a year. He decided to drop his on-air moniker and broadcast under his real name. He was fired from the station, but weeks later he landed a spot on KFBK in Sacramento, California, replacing Morton Downey Jr. The show launched on October 14, 1984. Limbaugh began to express his political opinions in 1985 when he mocked the Great Peace March for Global Nuclear Disarmament, which he considered along with the general anti-war movement to be \"inherently anti-US, yet was reported as substantive and morally correct by a willing and sympathetic media\". The FCC's repeal of the fairness doctrine\u2014which had required that stations provide free air time for responses to any controversial opinions that were broadcast\u2014on August 5, 1987, meant stations could broadcast editorial commentary without having to present opposing views. Daniel Henninger wrote, in a \"Wall Street Journal\" editorial, \"Ronald Reagan tore down this wall [the fairness doctrine] in 1987\u00a0... and Rush Limbaugh was the first man to proclaim himself liberated from the East Germany of liberal media domination.\"\n1988\u20131990s: WABC New York City, syndication, and tie brand.\nIn 1988, former ABC Radio Network executive Ed McLaughlin offered Limbaugh the nationally syndicated 12pm\u20132pm slot at ABC Radio Network to replace Owen Spann. Since many local radio stations of the time were hesitant to carry nationally syndicated programming during the daytime, he also secured Limbaugh a separate 10am\u201312pm show at WABC-AM in New York City to satisfy the provision of his contract requiring employment in a Top 5 market to leave KMBZ.\nLimbaugh began his new show at WABC-AM on July 4, 1988, with the first episode focusing on the Iran Air Flight 655 shootdown the previous day. His national program debuted on 50 stations the next month on August 1, and by three months later had expanded to 100 stations. He debuted just weeks after the Democratic National Convention, and just weeks before the Republican National Convention. Limbaugh's radio home in New York City was the talk-formatted WABC (AM), and this remained his flagship station for many years, even after Limbaugh moved to West Palm Beach, Florida, from where he broadcast his show. Limbaugh's show moved on January 1, 2014, to WABC's cross-town rival WOR (AM), its final New York outlet.\nBy 1990, Limbaugh had been on his \"Rush to Excellence Tour\", a series of personal appearances in cities nationwide, for two years. For the 45 shows he completed that year alone, he was estimated to have made around $360,000.\nIn December 1990, journalist Lewis Grossberger wrote in \"The New York Times Magazine\" that Limbaugh had \"more listeners than any other talk show host\" and described Limbaugh's style as \"bouncing between earnest lecturer and political vaudevillian\". Limbaugh's rising profile coincided with the Gulf War, coupled with a stalwart support for the war effort and relentless ridicule of peace activists. The program was moved to stations with larger audiences, eventually being broadcast on over 650 radio stations nationwide.\nBy the 1992 United States presidential election, Limbaugh had established himself as an influential political commentator. During the Republican Party presidential primaries, Limbaugh expressed a preference for Pat Buchanan over the incumbent George H. W. Bush, which Buchanan himself attributed to his early success in the primaries. Bush's campaign subsequently worked to court Limbaugh, culminating with an invitation to stay overnight at the White House's Lincoln Bedroom. Limbaugh was also given a seat at the president's box in the Houston Astrodome during the 1992 Republican National Convention, and both President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle appeared on Limbaugh's program.\nIn November 1992, Democrat Bill Clinton was elected President of the United States. Limbaugh satirized the policies of Clinton and First Lady Hillary Clinton, as well as those of the Democratic Party in general. Following the Republican Revolution, in which the party regained control of Congress in the 1994 midterm elections after several decades, the freshman Republican class awarded Limbaugh an honorary membership in their caucus, crediting him with having had a role in their success.\nIn 1995, Limbaugh started selling a line of neckties under the brand No Boundaries Collection, designed by his then-wife Marta without themes, ties to politics, or ties to issues. Limbaugh complained about coverage of the line, which he said underrated the ties' radicalness, and said media descriptions were emblematic of their general inaccuracy. Sold in nearly 1,500 retail outlets by 1996, the brand sold more than $5,000,000 worth in the first year. The New York Times described the designs: \"Much like their promulgator, Mr. Limbaugh's four dozen or so styles seem designed to evoke maximum sensory outrage. Like Rainbow Black, whose interweaving rainbow strands and blue raindrops play around an Ionic column, atop which a cranberry-red pomegranate tree sprouts from an urn. Or Triangle Red, with colliding stacks of black-and-yellow triangles and disjointed horizontal black stripes on a background of speckled salmon.\" In 2000, Limbaugh rented the email list collected from the No Boundaries website to Rudy Giuliani's senate campaign. The business dissolved along with his marriage to Marta but in 2020 the ties were still being sold by TieGal, Inc., for $29 each.\n2000s.\nLimbaugh had publicized personal difficulties in the 2000s. In late 2001, he acknowledged that he had become almost completely deaf, although he continued his show. He was able to regain much of his hearing with the help of a cochlear implant in 2001.\nIn 2003, Limbaugh had a brief stint as a professional football commentator with ESPN. He resigned a few weeks into the 2003 NFL season after making comments about the press coverage for quarterback Donovan McNabb that caused controversy and accusations of racism on the part of Limbaugh. His comment about McNabb was:\nI don't think he's been that good from the get-go. I think what we've had here is a little social concern in the NFL. I think the media has been very desirous that a black quarterback do well. They're interested in black coaches and black quarterbacks doing well. I think there's a little hope invested in McNabb and he got a lot of credit for the performance of his team that he really didn't deserve. The defense carried this team.\nThe sportswriter Peter King construed the comment as \"boneheaded\". The sports analyst Allen Barra wrote Limbaugh's viewpoint was shared by \"many football fans and analysts\" and \"it is... absurd to say that the sports media haven't overrated Donovan McNabb because he's black\".\nIn 2003, Limbaugh stated that he was addicted to pain medication, and sought treatment. In April 2006, Limbaugh turned himself in to authorities, on a warrant issued by the Palm Beach County state attorney's office, and was arrested \"on a single charge of prescription fraud\". His record was later expunged.\n2010s.\nIn 2013, news reports indicated that Cumulus Media, some of whose stations carried Limbaugh's program in certain major markets, including New York, Chicago, Dallas, Washington D.C., and Detroit, was considering dropping his show when its contract with Limbaugh expired at the end of that year, reportedly because the company believed that its advertising revenues had been hurt by listener reaction to controversial Limbaugh comments. Limbaugh himself said that the reports were overblown and that it was a matter of routine dollars-and-cents negotiations between Cumulus and his network syndication partner, Premiere Networks, a unit of Clear Channel Communications. Ultimately, the parties reached agreement on a new contract, with Limbaugh's show moving from its long-time flagship outlet in New York, the Cumulus-owned WABC, to the latter's cross-town rival, the Clear Channel-owned WOR, starting January 1, 2014, but remaining on the Cumulus-owned stations it was being carried on in other markets.\n2020s.\nIn January 2021, Limbaugh called the GameStop short squeeze \"the most fascinating thing\" to happen in a long time and said that \"the elites are bent out of shape that a bunch of average, ordinary users have figured out how to make themselves billionaires\".\n\"The Rush Limbaugh Show\".\nLimbaugh's radio show aired for three hours each weekday beginning at noon Eastern Time on both AM and FM radio. The program was also broadcast worldwide on the Armed Forces Radio Network.\nRadio broadcasting shifted from AM to FM in the 1970s because of the opportunity to broadcast music in stereo with better fidelity (AM stations in the United States would not get the opportunity to broadcast in stereo sound until August 2, 1982). Limbaugh's show was first nationally syndicated in August 1988, on the AM radio band. Limbaugh's popularity paved the way for other conservative talk radio programming to become commonplace on AM radio. The show increased its audience in the 1990s to the extent that even some FM stations picked it up. As of \u00a02019[ [update]], about half of Limbaugh's affiliate stations were on the FM dial.\nLimbaugh used props, songs, and photos to introduce his monologues on various topics. On his radio show, news about homeless people was often preceded by the Clarence \"Frogman\" Henry song \"Ain't Got No Home\".\nIn March 2006, WBAL in Baltimore became the first major market radio station in the country to drop Limbaugh's nationally syndicated radio program. In 2007, \"TALKERS Magazine\" again named him No.1 in its \"Heavy Hundred\" most important talk show hosts.\nLimbaugh frequently mentioned the EIB (Excellence In Broadcasting) Network, trademarked in 1990. In the beginning, his show was co-owned and first syndicated by Edward F. McLaughlin, former president of ABC, who founded EFM Media in 1988, with Limbaugh's show as his first product. In 1997, McLaughlin sold EFM to Jacor Communications, which was ultimately bought up by Clear Channel Communications. Limbaugh owned a majority of the show, which is syndicated by the Premiere Radio Networks.\nAccording to a 2001 article in \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", Limbaugh had an eight-year contract, at the rate of $31.25 million a year. In 2007, Limbaugh earned $33 million. A November 2008 poll by Zogby International found that Limbaugh was the most trusted news personality in the nation, garnering 12.5 percent of poll responses.\nLimbaugh signed a $400-million, eight-year contract in 2008 with what was then Clear Channel Communications, making him the highest-paid broadcaster on terrestrial radio. On August 2, 2016, Limbaugh signed a four-year extension of the 2008 contract. At the announcement of the extension, Premiere Radio Networks and iHeartMedia announced that his show experienced audience growth with 18% growth in adults 25\u201354, 27% growth with 25\u201354 women, and ad revenue growth of 20% year over year.\nIn 2018, Limbaugh was the world's second (behind Howard Stern) highest-paid radio host, reportedly earning $84.5 million. On January 5, 2020, Limbaugh renewed his contract again. Though media reports said it was \"a long-term\" renewal, (with no length specified), according to Donald Trump it was a four-year deal.\nRegular guest host Ken Matthews was also selected a \"TALKERS Magazine\" \"Heavy Hundred\".\nIn May, Premiere Networks announced that on June 21, 2021, The Limbaugh Show radio timeslot would be taken over by Clay Travis and Buck Sexton in hundreds of markets.\nTelevision show.\nLimbaugh had a syndicated half-hour television show from 1992 through 1996, produced by Roger Ailes. The show discussed many of the topics on his radio show, and was taped in front of an audience. In the months after its debut on September 12, 1992, it was the third highest rated late-night television show after \"Nightline\" and \"The Tonight Show with Jay Leno\". Limbaugh said he loved doing his radio show, but not a TV show.\nOther media appearances.\nLimbaugh's first television hosting experience came March 30, 1990, as a guest host on Pat Sajak's CBS late-night talk show, \"The Pat Sajak Show\". ACT UP activists in the audience heckled Limbaugh repeatedly; ultimately the entire studio audience was cleared. In 2001, Sajak said the incident was \"legendary around CBS\".\nOn December 17, 1993, Limbaugh appeared on the \"Late Show with David Letterman\". Limbaugh also guest-starred (as himself) on a 1994 episode of \"Hearts Afire\". He appeared in the 1995 Billy Crystal film \"Forget Paris\", and in 1998 on an episode of \"The Drew Carey Show\".\nIn 2007, Limbaugh made cameo appearances on Fox News Channel's short-lived \"The 1/2 Hour News Hour\" in a series of parodies portraying him as the future President of the United States. In the parodies, his vice president was fellow conservative pundit Ann Coulter. That year, he also made a cameo in the \"Family Guy\" episode \"Blue Harvest\", a parody of \"Star Wars\" in which Limbaugh can be heard on the radio claiming that the \"liberal galactic media\" were lying about climate change on the planet Hoth, and that Lando Calrissian's administrative position on Cloud City was a result of affirmative action. His later appearances on \"Family Guy\" were in the 2010 episode \"Excellence in Broadcasting\", and 2011's \"Episode VI: It's a Trap!\", a parody of \"Return of the Jedi\".\nViews.\nIn his first \"New York Times\" best seller, Limbaugh described himself as conservative, and was critical of broadcasters in many media outlets for claiming to be objective. He called for the adoption of core conservative philosophies in order to ensure the survival of the Republican Party. Limbaugh criticized the media and political activist movements such as feminism, environmentalism, and animal rights activism for allegedly serving as outlets for \"anticapitalism, secular humanism, and socialism\". Limbaugh, a proponent of American exceptionalism, often criticized politicians he believed reject this notion seeing them as unpatriotic or anti-American.\nRace.\nLimbaugh was known for making controversial race-related statements regarding African Americans. He once opined that all newspaper composite pictures of wanted criminals resembled Jesse Jackson, and another time that \"the NFL all too often looks like a game between the Bloods and the Crips without any weapons.\" While employed as what he described as an \"insult-radio\" DJ, he used a derogatory racial stereotype to characterize a black caller he could not understand, telling the caller to \"take that bone out of your nose and call me back\", although he expressed guilt over this when recounting it. Limbaugh asserted in 2008 that African Americans, in contrast with other minority groups, are \"left behind\" socially because they have been systematically trained from a young age to hate the United States because of the welfare state. On the topic of slavery, Limbaugh said, \u201cIf any race of people should not have guilt about slavery, it\u2019s Caucasians.\u201d\nLimbaugh argued that liberal politicians have encouraged immigration from Latin America but have discouraged their assimilation to deliberately create racial inequality to manipulate as a voter base, and that their continued admission will cause a collapse of representative democracy and rule of law in the United States. He criticized the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 for this reason.\nHe said of the genocide of Native Americans, \"Holocaust 90 million Indians? Only 4 million left? They all have casinos, what\u2019s to complain about?\"\nTaxes.\nJames Fallows described Limbaugh's economic ideology as \"a doctrinaire version of supply-side economics\" and noted that he frequently cited \"The Wall Street Journal\" in his radio shows and books. Limbaugh has called for fewer taxes, including progressive taxes targeted towards the wealthy, and argued the wealthy were being taxed excessively because they continued to pay the majority of taxes in the United States. Limbaugh further claimed that reductions in marginal tax rates would reduce poverty and inequality by removing obstacles towards economic growth, and that reducing marginal tax rates on the wealthy would increase tax revenue by increasing production. Limbaugh credited Reagan's tax cuts for ending the early 1980s recession, and blamed the early 1990s recession and rising rates of inequality on the American middle-class being \"taxed at a confiscatory rate\".\nLGBT and AIDS.\nLimbaugh expressed anti-LGBT views and viewed homosexual sexual practices as unhygienic. He made serophobic statements about HIV/AIDS victims in the 1980s and 1990s, and called the virus \"Rock Hudson's disease\" and \"the only federally-protected virus\". For a time, Dionne Warwick's song \"I'll Never Love This Way Again\" preceded reports about people with HIV/AIDS on his radio show. These later became \"condom updates\", preceded by The 5th Dimension's song \"Up, Up and Away\". Limbaugh defended President Reagan's response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and falsely claimed that AIDS did not \"spread to the heterosexual community\" in the United States. When Freddie Mercury died of complications from AIDS in 1991, Limbaugh played a snippet of \"Another One Bites the Dust\". In the early 1990s, Limbaugh ran a recurring segment, \"AIDS Update\", which mocked the deaths of gay individuals from HIV/AIDS, and read aloud the names of the dead. During the segment, he would play songs like \"I'll Never Love This Way Again\" and Johnny Lee's \"Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places\"; the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that Limbaugh said, \"Gays deserved their fate.\" Limbaugh later called the segment \"the single most regretful thing I have ever done.\"\nIn 2013, Limbaugh commented on same-sex marriage by saying, \"This issue is lost. I don't care what the Supreme Court does. This is inevitable. And it's inevitable because we lost the language on this. As far as I'm concerned, once we started talking about gay marriage, traditional marriage, opposite-sex marriage, same-sex marriage, hetero marriage, we lost. It was over.\" In 2016, Limbaugh described a program from the USDA for the LGBT community in rural America as, \u201cI never knew that lesbians wanted to get behind the horse and the plow and start burrowing\". In February 2020, Limbaugh predicted that Pete Buttigieg would not be able to win the 2020 presidential election because of his homosexuality.\nSexual consent.\nLimbaugh dismissed the concept of consent in sexual relations. He viewed consent as \"the magic key to the left\". In 2014, Limbaugh criticized a policy at Ohio State University encouraging students to obtain verbal consent, saying \"How many of you guys ... have learned that 'no' means 'yes' if you know how to spot it?\" The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee used these statements to advocate a boycott of Limbaugh's show and advertisers, asserting that the statements were tantamount to an endorsement of sexual assault. Limbaugh denied this, and his spokesman Brian Glicklick and lawyer Patricia Glaser threatened a defamation lawsuit against the DCCC. According to spokesperson Emily Bittner, the DCCC did not receive any correspondence from Limbaugh or his attorney.\nDrug policy.\nLimbaugh had been an outspoken critic of what he saw as leniency towards criminal drug use in the United States. On his television show on October 5, 1995, Limbaugh stated, \"too many whites are getting away with drug use\" and illegal drug trafficking. Limbaugh proposed that the racial disparity in drug enforcement could be fixed if authorities increased detection efforts, conviction rates and jail time for whites involved in illegal drugs. He defended mandatory-minimum sentencing as an effective tool against the crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980s. Limbaugh accused advocates of legalization of non-medical cannabis in the United States of hypocrisy due to their advocacy of tobacco control and backlash against electronic cigarettes, and compared the advocates for its legalization in Colorado to Big Tobacco. Limbaugh's past comments on drug users were highlighted by numerous media outlets after his own stint in a drug rehabilitation facility in 2003.\nEnvironmental issues.\nLimbaugh was opposed to environmentalism and climate science. He rejected the relationship between CFCs and depletion of the ozone layer, claiming the scientific evidence did not support them. Limbaugh argued against the scientific consensus on climate change claiming it was \"just a bunch of scientists organized around a political proposition\" and argued that projections of climate change were the product of ideologically motivated computer simulations without the proper support of empirical data, a claim which has been widely debunked. Limbaugh used the term \"environmentalist wacko\" both when referring to left-leaning environmental advocates and when referring to more mainstream climate scientists and other environmental scientists and advocates with whom he disagreed. Limbaugh opposed pollution credits, including a carbon cap-and-trade system, as a way to disproportionately benefit major American investment banks, particularly Goldman Sachs, and claimed that it would destroy the American national economy.\nLimbaugh wrote that \"there are more acres of forestland in America today than when Columbus discovered the continent in 1492\".\nLimbaugh strongly opposed the proposed Green New Deal and its sponsor Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.\nFeminism.\nLimbaugh was critical of feminism, which he viewed as advancing only liberals and not women in general. In a newspaper column he stated that it \"was established so that unattractive ugly broads could have easy access to the mainstream of society.\" He has criticized Democratic congressmen calling for more women in Congress as hypocritical due to their opposition to female Republican candidates. He has also regularly used the term \"feminazi\", described by \"The New York Times\" in 1994 as one of his \"favorite epithets for supporters of women's rights\". According to Limbaugh in 1992, for certain feminists, the \"most important thing in life is ensuring that as many abortions as possible occur.\" He also used the term referring to the half-million-large 2017 Women's March as the \"Deranged Feminazi March\". He credited his friend Tom Hazlett, a professor of law and economics at George Mason University, with coining the term.\nAbortion.\nFor two weeks in 1989, on his Sacramento radio show, Limbaugh performed \"caller abortions\" where he would end a call suddenly to the sounds of a vacuum cleaner and a scream. He would then deny that he had \"hung up\" on the caller, which he had promised not to do. Limbaugh claims that he used this gag to illustrate \"the tragedy of abortion\" as well as to highlight the question of whether abortion constitutes murder. In 2013, Limbaugh said that women were being turned into \"abortion machines\" by the Democratic Party.\nMiddle East.\nLimbaugh was supportive of the Iraq War, and first suggested bombing Ba'athist Iraq in 2002 in revenge for the September 11 attacks. Even after no Iraqi weapons of mass destruction were found, he supported theories that they had existed. On the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal, Limbaugh said, \"This is no different than what happens at the Skull and Bones initiation\u00a0... And we're going to ruin people's lives over it and we're going to hamper our military effort, and then we are going to really hammer them because they had a good time.\" Speaking at the 2009 Conservative Political Action Conference, Limbaugh accused Democratic congressional leaders such as Harry Reid of deliberately undermining the war effort.\nDuring the 2019\u201321 Persian Gulf crisis, Limbaugh praised the 2020 Baghdad International Airport drone strike that resulted in the death of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps's commander Major General Qasem Soleimani, and accused opponents of the strike of supporting Iran over the United States. On January 6, 2020, during an interview with President Donald Trump on his show, Limbaugh commended him for the strike.\nTrade.\nIn 1993, Limbaugh supported the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), joking in response to claims that it would lead to a transfer of unskilled labor to Mexico that this would leave the United States with only better jobs. During a 1993 televised debate against H. Ross Perot over NAFTA, Vice President Al Gore complimented Limbaugh as one of the \"distinguished Americans\" who pushed NAFTA forward in spite of the intense animosity between Limbaugh and the administration of President Bill Clinton. He later became more critical of NAFTA and trade agreements in general, claiming that they had reduced national sovereignty by \"subordinating\" America to \"world tribunals, like the World Trade Organization and the International Criminal Court and this kind of thing.\" He also claimed that promises to stem mass migration by invigorating the Latin American economy had failed. He supported a renegotiation of NAFTA and the eventual United States\u2013Mexico\u2013Canada Agreement.\nLimbaugh defended the first Trump tariffs and the China\u2013United States trade war as a legitimate response to predatory Chinese trade practices and its Communist command economy.\nBarack Obama.\nRush Limbaugh strongly opposed Barack Obama during the 2008 presidential election. In 2007, his show aired a song called \"Barack the Magic Negro\". Limbaugh spread false claims that Obama was a non-citizen not born in the United States. Limbaugh predicted that Obama would be unable to win the election. On January 16, 2009, Limbaugh commented on the then-upcoming Obama presidency, \"I hope he fails.\" Limbaugh later said that he wanted to see Obama's policies fail, not the man himself. Limbaugh frequently referred to the Obama administration or presidency as regime or as the \"Obama regime\", or even junta. Speaking of Obama, Limbaugh said, \"He's my president, he's a human being, and his ideas and policies are what count for me.\" Limbaugh later discouraged efforts to impeach Barack Obama as politically unrealistic.\nLimbaugh accused Obama of using his race to prevent criticism of his policies, and said he was successful in his first year in office only because conservative members of the 111th Congress feared accusations of racism. Limbaugh featured a recurring skit in which his colleague James Golden, who described himself as an \"African-American-in-good-standing-and-certified-black-enough-to-criticize-Obama guy\", appeared in a cameo as the \"Official EIB Obama Criticizer\".\nLimbaugh blamed Obama's foreign policy, including the withdrawal of U.S. troops from Iraq, for allowing the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. Limbaugh also claimed that the 2012 Benghazi attack occurred due to a secret arms trafficking operation to the Syrian opposition authorized by Obama and coordinated by Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, speculating that the 2016 Democratic National Committee email leak would reveal evidence of it. Limbaugh also criticized the Russian reset, viewing Vladimir Putin's rule in the Russian Federation as a thinly veiled continuation of the Soviet Union and Marxism\u2013Leninism. He was also critical of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, including of Obama's decision to ratify it as an executive agreement, and claimed that it was used as a pretext for surveillance against Obama's political opponents. Limbaugh argued that side agreements of the JCPOA limited transparency and would obligate the United States to militarily defend Iran against an Israeli offensive, including a preemptive strike to prevent nuclear weapons development.\nDuring the West African Ebola virus epidemic, Limbaugh blamed Obama for allowing the spread of the disease to the United States in 2014, claiming that he should have stopped air travel to West Africa. He claimed that both the media and the government, including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, deliberately downplayed its symptoms, expressing skepticism over the scientific consensus that the disease could be spread only through contact with bodily fluids and was not aerosol transmissible. When David Quammen criticized the idea of ending air travel to West Africa by pointing out that Liberia was founded due to slavery in the United States on \"Anderson Cooper 360\u00b0\", Limbaugh suggested in response that the Obama administration was deliberately allowing Ebola to be transmitted to the United States due to its guilt over slavery, stating \"People at the highest levels of our government say 'Why, why shouldn't we get it? Why should only those three nations in Africa get it? We're no better than they are.' And they have this attitude, 'Well, if they have it in Africa, by God, we deserve to get it, because they're in Africa because of us and because of slavery.'\"\nLimbaugh joked that the 2010 eruptions of Eyjafjallaj\u00f6kull were God's response to the Affordable Care Act being passed.\nRelationship with Donald Trump.\nLimbaugh was consistently supportive of the candidacy and first presidency of Donald Trump, although he endorsed Ted Cruz during the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries and took issue with Trump's treatment of Cruz. Limbaugh later criticized Cruz's hesitance to endorse Trump after his nomination at the 2016 Republican National Convention, comparing it to Ted Kennedy's lukewarm support of Jimmy Carter at the 1980 Democratic National Convention. After the election he became supportive of deep-state conspiracy theories, claiming that the United States had entered a \"Cold Civil War\" in which the Democratic Party was attempting to illegitimately overturn the election results and that it was part of a trend of Democrats contesting elections beginning with the 2000 Florida election recount intended to eventually eliminate free elections in the United States.\nIn December 2018, Limbaugh criticized Trump for preparing to accept a continuing resolution that would fund the government through February 8, 2019, but included no funding for a border wall on the Mexico\u2013United States border, a campaign promise repeatedly emphasized by Trump. Trump would subsequently make a surprise telephone call to Limbaugh announcing his intent to veto the bill, a decision that would lead to the 2018\u201319 United States federal government shutdown. Limbaugh would go on to support the shutdown, stating, \"We have a president keeping promises left and right. And isn't it interesting to see how trivial Washington thinks that is?\" After Trump declared the National Emergency Concerning the Southern Border of the United States and the 116th Congress failed in its attempt to override it, Limbaugh called on him to completely close the border with Mexico.\nLimbaugh was dismissive of controversies over links between Trump associates and Russian officials. He claimed that the FBI investigations of Michael Flynn and Paul Manafort, as well as the subsequent Special Counsel investigation directed by Robert Mueller, were orchestrated by Barack Obama and the Democratic Party to undermine the legitimacy of Trump's presidency, constituting an illegal coup d'\u00e9tat. Limbaugh claimed that George Papadopoulos was entrapped by the FBI, which he claimed Joseph Mifsud was an informant for, through Stefan Halper as part of an \"insurance policy\" against Trump's election by the Five Eyes intelligence alliance. Limbaugh advocated a full presidential pardon for all suspects indicted or convicted by the investigation. After the release of the Mueller report, he disputed its conclusion that WikiLeaks obtained the Democratic National Committee's emails from the Russian government and its depiction of Donald Trump Jr.'s Trump Tower meeting. He claimed that allegations of obstruction of justice were leveled at Trump due to the Report's conclusion that Trump did not directly collude with Russian officials, and that Trump's intent to fire Mueller and Attorney General Jeff Sessions was legitimate.\nLimbaugh supported the Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity as well as Trump's claims that he lost the popular vote due to voter impersonation by illegal immigrants.\nAfter the House of Representatives commenced a formal impeachment inquiry against President Trump due to the scandal over a 2019 telephone call to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy, pressuring the Ukrainian government to prosecute 2020 Democratic primary candidate Joe Biden shortly after a freeze of military aid, Limbaugh argued that the two events were unrelated since Trump had made a decision to withhold military funds a month in advance. He additionally claimed that Trump's desire for the Ukrainian government to prosecute Biden was legally justified by a 1999 mutual legal assistance treaty with Ukraine and \"was following the law to the letter when it comes to unearthing the long-standing corruption that has swirled in Ukraine and allegedly involves powerful Democrats like Joe Biden.\"\nAlleging false flag attacks.\nLimbaugh claimed that the October 2018 United States mail bombing attempts were perpetuated as a false flag operation to draw public attention away from Central American migrant caravans. He reiterated these claims two weeks after the arrest of the primary suspect Cesar Sayoc, a registered Republican.\nOn his show, Limbaugh said that the Christchurch mosque shootings of March 2019 may have been a false-flag operation. Limbaugh described \"an ongoing theory\" that the shooter was actually \"a leftist\" trying to smear the right. Despite providing no source or evidence, Limbaugh continued: \"you can't immediately discount this. The left is this insane, they are this crazy.\"\nControversies and inaccuracies.\nComedian Al Franken, who later became a Senator, wrote a satirical 1996 book, \"Rush Limbaugh Is a Big Fat Idiot and Other Observations\", in which he accused Limbaugh of distorting facts to serve his own political biases.\nOf Limbaugh's controversial statements and allegations they have investigated, \"Politifact\" has rated 84% as ranging from \"Mostly False\" to \"Pants On Fire\" (signifying false statements that cannot be reasonably assessed as merely errors), with 5% of Limbaugh's contested statements rising to the level of \"Mostly True\" and 0% rated \"True\". These debunked allegations by Limbaugh include suggestions that the existence of gorillas disproves the theory of evolution, that Ted Kennedy sent a letter to Soviet General Secretary Yuri Andropov seeking to undercut President Reagan, that a recent lack of hurricanes disproves climate change, and that President Obama wanted to mandate circumcision.\nHu Jintao.\nLimbaugh was heavily criticized for mocking Hu Jintao, then the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and paramount leader of the People's Republic of China, and the Chinese language during an episode. After proceeding to label Hu as a \"Chicom dictator\", Limbaugh mocked the Chinese language, primarily using words like ching chong.\nJoseph Kony.\nOn October 14, 2011, Limbaugh questioned the U.S. Armed Forces initiative against Joseph Kony and his Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), based on the assumption that they were Christians. \"They are fighting the Muslims in Sudan. And Obama has sent troops, United States troops to remove them from the battlefield, which means kill them.\" Upon learning about the accusations leveled against Kony, which included kidnapping whole schools of young children for use as child soldiers, Limbaugh stated that he would research the group.\n\"Deepwater Horizon\".\nIn 2010, after the \"Deepwater Horizon\" oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, Limbaugh speculated on his show that eco-terrorists deliberately destroyed the oil well to justify President Obama's deepwater drilling moratorium.\nUnite the Right.\nAfter the white supremacist Unite the Right rally, in which a counter-protester was murdered in the Charlottesville car attack, Limbaugh claimed that the violence had been provoked by Black Lives Matter activists, Antifa, and Robert Creamer. He also claimed without evidence that the police response had been deliberately restrained by Terry McAuliffe as a botched attempt to start a presidential bid in the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries, and that it was part of a campaign by \"international financiers\" such as George Soros to start a Second American Civil War to remove its status as a global superpower.\nChelsea Clinton.\nDuring the Clinton administration, while taping his television program, Limbaugh referred to media coverage of Socks, the Clintons' cat. He then stated, \"But did you know there is also a White House dog?\" and presented a picture of Chelsea Clinton who was 13 years old at the time.\nMichael J. Fox.\nIn October 2006, Limbaugh said Michael J. Fox, who has Parkinson's disease, had exaggerated the effects of his disability in a political TV advertisement advocating for funding of stem cell research. Limbaugh said that Fox in the ad had been \"shameless\" in \"moving all around and shaking\", and that Fox had not taken \"his medication or he's acting, one of the two\". Fox said \"the irony of it is I was too medicated\", adding that there was no way to predict how his symptoms would manifest. Limbaugh said he would apologize to Fox \"bigly, hugely... if I am wrong in characterizing his behavior on this commercial as an act.\" In 2012, Fox said Limbaugh in 2006 had acted on \"bullying instincts\" when \"he said I faked it. I didn't fake it.\", and said Limbaugh's goal was to have him marginalized and shut down for his stem cell stance.\nPhony soldiers.\nIn 2007, Media Matters reported that Limbaugh had categorized Iraq War veterans opposed to the war as \"the phony soldiers\". Limbaugh later said that he was speaking of Jesse MacBeth, a soldier who falsely claimed to have been decorated for valor but, in fact, had never seen combat. Limbaugh said Media Matters was trying to smear him with out-of-context and selectively edited comments. After Limbaugh published what he claimed was the entire transcript of phony soldiers discussion, Media Matters said that over a minute and 30 seconds of the transcript was omitted without \"notation or ellipsis to indicate that there is, in fact, a break in the transcript.\" Limbaugh said during the minute and a half gap Media Matters had pointed out, he was waiting for relevant ABC News copy on the topic, and the transcript and audio edits were \"for space and relevance reasons, not to hide anything.\" Senator Harry Reid and 41 Democrats, including Hillary Clinton, signed a letter asking the CEO of Clear Channel to denounce Limbaugh. Instead, the executive gave the letter to Limbaugh to auction. It raised $2.1 million, at the time an eBay record for an auction item for charity. Limbaugh said he would match the donation and give it to the Marine Corps-Law Enforcement Foundation.\nBid for ownership of the Rams.\nThe NFL team moved to St. Louis, Missouri, and Limbaugh wanted to be a partial owner, but in October 2009, the group that planned to buy the Rams, dropped him. Limbaugh blamed Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson, among others, for his bid failure.\nSandra Fluke.\nOn February 29, 2012, Limbaugh, while talking about contraceptive mandates, included remarks about law student Sandra Fluke as a \"slut\" and \"prostitute\". Limbaugh was commenting on Fluke's speech the previous week to House Democrats in support of mandating insurance coverage for contraceptives. Limbaugh made numerous similar statements over the next two days, leading to the loss of 45 to \"more than 100\" local and national sponsors and Limbaugh's apology on his show for some of his comments. Susan MacMillan Emry co-organized a public relations campaign called Rock the Slut Vote as a response to Limbaugh's remarks.\nCOVID-19 pandemic in the United States.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, Limbaugh asserted that the virus was the common cold. Limbaugh said on his radio show on February 24, 2020, \"I'm dead right on this. The coronavirus is the common cold, folks,\" alleging it was being \"weaponized\" to bring down Trump. Limbaugh's statement was called \"wildly irresponsible\" by \"The Washington Post\".\nCharitable work.\nLeukemia and lymphoma telethon.\nFrom 1990 until his death, Limbaugh held an annual fundraising telethon called the \"EIB Cure-a-Thon\" for the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. In 2006, the EIB Cure-a-Thon conducted its 16th annual telethon, raising $1.7 million, totaling over $15 million since the first cure-a-thon. According to Leukemia and Lymphoma Society annual reports, Limbaugh personally contributed between $100,000 and $499,999 from 2000 to 2005 and in 2007, and Limbaugh said that he contributed around $250,000 in 2003, 2004, and 2005. The Society's 2006 annual report placed him in the $500,000 to $999,999 category. Limbaugh donated $320,000 during the 2007 Cure-a-Thon, which the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society reported had raised $3.1 million. On his radio program April 18, 2008, Limbaugh pledged $400,000 to the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society after being challenged by two listeners to increase his initial pledge of $300,000.\nMarine Corps\u2013Law Enforcement Foundation.\nLimbaugh conducted an annual drive to help the Marine Corps\u2013Law Enforcement Foundation collect contributions to provide scholarships for children of Marines and law enforcement officers and agents who have died in the line of duty. The foundation was the beneficiary of a record $2.1 million eBay auction in October 2007 after Limbaugh listed for sale a letter critical of him signed by 41 Democratic senators; he pledged to match the selling price.\nWith the founding of his and his wife's company Two if by Tea, they pledged to donate at least $100,000 to the MC\u2013LEF beginning in June 2011.\nTunnel to Towers Foundation.\nIn July 2019, Nike announced a special Fourth of July edition of their Air Max1 Quick Strike sneaker that featured the thirteen-star Betsy Ross flag. The company withdrew the sneaker after their spokesman Colin Kaepernick raised concerns that the symbol represented an era of black enslavement. In response Limbaugh's radio program introduced a t-shirt imprinted \"Stand up for Betsy Ross\" with sale proceeds to benefit the Tunnel to Towers Foundation. As of December\u00a02019[ [update]], the sales have earned over US$5 million for the foundation.\nPublished works.\nIn 1992, Limbaugh published his first book, \"The Way Things Ought to Be\", followed by \"See, I Told You So\", the following year. Both titles were number one on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list for 24 weeks. His first book was dictated by himself, and transcribed and edited by \"Wall Street Journal\" writer John Fund.\nIn 2013, Limbaugh authored his first children's book, entitled \"Rush Revere and the Brave Pilgrims: Time-Travel with Exceptional Americans\". He received the Author of the Year Award from the Children's Book Council for this work. Limbaugh's second children's book was released the following year, entitled \"Rush Revere and the First Patriots: Time-Travel with Exceptional Americans\". This book was nominated as an author-of-the year finalist for the annual Children's and Teen Choice Book Awards. Limbaugh's third children's book was released later this same year, written with his wife Kathryn and entitled \"Rush Revere and the American Revolution\". The Limbaughs dedicated this to the U.S. military and their families.\nPersonal life.\nLimbaugh was raised and considered himself a Methodist.\nHe was married four times and divorced three times. He did not have any children. He was first married at the age of 26 to Roxy Maxine McNeely, a sales secretary at radio station WHB in Kansas City, Missouri. The couple married at the Centenary United Methodist Church in Limbaugh's hometown of Cape Girardeau on September 24, 1977. McNeely filed for divorce in March 1980, citing \"incompatibility\". They were formally divorced on July 10, 1980. \nIn 1983, Limbaugh married Michelle Sixta, a college student and usherette at the Kansas City Royals Stadium Club. They divorced in 1990, and she remarried the following year.\nOn May 27, 1994, Limbaugh married Marta Fitzgerald, a 35-year-old aerobics instructor whom he met on the online service CompuServe in 1990. They married at the house of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, who officiated. The couple separated on June 11, 2004. Limbaugh announced his divorce on the air. It was finalized in December 2004. In September 2004, Limbaugh became romantically involved with then-CNN news anchor Daryn Kagan; the relationship ended in February 2006.\nLimbaugh lived in Palm Beach from 1996 until his death in 2021. A friend recalls that Limbaugh \"fell in love with Palm Beach... after visiting her over Memorial Day weekend in 1995.\"\nHe dated Kathryn Rogers, a party planner from Florida, for three years; the couple married on June 5, 2010. At the wedding reception following the ceremony, Elton John entertained the wedding guests for a reported $1 million fee; however, Limbaugh denied that the $1 million figure was accurate on his September 7, 2010, radio show.\nThrough a holding company, KARHL Holdings (KARHL meaning \"Kathryn and Rush Hudson Limbaugh\"), Limbaugh launched a line of bottled iced tea beverages in 2011. The brand name \"Two if by Tea\" was a play on the line from Henry Wadsworth Longfellow's \"Paul Revere's Ride\", \"one if by land, two if by sea\". Production of the tea was put on hold in 2018 with a statement that \"Due to rising manufacturing and shipping costs, we did not feel it was right to pass this on to our customers.\".\nPrescription drug addiction.\nOn October 3, 2003, the \"National Enquirer\" reported that Limbaugh was being investigated for illegally obtaining the prescription drugs oxycodone and hydrocodone. Other news outlets quickly confirmed the investigation. He admitted to listeners on his radio show on October 10, 2003, that he was addicted to prescription painkillers and stated that he would enter inpatient treatment for 30 days, immediately after the broadcast. Limbaugh stated his addiction to painkillers resulted from several years of severe back pain heightened by a botched surgery intended to correct those problems.\nA subsequent investigation into whether Limbaugh had violated Florida's doctor shopping laws was launched by the Palm Beach State Attorney, which raised privacy issues when investigators seized Limbaugh's private medical records looking for evidence of crimes. Roy Black, one of Limbaugh's attorneys, stated that \"Rush Limbaugh was singled out for prosecution because of who he is. We believe the state attorney's office is applying a double standard.\" On November 9, 2005, following two years of investigations, Assistant State Attorney James L. Martz requested that the court set aside Limbaugh's doctor\u2013patient confidentiality rights and allow the state to question his physicians. Limbaugh's attorney opposed the prosecutor's efforts to interview his doctors on the basis of patient privacy rights, and argued that the prosecutor had violated Limbaugh's Fourth Amendment rights by illegally seizing his medical records. The American Civil Liberties Union issued a statement in agreement and filed an amicus curiae brief in support of Limbaugh. On December 12, 2005, Judge David F. Crow delivered a ruling prohibiting the State of Florida from questioning Limbaugh's physicians about \"the medical condition of the patient and any information disclosed to the health care practitioner by the patient in the course of the care and treatment of the patient.\"\nOn April 28, 2006, a warrant was issued for his arrest on the charge of doctor shopping. According to Teri Barbera, spokeswoman for the sheriff, during his arrest, Limbaugh was booked, photographed, and fingerprinted, but not handcuffed. He was then released after about an hour on $3,000 bail. After his surrender, he filed a \"not guilty\" plea to the charge. Prosecutors explained that the charges were brought after they discovered he received about 2,000 painkillers, prescribed by four doctors in six months, at a pharmacy near his Palm Beach mansion. In 2009, after three years of prolonged discussion regarding a settlement, prosecutors agreed to drop the charge if Limbaugh paid $30,000 to defray the cost of the investigation, completed an 18-month therapy regimen with his physician, submitted to random drug testing, and gave up his right to own a firearm for eighteen months. Limbaugh agreed to the settlement, though he continued to maintain his innocence of doctor shopping and asserted that the state's offer resulted from a lack of evidence supporting the charge.\nBefore his addiction became known, Limbaugh had condemned illegal drug use on his television program, stating that \"Drug use, some might say, is destroying this country... And so if people are violating the law by doing drugs, they ought to be accused and they ought to be convicted and they ought to be sent up.\"\nViagra incident.\nIn June 2006, Limbaugh was detained by drug enforcement agents at Palm Beach International Airport. Customs officials confiscated Viagra from Limbaugh's luggage as he was returning from the Dominican Republic. The prescription was not in Limbaugh's name. After he was released with no charges filed, Limbaugh joked about the incident on his radio show, claiming that he got the Viagra at the Clinton Library and was told they were blue M&amp;M's. He also stated that \"I had a great time in the Dominican Republic. Wish I could tell you about it.\"\nHealth problems and death.\nLimbaugh described himself as being \"100 percent, totally deaf\". In 2001, he announced that he had lost most of his ability to hear: \"I cannot hear television. I cannot hear music. I am, for all practical purposes, deaf\u00a0\u2013 and it's happened in three months.\" He said that the condition was not genetic. On December 19, 2001, doctors at the House Ear Clinic in Los Angeles were able to successfully restore a measure of his hearing through cochlear implant surgery. Limbaugh received a Clarion CII Bionic Ear.\nWhen questioned whether Limbaugh's sudden hearing loss was caused by his addiction to opioids, his cochlear implant doctor, otolaryngologist Jennifer Derebery, said that it was possible, but that there is no way to know for sure without performing tests that would destroy Limbaugh's hearing completely. \"We don't know why some people, but apparently not most, who take large doses may lose their hearing.\"\nIn 2005, Limbaugh was forced to undergo \"tuning\" due to an \"eye twitch\", an apparent side-effect of cochlear implants.\nOn December 30, 2009, while vacationing in Honolulu, Hawaii, Limbaugh was admitted to Queen's Medical Center with intense chest pains. His doctors attributed the pain to angina pectoris.\nOn April 8, 2014, on his radio program, Limbaugh announced his decision to 'go bilateral'. \"I'm going to get an implant on the right side\", he said. After bilateral tuning, there was a 100% improvement. \"Coming from total deafness, it is miraculous! How can you not believe in God?\", Limbaugh said in his national daily broadcast.\nLimbaugh, a cigar and former cigarette smoker, was diagnosed with advanced lung cancer on January 20, 2020, after first experiencing shortness of breath on January 12. He had previously downplayed the link between smoking and cancer deaths, arguing that it \"takes 50 years to kill people, if it does.\" He announced his diagnosis during his radio show on February 3. He advised he would miss airtime to undergo treatment, and that he would try to continue the program \"as normally and competently\" as he could. On October 20, 2020, Limbaugh announced that treatment had been ineffectual at containing the cancer, that his diagnosis was terminal, and that he had been given a time frame on when he should expect to die. In his final broadcast of 2020, he said \"I wasn't expected to make it to October, and then to November, and then to December. And yet, here I am, and today, got some problems, but I'm feeling pretty good today.\"\nLimbaugh made his last radio broadcast on February 2, 2021. He died on February 17, 2021, at the age of 70. According to his wife, Kathryn Rogers Limbaugh, his death was attributed to complications of his lung cancer. Governor Ron DeSantis directed flags in the state of Florida be lowered to half-staff on the date of his interment. Limbaugh was interred at the Bellefontaine Cemetery in St. Louis, Missouri.\nInfluence and legacy.\nLimbaugh was widely recognized as one of the leading voices of the conservative movement in the United States, beginning in the 1990s. Former president Ronald Reagan thanked him in a 1992 letter, giving him credit \"for all you're doing to promote Republican and conservative principles... [and] you have become the Number One voice for conservatism in our Country.\" In 1994, Republicans in the U.S. House of Representatives made Limbaugh an honorary member.\nFrom 1994, Limbaugh served as the inspiration for the character of Birch Barlow, a conservative radio talk show host on \"The Simpsons\".\nIn 1995, Limbaugh was profiled on the PBS series \"Frontline\" in a one-hour documentary called \"Rush Limbaugh's America\". Limbaugh refused to be interviewed, but his mother, brother, and many Republican supporters took part, as well as critics and opponents.\nBy the 1990s, Limbaugh had become known for his love of cigars, saying, \"I think cigars are just a tremendous addition to the enjoyment of life.\" During his syndicated television program from 1992 to 1996, he also became known for wearing distinctive neckties. In response to viewer interest, Limbaugh launched a series of ties designed primarily by his then-wife Marta.\nLimbaugh was awarded the Marconi Radio Award for Syndicated Radio Personality of the Year by the National Association of Broadcasters five times: 1992, 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2014. He was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1993 and the National Association of Broadcasters Hall of Fame in 1998. By 2001, he inked a US$\u00a0million contract for eight years, which was renewed in 2008 for another eight years at $400 million. By 2017, Limbaugh was the second-highest-paid radio host in the United States, earning an annual salary of $84 million, second only to Howard Stern. In 2002, \"Talkers Magazine\" ranked him as the greatest-ever radio talk show host; in 2017, he was the most-listened-to radio host in the United States, with 14 million listeners. Limbaugh is given much of the credit for having revived AM radio at a time when most people had switched to FM.\nConservative magazine \"Human Events\" announced Limbaugh as their 2007 Man of the Year. Later that same year, Barbara Walters featured Limbaugh as one of the most fascinating people of the year in a special that aired on December 4, 2008.\nOn February 28, 2009, following his self-described \"first address to the nation\" lasting 90 minutes, carried live on CNN and Fox News and recorded for C-SPAN, Limbaugh received CPAC's \"Defender of the Constitution Award\", a document signed by Benjamin Franklin, given to someone \"who has stood up for the First Amendment\u00a0... Rush Limbaugh is for America, exactly what Benjamin Franklin did for the Founding Fathers\u00a0... the only way we will be successful is if we listen to Rush Limbaugh\", reads the citation.\nIn his 2010 book, \"Rush Limbaugh: An Army of One\", Ze'ev Chafets cited Limbaugh as \"the brains and the spirit behind\" the Republican Party's resurgence in the 2010 midterm elections in the wake of the election of President Obama. Chafets pointed, among others, to Sen. Arlen Specter's defeat, after being labeled by Limbaugh as a \"Republican in Name Only\", and to Sarah Palin, whose \"biggest current applause line\u00a0\u2013 Republicans are not just the party of no, but the party of hell no\u00a0\u2013 came courtesy of Mr. Limbaugh.\" The author continued with ...\"Limbaugh has argued the 'party-of-no' conservative course for the Republicans vigorously, notably since six weeks after Obama's inauguration, and has been fundamental to, and encouraging to, the more prominently noted Tea Party movement\".\nRush Limbaugh was inducted into the Hall of Famous Missourians on May 14, 2012, in a secret ceremony announced only 20 minutes before it began in order to prevent negative media attention. A bronze bust of Limbaugh is on display at the Missouri State Capitol building in Jefferson City, along with 40 other awardees. Limbaugh's bust includes a security camera to prevent vandalism.\nOn February 4, 2020, the day after he announced that he had advanced lung cancer, Limbaugh was a guest of President Donald Trump at the 2020 State of the Union Address, where he was presented with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Melania Trump.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25428", "revid": "25749350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25428", "title": "Roman Polanski", "text": "Polish and French filmmaker (born 1933)\nRaymond Roman Thierry Pola\u0144ski (n\u00e9\u00a0Liebling; born 18 August 1933) is a Polish and French filmmaker and actor. He is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, three British Academy Film Awards, ten C\u00e9sar Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, as well as the Golden Bear and a Palme d'Or.\nIn 1977, Polanski was arrested for drugging and raping a 13-year-old girl. He pleaded guilty to the lesser charge of unlawful sex with a minor in exchange for a probation-only sentence. The night before his sentencing hearing in 1978, he learned that the judge would likely reject the proffered plea bargain, so he fled the U.S. to Europe, where he continued his career. He remains a fugitive from the U.S. justice system. Subsequently, allegations of abuse have been made by several women.\nPolanski's parents moved the family from his birthplace in Paris back to Krak\u00f3w in 1937. Two years later, the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany started World War II, and the family found themselves trapped in the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto. After his mother and father were taken in raids, Polanski spent his formative years in foster homes, surviving the Holocaust by adopting a false identity and concealing his half Jewish heritage. In 1969, Polanski's pregnant wife, actress Sharon Tate, was murdered, along with four friends by members of the Manson Family in an internationally notorious case.\nPolanski's first feature-length film, \"Knife in the Water\" (1962), made in Poland, was nominated for the United States Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. A few years later he first left for France and then moved to the United Kingdom, where he directed his first three English-language feature-length films: \"Repulsion\" (1965), \"Cul-de-sac\" (1966), and \"The Fearless Vampire Killers\" (1967). In 1968, he settled in the United States and cemented his status in the film industry by directing the horror film \"Rosemary's Baby\" (1968). He made \"Macbeth\" (1971) in England and \"Chinatown\" (1974) back in Hollywood. His other critically acclaimed films include \"The Tenant\" (1976), \"Tess\" (1979), \"Death and the Maiden\" (1994), \"The Pianist\" (2002) which won him the Academy Award for Best Director, \"The Ghost Writer\" (2010), \"Venus in Fur\" (2013), and \"An Officer and a Spy\" (2019). Polanski has made 23 feature films to date. He has also starred in several Polish films as well as in his own films.\nEarly life.\nRoman Polanski was born on 18 August 1933, in interbellum Paris. He was the son of Bula (aka \"Bella\") Katz-Przedborska and Moj\u017cesz (or Maurycy) Liebling (later Pola\u0144ski), a painter and manufacturer of sculptures, who after World War II was known as Ryszard Pola\u0144ski. Polanski's father was Jewish and originally from Poland. Polanski's mother was born in Russia. Her own father was Jewish and mother was a Gentile, but Bula had been raised in the Catholic faith. She had a daughter, Annette, by her previous husband. Annette survived Auschwitz, where her mother was murdered, and left Poland forever for France. Polanski's parents were both agnostics. Polanski has stated that he is an atheist.\nWorld War II and the Holocaust.\nThe Pola\u0144ski family moved back to Krak\u00f3w, Poland, in early 1937, and were living there when World War\u00a0II began with the invasion of Poland. Krak\u00f3w was soon occupied by the German forces, and the racist and anti-Semitic Nuremberg Laws made the Pola\u0144skis targets of persecution, forcing them into the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto, along with thousands of the city's Jews. Around the age of six, Polanski attended primary school for only a few weeks, until \"all the Jewish children were abruptly expelled\", writes biographer Christopher Sandford. That initiative was soon followed by the requirement that all Jewish children over the age of twelve wear white armbands, with a blue Star of David imprinted, for visual identification. After he was expelled, Polanski was not allowed to enter another classroom for six years.\nPolanski's father was transferred, along with thousands of other Jews, to Mauthausen, a group of 49 German concentration camps in Austria. His mother, who was four months pregnant at the time, was taken to Auschwitz and killed in the gas chamber soon after arriving. The forced exodus took place immediately after the German liquidation of the Warsaw Ghetto, a real-life backdrop to Polanski's film \"The Pianist\" (2002). Polanski, who was then hiding from the Germans, saw his father being marched off with a long line of people. Polanski tried getting closer to his father to ask him what was happening and got within a few yards. His father saw him, but afraid his son might be spotted by the German soldiers, whispered (in Polish), \"Get lost!\"\nPolanski escaped the Krak\u00f3w Ghetto in 1943 and survived with the help of some Polish Roman Catholics, including a woman who had promised Polanski's father that she would shelter the boy. Polanski attended church, learned to recite Catholic prayers by heart, and behaved outwardly as a Roman Catholic, although he was never baptized. His efforts to blend into a Catholic household failed miserably at least once, when the parish priest visiting the family posed questions to him one-on-one about the catechism, and ultimately said, \"You aren't one of us\". The punishment for helping a Jew in German-occupied Poland was death.\nAs Polanski roamed the countryside trying to survive in a Poland now occupied by German troops, he witnessed many horrors, such as being \"forced to take part in a cruel and sadistic game in which German soldiers took shots at him for target practice\". The author Ian Freer concludes that Polanski's constant childhood fears and dread of violence have contributed to the \"tangible atmospheres he conjures up on film\". By the time the war ended in 1945, a fifth of the Polish population had been killed, the vast majority being civilians. Of those deaths, 3 million were Polish Jews, which accounted for 90% of the country's Jewish population. According to Sandford, Polanski used the memory of his mother, her dress and makeup style, as a physical model for Faye Dunaway's character in his film \"Chinatown\" (1974).\nIn October 2020, Polanski went back to Poland and paid respects to a Polish couple who helped him hide and escape the Nazis. Stefania and Jan Buchala were recognized by Yad Vashem, Israel's Holocaust memorial, as \"Righteous Among the Nations\". Polanski recalled Stefania Buchala as being an \"extremely noble\" and courageous person.\nAfter the war.\nAfter the war, Polanski was reunited with his father and moved back to Krak\u00f3w. His father remarried on 21 December 1946 to Wanda Zaj\u0105czkowska (whom Polanski had never liked) and died of cancer in 1984. Time repaired the family contacts; Polanski visited them in Krak\u00f3w, and relatives visited him in Hollywood and Paris. Polanski recalls the villages and families he lived with as relatively primitive by European standards:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They were really simple Catholic peasants. This Polish village was like the English village in \"Tess\". Very primitive. No electricity. The kids with whom I lived didn't know about electricity\u00a0... they wouldn't believe me when I told them it was enough to turn on a switch!\nPolanski stated that \"you must live in a Communist country to really understand how bad it can be. Then you will appreciate capitalism.\" He also remembered events at the war's end and his reintroduction to mainstream society when he was 12, forming friendships with other children, such as Roma Ligocka, Ryszard Horowitz and his family.\nIntroduction to movies.\nPolanski's fascination with cinema began very early when he was around age four or five. He recalls this period in an interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter the war, Polanski watched films, either at school or at a local cinema, using whatever pocket money he had. Polanski writes, \"Most of this went on the movies, but movie seats were dirt cheap, so a little went a long way. I lapped up every kind of film.\" As time went on, movies became more than an escape into entertainment, as he explains:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolanski was above all influenced by Carol Reed's \"Odd Man Out\" (1947) \u2013 \"I still consider it as one of the best movies I've ever seen and a film which made me want to pursue this career more than anything else ... I always dreamt of doing things of this sort or that style. To a certain extent I must say that I somehow perpetuate the ideas of that movie in what I do.\"\nEarly career in Poland.\nPolanski attended the National Film School in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, the third-largest city in Poland. In the 1950s, Polanski took up acting, appearing in Andrzej Wajda's \"Pokolenie\" (\"A Generation\", 1954) and in the same year in Silik Sternfeld's \"Zaczarowany rower\" (\"Enchanted Bicycle\" or \"Magical Bicycle\"). Polanski's directorial debut was also in 1955 with a short film, \"Rower\" (\"Bicycle\"). \"Rower\" is a semi-autobiographical feature film, believed to be lost, which also starred Polanski. It refers to his real-life violent altercation with a notorious Krak\u00f3w felon, Janusz Dziuba, who arranged to sell Polanski a bicycle, but instead beat him badly and stole his money. In real life, the offender was arrested while fleeing after fracturing Polanski's skull, and executed for three murders, out of eight prior such assaults which he had committed. Several other short films made during his study at \u0141\u00f3d\u017a gained him considerable recognition, particularly \"Two Men and a Wardrobe\" (1958) and \"When Angels Fall\" (1959). He graduated in 1959.\nFilm director.\n1962\u20131976: Breakthrough and stardom.\n \"Knife in the Water\" (1962)\nPolanski's first feature-length film, \"Knife in the Water\", was also one of the first significant Polish films after the Second World War that did not have a war theme. Scripted by Jerzy Skolimowski, Jakub Goldberg, and Polanski, \"Knife in the Water\" is about a wealthy, unhappily married couple who decide to take a mysterious hitchhiker with them on a weekend boating excursion. \"Knife in the Water\" was a major commercial success in the West and gave Polanski an international reputation. The film also earned its director his first Academy Award nomination (Best Foreign Language Film) in 1963. Leon Niemczyk, who played Andrzej, was the only professional actor in the film. Jolanta Umecka, who played Krystyna, was discovered by Polanski at a swimming pool.\nPolanski left then-communist Poland and moved to France, where he had already made two notable short films in 1961: \"The Fat and the Lean\" and \"Mammals\". While in France, Polanski contributed one segment (\"La rivi\u00e8re de diamants\") to the French-produced omnibus film, \"Les plus belles escroqueries du monde\" (English title: \"The Beautiful Swindlers\") in 1964. (He has since had the segment removed from all releases of the film.) However, Polanski found that in the early 1960s, the French film industry was xenophobic and generally unwilling to support a rising filmmaker of foreign origin.\n \"Repulsion\" (1965)\nPolanski made three feature films in England, based on original scripts written by himself and G\u00e9rard Brach, a frequent collaborator. \"Repulsion\" (1965) is a psychological horror film focusing on a young Belgian woman named Carol (Catherine Deneuve).\nThe film's themes, situations, visual motifs, and effects clearly reflect the influence of early surrealist cinema as well as horror movies of the 1950s\u2014particularly Luis Bu\u00f1uel's \"Un chien Andalou\", Jean Cocteau's \"The Blood of a Poet\", Henri-Georges Clouzot's \"Diabolique\" and Alfred Hitchcock's \"Psycho\".\n \"Cul-de-sac\" (1966)\n\"Cul-de-sac\" (1966) is a bleak nihilist tragicomedy filmed on location in Northumberland. The tone and premise of the film owe a great deal to Samuel Beckett's \"Waiting for Godot\", along with aspects of Harold Pinter's \"The Birthday Party\".\nIn 1966 Polanski co-produced the short film \"G.G. Passion\", directed by David Bailey.\n \"The Fearless Vampire Killers/Dance of the Vampires\" (1967)\n\"The Fearless Vampire Killers\" (1967) (known by its original title, \"Dance of the Vampires\" in most countries outside the United States) is a parody of vampire films. The plot concerns a buffoonish professor and his clumsy assistant, Alfred (played by Polanski), who are traveling through Transylvania in search of vampires. \"The Fearless Vampire Killers\" was Polanski's first feature to be photographed in color with the use of Panavision lenses, and included a striking visual style with snow-covered, fairy-tale landscapes, similar to the work of Soviet fantasy filmmakers. In addition, the richly textured color schemes of the settings evoke the paintings of the Belarusian-Jewish artist Marc Chagall, who provides the namesake for the innkeeper in the film. The film was written for Jack MacGowran, who played the lead role of Professor Abronsius.\nPolanski met Sharon Tate while making the film; she played the role of the local innkeeper's daughter. They were married in London on 20 January 1968. Shortly after they married, Polanski, with Tate at his side during a documentary film, described the demands of young movie viewers who he said always wanted to see something \"new\" and \"different\".\n \"Rosemary's Baby\" (1968)\nParamount studio head Robert Evans brought Polanski to America ostensibly to direct the film \"Downhill Racer\", but told Polanski that he really wanted him to read the horror novel \"Rosemary's Baby\" by Ira Levin to see if a film could be made out of it. Polanski read it non-stop through the night and the following morning decided he wanted to write as well as direct it. He wrote the 272-page screenplay in just over three weeks. The film, \"Rosemary's Baby\" (1968), was a box-office success and became his first Hollywood production, thereby establishing his reputation as a major commercial filmmaker. The film, a horror-thriller set in trendy Manhattan, is about Rosemary Woodhouse (Mia Farrow), a young housewife who is impregnated by the devil. Polanski's screenplay adaptation earned him a second Academy Award nomination.\nOn 9 August 1969, while Polanski was working in London, his pregnant wife, Sharon Tate, and four other people were murdered at the Polanskis' residence in Los Angeles by cult leader Charles Manson's followers.\n \"Macbeth\" (1971)\nPolanski adapted \"Macbeth\" into a screenplay with the Shakespeare expert Kenneth Tynan. Jon Finch and Francesca Annis played the main characters. Hugh Hefner and Playboy Productions funded the 1971 film, which opened in New York and was screened in Playboy Theater. Hefner was credited as executive producer, and the film was listed as a \"Playboy Production\". It was controversial because of Lady Macbeth's being nude in a scene, and received an X rating because of its graphic violence and nudity. In his autobiography, Polanski wrote that he wanted to be true to the violent nature of the work and that he had been aware that his first project following Tate's murder would be subject to scrutiny and probable criticism regardless of the subject matter; if he had made a comedy he would have been perceived as callous.\n \"What?\" (1972)\nWritten by Polanski and previous collaborator G\u00e9rard Brach, \"What?\" (1972) is a mordant absurdist comedy loosely based on the themes of \"Alice in Wonderland\" and Henry James. The film is a rambling shaggy dog story about the sexual indignities that befall a winsome young American hippie woman hitchhiking through Europe.\n \"Chinatown\" (1974)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolanski was an outstanding director. There was no question, after three days seeing him operate, that here was a really top talent.\nCo-star John Huston\nPolanski returned to Hollywood in 1973 to direct \"Chinatown\" (1974) for Paramount Pictures. The film is widely considered to be one of the finest American mystery crime movies, inspired by the real-life California Water Wars, a series of disputes over southern California water at the beginning of the 20th century.\nIt was nominated for 11 Academy Awards, including those for actors Jack Nicholson and Faye Dunaway. Robert Towne won for Best Original Screenplay. It also had actor-director John Huston in a supporting role, and was the last film Polanski directed in the United States. In 1991, the film was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being \"culturally, historically or aesthetically significant\" and it is frequently listed as among the best in world cinema.\n \"The Tenant\" (1976)\nPolanski returned to Paris for his next film, \"The Tenant\" (1976), which was based on a 1964 novel by Roland Topor, a French writer of Polish-Jewish origin. In addition to directing the film, Polanski also played a leading role of a timid Polish immigrant living in Paris. Together with \"Repulsion\" and \"Rosemary's Baby\", \"The Tenant\" can be seen as the third installment in a loose trilogy of films called the \"Apartment Trilogy\" that explores the themes of social alienation and psychic and emotional breakdown.\nIn 1978, Polanski became a fugitive from American justice and could no longer work in countries where he might face arrest or extradition.\n1979\u20132004.\n \"Tess\" (1979)\nHe dedicated his next film, \"Tess\" (1979), to the memory of his late wife, Sharon Tate. It was Tate who first suggested he read \"Tess of the d'Urbervilles\", which she thought would make a good film; he subsequently expected her to star in it. Nearly a decade after Tate's death, he met Nastassja Kinski, a model and aspiring young actress who had already been in a number of European films. He offered her the starring role, which she accepted. Her father was Klaus Kinski, a leading German actor, who had introduced her to films.\nBecause the role required having a local dialect, Polanski sent her to London for five months of study and to spend time in the Dorset countryside to get a flavor of the region. In the film, Kinski starred opposite Peter Firth and Leigh Lawson.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[Polanski] took a lot of time, two years, preparing me for that film. ... He was strict with me, but in a good way. He made me feel smart, that I could do things.\nNastassja Kinski\n\"Tess\" was shot in the north of France instead of Hardy's England and became the most expensive film made in France up to that time. Ultimately, it proved a financial success and was well received by both critics and the public. Polanski won France's C\u00e9sar Awards for Best Picture and Best Director and received his fourth Academy Award nomination (and his second nomination for Best Director). The film received three Oscars: best cinematography, best art direction, best costume design, and was nominated for best picture.\nAt the time, there were rumors that Polanski and Kinski became romantically involved, which he confirmed in a 1994 interview with Diane Sawyer, but Nastassja says the rumors are untrue; they were never lovers or had an affair. She admits that \"there was a flirtation. There \"could\" have been a seduction, but there was not. He had respect for me.\" She also recalls his influence on her while filming: \"He was really a gentleman, not at all like the things I had heard. He introduced me to beautiful books, plays, movies. He educated me.\" On an emotional level, she said years later that \"he was one of the people in my life who cared, ... who took me seriously and gave me a lot of strength.\" She told David Letterman more about her experience working with Polanski during an interview.\nIn 1981, Polanski directed and co-starred (as Mozart) in a stage production of Peter Shaffer's play \"Amadeus\", first in Warsaw, then in Paris. The play was again directed by Polanski, in Milan, in 1999.\n \"Pirates\" (1986)\nNearly seven years passed before Polanski's next film, \"Pirates\", a lavish period piece starring Walter Matthau as Captain Red, which the director intended as an homage to the beloved Errol Flynn swashbucklers of his childhood. Captain Red's henchman, Jean Baptiste, was played by Cris Campion. The film is about a rebellion the two led on a ship called the \"Neptune\", in the seventeenth century. The screenplay was written by Polanski, G\u00e9rard Brach, and John Brownjohn. The film was shot on location in Tunisia, using a full-sized pirate vessel constructed for the production. It was a financial and critical failure, recovering a small fraction of its production budget and garnering a single Academy Award nomination.\n \"Frantic\" (1988)\n\"Frantic\" (1988) was a Hitchcockian suspense-thriller starring Harrison Ford and the actress/model Emmanuelle Seigner, who later became Polanski's wife. The film follows an ordinary tourist in Paris whose wife is kidnapped. He attempts, hopelessly, to go through the Byzantine bureaucratic channels to deal with her disappearance, but finally takes matters into his own hands. The film was a commercial failure but received positive reviews from critics.\n \"Bitter Moon\" (1992)\nIn 1992 Polanski followed with the dark psycho-sexual film \"Bitter Moon\". The film starred Seigner, Hugh Grant, and Kristin Scott Thomas. Film critic Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Whatever else Mr. Polanski may be \u2013 nasty, mocking, darkly subversive in his view of the world \u2013 he definitely isn't dull. \"Bitter Moon\" is the kind of world-class, defiantly bad film that has a life of its own.\"\n \"Death and the Maiden\" (1994)\nIn 1994 Polanski directed a film of the acclaimed play \"Death and the Maiden\" starring Ben Kingsley and Sigourney Weaver. The film is based on the Ariel Dorfman play of the same name. Roger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" praised Polanski on his directing writing, \"Death and the Maiden is all about acting. In other hands, even given the same director, this might have been a dreary slog.\"\n \"The Fearless Vampire Killers\" (1997)\nIn 1997, Polanski directed a stage version of his 1967 film \"The Fearless Vampire Killers\", which debuted in Vienna followed by successful runs in Stuttgart, Hamburg, Berlin, and Budapest.\nOn 11 March 1998, Polanski was elected a member of the Acad\u00e9mie des Beaux-Arts.\n \"The Ninth Gate\" (1999)\n\"The Ninth Gate\" is a thriller based on the novel \"El Club Dumas\" by Arturo Perez-Reverte and starring Johnny Depp. The movie's plot is based on the idea that an ancient text called \"The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of Shadows\", authored by Aristide Torchia along with Lucifer, is the key to raising Satan.\n \"The Pianist\" (2002)\nIn 2001, Polanski filmed \"The Pianist\", an adaptation of the World War II autobiography of the same name by Polish-Jewish musician W\u0142adys\u0142aw Szpilman. Szpilman's experiences as a persecuted Jew in Poland during World War II were reminiscent of those of Polanski and his family. While Szpilman and Polanski escaped the concentration camps, their families did not, eventually perishing.\nWhen Warsaw, Poland, was chosen for the 2002 premiere of \"The Pianist\", \"the country exploded with pride\". According to reports, numerous former communists came to the screening and \"agreed that it was a fantastic film\". In May 2002, the film won the (Golden Palm) award at the Cannes Film Festival, as well as C\u00e9sars for Best Film and Best Director.\nThe film was released in North America to critical acclaim. Roger Ebert praised in particular Polanski, writing: \"[His] direction is masterful.\" and added \"Polanski is reflecting, I believe, his own deepest feelings: that he survived, but need not have, and that his mother died and left a wound that had never healed.\" Polanski later won the 2002 Academy Award for Best Director. Because Polanski would have been arrested in the United States, he did not attend the Academy Awards ceremony in Hollywood. After the announcement of the Best Director Award, Polanski received a standing ovation from most of those present in the theater. Actor Harrison Ford accepted the award for Polanski and then presented the Oscar to him at the Deauville Film Festival five months later in a public ceremony. Polanski later received the Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival in 2004.\n2005\u2013present.\n \"Oliver Twist\" (2005)\n\"Oliver Twist\" is an adaptation of Charles Dickens' novel, written by \"The Pianist\"'s Ronald Harwood and shot in Prague. Polanski said in interviews that he made the film as something he could show his children and that the life of the young scavenger mirrored his own life, fending for himself in World War II Poland.\n \"The Ghost Writer\" (2010)\n\"The Ghost Writer\", a thriller focusing on a ghostwriter working on the memoirs of a character based loosely on former British prime minister Tony Blair, swept the European Film Awards in 2010, winning six awards, including best movie, director, actor and screenplay. When it premiered at the 60th Berlinale in February 2010, Polanski won a Silver Bear for Best Director, and in February 2011, it won four C\u00e9sar Awards, France's version of the Academy Awards.\nThe film is based on the novel by British writer Robert Harris. Harris and Polanski had previously worked for many months on a film of Harris's earlier novel \"Pompeii\", a novel that was in turn inspired by Polanski's \"Chinatown\". They had completed a script for \"Pompeii\" and were nearing production when the film was cancelled due to a looming actors' strike in September 2007. After that film fell apart, they moved on to Harris's novel, \"The Ghost\", and adapted it for the screen together.\nThe cast includes Ewan McGregor as the writer and Pierce Brosnan as former British Prime Minister Adam Lang. The film was shot on locations in Germany.\nIn the United States, film critic Roger Ebert included it in his top 10 picks for 2010 and stated that \"this movie is the work of a man who knows how to direct a thriller. Smooth, calm, confident, it builds suspense instead of depending on shock and action.\" Co-star Ewan McGregor agreed, having said about Polanski that \"he's a legend ... I've never examined a director and the way that they work so much before. He's brilliant, just brilliant, and absolutely warrants his reputation as a great director.\"\n \"Carnage\" (2011)\nPolanski shot \"Carnage\" in February/March 2011. The film is a screen version of Yasmina Reza's play \"God of Carnage\", a comedy about two couples who meet after their children get in a fight at school, and how their initially civilized conversation devolves into chaos. It stars Kate Winslet, Jodie Foster, Christoph Waltz and John C. Reilly. Though set in New York, it was shot in Paris. The film had its world premiere on 9 September 2011 at the Venice Film Festival and was released in the United States by Sony Pictures Classics on 16 December 2011.\nCo-stars Jodie Foster and Kate Winslet commented about Polanski's directing style. According to Foster, \"He has a very, very definitive style about how he likes it done. He decides everything. He decided every lens. Every prop. Everything. It's all him.\" Winslet adds that \"Roman is one of the most extraordinary men I've ever met. The guy is 77 years old. He has an effervescent quality to him. He's very joyful about his work, which is infectious. He likes to have a small crew, to the point that, when I walked on the set, my thought was, 'My God, this is it?'\" Also noting that style of directing, New York Film Festival director Richard Pena, during the American premiere of the film, called Polanski \"a poet of small spaces ... in just a couple of rooms he can conjure up an entire world, an entire society.\"\nPolanski makes an uncredited cameo appearance as a neighbor.\n \"Venus in Fur\" (2013)\nPolanski's French-language adaptation of the play \"Venus in Fur\", starred his wife Emmanuelle Seigner and Mathieu Amalric. Polanski worked with the play's author, David Ives, on the screenplay. The film was shot from December 2012 to February 2013 in French and is Polanski's first non-English-language feature film in forty years. The film premiered in competition at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival on 25 May 2013.\n \"Based on a True Story\" (2017)\nPolanski's \"Based on a True Story\" is an adaptation of the French novel by bestselling author Delphine de Vignan. The film follows a writer (Emmanuelle Seigner) struggling to complete a new novel, while followed by an obsessed fan (Eva Green). It started production in November 2016 from a script adapted by Polanski and Olivier Assayas. It premiered out of competition at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival on 27 May 2017 and opened in France on 1 November 2017.\nExpulsion from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences\nIn May 2018, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences stated that the board \"has voted to expel actor Bill Cosby and director Roman Polanski from its membership in accordance with the organisation's Standards of Conduct.\" Polanski is one of only four members to have been expelled from the Academy. Following its expulsion of Harvey Weinstein, the academy's Standards of Conduct had recently been revised as a result of impacts of the #MeToo and Time's Up movements on the film industry. The same year, his wife Emmanuelle Seigner rejected the invitation to join the academy, denouncing the \"hypocrisy\" of a group that expelled Polanski.\n\"An Officer and a Spy\" (2019)\nPolanski's 2019 film \"An Officer and a Spy\", centers on the notorious 19th century Dreyfus affair. The film stars Jean Dujardin as French officer Georges Picquart and follows his struggle from 1896\u20131906 to expose the truth about the doctored evidence that led to Alfred Dreyfus, one of the few Jewish members of the French Army's general staff, being wrongly convicted of passing military secrets to the German Empire and sent to Devil's Island. The film is written by Robert Harris, who was working with Polanski for the third time. It co-stars Louis Garrel as Dreyfus, Mathieu Amalric and Polanski's wife Emmanuelle Seigner. It was produced by Alain Goldman's Legende Films and distributed by Gaumont. Filming began on 26 November 2018 and was completed on 28 April 2019.\nAlthough set in Paris, the film was first scheduled to shoot in Warsaw in 2014, for economic reasons. However, production was postponed after Polanski moved to Poland for filming and the U.S. Government filed extradition papers. The Polish government eventually rejected them, by which time new French film tax credits had been introduced, allowing the film to shoot on location in Paris. It was budgeted at \u20ac60m and was again set to start production in July 2016, however its production was postponed as Polanski waited on the availability of a star, whose name was not announced. In a 2017 interview Polanski discussed the difficulty of the project:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The problem of the film is the combination of casting and financing, it's an expensive film and films of this scale are only made with a bankable star, as they say vulgarly, and the stars capable of satisfying the financial requirement I do not necessarily see in the role of Picquart, who is our main character. Apart from that, there are about fifty important roles. They should all speak with the same accent in English, otherwise it would be appalling. It is necessary so that the film can be sold around the world. To unlock the financial means to produce such a project is impossible if you shoot in French.\"\nIt had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on 30 August 2019. It received a standing ovation and won the Grand Jury Prize. It was released in France on 13 November 2019, by Gaumont. The film has received backlash due to the plot of the film relating to Polanski's sexual abuse case and further accusations of harassment and assault.\nPolanski caused outrage by comparing his own experience's to Dreyfus's. In an interview to promote the film, Polanski said: \"I am familiar with many of the workings of the apparatus of persecution shown in the film... I can see the same determination to deny the facts and condemn me for things I have not done. Most of the people who harass me do not know me and know nothing about the case.\" Aside from Polanski's involvement, the film was not controversial and was generally well reviewed.\nIn February 2020, Polanski won Best Director at France's 2020 Cesar Awards. Neither Polanski nor the cast and crew of \"An Officer and a Spy\" (\"J'accuse\") attended the awards ceremony hosted at the Salle Pleyel in Paris. Polanski said that he will not submit himself to a \"public lynching\" over rape accusations he denies. Addressing the accusations of sexual assault leveled at him, he said, \"Fantasies of unhealthy minds are now treated as proven facts.\" This is Polanski's fifth Best Director Cesar win, the record for a single director; he previously won for \"Tess\", \"The Pianist\", \"The Ghost Writer\", and \"Venus in Fur\". Polanski's wife Emmanuelle Seigner accepted the award on his behalf.\nPrior to the awards ceremony, Polanski released a statement, saying: \"For several days, people have asked me this question: Will I or won't I attend the Cesar ceremony? The question I ask in turn is this: How could I?. [...] The way the night will unfold, we already know in advance,\" he continued. \"Activists have already threatened me with a public lynching, some have announced protests in front of the Salle Pleyel. Others intend to make it a platform to denounce (the) governing body. It promises to look more like a symposium than a celebration of cinema.\" Polanski said he was skipping the ceremony in order to protect his team as well as his wife and children, who \"have been made to suffer injuries and affronts\". Making reference to the recent media scandal that led to the Cesar board's mass resignation, Polanski added: \"The press and social media have presented our 12 nominations as if they were gifts offered to us by the academy's board of directors, as some authoritarian gesture that had forced their resignations. Doing so undermines the secret vote of the 4,313 professionals who alone decide the nominations and the more than 1.5 million viewers who came to see the film\".\nDespite Polanski's absence from the awards ceremony, his nomination and win sparked protests due to the rape charges that he still faces. The protestors held up signs with slogans like \"Shame on an industry that protects rapists\". Police clashed with protestors, even firing tear gas upon them. Actions were also taken by celebrities, such as Ad\u00e8le Haenel, No\u00e9mie Merlant and Celine Sciamma, who walked out of the awards. Many other celebrities and feminists spoke out against Polanski online, such as NousToutes, a French feminist collective, who called the win \"shameful\", and Jessica Chastain tweeted, \"I Fucking Stan\" in regard to the protests. At the same time some celebrities came to his defense, like actress Fanny Ardant, who said, \"When I love someone, I love them passionately. And I love Roman Polanski a lot... a lot... So I'm very happy for him. Then, I understand that not everyone agrees but long live freedom!\" and actress Brigitte Bardot who said, \"Thankfully Polanski exists and he is saving cinema from its mediocrity! I judge him on his talent and not on his private life! I regret never having shot with him!\" The actor Lambert Wilson called the protest campaign against Polanski \"abominable public lynching\", as did Isabelle Huppert, who stated that \"lynching is a form of pornography\". Likewise, Polanski's alleged victim Samantha Geimer criticized the protesters as \"very opportunistic\", and said that \"If you want to change the world today, you do it by... demanding people be held accountable today, not by picking someone who is famous and thinking that if you demonise him for things that happened decades ago that somehow that has any value in protecting people and changing society\".\n\"The Palace\" (2023)\n\"The Palace\" began filming in February 2022 in Gstaad, Switzerland. The film stars Mickey Rourke, Fanny Ardant and Oliver Masucci, and is a black comedy about the guests at a Swiss luxury hotel on New Year's Eve 1999. Polanski co-wrote the screenplay with fellow Polish director Jerzy Skolimowski, who also co-wrote Polanski's first feature, \"Knife in the Water\", in 1962. The film was unable to find financing in France due to souring French public opinion of Polanski following a new round of sexual assault allegations, and ended up being primarily funded by the Italian company, Rai Cinema. Polanski's reputation also brought casting challenges, with a number of actors turning down roles for fear of tarnishing their careers. Rai Cinema and Eliseo Entertainment produced the film. The film had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival on 2 September 2023, before it was released theatrically in Italy by 01 Distribution on 28 September 2023.\n2023 Venice Film Festival controversy\nThe inclusion of films from Polanski, Woody Allen, and Luc Besson at the 2023 Venice Film Festival was controversial and brought significant criticism to its organizers due to the various sex abuse allegations against all three. Festival head Alberto Barbera defended their inclusion, saying of Polanski specifically, \"I don't understand why one cannot distinguish between the responsibilities of the man and those of the artist. Polanski is 90 years old, he is one of the few working masters, he made an extraordinary film. It may be the last film of his career, although I hope he does like De Oliveira, who made films until he was 105. I stand firmly among those who in the debate distinguish between the responsibility of the man and that of the artist.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn 1959, Polanski married actress Barbara Kwiatkowska-Lass. She starred in his short film \"When Angels Fall\". The couple separated in 1961 and divorced the next year.\nThroughout the 1960s, Polanski dated a succession of actresses including Carol Lynley, Jacqueline Bisset, Jill St. John and Michelle Phillips.\nPolanski met actress Sharon Tate while filming \"The Fearless Vampire Killers\", and during the production, the two of them began dating. On 20 January 1968, Polanski and Tate married in London.\nIn February 1969, Polanski and Tate began renting the home at 10050 Cielo Drive in the Benedict Canyon region of Los Angeles. In August, while Polanski was in Europe working on a film, Tate remained home, eight-and-a-half months pregnant. The Manson Family cult broke into the home late in the evening of 8 August and proceeded to murder Tate and four others. Tate's unborn child was posthumously named Paul Richard Polanski. Charles Manson, along with members of the cult, was arrested in late 1969, eventually tried, and found guilty in 1971 of first-degree murder.\nPolanski has said that his absence on the night of the murders is the greatest regret of his life. He wrote in his autobiography: \"Sharon's death is the only watershed in my life that really matters\", and commented that her murder changed his personality from a \"boundless, untroubled sea of expectations and optimism\" to one of \"ingrained pessimism... eternal dissatisfaction with life\". Polanski was left with a negative impression of the press, which he felt was interested in sensationalizing the lives of the victims, and indirectly himself, to attract readers. He was shocked by the lack of sympathy expressed in various news stories:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had long known that it was impossible for a journalist to convey 100 percent of the truth, but I didn't realize to what extent the truth is distorted, both by the intentions of the journalist and by neglect. I don't mean just the interpretations of what happened; I also mean the facts. The reporting about Sharon and the murders was virtually criminal. Reading the papers, I could not believe my eyes. I could not believe my eyes! They blamed the victims for their own murders. I really despise the press. I didn't always. The press made me despise it.\nIn 1989, Polanski married French actress Emmanuelle Seigner. They have two children, daughter Morgane and son Elvis. Polanski and his children speak Polish at home.\nLegal history.\nIn 1977, Polanski was arrested and charged with drugging and raping a 13-year-old girl. As a result of a plea bargain, he pleaded guilty to the lesser offence of unlawful sex with a minor. In 1978, after learning that the judge planned to reject his plea deal and impose a prison term instead of probation, he fled to Paris. A number of other women have later accused Polanski of raping them when they were teenagers. An Interpol red notice was issued for his arrest, and he rarely leaves France.\nSexual abuse.\nOn 11 March 1977, three years after making \"Chinatown\", Polanski was arrested at the Beverly Wilshire Hotel for the sexual assault of 13-year-old Samantha Gailey. Gailey had modeled for Polanski during a \"Vogue\" photoshoot the previous day around the swimming pool at the Bel Air home of Polanski was indicted on six counts of criminal behavior, including rape. At his arraignment, he pleaded not guilty to all charges. Many executives in Hollywood came to his defense. Gailey's attorney arranged a plea bargain in which five of the six charges would be dismissed, and Polanski accepted.\nAs a result of the plea bargain, Polanski pleaded guilty to the charge of \"unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor\", and was ordered to undergo 90 days of psychiatric evaluation at California Institution for Men at Chino. Upon release from prison after 42 days, Polanski agreed to the plea bargain, his penalty to be time served along with probation. However, he learned afterward that the judge, Laurence J. Rittenband, had told some friends that he was going to disregard the plea bargain and sentence Polanski to 50 years in prison: \"I'll see this man never gets out of jail\", he told Polanski's friend, screenwriter Howard E. Koch. Gailey's attorney confirmed the judge changed his mind after he met the judge in his chambers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolanski was told by his attorney that \"the judge could no longer be trusted\" and that the judge's representations were \"worthless\". Polanski decided not to appear at his sentencing. He told his friend, producer Dino De Laurentiis, \"I've made up my mind. I'm getting out of here.\" On 31 January 1978, the day before sentencing, Polanski left the country on a flight to where he had a home. One day later, he left for As a French citizen, he has been protected from extradition and has lived mostly in France since then.\nIn 1979, Polanski gave a controversial interview with novelist Martin Amis in which, discussing the case, he said \"If I had killed somebody, it wouldn't have had so much appeal to the press, you see? But ... fucking, you see, and the young girls. Judges want to fuck young girls. Juries want to fuck young girls. Everyone wants to fuck young girls!\"\nIn 1988, Gailey sued Polanski. Among other things, the suit alleged sexual assault, false imprisonment, seduction of a minor, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. In 1993, Polanski agreed to settle with his victim. In August 1996, Polanski still owed her $604,416; court filings confirm that the settlement was completed by 1997 via a confidential financial arrangement. The victim, now married and going by the name Samantha Geimer, stated in a 2003 interview with Larry King that the police and media had been slow at the time of the assault to believe her account, which she attributed to the social climate of the era. In 2008, she stated, \"I don't wish for him to be held to further punishment or consequences.\"\nOn 26 September 2009, Polanski was arrested while in Switzerland at the request of United States authorities. The arrest brought renewed attention to the case and stirred controversy, particularly in the United States and Europe. Polanski was defended by many prominent individuals, including Hollywood celebrities and European artists and politicians, who called for his release. American public opinion was reported to run against him, and polls in France and Poland showed that strong majorities favored his extradition to the United States.\nPolanski was jailed near Zurich for two months, then put under house arrest at his home in Gstaad while awaiting the results of his extradition appeals. On 12 July 2010, the Swiss rejected the United States' request, declared Polanski a \"free man\" and released him from custody. A year later, he was invited to the 2011 Zurich Film Festival where he received a lifetime achievement award. An Interpol red notice was issued in 1978 after he fled the United States, limiting his movements to France, Switzerland, and Poland. However, his name is no longer found on Interpol's wanted list.\nDuring a television interview on 10 March 2011, Geimer blamed the media, reporters, the court, and the judge for having caused \"way more damage to me and my family than anything Roman Polanski has ever done\", and opined that the judge was using her and Polanski for media exposure.\nIn January 2014, newly uncovered emails from 2008 by a Los Angeles County Superior Court Judge, Larry P. Fidler, indicated that if Polanski returned to the United States for a hearing, the conduct of the judge who had originally presided over the case, Laurence A. Rittenband, might require that Polanski be freed. These emails were related to a 2008 documentary film by Marina Zenovich.\nIn late October 2014, Polanski was questioned by Polish prosecutors in Krak\u00f3w. On 30 October 2015, Polish judge Dariusz Mazur denied a request by the United States to extradite Polanski, who has dual French\u2013Polish citizenship, for a full trial, claiming that it would be \"obviously unlawful\". The Krak\u00f3w prosecutor's office declined to challenge the court's ruling, agreeing that Polanski had served his punishment and did not need to face an American court ever again.\nPoland's national justice ministry appealed, arguing that sexual abuse of minors should be prosecuted regardless of the suspect's accomplishments or the length of time since the suspected crime took place. In a December 2016 decision, the Supreme Court of Poland dismissed the government's appeal, holding that the prosecutor general had failed to prove misconduct or flagrant legal error on the part of the lower court.\nPreparations for \"An Officer and a Spy\" had been stalled by the extradition request.\nOn 3 May 2018, Polanski was removed from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, with the decision referencing the case.\nPolanski has blamed Harvey Weinstein for the renewed focus on his sexual abuse case in the 2000s and claimed that Weinstein tried to brand him a \"child rapist\" to stop him from winning an Oscar in 2003.\nIn March 2023, Geimer and her husband met with Polanski and his wife Seigner for a French magazine cover interview. Geimer states in the interview: \"Let me be very clear: what happened with Polanski was never a big problem for me. I didn't even know it was illegal, that someone could be arrested for it. I was fine, I'm still fine. It was so unfair and so in opposition to justice\u00a0... Everyone should know by now that Roman has served his sentence. Which was\u00a0... long, if you want my opinion. Anyone who thinks that he deserves to be in prison is wrong. It isn't the case today and it wasn't the case yesterday.\"\nDocumentary films.\nIn 2008, the documentary film by Marina Zenovich, \"\", was released in Europe and the United States where it won numerous awards. The film focuses on the judge in the case and the possible reasons why he changed his mind. It includes interviews with people involved in the case, including the victim, Geimer, and the prosecutor, Roger Gunson. Geimer said that the judge \"didn't care what happened\" to her or Polanski, but \"was orchestrating some little show\", while Gunson added, \"I'm not surprised that Polanski left under those circumstances,\u00a0... It was going to be a real circus.\"\nFormer Los Angeles County Deputy District Attorney David Wells, whose statements were the most damning evidence in the movie, and who said he advised the judge to imprison Polanski, admitted that he lied about those statements, and said that to the documentary makers to \"play up\" his own role.\nIn December 2009, a California appellate court discussed the film's allegations as it denied Polanski's request to have the case dismissed. While saying it was \"deeply concerned\" by the allegations, and that the allegations were \"in many cases supported by considerable evidence\", it also found that \"Even in light of our fundamental concern about the misconduct\u00a0... flight was not Polanski's only option. It was not even his best option.\" It said dismissal of the case, which would erase Polanski's guilty plea, would not be an \"appropriate result\", and that he still had other legal options.\nIn September 2011, the documentary film \"\" had its world premiere in Zurich, Switzerland. During an interview in the film, he offers his apology to Geimer: \"She is a double victim: My victim, and a victim of the press.\" On this occasion, he collected the lifetime achievement award he was to have received at the time of his arrest two years earlier.\n\"Vanity Fair\" libel case.\nIn 2004, Polanski sued \"Vanity Fair\" magazine in London for libel. A 2002 article in the magazine claimed that Polanski promised he would \"make another Sharon Tate out of you\" in an attempt to seduce a Scandinavian model while he was travelling to Tate's funeral. He received supporting testimony from Mia Farrow, and \"Vanity Fair\" \"was unable to prove that the incident occurred\". Polanski was awarded \u00a350,000 in damages plus some of his legal costs.\nMatan Uziel libel case.\nIn December 2017, Polanski filed a \u20aa1.5 million suit in Herzliya Magistrates' Court against Israeli journalist and filmmaker Matan Uziel. Polanski maintained that Uziel, through his website, www.imetpolanski.com, falsely reported that five women had come forward to accuse him of raping them. Polanski was suing for libel and defamation of character. Herzliya Magistrates' Court rejected Polanski's request to be exempt from appearing in court after filing the libel suit. While Polanski gave various reasons for his inability to appear, the presiding judge, Gilad Hess, dismissed them one by one and ordered Polanski to pay Uziel \u20aa10,000 in costs. In November 2018, it was published that Polanski decided to drop the lawsuit, and was ordered by the court to pay Uziel \u20aa30,000 (US$8,000) for court costs. The court accepted Uziel's request that the suit not be dropped, but rather that it be rejected, making Polanski unable to sue Uziel again over the same issue in the future.\nIn late December 2019, in Polanski's interviews with \"Paris Match\" and , the latter accused Matan Uziel of carefully orchestrating the attacks on his character and for playing a major role in designing an international campaign to besmirch his name and reputation in order to make his career fall from grace.\nIn November 2022, Polanski filed a cybersquatting dispute with World Intellectual Property Organization against the domain name imetpolanski.com. Polanski asked World Intellectual Property Organization to rule that the site was cybersquatting. However, the three-person panel ruled that Polanski did not show the domain was registered and used in bad faith, nor did he show that the registrant, Matan Uziel, lacked rights or legitimate interests in the domain name.\nAcademy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences case.\nIn April 2019, following his expulsion from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Polanski filed a lawsuit against the academy alleging that the decision to expel him was not appropriately supported and demanding his reinstatement. In August 2020 his expulsion was upheld by the court with the judge finding that the academy's board had given Polanski a fair hearing and that they had cause to expel him.\nCharlotte Lewis.\nIn 2010, lawyer Gloria Allred appeared in a press conference with British actress Charlotte Lewis, where she stated that Polanski had forced himself on her while she was auditioning for \"Pirates\" in Paris in 1983, which she was later cast in. \"He sexually abused me in the worst possible way when I was just 16 years old, four years after he fled the United States to avoid sentencing for his crime.\" \nIn 1999, Lewis had an interview with the UK's \"News of the World\" where she asserted that she had a six-month tryst with Polanski when she was 17. Lewis also talked about how Polanski treated her in the relationship: \"Roman would say, \u2018You\u2019re gaining weight\u2019. It was ridiculous\u2014I was a thin teenage girl, but I took it seriously and stopped eating. Then I'd overeat, and for years I suffered from bulimia. I know that was the start.\" \nDuring an interview with \"Paris Match\" in 2019, Polanski was asked about Charlotte Lewis' accusations, to which he responded \"It's an odious lie!\" He also pulled out a press clipping of her 1999 interview, quoting her talk about having sex with many men by the age of 14. In the interview Lewis discloses that she was drugged and prostituted at 14, which led to her sexual promiscuity and her relationship with numerous film stars, including Polanski.\nLewis alleged Polanski led a smear campaign against her, primarily founded on the \"Paris Match\" interview, and in September 2022 Polanski was ordered to stand trial in France for a defamation case from Lewis. Polanski was acquitted on 14 May 2024. He was not present in court for the verdict.\n2024 civil complaint.\nIn June 2023, Polanski was sued in the Los Angeles Superior Court by a woman who alleged that he raped her at his home in 1973 after supplying her with tequila shots. The woman was said to be under the age of 18 at the time. The civil trial date was originally set for August 2025; however, Polanski and the woman settled the suit in October 2024.\nOther allegations.\nIn October 2017, German actress Renate Langer told Swiss police that Polanski raped her in Gstaad when she was 15, in 1972. The same month, American artist Marianne Barnard accused Polanski of sexually assaulting her in 1975, when she was 10 years old.\nIn November 2019, French actress Valentine Monnier said Polanski raped her at a ski chalet in Gstaad in 1975.\nAwards and nominations.\nDirected Academy Award performances\nUnder Polanski's direction, these actors have received Academy Award nominations (and wins) for their performances in their respective roles.\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25429", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25429", "title": "Romantic Music", "text": ""}
{"id": "25430", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25430", "title": "Role playing games", "text": ""}
{"id": "25431", "revid": "50066414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25431", "title": "Russian language", "text": "East Slavic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nRussian is an East Slavic language belonging to the Balto-Slavic branch of the Indo-European language family. It is one of the four extant East Slavic languages, and is the native language of the Russians. It was the \"de facto\" and \"de jure\" official language of the former Soviet Union. Russian has remained an official language of the Russian Federation, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, and is still commonly used as a lingua franca in Ukraine, Moldova, the Caucasus, Central Asia, and to a lesser extent in the Baltic states and Israel.\nRussian has over 253 million total speakers worldwide. It is the most spoken native language in Europe, the most spoken Slavic language, and the most geographically widespread language of Eurasia. It is the world's seventh-most spoken language by number of native speakers, and the world's ninth-most spoken language by total number of speakers. Russian is one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station, one of the six official languages of the United Nations, as well as the fourth most widely used language on the Internet.\nRussian is written using the Russian alphabet of the Cyrillic script; it distinguishes between consonant phonemes with palatal secondary articulation and those without\u2014the so-called \"soft\" and \"hard\" sounds. Almost every consonant has hard-soft counterparts, and the distinction is a prominent feature of the language, which is usually shown in writing not by a change of the consonant but rather by changing the following vowel. Another important aspect is the reduction of unstressed vowels. Stress, which is often unpredictable, is not normally indicated orthographically, though an optional acute accent may be used to mark stress \u2013 such as to distinguish between homographic words (e.g. [, 'lock'] and [, 'castle']), or to indicate the proper pronunciation of uncommon words or proper nouns.\nRussian is a typical fusional language, where single inflectional morphemes at the end of a word are used to denote multiple grammatical features. In addition to inflection for morphology Russian also actively uses prefixes and suffixes for word formation, more so than most other Slavic languages. On the other hand, Russian often uses Compound (linguistics) (including open compounding), than most other Slavic languages. For example, \"railroad\" in Russian is two words (\"zheleznaya doroga\"), whereas in Czech it is one word (\"\u017eeleznice\"). \nClassification.\nRussian is an East Slavic language of the wider Indo-European family. Old East Slavic (or Old Russian) is the parent language of the modern Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian languages. In many places in eastern and southern Ukraine and throughout Belarus, these languages are spoken interchangeably, and in certain areas traditional bilingualism resulted in language mixtures such as \"surzhyk\" in eastern Ukraine and \"trasianka\" in Belarus. The Novgorod dialect, a historical variety of Russian with unique northwestern dialectal features, is sometimes considered to have played a significant role in the formation of modern Russian. Also, Russian has notable lexical similarities with Bulgarian due to a common Church Slavonic influence on both languages, but because of later developments in the 19th and 20th centuries, modern Bulgarian grammar differs markedly from Russian.\nOver the course of centuries, the vocabulary and literary style of Russian have also been influenced by Western and Central European languages such as Greek, Latin, Polish, Dutch, German, French, Italian, and English, and to a lesser extent the languages to the south and the east: Uralic, Turkic, Persian, Arabic, and Hebrew.\nAccording to the Defense Language Institute in Monterey, California, Russian is classified as a level III language in terms of learning difficulty for native English speakers, requiring approximately 1,100 hours of immersion instruction to achieve intermediate fluency.\nStandard Russian.\nFeudal divisions and conflicts created obstacles between the Russian principalities before and especially during Mongol rule. This strengthened dialectal differences, and for a while, prevented the emergence of a standardized national language. The formation of the unified and centralized Russian state in the 15th and 16th centuries, and the gradual re-emergence of a common political, economic, and cultural space created the need for a common standard language. The initial impulse for standardization came from the government bureaucracy for the lack of a reliable tool of communication in administrative, legal, and judicial affairs became an obvious practical problem. The earliest attempts at standardizing Russian were made based on the so-called Moscow official or chancery language, during the 15th to 17th centuries. Since then, the trend of language policy in Russia has been standardization in both the restricted sense of reducing dialectical barriers between ethnic Russians, and the broader sense of expanding the use of Russian alongside or in favour of other languages.\nThe current standard form of Russian is generally regarded as the \"modern Russian literary language\" (), or \"Contemporary Standard Russian\". It arose at the beginning of the 18th century with the modernization reforms of the Russian state under the rule of Peter the Great and developed from the Moscow (Middle or Central Russian) dialect substratum under some influence of the Russian chancery language. The Moscow dialect had a northern dialectal base, but after Moscow became the center of a unified state, the attraction of southern dialectal speakers led to the emergence of a transitional dialect group.\nPrior to the Bolshevik Revolution, the spoken form of the Russian language was that of the nobility and the urban bourgeoisie. Russian peasants, the great majority of the population, continued to speak in their own dialects. However, the peasants' speech was never systematically studied, as it was generally regarded by philologists as simply a source of folklore and an object of curiosity. This was acknowledged by the noted Russian dialectologist Nikolai Karinsky, who toward the end of his life wrote: \"Scholars of Russian dialects mostly studied phonetics and morphology. Some scholars and collectors compiled local dictionaries. We have almost no studies of lexical material or the syntax of Russian dialects.\"\nAfter 1917, Marxist linguists had no interest in the multiplicity of peasant dialects and regarded their language as a relic of the rapidly disappearing past that was not worthy of scholarly attention. Nakhimovsky quotes the Soviet academicians A.M Ivanov and L.P Yakubinsky, writing in 1930:\nThe language of peasants has a motley diversity inherited from feudalism. On its way to becoming proletariat peasantry brings to the factory and the industrial plant their local peasant dialects with their phonetics, grammar, and vocabulary, and the very process of recruiting workers from peasants and the mobility of the worker population generate another process: the liquidation of peasant inheritance by way of leveling the particulars of local dialects. On the ruins of peasant multilingual, in the context of developing heavy industry, a qualitatively new entity can be said to emerge\u2014the general language of the working class... capitalism has the tendency of creating the general urban language of a given society.\nGeographic distribution.\nIn 2010, there were 259.8 million speakers of Russian in the world: in Russia \u2013 137.5 million, in the CIS and Baltic countries \u2013 93.7 million, in Eastern Europe \u2013 12.9 million, Western Europe \u2013 7.3 million, Asia \u2013 2.7 million, in the Middle East and North Africa \u2013 1.3 million, Sub-Saharan Africa \u2013 0.1 million, Latin America \u2013 0.2 million, U.S., Canada, Australia, and New Zealand \u2013 4.1 million speakers. Therefore, the Russian language is the seventh-largest in the world by the number of speakers, after English, Mandarin, Hindi-Urdu, Spanish, French, Arabic, and Portuguese.\nRussian is one of the six official languages of the United Nations. Education in Russian is still a popular choice for both Russian as a second language (RSL) and native speakers in Russia, and in many former Soviet republics. Russian is still seen as an important language for children to learn in most of the former Soviet republics.\nEurope.\nIn Belarus, Russian is a second state language alongside Belarusian per the Constitution of Belarus. 77% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 67% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. According to the 2019 Belarusian census, out of 9,413,446 inhabitants of the country, 5,094,928 (54.1% of the total population) named Belarusian as their native language, with 61.2% of ethnic Belarusians and 54.5% of ethnic Poles declaring Belarusian as their native language. In everyday life in the Belarusian society the Russian language prevails, so according to the 2019 census 6,718,557 people (71.4% of the total population) stated that they speak Russian at home, for ethnic Belarusians this share is 61.4%, for Russians \u2014 97.2%, for Ukrainians \u2014 89.0%, for Poles \u2014 52.4%, and for Jews \u2014 96.6%; 2,447,764 people (26.0% of the total population) stated that the language they usually speak at home is Belarusian, among ethnic Belarusians this share is 28.5%; the highest share of those who speak Belarusian at home is among ethnic Poles \u2014 46.0%.\nIn Estonia, Russian is spoken by 29.6% of the population, according to a 2011 estimate from the World Factbook, and is officially considered a foreign language. School education in the Russian language is a very contentious point in Estonian politics, and in 2022, the parliament approved a bill to close up all Russian language schools and kindergartens by the school year. The transition to only Estonian language schools and kindergartens will start in the 2024\u20132025 school year.\nIn Latvia, Russian is officially considered a foreign language. 55% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 26% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. On 18 February 2012, Latvia held a constitutional referendum on whether to adopt Russian as a second official language. According to the Central Election Commission, 74.8% voted against, 24.9% voted for and the voter turnout was 71.1%. Starting in 2019, instruction in Russian will be gradually discontinued in private colleges and universities in Latvia, and in general instruction in Latvian public high schools. On 29 September 2022, Saeima passed in the final reading amendments that state that all schools and kindergartens in the country are to transition to education in Latvian. From 2025, all children will be taught in Latvian only. On 28 September 2023, Latvian deputies approved The National Security Concept, according to which from 1 January 2026, all content created by Latvian public media (including LSM) should be only in Latvian or a language that \"belongs to the European cultural space\". The financing of Russian-language content by the state will cease, which the concept says create a \"unified information space\". However, one inevitable consequence would be the closure of public media broadcasts in Russian on LTV and Latvian Radio, as well as the closure of LSM's Russian-language service.\nIn Lithuania, Russian has no official or legal status, but the use of the language has some presence in certain areas. A large part of the population, especially the older generations, can speak Russian as a foreign language. However, English has replaced Russian as a second language in Lithuania and around 80% of young people speak English as their first foreign language. In contrast to the other two Baltic states, Lithuania has a relatively small Russian-speaking minority (5.0% as of 2008[ [update]]). According to the 2011 Lithuanian census, Russian was the native language for 7.2% of the population.\nIn Moldova, Russian was considered to be the language of interethnic communication under a Soviet-era law. On 21 January 2021, the Constitutional Court of Moldova declared the law unconstitutional and deprived Russian of the status of the language of interethnic communication. 50% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 19% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. According to the 2014 Moldovan census, Russians accounted for 4.1% of Moldova's population, 9.4% of the population declared Russian as their native language, and 14.5% said they usually spoke Russian.\nAccording to the 2010 census in Russia, Russian language skills were indicated by 138 million people (99.4% of the respondents), while according to the 2002 census \u2013 142.6 million people (99.2% of the respondents).\nIn Ukraine, Russian is a significant minority language. According to estimates from Demoskop Weekly, in 2004 there were 14,400,000 native speakers of Russian in the country, and 29 million active speakers. 65% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 38% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work. On 5 September 2017, Ukraine's Parliament passed a new education law which requires all schools to teach at least partially in Ukrainian, with provisions while allow indigenous languages and languages of national minorities to be used alongside the national language. The law faced criticism from officials in Russia and Hungary. The 2019 Law of Ukraine \"On protecting the functioning of the Ukrainian language as the state language\" gives priority to the Ukrainian language in more than 30 spheres of public life: in particular in public administration, media, education, science, culture, advertising, services. The law does not regulate private communication. A poll conducted in March 2022 by RATING in the territory controlled by Ukraine found that 83% of the respondents believe that Ukrainian should be the only state language of Ukraine. This opinion dominates in all macro-regions, age and language groups. On the other hand, before the war, almost a quarter of Ukrainians were in favour of granting Russian the status of the state language, while after the beginning of Russia's invasion the support for the idea dropped to just 7%. In peacetime, the idea of raising the status of Russian was traditionally supported by residents of the south and east. But even in these regions, only a third of the respondents were in favour, and after Russia's full-scale invasion, their number dropped by almost half. According to the survey carried out by RATING in August 2023 in the territory controlled by Ukraine and among the refugees, almost 60% of the polled usually speak Ukrainian at home, about 30% \u2013 Ukrainian and Russian, only 9% \u2013 Russian. Since March 2022, the use of Russian in everyday life has been noticeably decreasing. For 82% of respondents, Ukrainian is their mother tongue, and for 16%, Russian is their mother tongue. IDPs and refugees living abroad are more likely to use both languages for communication or speak Russian. Nevertheless, more than 70% of IDPs and refugees consider Ukrainian to be their native language.\nIn the 20th century, Russian was a mandatory language taught in the schools of the members of the old Warsaw Pact and in other countries that used to be satellites of the USSR. According to the Eurobarometer 2005 survey, fluency in Russian remains fairly high (20\u201340%) in some countries, in particular former Warsaw Pact countries.\nCaucasus.\nIn Armenia, Russian has no official status, but it is recognized as a minority language under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. 30% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 2% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work.\nIn Azerbaijan, Russian has no official status, but is a \"lingua franca\" of the country. 26% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 5% used it as the main language with family, friends, or at work.\nIn Georgia, Russian has no official status, but it is recognized as a minority language under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. Russian is the language of 9% of the population according to the World Factbook. Ethnologue cites Russian as the country's de facto working language.\nAsia.\nIn China, Russian has no official status, but it is spoken by the small Russian communities in the northeastern Heilongjiang and the northwestern Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. Russian was also the main foreign language taught in school in China between 1949 and 1964.\nIn Kazakhstan, Russian is not a state language, but according to article 7 of the Constitution of Kazakhstan its usage enjoys equal status to that of the Kazakh language in state and local administration. The 2009 census reported that 10,309,500 people, or 84.8% of the population aged 15 and above, could read and write well in Russian, and understand the spoken language. In October 2023, Kazakhstan drafted a media law aimed at increasing the use of the Kazakh language over Russian, the law stipulates that the share of the state language on television and radio should increase from 50% to 70%, at a rate of 5% per year, starting in 2025.\nIn Kyrgyzstan, Russian is a co-official language per article 5 of the Constitution of Kyrgyzstan. The 2009 census states that 482,200 people speak Russian as a native language, or 8.99% of the population. Additionally, 1,854,700 residents of Kyrgyzstan aged 15 and above fluently speak Russian as a second language, or 49.6% of the population in the age group.\nIn Tajikistan, Russian is the language of inter-ethnic communication under the Constitution of Tajikistan and is permitted in official documentation. 28% of the population was fluent in Russian in 2006, and 7% used it as the main language with family, friends or at work. The World Factbook notes that Russian is widely used in government and business.\nIn Turkmenistan, Russian lost its status as the official \"lingua franca\" in 1996. Among 12% of the population who grew up in the Soviet era can speak Russian; other generations of citizens do not have any knowledge of Russian. Primary and secondary education by Russian is almost non-existent.\nIn Uzbekistan, Russian is spoken by 14.2% of the population according to an undated estimate from the World Factbook.\nIn 2005, Russian was the most widely taught foreign language in Mongolia, and was compulsory in Year 7 onward as a second foreign language in 2006.\nAround 1.5million Israelis spoke Russian as of 2017[ [update]]. The Israeli press and websites regularly publish material in Russian and there are Russian newspapers, television stations, schools, and social media outlets based in the country. There is an Israeli TV channel mainly broadcasting in Russian with Israel Plus. See also Russian language in Israel.\nRussian is also spoken as a second language by a small number of people in Afghanistan.\nIn Vietnam, Russian has been added in the elementary curriculum along with Chinese and Japanese and were named as \"first foreign languages\" for Vietnamese students to learn, on equal footing with English.\nNorth America.\nThe Russian language was first introduced in North America when Russian explorers voyaged into Alaska and claimed it for Russia during the 18th century. Although most Russian colonists left after the United States bought the land in 1867, a handful stayed and preserved the Russian language in this region to this day, although only a few elderly speakers of this unique dialect are left. In Nikolaevsk, Alaska, Russian is more spoken than English. Sizable Russian-speaking communities also exist in North America, especially in large urban centers of the US and Canada, such as New York City, Philadelphia, Boston, Los Angeles, Nashville, San Francisco, Seattle, Spokane, Toronto, Calgary, Baltimore, Miami, Portland, Chicago, Denver, and Cleveland. In a number of locations they issue their own newspapers, and live in ethnic enclaves (especially the generation of immigrants who started arriving in the early 1960s). Only about 25% of them are ethnic Russians, however. Before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the overwhelming majority of Russophones in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn in New York City were Russian-speaking Jews. Afterward, the influx from the countries of the former Soviet Union changed the statistics somewhat, with ethnic Russians and Ukrainians immigrating along with some more Russian Jews and Central Asians. According to the United States Census, in 2007 Russian was the primary language spoken in the homes of over 850,000 individuals living in the United States.\nAs an international language.\nRussian is one of the official languages (or has similar status and interpretation must be provided into Russian) of the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Russian language is also one of two official languages aboard the International Space Station \u2013 NASA astronauts who serve alongside Russian cosmonauts usually take Russian language courses. This practice goes back to the Apollo\u2013Soyuz mission, which first flew in 1975.\nIn March 2013, Russian was found to be the second-most used language on websites after English. Russian was the language of 5.9% of all websites, slightly ahead of German and far behind English (54.7%). Russian was used not only on 89.8% of .ru sites, but also on 88.7% of sites with the former Soviet Union domain .su. Websites in former Soviet Union member states also used high levels of Russian: 79.0% in Ukraine, 86.9% in Belarus, 84.0% in Kazakhstan, 79.6% in Uzbekistan, 75.9% in Kyrgyzstan and 81.8% in Tajikistan. However, Russian was the sixth-most used language on the top 1,000 sites, behind English, Chinese, French, German, and Japanese.\nOn 13 October 2023, the CIS Council of Heads of State signed the Treaty on the Establishment of the International Organization for the Russian Language and adopted the Statement on Support and Promotion of the Russian Language as a Language of Interethnic Communication.\nDialects.\nDespite leveling after 1900, especially in matters of vocabulary and phonetics, a number of dialects still exist in Russia. Some linguists divide the dialects of Russian into two primary regional groupings, \"Northern\" and \"Southern\", with Moscow lying on the zone of transition between the two. Others divide the language into three groupings, Northern, Central (or Middle), and Southern, with Moscow lying in the Central region.\nThe Northern Russian dialects and those spoken along the Volga River typically pronounce unstressed clearly, a phenomenon called okanye (). Besides the absence of vowel reduction, some dialects have high or diphthongal in place of Proto-Slavic\u00a0*\"\u011b\" and in stressed closed syllables (as in Ukrainian) instead of Standard Russian and , respectively. Another Northern dialectal morphological feature is a post-posed definite article \"-to\", \"-ta\", \"-te\" similar to that existing in Bulgarian and Macedonian.\nIn the Southern Russian dialects, instances of unstressed and following palatalized consonants and preceding a stressed syllable are not reduced to (as occurs in the Moscow dialect), being instead pronounced in such positions (e.g. is pronounced , not ) \u2013 this is called yakanye (). Consonants include a fricative, a semivowel and , whereas the Standard and Northern dialects have the consonants , , and final and , respectively. The morphology features a palatalized final in 3rd person forms of verbs (this is unpalatalized in the Standard and Northern dialects).\nComparison with other Slavic languages.\nDuring the Proto-Slavic (Common Slavic) times all Slavs spoke one mutually intelligible language or group of dialects. There is a high degree of mutual intelligibility between Russian, Belarusian and Ukrainian, and a moderate degree of it in all modern Slavic languages, at least at the conversational level.\nAlphabet.\nRussian is written using a Cyrillic alphabet. The early Cyrillic alphabet was adapted to Russian from Old Church Slavonic. The first attempt at reforming Russian orthography was carried out in 1708\u20131710. The last major reform was carried out in 1917\u20131918.\nThe Russian alphabet consists of 33 letters. The following table gives their forms, along with values for each letter's typical sound:\nOlder letters of the Russian alphabet include \u27e8\u27e9, which merged to \u27e8\u27e9 ( or ); \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9, which both merged to \u27e8\u27e9 (); \u27e8\u27e9, which merged to \u27e8\u27e9 (); \u27e8\u27e9, which merged to \u27e8\u27e9 (); \u27e8\u27e9, which merged to \u27e8\u27e9 ( or ); and \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9, which later were graphically reshaped into \u27e8\u27e9 and merged phonetically to or . While these older letters have been abandoned at one time or another, they may be used in this and related articles. The yers \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 originally indicated the pronunciation of \"ultra-short\" or \"reduced\" , .\nTransliteration.\nBecause of many technical restrictions in computing and also because of the unavailability of Cyrillic keyboards abroad, Russian is often transliterated using the Latin alphabet. For example, ('frost') is transliterated \"moroz\", and ('mouse'), \"mysh\" or \"my\u0161'\". Once commonly used by the majority of those living outside Russia, transliteration is being used less frequently by Russian-speaking typists in favor of the extension of Unicode character encoding, which fully incorporates the Russian alphabet. Free programs are available offering this Unicode extension, which allow users to type Russian characters, even on Western 'QWERTY' keyboards.\nComputing.\nThe Russian language was first introduced to computing after the M-1, and MESM models were produced in 1951.\nOrthography.\nAccording to the Institute of Russian Language of the Russian Academy of Science, an optional acute accent () may, and sometimes should, be used to mark stress. For example, it is used \nto distinguish between otherwise identical words, especially when context does not make it obvious: \n (\"zam\u00f3k\" \u2013 \"lock\") \u2013 (\"z\u00e1mok\" \u2013 \"castle\"), \n (\"st\u00f3yashchy\" \u2013 \"worthwhile\") \u2013 (\"stoy\u00e1shchy\" \u2013 \"standing\"),\n (\"chudn\u00f3\" \u2013 \"this is odd\") \u2013 (\"ch\u00fadno\" \u2013 \"this is marvellous\"),\n (\"molod\u00e9ts\" \u2013 \"well done!\") \u2013 (\"m\u00f3lodets\" \u2013 \"fine young man\"),\n (\"uzn\u00e1yu\" \u2013 \"I shall learn it\") \u2013 (\"uznay\u00fa\" \u2013 \"I recognize it\"),\n (\"otrez\u00e1t\" \u2013 \"to be cutting\") \u2013 (\"otr\u00e9zat\" \u2013 \"to have cut\"); \nto indicate the proper pronunciation of uncommon words, especially personal and family names, like\n (\"af\u00e9ra\", \"scandal, affair\"),\n (\"g\u00faru\", \"guru\"), (\"Garc\u00eda\"),\n (\"Ol\u00e9sha\"), (\"Fermi\"),\nand to show which is the stressed word in a sentence, for example\n (\"T\u00fd syel pechenye?\" \u2013 \"Was it \"you\" who ate the cookie?\") \u2013\n (\"Ty sy\u00e9l pechenye?\" \u2013 \"Did you \"eat\" the cookie?) \u2013\n (\"Ty syel pech\u00e9nye?\" \"Was it the \"cookie\" you ate?\").\nStress marks are mandatory in lexical dictionaries and books for children or Russian learners.\nPhonology.\nThe Russian syllable structure can be quite complex, with both initial and final consonant clusters of up to four consecutive sounds. Using a formula with V standing for the nucleus (vowel) and C for each consonant, the maximal structure can be described as follows:\nConsonants.\nRussian is notable for its distinction based on palatalization of most of its consonants. The phoneme // is generally considered to be always hard; however, loan words such as \u0426\u044e\u0440\u0438\u0445 and some other neologisms contain // through the word-building processes (e.g., \u0444\u0440\u0438\u0446\u0451\u043d\u043e\u043a [\"\u0444\u0440\u0438\u0446\" plus diminutive \"\u0451\u043d\u043e\u043a\"], \u0448\u043f\u0438\u0446\u044f\u0442\u0430 [\"\u0448\u043f\u0438\u0446\" plus diminutive \"\u044f\u0442\u0430\"]). Palatalization means that the center of the tongue is raised toward the palate during and after the articulation of the consonant. In the case of and , the tongue is raised enough to produce slight frication (affricate sounds; cf. Belarusian \u0446\u044c, \u0434\u0437\u044c, or Polish \u0107, d\u017a). The sounds are dental, that is, pronounced with the tip of the tongue against the teeth rather than against the alveolar ridge. According to some linguists, the \"plain\" consonants are velarized as in Irish, something which is most noticeable when it involves a labial before a hard vowel, such as \u043c\u044b, , \"we\" , or \u0431\u044d, , \"the letter \u0411\".\nVowels.\nRussian has five or six vowels in stressed syllables, , and in some analyses , but in most cases these vowels have merged to only two to four vowels when unstressed: (or ) after hard consonants and after soft ones. These vowels have several allophones, which are displayed on the diagram to the right.\nGrammar.\nRussian has preserved an Indo-European synthetic-inflectional structure, although considerable leveling has occurred. Russian grammar encompasses:\nThe spoken language has been influenced by the literary one but continues to preserve characteristic forms. The dialects show various non-standard grammatical features.\nIn terms of actual grammar, there are three verb tenses in Russian\u00a0\u2013 past, present, and future\u00a0\u2013 and each verb has one of the two aspects (perfective and imperfective). Verbs of motion in Russian\u00a0\u2013 such as 'go', 'walk', 'run', 'swim', and 'fly'\u00a0\u2013 use the imperfective or perfective form to indicate a single or return trip. Also, unlike the English verbs, that use post-positions to clarify the verb's meaning (e.g. \"go OUT\") , Russian verbs use a multitude of prefixes to add shades of meaning to the verb (e.g \"\u0412\u042b\u0445\u043e\u0434\u0438\u0442\u044c\" ). Such verbs also take on different forms to distinguish between concrete and abstract motion.\nRussian nouns and adjectives (and even verbs, although in the past tense only) each have a gender\u00a0\u2013 either feminine, masculine, or neuter, chiefly indicated by an inflection at the end of the word. Words change depending on both their gender and function in the sentence. \nRussian has six cases for nouns, personal pronouns and adjectives: Nominative (for the grammatical subject), \nGenitive (to indicate possession or relation),\nDative (for indirect objects),\nAccusative (for direct objects),\nInstrumental (to indicate 'with' or 'by means of'),\nLocative (used after the locative prepositions \u0432 \"in\", \u043d\u0430 \"on\", \u043e \"about\", \u043f\u0440\u0438 \"in the presence of\").\nVocabulary.\nThe number of listed words or entries in some of the major dictionaries published during the past two centuries, are as follows:\nHistory and literary language.\nNo single periodization is universally accepted. The history of the Russian language is sometimes divided into \"Old Russian\" from the 11th to 17th centuries, followed by \"Modern Russian\". It is also sometimes divided into the following periods:\nThe emergence of writing (and thus Old Russian literature) is dated to around the year 1000, after Old Church Slavonic was introduced as the liturgical language in the late 10th century. At this point, the two languages were mutually intelligible, but there were clear East Slavic and South Slavic forms. The vernacular was considered the \"low variety\" while Church Slavonic was considered the \"high variety\". The language found in the birch bark manuscripts of the 11th\u201315th centuries represents the closest approximation to the vernacular Old Russian language.\nDuring the rise of Moscow as the political center of Russia in the 14th\u201316th centuries, in which the language is sometimes called \"Great Russian\" to distinguish it from the territories where the future Belarusian and Ukrainian languages developed, the attraction of speakers of the southern dialects gave rise to a hybrid dialect and this became the basis of the standard language. The main phonological development during this period was \"akanye\".\nThe political reforms of Peter the Great were accompanied by a reform of the alphabet, and achieved their goal of secularization and modernization, but caused a need for a written language that more closely resembled the spoken vernacular. The polymath Mikhail Lomonosov, in his \"Russian Grammar\" (1755), defined three styles: the \"high style\" (i.e. Church Slavonic, which would be used for high poetic genres, in addition to religious texts), the \"middle style\" (for lyric poetry, literary prose, scientific works), and a \"low style\" (i.e. a pure vernacular, which would be used for personal correspondence and low comedy). The modern standard language is closest to the middle style.\nBlocks of specialized vocabulary were adopted from the languages of Western Europe. By 1800, a significant portion of the gentry spoke French daily, and German sometimes. Many Russian novels of the 19thcentury, e.g. Leo Tolstoy's \"War and Peace\", contain entire paragraphs and even pages in French with no translation given, with an assumption that educated readers would not need one.\nThe modern literary language was established by the time of Alexander Pushkin in the first third of the 19thcentury. Pushkin revolutionized Russian literature by rejecting archaic grammar and vocabulary (the \"high style\") in favor of grammar and vocabulary found in the spoken language of the time. Even modern readers of younger age may only experience slight difficulties understanding some words in Pushkin's texts, since relatively few words used by Pushkin have become archaic or changed meaning. In fact, many expressions used by Russian writers of the early 19thcentury, in particular Pushkin, Mikhail Lermontov, Nikolai Gogol, Aleksander Griboyedov, became proverbs or sayings which can be frequently found even in modern Russian colloquial speech.\n\nDuring the Soviet period, the policy toward the languages of the various other ethnic groups fluctuated in practice. Though each of the constituent republics had its own official language, the unifying role and superior status was reserved for Russian, although it was declared the official language only in 1990. Following the break-up of the USSR in 1991, several of the newly independent states have encouraged their native languages, which has partly reversed the privileged status of Russian, though its role as the language of post-Soviet national discourse throughout the region has continued.\nThe Russian language in the world declined after 1991 due to the collapse of the Soviet Union and decrease in the number of Russians in the world and diminution of the total population in Russia (where Russian is an official language), however has since been reversed.\nAccording to figures published in 2006 in the journal \"\" research deputy director of Research Center for Sociological Research of the Ministry of Education and Science (Russia) Arefyev A. L., the Russian language is gradually losing its position in the world in general, and in Russia in particular. In 2012, A. L. Arefyev published a new study \"Russian language at the turn of the 20th\u201321st centuries\", in which he confirmed his conclusion about the trend of weakening of the Russian language after the Soviet Union's collapse in various regions of the world (findings published in 2013 in the journal \"\"). In the countries of the former Soviet Union the Russian language was being replaced or used in conjunction with local languages. Currently, the number of speakers of Russian in the world depends on the number of Russians in the world and total population in Russia.\nSample text.\nArticle 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in Russian:\u0412\u0441\u0435 \u043b\u044e\u0434\u0438 \u0440\u043e\u0436\u0434\u0430\u044e\u0442\u0441\u044f \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0438 \u0438 \u0440\u0430\u0432\u043d\u044b\u043c\u0438 \u0432 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0451\u043c \u0434\u043e\u0441\u0442\u043e\u0438\u043d\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0435 \u0438 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430\u0445. \u041e\u043d\u0438 \u043d\u0430\u0434\u0435\u043b\u0435\u043d\u044b \u0440\u0430\u0437\u0443\u043c\u043e\u043c \u0438 \u0441\u043e\u0432\u0435\u0441\u0442\u044c\u044e \u0438 \u0434\u043e\u043b\u0436\u043d\u044b \u043f\u043e\u0441\u0442\u0443\u043f\u0430\u0442\u044c \u0432 \u043e\u0442\u043d\u043e\u0448\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0438 \u0434\u0440\u0443\u0433 \u0434\u0440\u0443\u0433\u0430 \u0432 \u0434\u0443\u0445\u0435 \u0431\u0440\u0430\u0442\u0441\u0442\u0432\u0430.The romanization of the text into Latin alphabet:\"Vse lyudi rozhdayutsya svobodnymi i ravnymi v svoyom dostoinstve i pravakh. Oni nadeleny razumom i sovest'yu i dolzhny postupat' v otnoshenii drug druga v dukhe bratstva.\"Article 1 of the \"Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" in English:All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25432", "revid": "41744893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25432", "title": "Rush (band)", "text": "Canadian rock band\nRush is a Canadian rock band formed in Toronto in 1968. The band's original line-up included guitarist Alex Lifeson, drummer John Rutsey, and bassist and vocalist Jeff Jones, whom Geddy Lee replaced shortly after its formation. Rush went through a few line-up changes over the next six years, before arriving at its classic power trio line-up with the addition of Neil Peart in July 1974, replacing Rutsey four months after the release of their self-titled debut album. The line-up of Lifeson, Lee and Peart remained stable for the remainder of the band's initial run until 2015, after which Peart retired from music. Lifeson later confirmed in 2018 that the band had disbanded, citing Peart's health as a contributing factor. Lifeson and Lee continued to occasionally work together in the years following Peart's death in 2020. In October 2025, Lifeson and Lee announced a 2026 reunion tour as Rush, with Anika Nilles filling in for Peart.\nRush is known for their virtuosic musicianship, complex compositions and eclectic lyrical motifs, which drew primarily on science fiction, fantasy and philosophy. The band's style changed over the years, from a blues-inspired hard rock beginning, later moving into progressive rock, then a period in the 1980s marked by heavy use of synthesizers, before returning to guitar-driven rock in the remainder of their career. The members of Rush have been acknowledged as some of the most proficient players on their respective instruments, with each winning numerous awards in magazine readers' polls in various years.\nAs of 2024, Rush ranks 90th in the US with sales of 26 million albums and industry sources estimate their total worldwide album sales at over 42 million. They have been awarded 14 platinum and 3 multi-platinum albums in the US and 17 platinum albums in Canada. Rush was nominated for seven Grammy Awards, won ten Juno Awards, and won an International Achievement Award at the 2009 SOCAN Awards. The band was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame in 1994 and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2013. Music critics consider Rush to be one of the greatest rock bands of all time.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1968\u20131974: Early years and debut album.\nThe band was formed in the neighbourhood of Willowdale in Toronto by guitarist Alex Lifeson, bassist and frontman Jeff Jones, and drummer John Rutsey, in August 1968. Lifeson and Rutsey had been friends since a young age and played together in a short-lived band, The Projection (formerly known as The Lost Cause). Afterward the two stuck together and brought in Jones to form a new group; their first gig was in September at the Coff-Inn, a youth centre in the basement of St. Theodore of Canterbury Anglican Church in Willowdale; they were paid . They had not named themselves at the time of the booking; Rutsey's brother, Bill thought they needed a name that was short and to the point. He suggested Rush, and the group went with it.\nDue to increasing difficulties in getting to Lifeson's house for practice, Jones suggested that Lifeson get his schoolmate Gary \"Geddy\" Weinrib to step in on lead vocals and bass. Weinrib replaced Jones as Rush's frontman, adopting the stage name Geddy Lee. Rush rehearsed a set mainly formed of covers by various rock artists, including Cream, Jimi Hendrix, and John Mayall. The band underwent several configurations to the line-up that included Lindy Young (who was recruited in early 1969) on keyboards and various instruments, and Mitch Bossi on second guitar (later on, in 1971). Shortly after becoming a four-piece band of Lee, Lifeson, Young and Rutsey, Ray Danniels was hired to be their manager. As Lee recounted years later, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Ray came along. He had no real reputation yet as a manager or anything. He was just kind of an agent working in Toronto. So he started directing the band and he just thought I wasn't suitable, for whatever reasons he had. I don't know whether it was the way I looked, or my religious background\u2013who the f--- knew? Anyway, he influenced them and they went along with it, Alex Lifeson and John Rutsey, and I was out.\nWith Lee kicked out of the band in spring 1969, Rutsey recruited new bassist and vocalist Joe Perna, and the group of Lifeson, Rutsey, Young and Perna named themselves Hadrian. But after a disastrous gig with Perna, Rutsey invited Lee back in September 1969 and the group resumed as Rush. Lee said, \"I started a blues band (named Ogilvie, then Judd, and joined by Lindy Young) and I was, frankly speaking, doing better than they were. Then I got a call from John and he said, 'Can we get together?' Basically, 'Can you come back? We're sorry.'\" Second guitarist Mitch Bossi joined during the first half of 1971 but after that, the band stabilized as a trio of Lifeson, Rutsey and Lee. They kept Danniels as their manager, with his business partner and agent Vic Wilson sharing duties.\nRush honed their skills with regular gigs, initially touring the Ontario high school circuit. In 1971, the legal drinking age was decreased from 21 to 18, allowing the band to play bars and clubs. Lee said it was at this point that Rush turned \"from a basement garage band that played the occasional high school gig to a regular working band playing six days a week.\" A demo tape was shipped to various record labels, but Rush were unable to secure a deal, leading to Danniels and them forming their own label, Moon Records. Rush recorded their first single in 1973; their cover of \"Not Fade Away\" by Buddy Holly was chosen as it had become a crowd favourite. \"You Can't Fight It\", an original song, was put on the B-side. Released in September, it went to No. 88 on the Canadian \"RPM\" Top Singles chart. Also in September 1973, Rush performed their first major gig, opening for the New York Dolls in Toronto and finished putting down tracks for their first album. The initial sessions produced undesirable results over the sound quality, so tracks were recut and remixed with a new engineer, Terry Brown. Danniels sold his management company to help raise funds to make the record. Rutsey wrote the lyrics, but tore them up on the day Lee was to record them and would not produce a new set. Lee quickly wrote a fresh set based on earlier versions, which was used on the final take.\nThe debut album, \"Rush\", was released in March 1974; the initial pressing of 3,500 copies quickly sold out. It went on to peak at No. 86 on the \"RPM\" Top Albums chart. Most critics considered the album to be highly derivative of Led Zeppelin. It had a limited release until it was picked up by Donna Halper, a music director and DJ at rock station WMMS in Cleveland, Ohio. She added \"Working Man\" to the station's regular playlist, and the song's blue-collar theme resonated with hard rock fans in the predominantly working class city. In June 1974, Danniels signed Rush to American Talent International (ATI), an American booking agency, and ATI executive Ira Blacker sent a copy of \"Rush\" to Mercury Records. The record caught the attention of Cliff Burnstein in A&amp;R, who signed Rush with a $75,000 advance as part of a $200,000 deal.\nAfter a series of Canadian dates, Rutsey played his last gig with the band on July 25. His preference for more straightforward rock was incompatible with the more complex music that Lifeson and Lee had written, and Lee recalled that Rutsey had a general distaste for life as a touring musician. His Type 1 diabetes caused further complications, as he required frequent hospital visits to have tests and receive insulin. Since October 1973, Rutsey had often been unable to perform due to his health; in the months prior to his departure, Rush temporarily replaced him with drummer, Gerry Fielding.\n1974\u20131977: Arrival of Neil Peart and foray into progressive rock.\nAfter auditioning five drummers, Lifeson and Lee picked Neil Peart, who joined on July 29, 1974, which was two weeks before the group's first US tour. They performed their first concert together on August 14 at the Civic Arena in Pittsburgh, opening for Uriah Heep and Manfred Mann's Earth Band to more than 11,000 people. Peart assumed the role of lyricist; Lifeson and Lee had little interest in the job and recognized Peart's wider vocabulary range from reading regularly. Lifeson and Lee focused primarily on the music, with the new material displaying their influences from progressive rock bands Yes and Pink Floyd. When the U.S. tour concluded in December 1974, \"Rush\" had reached its peak of No. 105 on the U.S. \"Billboard\" 200 chart.\n\"Fly by Night\" (1975), Rush's first album with Peart, saw the inclusion of the story song \"By-Tor &amp; the Snow Dog\", replete with complex arrangements and a multi-section format. Lyrical themes also underwent dramatic changes because of Peart's love for fantasy and science-fiction literature. Despite the new styles, some other songs on the album mirrored the simplistic blues style found on Rush's debut. \"Fly by Night\" was released as a single that reached No. 45 in Canada. The album reached No. 9 in Canada, where it was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association (CAN) for selling 100,000 copies and in the U.S. by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for selling 1 million copies there.\n\"Caress of Steel\" (1975) followed \"Fly by Night\", the latter is a five-track album featuring two extended multi-chapter songs, \"The Necromancer\" and \"The Fountain of Lamneth\". Some critics said \"Caress of Steel\" was unfocused and an audacious move for the band because of the placement of two back-to-back protracted songs, as well as a heavier reliance on atmospherics and storytelling, a large deviation from \"Fly by Night\". Intended to be the band's breakthrough album, \"Caress of Steel\" sold below expectations. The tour consisted of smaller venues and declining box office receipts, which led to it being nicknamed the Down the Tubes Tour.\nIn light of these events, Rush's record label tried to pressure the members into moulding their next album in a more commercially friendly and accessible fashion; the band ignored the requests and developed their next album \"2112\" (1976) with a 20-minute title track divided into seven sections. Despite that, the album was the band's first taste of significant commercial success as it reached No. 5 in Canada, becoming their first to reach double platinum certification.\nRush toured in support of \"2112\" between February 1976 and June 1977 with concerts in Canada, the US, and for the first time Europe, with dates in the UK, Sweden, Germany, and the Netherlands. The three sold-out shows at Massey Hall in Toronto in June 1976 were recorded for Rush's debut live album, \"All the World's a Stage\". Released in September of that year, the double album reached No. 6 in Canada and became Rush's first to crack the US top 40. \"Record World\" wrote: \"Building its American reputation slowly but steadily Rush stands poised for breaking through all the way via this two record live set [...] All the highly charged electricity is here in an explosive setting.\" The liner notes include the statement, \"This album to us, signifies the end of the beginning, a milestone to mark the close of chapter one, in the annals of Rush.\"\n1977\u20131981: Peak progressive era.\nAfter the conclusion of the \"2112\" tour, Rush recorded \"A Farewell to Kings\" (1977) and \"Hemispheres\" (1978) at Rockfield Studios in Monmouthshire, Wales. The albums had the band members expanding the progressive elements in their music. \"As our tastes got more obscure\", Lee said in an interview, \"we discovered more progressive rock-based bands like Yes, Van der Graaf Generator, and King Crimson, and we were very inspired by those bands. They made us want to make our music more interesting and more complex, and we tried to blend that with our own personalities to see what we could come up with that was indisputably us.\" Increased synthesizer use, lengthy songs, and highly dynamic playing featuring complex time signature changes became a staple of Rush's compositions. To achieve a broader, more progressive sound, Lifeson began to experiment with classical and twelve-string guitars, and Lee added bass-pedal synthesizers and Minimoog.\nLikewise, Peart's percussion became diversified in the form of triangles, glockenspiel, wood blocks, cowbells, timpani, gong, and chimes. Beyond instrument additions, the band kept in stride with progressive rock trends by continuing to compose long, conceptual songs with science fiction and fantasy overtones. As the new decade approached, Rush gradually began to dispose of their older styles of music in favour of shorter and sometimes softer arrangements, due in part to the band's exhaustion from recording \"Hemispheres\". The lyrics up to this point were heavily influenced by classical poetry, fantasy literature, science fiction, and the writings of novelist Ayn Rand, as exhibited most prominently by their 1975 song \"Anthem\" from \"Fly By Night\" and a specifically acknowledged derivation in \"2112\" (1976). The first single from \"A Farewell to Kings\", \"Closer to the Heart\", was the band's first successful song in the UK, peaking at No. 36, while reaching No. 76 in the US and No. 45 in Canada. \"A Farewell to Kings\" did not sell as well as \"2112\", but still went platinum in both Canada and the United States. By this time, Rush's record deal allowed them a CA$250,000 advance on each album and a 16% royalty rate.\n\"Permanent Waves\" (1980) shifted Rush's style of music with the introduction of reggae and new wave elements. Although a hard rock style was still evident, more synthesizers were introduced. Because of the limited airplay Rush's previous extended-length songs received, \"Permanent Waves\" contained shorter, more radio-friendly songs, such as \"The Spirit of Radio\" and \"Freewill\", which helped the album become Rush's highest-charting album to date. \"The Spirit of Radio\" became the group's biggest hit single to date, peaking at No. 22 in Canada, No. 51 on the US Billboard Hot 100, and No. 13 on the UK Singles Chart. Peart's lyrics on \"Permanent Waves\" shifted toward an expository tone with subject matter that dwelled less on fantastical or allegorical storytelling and more heavily on topics that explored humanistic, social, and emotional elements. Rush toured \"Permanent Waves\" for six months through 1980 to more than 650,000 people across 96 shows, becoming their first tour to make a profit. After the tour, Rush joined rock band Max Webster from Toronto and recorded \"Battle Scar\" for their 1980 album, \"Universal Juveniles\". Webster's lyricist, Pye Dubois, offered the band lyrics to a song he had written. The band accepted, and after reworking by Peart the song became \"Tom Sawyer\".\nRush's popularity reached its pinnacle with the release of \"Moving Pictures\" in February 1981. Essentially, \"Moving Pictures\" continued where \"Permanent Waves\" left off, extending the trend of accessible and commercially friendly progressive rock which helped thrust them into the spotlight. The lead track, \"Tom Sawyer\", is probably the band's best-known song. When it was released, it reached No. 24 on the Canadian Top 40 Singles Chart, No. 44 on the Billboard Hot 100, and No. 8 on the new US Album Rock Tracks chart. The second single, \"Limelight\", also received a strong response from listeners and radio stations, going to No. 18 in Canada, No. 54 on the Hot 100, and No. 4 on the US Album Rock Tracks Chart. \"Moving Pictures\" was Rush's last album to feature an extended song, the 11-minute \"The Camera Eye\". The song contained the band's heaviest usage of synthesizers yet, hinting that Rush's music was shifting direction once more. \"Moving Pictures\" became the band's first album to reach No. 1 on the Canadian Albums Chart, and also reached No. 3 on the US \"Billboard\" 200 and UK album charts; it has been certified quintuple platinum by both the Recording Industry Association of America and Music Canada. After the success of \"Moving Pictures\", Rush released their second live recording, \"Exit... Stage Left\", in 1981.\n1981\u20131989: Synthesizer-oriented era.\nThe band had another stylistic change with the recording of \"Signals\" in 1982. While Lee's synthesizers had been featured instruments since the late 1970s, keyboards were shifted from the background to the melodic front-lines in songs like \"Countdown\" and the opening track, \"Subdivisions\". Both feature prominent lead synthesizer lines with minimalistic guitar chords and solos. Other previously unused instrument additions were seen in the song \"Losing It\", featuring collaborator Ben Mink on electric violin.\n\"Signals\" also represented a drastic stylistic transformation apart from instrumental changes. The album contained Rush's biggest hit single, \"New World Man\", while other more experimental songs such as \"Digital Man\", \"The Weapon\", and \"Chemistry\" expanded the band's use of ska, reggae, and funk. The second single, \"Subdivisions\" reached No. 36 in Canada and No. 5 on the US Album Rock Tracks Chart. Both singles reached the Top 50 in the UK. \"Signals\" became the group's second No. 1 album in Canada, their third straight No. 3 album in the UK, and peaked at No. 10 in the US, while continuing their moderate success in the Netherlands, Sweden and Norway, making the Top 30 in each country. Although the band members consciously decided to move in this overall direction, creative differences between the band and longtime producer Terry Brown began to emerge. The band felt dissatisfied with Brown's studio treatment of \"Signals\", while Brown was becoming more uncomfortable with the increased use of synthesizers. Ultimately, Rush and Brown parted ways in 1983, and the experimentation with new electronic instruments and varying musical styles would come into further play on their next studio album.\nThe style and production of \"Signals\" were augmented and taken to new heights on \"Grace Under Pressure\" (1984). Peart named the album, as he borrowed the words of Ernest Hemingway (\"Courage is grace under pressure\") to describe what the band had to go through after making the decision to leave Brown. Producer Steve Lillywhite, who gained fame with successful productions of Simple Minds and U2, produced \"Grace Under Pressure\". He backed out at the last moment, however, much to the ire of Lee, Lifeson and Peart. Lee said, \"Steve Lillywhite is really not a man of his word... after agreeing to do our record, he got an offer from Simple Minds, changed his mind, blew us off... so it put us in a horrible position.\" Rush eventually hired Peter Henderson to co-produce and engineer the album instead. Henderson was nominated for a Grammy Award for his work on Supertramp's \"Breakfast in America\".\nMusically, although Lee's use of sequencers and synthesizers remained the band's cornerstone, his focus on new technology was complemented by Peart's adaptation of Simmons electronic drums and percussion. Lifeson's contributions on the album were decidedly enhanced, in response to the minimalist role he played on \"Signals\". Still, many of his trademark guitar textures remained intact in the form of open reggae chords and funk and new-wave rhythms. \"Grace Under Pressure\" reached the Top 5 in Canada and the UK and the Top 10 in the US It became the highest charter to that date in Sweden (No. 18), while becoming their first album to chart in Germany (No. 43) and Finland (No. 14). While \"Distant Early Warning\" was not a success on Top 40 radio, it peaked at No. 5 on the US Album Rock Tracks chart.\nWith new producer Peter Collins, the band released \"Power Windows\" (1985) and \"Hold Your Fire\" (1987). The music on the two albums gives far more emphasis and prominence to Lee's multi-layered synthesizer work, and he switched to an English-made Wal MK1 bass. While fans and critics took notice of Lifeson's diminished guitar work, his presence was still palpable. Lifeson, like many guitarists in the mid to late 1980s, experimented with processors that reduced his instrument to echoey chord bursts and thin leads. \"Power Windows\" went to No. 2 in Canada while peaking at No. 9 and 10 in the UK and US, respectively. The lead track, \"The Big Money\" made the Top 50 in Canada, the UK and US, plus No. 4 on the US Mainstream Rock Chart. \"Hold Your Fire\" represents both an extension of the guitar style found on \"Power Windows\", and, according to AllMusic critic Eduardo Rivadavia, the culmination of this era of Rush. \"Hold Your Fire\" only went gold in the US, whereas the previous five Rush albums had gone platinum, although it managed to peak at No. 13 on the \"Billboard\" 200. and made the Top 10 in Canada, the UK and Finland. Two tracks from \"Hold Your Fire\", \"Force Ten\" and \"Time Stand Still\", both peaked at No. 3 on the US Mainstream Rock Tracks chart.\nA third live album and video, \"A Show of Hands\" (1989), was released by Anthem and Mercury following the \"Power Windows\" and \"Hold Your Fire\" tours, demonstrating the aspects of Rush in the 1980s. \"A Show of Hands\" met with strong fan approval, but \"Rolling Stone\" critic Michael Azerrad dismissed it as \"musical muscle\" with 1.5 stars, claiming Rush fans viewed their favourite power trio as \"the holy trinity\". Nevertheless, \"A Show of Hands\" reached the gold album mark in the US and the platinum level in Canada. At that point, the group decided to change international record labels from Mercury to Atlantic. After Rush's departure in 1989, Mercury released a double platinum two-volume compilation of their Rush catalogue, \"Chronicles\" (1990).\n1989\u20132000: Return to guitar-oriented sound and hiatus.\nRush started to deviate from its 1980s style with the albums \"Presto\" (1989) and \"Roll the Bones\" (1991). Produced by record engineer and musician Rupert Hine, these two albums saw Rush shedding much of its keyboard-saturated sound. Beginning with \"Presto\", the band opted for arrangements notably more guitar-centric than the previous two studio albums. Although synthesizers were still used, they were no longer featured as the centre-piece of Rush's compositions. Continuing this trend, \"Roll the Bones\" extended the use of the standard three-instrument approach with even less focus on synthesizers than its predecessor. While musically these albums do not deviate significantly from a general pop-rock sound, Rush incorporated other musical styles such as funk and hip hop in \"Roll the Bones\" and jazz in the instrumental track \"Where's My Thing?\". \"Show Don't Tell\" from \"Presto\" was a No. 1 hit on the US Mainstream Rock Tracks Chart, and while the album reached the Top 10 in Canada, it was less successful in the US (No. 16) and the UK (No. 27). From \"Roll the Bones\", \"Dreamline\" (No. 1) and \"Ghost of a Chance\" (No. 2) were successful on US Mainstream Rock Radio stations, marking a resurgence of Rush's album sales in the US (No. 3 and platinum), the UK (No. 10) and some other parts of northern Europe.\nThe transition from synthesizers to more guitar-oriented and organic instrumentation continued with \"Counterparts\" (1993) and its follow-up, \"Test for Echo\" (1996), both produced in collaboration with Peter Collins. Up to this point, \"Counterparts\" and \"Test for Echo\" were two of Rush's most guitar-driven albums. The latter album also includes elements of jazz and swing-style drumming by Peart, which he had learned from drum coach Freddie Gruber during the interim between \"Counterparts\" and \"Test for Echo\". \"Stick It Out\" from \"Counterparts\" reached the summit of the US Mainstream Rock Tracks Chart, with the album peaking at No. 2 in the US and No. 6 in Canada. \"Test for Echo\" reached the Top 5 in both countries, with the title track again topping the US Mainstream Rock Tracks Chart. In October 1996, in support of \"Test For Echo\", the band embarked on a North American tour, the band's first without an opening act and dubbed \"An Evening with Rush\". The tour was broken into two segments, spanning October through December 1996 and May through July 1997.\nAfter the conclusion of the \"Test for Echo\" tour in 1997, the band entered a five-year hiatus primarily due to personal tragedies in Peart's life. Peart's daughter Selena died in a car crash in August 1997, and his wife Jacqueline died of cancer in June 1998. Peart went on hiatus to mourn and reflect. During that time, he travelled extensively throughout North America on his BMW motorcycle, covering . In his book \"\", Peart writes of how he had told his bandmates at Selena's funeral, \"consider me retired.\" This left the band's future uncertain, and Lee and Lifeson prepared an archival album, \"Different Stages\", for release during the hiatus. Mixed by producer Paul Northfield and engineered by Terry Brown, it is a three-disc live album featuring recorded performances from the band's \"Counterparts\", \"Test For Echo\", and \"A Farewell to Kings\" tours, dedicated to the memory of Selena and Jacqueline. After a time of grief and recovery, and while visiting longtime Rush photographer Andrew MacNaughton in Los Angeles, Peart was introduced to his future wife, photographer Carrie Nuttall, and they married on September 9, 2000. In 2001, Peart decided to return to Rush.\n2001\u20132009: Comeback, \"Vapor Trails\" and \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\".\nIn January 2001, Lee, Lifeson, and Peart came together to attempt to reassemble the band. According to Peart, \"We laid out no parameters, no goals, no limitations, only that we would take a relaxed, civilized approach to the project.\" With the help of producer Paul Northfield, the band produced seventy-four minutes of music for their new album \"Vapor Trails\", which was written and recorded in Toronto. \"Vapor Trails\" marked the first Rush studio recording to not include any keyboards or synthesizers since \"Caress of Steel\". According to the band, the album's developmental process was extremely taxing and took approximately 14 months to finish, the longest they had ever spent writing and recording a studio album. \"Vapor Trails\" was released on May 14, 2002; to herald the band's comeback, the single and lead track from the album, \"One Little Victory\", was designed to grab the attention of listeners with its rapid guitar and drum tempos. The album was supported by the band's first tour in six years, including first-ever concerts in Brazil and Mexico City, where they played to some of the largest crowds of their career. The largest was a capacity crowd of 60,000 in S\u00e3o Paulo. \"Vapor Trails\" peaked at No. 3 in Canada and No. 6 in the US, while selling disappointingly in the UK, where it peaked at No. 38.\nA live album and DVD, \"Rush in Rio\", was released in October 2003, featuring the last performance of the band's Vapor Trails Tour on November 23, 2002, at Maracan\u00e3 Stadium in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. To celebrate the band's 30th anniversary, June 2004 saw the release of \"Feedback\", an extended play work recorded in suburban Toronto featuring eight covers of artists including Cream, The Who and The Yardbirds, bands the members of Rush cite as being their inspiration around the time of their inception. Helping to support \"Feedback\" and continue celebrating their 30th anniversary as a band, Rush launched the 30th Anniversary Tour in the summer of 2004, playing dates in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy, Sweden, the Czech Republic, and the Netherlands. On September 24, 2004, the concert at The Festhalle in Frankfurt, Germany was filmed for a DVD titled \"\", which was released on November 22, 2005. The release omitted eight songs also included on \"Rush in Rio\"; the complete concert was released on Blu-ray on December 8, 2009.\nDuring promotional interviews for the \"R30\" DVD, the band members revealed their intention to begin writing new material in early 2006. While in Toronto, Lifeson and Lee began writing songs in January 2006. During that time, Peart assumed the role of lyric writing while living in Southern California. In September 2007, Rush hired American producer Nick Raskulinecz to co-produce the album. The band went to Allaire Studios in Shokan, New York in November 2006 to record the bulk of the material. Taking five weeks to record, the sessions ended in December. On February 14, 2007, an announcement was made on the official Rush website that the title of the new album would be \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\". The first single, \"Far Cry\", was released to North American radio stations on March 12, 2007, and reached No. 2 on the Mediabase Mainstream and Radio and Records Charts.\nThe Rush website, newly redesigned on March 12, 2007, to support the new album, also announced that the band would embark on a tour to begin in the summer. \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\" was released on May 1, 2007, in North America, where it debuted at No. 3 on the \"Billboard\" 200 with approximately 93,000 units sold in its first week. It peaked at No. 3 in Canada and No. 13 in the UK, selling an estimated 611,000 copies worldwide. Coinciding with the beginning of Atlantic Ocean hurricane season, \"Spindrift\" was released as the official second radio single on June 1, 2007, while \"The Larger Bowl (A Pantoum)\" came out as a single on June 25, 2007. \"The Larger Bowl\" peaked within the top 20 of both the \"Billboard\" Mainstream Rock and Mediabase Mainstream charts, but \"Spindrift\" failed to appear on any commercial chart. The planned intercontinental tour in support of \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\" began on June 13, 2007, in Atlanta, coming to a close on October 29, 2007, at Hartwall Arena in Helsinki, Finland.\nThe 2008 portion of the \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\" tour began on April 11, 2008, in San Juan, Puerto Rico, at Jos\u00e9 Miguel Agrelot Coliseum, and concluded on July 24, 2008, in Noblesville, Indiana at the Verizon Wireless Music Center. On April 15, 2008, the band released \"Snakes &amp; Arrows Live\", a double live album documenting the first leg of the tour, recorded at the Ahoy arena in Rotterdam, Netherlands on October 16 and 17, 2007. A DVD and Blu-ray recording of the same concerts was released on November 24, 2008. As Rush neared the conclusion of the \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\" tour, they announced their first appearance on American television in over 30 years. They appeared on \"The Colbert Report\" on July 16, 2008 and were interviewed by Stephen Colbert; they performed \"Tom Sawyer\". Riding what film critic Manohla Dargis called a \"pop cultural wave\", the band appeared as themselves in the 2009 comedy film \"I Love You, Man\".\n2009\u20132013: Time Machine Tour and \"Clockwork Angels\".\nOn February 16, 2009, Lifeson remarked that the band might begin working on a new album in the fall of 2009, with Nick Raskulinecz again producing. In November 2009, Lee, Lifeson and Peart were awarded the International Achievement Award at the annual SOCAN Awards in Toronto. On March 19, 2010, the CBC posted a video interview with Lee and Lifeson in which they discussed Rush's induction into the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame on March 28, 2010, at the Toronto Centre for the Arts' George Weston Recital Hall. The band was recognized for the songs \"Limelight\", \"Closer to the Heart\", \"The Spirit of Radio\", \"Tom Sawyer\" and \"Subdivisions\". In addition to discussing their induction, Lee and Lifeson touched on future material, with Lee saying, \"Just about a month and a half ago we had no songs. And now we've been writing, and now we've got about 6 songs that we just love...\" On March 26, 2010, in an interview with The Globe and Mail, Lifeson remarked that there was even the potential for two supporting tours. Soon afterwards, Peart confirmed that Raskulinecz had returned as co-producer.\nIn April 2010, Rush recorded \"Caravan\" and \"BU2B\", two new songs to be featured on the band's then-upcoming studio album \"Clockwork Angels,\" at Blackbird Studios in Nashville with Raskulinecz. \"Caravan\" and \"BU2B\" were released together on June 1, 2010, and made available for digital download. The Time Machine Tour's first leg began on June 29 in Albuquerque, New Mexico and finished on October 17 in Santiago, Chile, at the National Stadium. It featured the album \"Moving Pictures\" played in its entirety, as well as \"Caravan\" and \"BU2B\". It was suggested that Rush would return to the studio after the completion of the Time Machine Tour with plans to release \"Clockwork Angels\" in 2011. \nHowever, Rush announced on November 19, 2010, that they would be extending the Time Machine Tour. The second leg began on March 30, 2011, in Fort Lauderdale, Florida and ended on July 2, 2011, in Seattle. On November 8, 2011, the band released \"\", a concert DVD, Blu-ray and double CD documenting the April 15, 2011, concert at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland, Ohio. After the tour's second leg was finished, Rush entered Revolution Recording studios in Toronto finishing the recording of \"Clockwork Angels.\" The second single, \"Headlong Flight\", was released on April 19, 2012. Peart and author Kevin J. Anderson collaborated on a novelization of \"Clockwork Angels\" which was released in September 2012.\n\"Clockwork Angels\" was released in the U.S. and Canada on June 12, 2012, reaching No. 1 in Canada, No. 2 in the US, No. 21 in the UK and entering the Top 10 in most of Rush's traditional northern European markets. The supporting Clockwork Angels Tour began on September 7, 2012, with performances on November 25 in Phoenix and November 28 in Dallas, recorded to make a live CD/DVD/Blu-ray which was released on November 19, 2013. During Rush's European leg of the \"Clockwork Angels Tour\", the June 8, 2013, show at the Sweden Rock Festival was the group's first festival appearance in 30 years. On August 31, 2011, Rush switched their American distribution from Atlantic Records to the Warner Brothers majority-owned metal label Roadrunner Records. Roadrunner handled American distribution of \"Time Machine 2011: Live in Cleveland\" and \"Clockwork Angels\". Anthem/Universal Music would continue to release their music in Canada. On April 18, 2013, Rush were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, Ohio.\n2013\u20132020: R40 Tour, disbandment and Peart's death.\nOn November 18, 2013, Lifeson said that the band would take a year off after the completion of the world tour, in support of \"Clockwork Angels\". \"We've committed to taking about a year off\", Lifeson said. \"We all agreed when we finished this [\"Clockwork Angels\"] tour [in early August], we were going to take this time off and we weren't going to talk about band stuff or make any plans. We committed to a year, so that's going to take us through to the end of next summer, for sure. That's the minimum. We haven't stopped or quit. Right now we're just relaxing. We're taking it easy and just enjoying our current employment.\"\nIn September 2014, the \"Rush R40\" box set was announced to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the release of the band's self-titled debut album. It included five previously released live video albums, and various previously unreleased footage from across the band's career. On January 22, 2015, the band announced the Rush R40 Tour, celebrating the 40th anniversary of Peart's membership in the band. The tour started on May 8 in Tulsa, Oklahoma, and wrapped up on August 1 in Los Angeles.\nOn April 29, 2015, Lifeson said in an interview that R40 might be the final large-scale Rush tour due to his psoriatic arthritis and Peart's chronic tendinitis. He noted that it did not necessarily mean an end to the band, suggesting the possibility of smaller tours and limited performances. He said that he wanted to work on soundtracks with Lee. On December 7, 2015, Peart stated in an interview that he was retiring. The following day, Lee insisted that Peart's remarks had been taken out of context, and suggested he was \"simply taking a break\". Lifeson confirmed in 2016 that the R40 tour was the band's last large-scale tour. The band's latest documentary, \"Time Stand Still\", was announced in November 2016.\nOn January 16, 2018, Lifeson told \"The Globe and Mail\" that it was unlikely that Rush would play any more shows or record new material. He said, \"We have no plans to tour or record anymore. We're basically done. After 41 years, we felt it was enough.\" In October 2018, \"Rolling Stone\" published an interview with Lee, who said, \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I'd say I can't really tell you much other than that there are zero plans to tour again. As I said earlier, we're very close and talk all the time, but we don't talk about work. We're friends, and we talk about life as friends. I can't really tell you more than that, I'm afraid. I would say there's no chance of seeing Rush on tour again as Alex, Geddy, Neil. But would you see one of us or two of us or three of us? That's possible.\nOn January 7, 2020, Peart died at the age of 67 after a 3\u00bd-year battle with glioblastoma, a type of brain cancer. In 2021, Lee confirmed to \"Rolling Stone\" that Rush was \"over\" and expressed the impossibility of the band continuing without Peart: \"That's finished, right? That's over. I still am very proud of what we did. I don't know what I will do again in music... I'm sure Al doesn't, whether its together, apart, or whatever. But the music of Rush is always part of us... I would never hesitate to play one of those songs in the right context. But at the same time, you have to give respect to what the three of us with Neil did together.\"\n2021\u20132025: Post-Rush activities.\nIn a January 2021 interview with Make Weird Music, Lifeson revealed that he and Lee were talking of working together on new music, \"We're both eager to get back together and kind of get back into that thing that we've done since we were 14 years old that we love to do... we work really, really well together. So we'll see what happens with that.\" Lifeson reiterated the status of Rush and the possibility of continuing to work with Lee in a June 2021 interview with Eddie Trunk: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"There's no way Rush will ever exist again because Neil's not here to be a part of it... that's not to say that we can't do other things and we can't do things that benefit our communities and all of that. I have lots of plans for that sort of thing that don't necessarily include Geddy. I get asked this all the time\u2014are we gonna do this, or are we gonna do that? Who knows? All I know is we still love each other and we're still very, very good friends, and we always will be.\"\nIn August 2022, Lee and Lifeson returned to the stage at the \"South Park\" 25th anniversary concert at Red Rocks Amphitheatre, with \"South Park\"'s co-creator Matt Stone on drums to perform \"Closer to the Heart\" alongside the members of Primus, their first performance since the death of Peart. In September 2022, Lee and Lifeson performed at the London Taylor Hawkins tribute concert with Dave Grohl and Omar Hakim on drums. They performed \"2112: Overture\", \"Working Man\", and \"YYZ\", the latter of which was Hawkins' favourite Rush song. Later in September 2022, Lee and Lifeson played the same set at the second Taylor Hawkins Tribute show in Los Angeles. Grohl was the drummer again on \"2112\", Chad Smith of the Red Hot Chili Peppers joined them for \"Working Man\", and Danny Carey from Tool played drums for \"YYZ\". Those appearances fuelled speculation over a possible Rush reunion, with Paul McCartney (who attended the Hawkins tribute shows) urging Lee and Lifeson to tour again, and Smith commenting, \"Those guys are so happy to be playing again... They were part of the show. They loved it and enjoyed the hell out of it. Those guys miss playing. They couldn't play anymore, Neil couldn't do it anymore, but they still want to play.\"\nLee told \"The Washington Post\" in November 2023 that he would not rule out performing with Lifeson again as Rush, saying, \"It was nice to know that if we decide to go out, Alex and I, whether we went out as part of a new thing, or whether we just wanted to go out and play Rush as Rush, we could do that now.\" When asked in December 2023 by \"CBS News Sunday Morning\" if he and Lifeson had talked about continuing as Rush with a new drummer, Lee said, \"Have we talked about it? Yeah. It's not impossible, but at this point, I can't guarantee it.\" Lifeson then expressed optimism about the band's future, stating that, \"It's just not in our DNA to stop.\" Lifeson later said in a January 2024 interview that he was no longer interested in touring, citing arthritis and expressing doubt that he could perform as he did years ago. In May 2024, Lifeson said that he and Lee were playing songs together, but continued to rule out the possibility of ever going back on tour. He declared that he was \"proud of the fact\" that Rush \"was over when it was over.\" Also in May 2024, Lee and Lifeson appeared together onstage at a Gordon Lightfoot tribute concert at Massey Hall in Toronto, where they joined Blue Rodeo performing Lightfoot's \"The Way I Feel\".\nAn anthology box set, titled \"Rush 50\" was released on March 21, 2025. In addition to tracks from all of their studio albums, the box set contains live tracks dating back to 1974 through the band's final show in 2015, and also marked the first time that their 1973 debut single \"Not Fade Away\" and its B-side \"You Can't Fight It\" were made available on any other format. Upon the release of \"Rush 50\", concerns emerged over the authenticity and artistic value of the artwork, as Rush fans widely speculated art director Hugh Syme may have created the \"Rush 50\" artwork using generative artificial intelligence tools.\n2025\u2013present: Reunion with new line-up.\nOn October 6, 2025, Lee and Lifeson announced that they were reforming Rush for a tour called Fifty Something which is scheduled from June to December 2026, with Anika Nilles on drums. Lee suggested that the tour will include up to two more musicians, including a backing keyboardist. Lee and Lifeson also stated that 35 songs will be performed on the tour, with the intention of varying their set list at each show. When asked in an interview with \"The Globe and Mail\" if the tour will include dates outside of North America, Lee said, \"We're wrestling with extending the tour into 2027. I really don't know. We'll see how that all shakes down.\"\nMusical style and influences.\nRush's music has been described as progressive rock, hard rock, and heavy metal. The band's musical style changed substantially over the years. Its debut album was strongly influenced by British blues-based hard rock and heavy metal: an amalgam of sounds and styles from such rock bands including the Beatles, Black Sabbath, the Who, Cream, and Led Zeppelin. Rush became increasingly influenced by bands of the British progressive rock movement of the mid-1970s, especially Pink Floyd, Genesis, Yes, and Jethro Tull. In the tradition of progressive rock, Rush wrote extended songs with irregular and shifting mood, timbre, and metre, combined with lyrics influenced by Ayn Rand. In the 1980s, Rush merged their sound with trends of this period experimenting with new wave, reggae, and pop rock. The era included the band's most extensive use of instruments such as synthesizers, sequencers, and electronic percussion. In the early 1990s, the band transformed their style once again, returning to a more grounded hard rock style, and simultaneously harmonize with the alternative rock movement. The songs released during this period have been described as \"hooky and radio-friendly.\" The band continued to experiment with fusing heavy metal and progressive rock in \"new ways\" during its latter years.\nReputation and legacy.\nMore than 40 years of activity provided Rush with the opportunity for musical diversity across their discography. As with many bands known for experimentation, changes inevitably resulted in dissent among critics and fans. The bulk of the band's music included synthetic instruments and this has been a source of contention among fans and critics, especially the band's heavy usage of synthesizers and keyboards during the 1980s, particularly on \"Grace Under Pressure\", \"Power Windows\", and \"Hold Your Fire\".\nThe members of Rush have noted that people \"either love Rush or hate Rush\", resulting in strong detractors and an intensely loyal fan base. In 1979, \"The Rolling Stone Record Guide\" called them \"the power boogie band for the \"16\" magazine graduating class\". A July 2008 \"Rolling Stone\" article said, \"Rush fans are the Trekkies/trekkers of rock\". Rush have been cited as an influence by artists including Alice in Chains, Anthrax, Dream Theater, Exciter, Fates Warning, Fishbone, Foo Fighters, Iron Maiden, Jane's Addiction, Living Colour, Manic Street Preachers, Megadeth, Meshuggah, Metallica, No Doubt, Pearl Jam, the Pixies, Primus, Queensr\u00ffche, Rage Against the Machine, the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Sepultura, the Smashing Pumpkins, Elliott Smith, Soundgarden, Stone Temple Pilots, System of a Down, Testament, Tool, and Steven Wilson. Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails said in the 2010 documentary \"\" that Rush is one of his favourite bands, and he has also cited the band's early 1980s period in particular as a major influence on him in regard to incorporating keyboards and synthesizers into hard rock.\nRush were eligible for nomination into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame beginning in 1998. The band were nominated for entry in 2012, and their induction was announced on December 11, 2012. A reason for their previous exclusion may have been their genre. \"USA Today\" writer Edna Gundersen criticized the Hall of Fame for excluding some genres, including progressive rock. Supporters cited the band's accomplishments, including longevity, proficiency, and influence, as well as commercial sales figures and RIAA certifications. In the years before induction, Lifeson expressed his indifference toward the perceived slight, saying, \"I couldn't care less. Look who's up for induction; it's a joke\".\nOn April 24, 2010, the documentary \"Rush: Beyond the Lighted Stage\", directed by Scot McFadyen and Sam Dunn, premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival. It received the Tribeca Film Festival Audience Award. The film was nominated for Best Long Form Music Video at the 53rd Grammy Awards, losing to \"When You're Strange\", a documentary about The Doors. A limited theatrical run began on June 10, 2010, and the film was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the U.S. and Canada on June 29, 2010. The film explores the band's influence on popular music and the reasons why that influence has been underrepresented over the years. That is done via interviews with popular musicians, music industry professionals, and the band members themselves.\nOn June 25, 2010, Rush received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6752 Hollywood Boulevard. Critical acclaim continued to mount for Rush in 2010 when, on September 28, \"Classic Rock\" announced that Rush would receive 2010's Living Legends award at the Marshall Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards in the UK. The award was presented on November 10, 2010. On September 29, Billboard.com announced that Rush would also receive the 2010 Legends of Live award for significant and lasting contributions to live music and the art of performing live and reaching fans through the concert experience. The award was presented at the Billboard Live Music Awards on November 4, 2010. In 2013, the Canadian government honoured Rush with a first class \"permanent\" postage stamp, the equivalent of a \"Forever\" stamp in the US, featuring the iconic \"Starman\" Rush logo.\nThe band members were made Officers of the Order of Canada in 1996. In May 2012, the band received the Governor General's Performing Arts Award for Lifetime Artistic Achievement at a ceremony at Rideau Hall, followed the next by a gala at the National Arts Centre celebrating the award recipients. In 2017, the band members had three new microbe species named in their honour.\nGeddy Lee.\nGeddy Lee's high-register vocal style has always been a signature of the band\u2013and sometimes a focal point for criticism, especially during the early years of Rush's career when his vocals were high-pitched, with a strong likeness to other singers like Robert Plant of Led Zeppelin. A review in \"The New York Times\" opined that Lee's voice \"suggests a munchkin giving a sermon\". Although his voice has softened, it is often described as a \"wail\". His instrumental abilities, on the other hand are rarely criticized. He has cited Jeff Berlin, Jack Casady, John Entwistle, Jack Bruce and Chris Squire as being the bassists who had the biggest impact on his playing style. Lee's style, technique, and ability on the bass guitar have been influential to rock and heavy metal musicians, inspiring players including Steve Harris, John Myung, Les Claypool, and Cliff Burton. Lee is able to operate various pieces of instrumentation simultaneously during concerts, most evidently when he plays bass and keyboards, sings, and triggers foot pedals as in the song \"Tom Sawyer\".\nAlex Lifeson.\nLifeson as a guitarist is best known for his signature riffing, electronic effects and processing, unorthodox chord structures, and a copious arsenal of equipment used over the years.\nDuring his adolescent years, he was influenced by Jimi Hendrix, Pete Townshend, Jeff Beck, Eric Clapton and Jimmy Page. Lifeson incorporated touches of Spanish and classical music into Rush's sound during the 1970s, reflecting his interest in progressive rock guitarists like Steve Hackett and Steve Howe. Adapting to Lee's expanding use of synthesizers in the 1980s, Lifeson took inspiration from guitarists like Allan Holdsworth, Andy Summers of The Police and The Edge of U2, who gave him models for rethinking the guitar's role in Rush's music. Lifeson's guitar returned to the forefront in the 1990s, and especially on \"Vapor Trails\" (2002). During live performances, he was responsible for cuing various guitar effects, the use of bass-pedal synthesizers and backing vocals. He occasionally has played keyboard synthesizers live.\nNeil Peart.\nPeart has been voted the greatest rock drummer by music fans, critics and fellow musicians, according to Drummerworld. He was also regarded as one of the finest practitioners of the in-concert drum solo. Initially inspired by Keith Moon, Peart absorbed the influence of other rock drummers from the 1960s and 1970s such as Ginger Baker, Carmine Appice, and John Bonham. Incorporation of unusual instruments (for rock drummers of the time) such as the glockenspiel and tubular bells, along with several standard kit elements, helped create a highly varied setup. Continually modified, Peart's drumkit offered an enormous array of percussion instruments for sonic diversity. For two decades Peart honed his technique; each new Rush album introduced an expanded percussive vocabulary. In the 1990s, he reinvented his style with the help of drum coach Freddie Gruber.\nPeart served as Rush's primary lyricist, attracting attention over the years for his eclectic style. During the band's early years, Peart's lyrics were largely fantasy/science fiction-focused, though after 1980 he focused more on social, emotional, and humanitarian issues. In 2007, he was placed second on \"Blender\" magazine's list of the \"40 Worst Lyricists In Rock\". In contrast, AllMusic has called Peart \"one of rock's most accomplished lyricists\", Gibson.com describes Rush's lyrics as \"great\", and others have called the lyrics \"brilliant\".\nSales.\nRush has released 24 gold records and 14 platinum records (including three multi-platinum), placing them fifth behind the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Kiss and Aerosmith for the most consecutive gold or platinum studio albums by a rock band in the United States. As of 2005, Rush had sold about 25 million copies of their albums in the US (ranked 88th among recording acts) and 40 million worldwide. As of April 2021, \"Moving Pictures\" was the band's highest-selling album at over 5 million units, having been certified 5\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA.\nDespite dropping out of the public eye for five years after the gold-selling \"Test for Echo\" (which peaked at No. 5 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart) and the band being relegated almost solely to classic rock stations in the US, \"Vapor Trails\" reached No. 6 on the \"Billboard\" 200 in its first week of release in 2002, with 108,000 copies sold. It has sold about 343,000 units to date. The subsequent \"Vapor Trails\" tour grossed over $24 million and included the largest audience ever to see a headlining Rush show: 60,000 fans in S\u00e3o Paulo, Brazil.\nRush's triple-CD live album, \"Rush in Rio\" (2003), was certified gold, marking the fourth decade in which a Rush album had been released and certified at least gold. In 2004, \"Feedback\" cracked the top 20 on the \"Billboard\" 200 and received radio airplay. The band's 2007 album, \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\", debuted at No. 3 (just one position shy of Rush's highest-peaking albums, \"Counterparts\" (1993) and \"Clockwork Angels\" (2012), which both debuted at No. 2) on the \"Billboard\" 200, selling about 93,000 in its first week of release. That marks the 13th Rush studio album to appear in the Top 20 and the band's 27th album to appear on the chart. The album also debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard's Top Rock Albums chart, and, when the album was released on the MVI format a month later, peaked at No. 1 on the Top Internet Albums chart.\nThe tours in support of \"Snakes &amp; Arrows\" in 2007 and 2008 accrued $21 million and $18.3 million respectively, earning Rush the No. 6 and 8 spots among the summers' rock concerts.\nLive performances.\nThe members of Rush shared a strong work ethic, desiring to accurately recreate songs from their albums when playing live performances. To achieve this goal, beginning in the late 1980s, Rush included a capacious rack of digital samplers in their concert equipment to recreate the sounds of non-traditional instruments, accompaniments, vocal harmonies, and other sound \"events\" in real time to match the sounds on the studio versions of the songs. In live performances, the band members shared duties throughout most songs. Each member had one or more MIDI controllers, which were loaded with different sounds for each song, and they used available limbs to trigger the sounds while simultaneously playing their primary instrument(s). With this technology the group was able to present their arrangements in a live setting with the level of complexity and fidelity fans had come to expect, and without the need to resort to the use of backing tracks or employing an additional band member during their initial run. The members' coordinated use of pedal keyboards and other electronic triggers to \"play\" sampled instruments and audio events was subtly visible in their live performances, especially on the R30: 30th Anniversary World Tour, their 2005 concert DVD.\nA staple of Rush's concerts was Neil Peart's drum solos, which included a basic framework of routines connected by sections of improvisation, making each performance unique. Each successive tour saw his solos become more advanced, with some routines dropped in favour of newer, more complex ones. Since the mid-1980s, Peart used MIDI trigger pads to elicit sounds sampled from various pieces of acoustic percussion that would otherwise consume far too much stage area, such as a marimba, harp, temple blocks, triangles, glockenspiel, orchestra bells, tubular bells, and vibraslap, as well as other, more esoteric percussion.\nOne prominent feature of Rush's concerts were props on stage, at one point called \"diversions\". These props have included washing machines, vintage popcorn poppers, animations, and inflatable rabbits emerging from giant hats behind the band. Starting in the mid-'90s, the props often took Lee's side of the stage (stage left) as a way to balance out the amp stacks on Lifeson's side (stage right) when Lee opted to use a venue's house system instead of amps.\nPhilanthropy.\nRush actively participated in philanthropic causes. The band were one of several hometown favourites to play Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto, also dubbed SARStock, at Downsview Park in Toronto on July 30, 2003, with an attendance of over half a million people. The concert benefited the Toronto economy after the SARS outbreaks earlier in the year. The band has continued to be interested in promoting human rights. They donated $100,000 to the Canadian Museum for Human Rights after a concert they held in Winnipeg, Manitoba on May 24, 2008.\nOn July 24, 2013, Rush performed a benefit concert in Red Deer, Alberta at the ENMAX Centrium, with all proceeds going to the Canadian Red Cross to help victims of the 2013 flooding that devastated many regions of southern Alberta. The original venue for the show, the Scotiabank Saddledome in Calgary was heavily damaged from the flooding and was unavailable for the concert date as originally planned.\nIndividual members of Rush have also been a part of philanthropic causes. Hughes &amp; Kettner, zenTera, and TriAmp electronics have been endorsed and used by Lifeson for many years. A custom signature amplifier was engineered by Lifeson and released in April 2005 with the stipulation that UNICEF receive a $50 donation for every Alex Lifeson Signature TriAmp sold. Lee, a longtime fan of baseball, donated 200 baseballs signed by famous Negro league players including Willie Mays, Hank Aaron, and Josh Gibson, to the Negro Leagues Baseball Museum in Kansas City, Missouri in June 2008. In late 2009, Lee and Lifeson launched an auction for their initiative \"Grapes Under Pressure\", in support of \"Grapes for Humanity\", a charity. The auction consisted of items from the band such as autographed guitars, cymbals and basses. There were autographs by band members from Depeche Mode, Tool, the Fray, Judas Priest, Pearl Jam and other bands in addition to a rare Epiphone guitar with signatures from Ricky, Julian, and Bubbles from \"Trailer Park Boys\". The band is featured on the album \"Songs for Tibet\", appearing with other celebrities as an initiative to support Tibet and Dalai Lama Tenzin Gyatso. The album, made downloadable on August 5, 2008, via iTunes, was released commercially on August 12, 2008.\nRush have also been big supporters of Little Kids Rock, a nonprofit which works to restore and revitalize music education programs in disadvantaged US public schools. Musician's Friend, Sabian, and Rush teamed to help Little Kids Rock provide percussion to public schools nationwide. They donated $500 of the proceeds from each Neil Peart Paragon Cymbal Pack sold, each of which came with a free splash cymbal personally autographed by Peart. The marketing initiative raised over $50,000 for Little Kids Rock.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConcert tours.\nSources: Rush.com and \"Rush: Wandering the Face of the Earth\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTrivia.\nIn his acceptance speech on the occasion of Rush's induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 18 April 2013, Alex Lifeson spontaneously recited his prepared text in \"blah blah blah\" speech, annoying his band fellows and confusing the audience.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "25433", "revid": "44791718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25433", "title": "Ronald Reagan", "text": "President of the United States from 1981 to 1989\nRonald Wilson Reagan (February 6, 1911 \u2013 June 5, 2004) was an American politician and actor who served as the 40th president of the United States from 1981 to 1989. A member of the Republican Party, he became an important figure in the American conservative movement. The period encompassing his presidency is known as the Reagan era.\nBorn in Tampico, Illinois, Reagan graduated from Eureka College in 1932 and was hired the next year as a sports broadcaster in Iowa. In 1937, he moved to California where he became a well-known film actor. During his acting career, Reagan was president of the Screen Actors Guild twice from 1947 to 1952 and from 1959 to 1960. In the 1950s, he hosted \"General Electric Theater\" and worked as a motivational speaker for General Electric. During the 1964 presidential election, Reagan's \"A Time for Choosing\" speech launched his rise as a leading conservative figure. After being elected governor of California in 1966, he raised state taxes, turned the state budget deficit into a surplus and implemented crackdowns on university protests. Following his loss to Gerald Ford in the 1976 Republican Party presidential primaries, Reagan won the Republican Party's nomination and then obtained a landslide victory over President Jimmy Carter in the 1980 presidential election.\nIn his first term as president, Reagan began implementing \"Reaganomics\", a policy involving economic deregulation and cuts in both taxes and government spending during a period of stagflation. On the world stage, he escalated the arms race, increased military spending, transitioned Cold War policy away from \"d\u00e9tente\", and ordered the 1983 invasion of Grenada. Reagan's first term was also notable for his survival of an assassination attempt, a well-publicized fight with public-sector labor unions, an expansion of the war on drugs, and his slow response to the AIDS epidemic. In the 1984 presidential election, Reagan was elected to a second term upon defeating former vice president Walter Mondale in one of the largest landslide victories in American history. Foreign affairs dominated Reagan's second term, including the 1986 bombing of Libya, the secret and illegal sale of arms to Iran to fund the Contras, and engaging in negotiations with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, which culminated in the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.\nReagan left the presidency in 1989 with the American economy having seen a significant reduction of inflation, a fall in the unemployment rate, and the longest peacetime economic expansion in U.S. history at that time; the national debt had nearly tripled since 1981 as a result of his tax cuts and increased military spending outweighing his cuts to domestic discretionary spending. Reagan's foreign policies also contributed to the end of the Cold War. Though he planned an active post-presidency, it was hindered after he was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in 1994, and his physical and mental capacities gradually deteriorated, leading to his death in 2004. His tenure constituted a realignment toward conservative policies in the United States, and he is often considered an icon of American conservatism. Historical rankings of U.S. presidents have typically placed Reagan in the middle to upper tier, and his post-presidential approval ratings by the general public are usually high.\nEarly life.\nRonald Wilson Reagan was born on February 6, 1911, in an apartment in Tampico, Illinois, as the younger son of Nelle Clyde Wilson and Jack Reagan. Nelle was committed to the Disciples of Christ, which believed in the Social Gospel. She led prayer meetings and ran mid-week prayers at her church when the pastor was out of town. Reagan credited her spiritual influence and he became a Christian. According to American political figure Stephen Vaughn, Reagan's values came from his pastor, and the First Christian Church's religious, economic and social positions \"coincided with the words, if not the beliefs of the latter-day Reagan\". Jack focused on making money to take care of the family, but this was complicated by his alcoholism. Reagan had an older brother, Neil. The family lived in Chicago, Galesburg, and Monmouth before returning to Tampico. In 1920, they settled in Dixon, Illinois, living in a house near the H. C. Pitney Variety Store Building.\nReagan attended Dixon High School, where he developed interests in drama and football. His first job was as a lifeguard at the Rock River in Lowell Park.\nIn 1928, Reagan began attending Eureka College, which Nelle approved because of its affiliation with the Disciples of Christ. He was a mediocre student who participated in cheerleading, sports, drama, and campus politics. He became student body president and joined a student strike that resulted in the college president's resignation. Reagan was initiated as a member of Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity and served as president of the local chapter. Reagan played at the guard position for the 1930 and 1931 Eureka Red Devils football teams and recalled a time when two Black teammates were refused service at a segregated hotel; he invited them to his parents' home nearby in Dixon and his parents welcomed them. At the time, his parents' stance on racial questions was unusually progressive in Dixon. Reagan himself had grown up with very few Black Americans and was oblivious to racial discrimination.\nEntertainment career.\nRadio and film.\nAfter obtaining a Bachelor of Arts in economics and sociology from Eureka College in 1932, Reagan took a job in Davenport, Iowa, as a sports broadcaster for four football games in the Big Ten Conference. He then worked for WHO radio in Des Moines as a broadcaster for the Chicago Cubs. His specialty was creating play-by-play accounts of games using only basic descriptions that the station received by wire as the games were in progress. Simultaneously, he often expressed his opposition to racism. In 1936, while traveling with the Cubs to their spring training in California, Reagan took a screen test that led to a seven-year contract with Warner Bros.\nReagan arrived at Hollywood in 1937, debuting in \"Love Is on the Air\" (1937). Using a simple and direct approach to acting and following his directors' instructions, he made thirty films, mostly B films, before beginning military service in April 1942. He broke out of these types of films by portraying George Gipp in \"Knute Rockne, All American\" (1940), which would be rejuvenated when reporters called Reagan \"the Gipper\" while he campaigned for president. Reagan starred in \"Kings Row\" (1942) as a leg amputee; this performance was considered his best by many critics. Reagan became a star, with Gallup polls placing him \"in the top 100 stars\" from 1941 to 1942.\nWorld War II interrupted the movie stardom that Reagan would never be able to achieve again as Warner Bros. became uncertain about his ability to generate ticket sales. Reagan, who had a limited acting range, was dissatisfied with the roles he received. Lew Wasserman renegotiated his contract with his studio, allowing him to also make films with Universal Pictures, Paramount Pictures, and RKO Pictures as a freelancer. Reagan appeared in multiple western films, something that had been denied to him while working at Warner Bros. In 1952, he ended his relationship with Warner Bros., but went on to appear in a total of 53 films, his last being \"The Killers\" (1964).\nMilitary service.\nIn April 1937, Reagan enlisted in the United States Army Reserve. He was assigned as a private in Des Moines' 322nd Cavalry Regiment and reassigned to second lieutenant in the Officers Reserve Corps. He later became a part of the 323rd Cavalry Regiment in California. As relations between the United States and Japan worsened, Reagan was ordered for active duty while he was filming \"Kings Row\". Wasserman and Warner Bros. lawyers successfully sent draft deferments to complete the film in October 1941. However, to avoid accusations of Reagan being a draft dodger, the studio let him go in April 1942.\nReagan reported for duty with severe near-sightedness. His first assignment was at Fort Mason as a liaison officer, a role that allowed him to transfer to the United States Army Air Forces (AAF). Reagan became an AAF public relations officer and was assigned to the 18th AAF Base Unit in Culver City where he felt that it was \"impossible to remove an incompetent or lazy worker\" due to what he felt was \"the incompetence, the delays, and inefficiencies\" of the federal bureaucracy. Despite this, Reagan participated in the Provisional Task Force Show Unit in Burbank and continued to make theatrical films. He was also ordered to temporary duty in New York City to participate in the sixth War Loan Drive before being reassigned to Fort MacArthur until his discharge on December 9, 1945, as a captain. Throughout his military service, Reagan produced over 400 training films.\nScreen Actors Guild presidency.\nWhen Robert Montgomery resigned as president of the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) on March 10, 1947, Reagan was elected to that position in a special election. Reagan's first tenure saw various labor\u2013management disputes, the Hollywood blacklist, and the Taft\u2013Hartley Act's implementation. Reagan aligned the union with the studios against the Conference of Studio Unions in the aftermath of the Hollywood Black Friday strike. In \"The Invisible Bridge\", Rick Perlstein wrote that Reagan's actions lent legitimacy to the studio's efforts to crush the more radical union by giving liberals in SAG who did not want to strike \"a story that turned them into moral innocents instead of scabs\". On April 10, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) interviewed Reagan and he provided the names of actors whom he believed to be communist sympathizers. During a House Un-American Activities Committee hearing, Reagan testified that some guild members were associated with the Communist Party and that he was well-informed about a \"jurisdictional strike\". When asked if he was aware of communist efforts within the Screen Writers Guild, he called information about the efforts \"hearsay\". Reagan resigned as SAG president November 10, 1952, but remained on the board.\nThe SAG fought with film producers for the right to receive residual payments, and on November 16, 1959, the board elected Reagan SAG president for the second time. Reagan managed to secure payments for actors whose theatrical films had been released between 1948 and 1959 and subsequently televised. The producers were initially required to pay the actors fees, but they ultimately settled instead for providing pensions and paying residuals for films made after 1959. Reagan resigned from the SAG presidency on June 7, 1960, and also left the board.\nMarriages and children.\nIn January 1940, Reagan married Jane Wyman, his co-star in the 1938 film \"Brother Rat\". Together, they had two biological daughters: Maureen in 1941, and Christine in 1947 (born prematurely and died the following day). They adopted one son, Michael, in 1945. Wyman filed for divorce in June 1948. She was uninterested in politics, and occasionally recriminated, reconciled and separated with him. Although Reagan was unprepared, the divorce was finalized in July 1949. Reagan would remain close to his children. Later that year, Reagan met Nancy Davis after she contacted him in his capacity as the SAG president about her name appearing on a communist blacklist in Hollywood; she had been mistaken for another Nancy Davis. They married in March 1952, and had two children, Patti in October 1952, and Ron in May 1958.\nTelevision.\nReagan became the host of MCA Inc. television production \"General Electric Theater\" at Wasserman's recommendation. It featured multiple guest stars, and Ronald and Nancy Reagan, continuing to use her stage name Nancy Davis, acted together in three episodes. When asked how Reagan was able to recruit such stars to appear on the show during television's infancy, he replied, \"Good stories, top direction, production quality\". However, the viewership declined in the 1960s and the show was canceled in 1962. In 1965, Reagan became the host of another MCA production, \"Death Valley Days\".\nEarly political activities.\nReagan began his political career as a Democrat, viewing Franklin D. Roosevelt as \"a true hero\". He joined the American Veterans Committee and Hollywood Independent Citizens Committee of the Arts, Sciences and Professions (HICCASP), worked with the AFL\u2013CIO to fight right-to-work laws, and continued to speak out against racism when he was in Hollywood. In 1945, Reagan planned to lead an HICCASP anti-nuclear rally, but Warner Bros. prevented him from going. In 1946, he appeared in a radio program called \"Operation Terror\" to speak out against rising Ku Klux Klan activity, calling it a \"capably organized systematic campaign of fascist violence and intimidation and horror\". Reagan supported Harry S. Truman in the 1948 presidential election, and Helen Gahagan Douglas for the U.S. Senate in 1950. It was Reagan's belief that communism was a powerful backstage influence in Hollywood that led him to rally his friends against them.\nReagan began shifting to the right when he supported the presidential campaigns of Dwight D. Eisenhower in 1952 and Richard Nixon in 1960. When Reagan was contracted by General Electric (GE), he gave speeches to their employees. His speeches had a positive take on free markets. In 1961, Reagan adapted his speeches into another speech to criticize Medicare. In his view, its legislation would have meant \"the end of individual freedom in the United States\". In 1962, Reagan was dropped by GE, and he formally registered as a Republican.\nIn the 1964 U.S. presidential election, Reagan gave a speech for presidential contender Barry Goldwater that was eventually referred to as \"A Time for Choosing\". Reagan argued that the Founding Fathers \"knew that governments don't control things. And they knew when a government sets out to do that, it must use force and coercion to achieve its purpose\" and that \"We've been told increasingly that we must choose between left or right\". Even though the speech was not enough to turn around the faltering Goldwater campaign, it increased Reagan's profile among conservatives. David S. Broder and Stephen H. Hess called it \"the most successful national political debut since William Jennings Bryan electrified the 1896 Democratic convention with his famous 'Cross of Gold' address\".\n1966 California gubernatorial election.\nIn January 1966, Reagan announced his candidacy for the California governorship, repeating his stances on individual freedom and big government. When he met with black Republicans in March, he was criticized for opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Reagan responded that bigotry was not in his nature and later argued that certain provisions of the act infringed upon the rights of property owners. After the Supreme Court of California ruled that the initiative that repealed the Rumford Act was unconstitutional in May, he voiced his support for the act's repeal, but later preferred amending it. In the Republican primary, Reagan defeated George Christopher, a moderate Republican who William F. Buckley Jr. thought had painted Reagan as extreme.\nReagan's general election opponent, incumbent governor Pat Brown, attempted to label Reagan as an extremist. Reagan portrayed himself as a political outsider, and charged Brown as responsible for the Watts riots and lenient on crime. In numerous speeches, Reagan \"hit the Brown administration about high taxes, uncontrolled spending, the radicals at the University of California, Berkeley, and the need for accountability in government\". Meanwhile, many in the press perceived Reagan as \"monumentally ignorant of state issues\", though Lou Cannon said that Reagan benefited from an appearance he and Brown made on \"Meet the Press\" in September. Reagan won the governorship with 58% of the vote compared to Brown's 42%.\nCalifornia governorship (1967\u20131975).\nBrown had spent much of California's funds on new programs, prompting them to use accrual accounting to avoid raising taxes. Consequently, it generated a larger deficit, and Reagan called for reduced government spending and tax hikes to balance the budget. He worked with Jesse M. Unruh on securing tax increases and promising future property tax cuts. This caused some conservatives to accuse Reagan of betraying his principles. As a result, taxes on sales, banks, corporate profits, inheritances, liquor, and cigarettes jumped. Kevin Starr states Reagan \"gave Californians the biggest tax hike in their history\u2014and got away with it\". In the 1970 gubernatorial election, Unruh used Reagan's tax policy against him, saying it disproportionally favored the wealthy. Reagan countered that he was still committed to reducing property taxes. By 1973, the budget had a surplus, which Reagan preferred \"to give back to the people\".\nIn 1967, Reagan reacted to the Black Panther Party's strategy of copwatching by signing the Mulford Act to prohibit the public carrying of firearms. The act was California's most restrictive piece of gun control legislation, with critics saying that it was \"overreacting to the political activism of organizations such as the Black Panthers\". The act marked the beginning of both modern legislation and public attitude studies on gun control. Reagan also signed the 1967 Therapeutic Abortion Act that allowed abortions in the cases of rape and incest when a doctor determined the birth would impair the physical or mental health of the mother. He later expressed regret over signing it, saying that he was unaware of the mental health provision. He believed that doctors were interpreting the provision loosely, resulting in more abortions.\nAfter Reagan won the 1966 election, he and his advisors planned a run in the 1968 Republican presidential primaries. He ran as an unofficial candidate to cut into Nixon's southern support and be a compromise candidate if there were to be a brokered convention. He won California's delegates, but Nixon secured enough delegates for the nomination.\nReagan had previously been critical of former governor Brown and university administrators for tolerating student demonstrations in the city of Berkeley, making it a major theme in his campaigning. On February 5, 1969, Reagan declared a state of emergency in response to ongoing protests and violence at the University of California, Berkeley, and sent in the California Highway Patrol. In May 1969, these officers, along with local officers from Berkeley and Alameda county, clashed with protestors over a site known as the People's Park. One student was shot and killed while many police officers and two reporters were injured. Reagan then commanded the state National Guard troops to occupy Berkeley for seventeen days to subdue the protesters, allowing other students to attend class safely. In February 1970, violent protests broke out near the University of California, Santa Barbara, where he once again deployed the National Guard. On April 7, Reagan defended his policies regarding campus protests, saying, \"If it takes a bloodbath, let's get it over with. No more appeasement\".\nDuring his victorious reelection campaign in 1970, Reagan, remaining critical of government, promised to prioritize welfare reform. He was concerned that the programs were disincentivizing work and that the growing welfare rolls would lead to both an unbalanced budget and another big tax hike in 1972. At the same time, the Federal Reserve increased interest rates to combat inflation, putting the American economy in a mild recession. Reagan worked with Bob Moretti to tighten up the eligibility requirements so that the financially needy could continue receiving payments. This was only accomplished after Reagan softened his criticism of Nixon's Family Assistance Plan. Nixon then lifted regulations to shepherd California's experiment. In 1976, the Employment Development Department published a report suggesting that the experiment that ran from 1971 to 1974 was unsuccessful.\nReagan declined to run for the governorship in 1974 and it was won by Pat Brown's son, Jerry. Reagan's governorship, as professor Gary K. Clabaugh writes, saw public schools deteriorate due to his opposition to additional basic education funding. As for higher education, journalist William Trombley believed that the budget cuts Reagan enacted damaged Berkeley's student-faculty ratio and research. The homicide rate doubled and armed robbery rates rose by even more during Reagan's eight years, even with the many laws Reagan signed to try toughening criminal sentencing and reforming the criminal justice system. Reagan strongly supported capital punishment, but his efforts to enforce it were thwarted by \"People v. Anderson\" in 1972. According to his son, Michael, Reagan said that he regretted signing the Family Law Act that granted no-fault divorces.\nSeeking the presidency (1975\u20131981).\n1976 Republican primaries.\nInsufficiently conservative to Reagan and many other Republicans, President Gerald Ford suffered from multiple political and economic woes. Ford, running for president, was disappointed to hear him also run. Reagan was strongly critical of \"d\u00e9tente\" and Ford's policy of \"d\u00e9tente\" with the Soviet Union. He repeated \"A Time for Choosing\" around the country before announcing his campaign on November 20, 1975, when he discussed economic and social problems, and to a lesser extent, foreign affairs. Both candidates were determined to knock each other out early in the primaries, but Reagan would devastatingly lose the first five primaries beginning with New Hampshire, where he popularized the welfare queen narrative about Linda Taylor, exaggerating her misuse of welfare benefits and igniting voter resentment for welfare reform, but never overtly mentioning her name or race.\nIn Florida, Reagan used racially coded rhetoric to undermine Food Stamps, referring to recipients as \"strapping young buck[s]\", and attacked Ford for handing the Panama Canal to Panama's government, while Ford implied that Reagan would end Social Security. Then, in Illinois, Reagan again criticized Ford's policy and his secretary of state, Henry Kissinger. Losing the first five primaries prompted Reagan to desperately win North Carolina's by running a grassroots campaign and uniting with the Jesse Helms political machine that viciously attacked Ford. Reagan won an upset victory, convincing party delegates that Ford's nomination was no longer guaranteed. Reagan won subsequent victories in Texas, Alabama, Georgia, and Indiana with his attacks on social programs, opposition to forced busing to achieve school desegregation, and repeated criticisms of Ford and Kissinger's policies, including \"d\u00e9tente\".\nThe result was a seesaw battle for the 1,130 delegates required for their party's nomination that neither would reach before the Kansas City convention in August and Ford replacing mentions of \"d\u00e9tente\" with Reagan's preferred phrase, \"peace through strength\". Reagan took John Sears' advice of choosing liberal Richard Schweiker as his running mate, hoping to pry loose of delegates from Pennsylvania and other states, and distract Ford. Instead, conservatives were left alienated, and Ford picked up the remaining uncommitted delegates, earning 1,187 to Reagan's 1,070.\nAfter giving his acceptance speech, Ford invited Reagan to address the convention. Reagan gave an eloquent and stirring speech that overshadowed Ford's own acceptance address, despite being little more than five minutes long. Some delegates later stated that they left the convention wondering if they had voted for the wrong candidate. A contemporary media account stated that if a motion to reconsider the nomination had been in order, it might have passed.\nIn 1977, Ford told Cannon that Reagan's primary challenge contributed to his own narrow loss to Democrat Jimmy Carter in the 1976 presidential election.\n1980 election.\nReagan emerged as a vocal critic of President Carter in 1977. The Panama Canal Treaty's signing, the 1979 oil crisis, and rise in the interest, inflation and unemployment rates helped set up his 1980 presidential campaign, which he announced on November 13, 1979 with an indictment of the federal government. His announcement stressed his fundamental principles of tax cuts to stimulate the economy and having both a small government and a strong national defense, since he believed the United States was behind the Soviet Union militarily. Heading into 1980, his age became an issue among the press, and the United States was in a severe recession.\nIn the primaries, Reagan unexpectedly lost the Iowa caucus to George H. W. Bush. Three days before the New Hampshire primary, the Reagan and Bush campaigns agreed to a one-on-one debate sponsored by \"The Telegraph\" at Nashua, New Hampshire, but hours before the debate, the Reagan campaign invited other candidates including Bob Dole, John B. Anderson, Howard Baker and Phil Crane. Debate moderator Jon Breen denied seats to the other candidates, asserting that \"The Telegraph\" would violate federal campaign contribution laws if it sponsored the debate and changed the ground rules hours before the debate. As a result, the Reagan campaign agreed to pay for the debate. Reagan said that as he was funding the debate, he could decide who would debate. During the debate, when Breen was laying out the ground rules and attempting to ask the first question, Reagan interrupted in protest to make an introductory statement and wanted other candidates to be included before the debate began. The moderator asked Bob Malloy, the volume operator, to mute Reagan's microphone. After Breen repeated his demand to Malloy, Reagan furiously replied, \"I am paying for this microphone, Mr. Green! [\"sic\"]\". This turned out to be the turning point of the debate and the primary race. Ultimately, the four additional candidates left, and the debate continued between Reagan and Bush. Reagan's polling numbers improved, and he won the New Hampshire primary by more than 39,000 votes. Soon thereafter, Reagan's opponents began dropping out of the primaries, including Anderson, who left the party to become an independent candidate. Reagan easily captured the presidential nomination and chose Bush as his running mate at the Detroit convention in July.\nThe general election pitted Reagan against Carter amid the multitude of domestic concerns and ongoing Iran hostage crisis that began on November 4, 1979. Reagan's campaign worried that Carter would be able to secure the release of the American hostages in Iran as part of the October surprise, Carter \"suggested that Reagan would wreck Social Security\" and portrayed him as a warmonger, and Anderson carried support from liberal Republicans dissatisfied with Reagan's conservatism. One of Reagan's key strengths was his appeal to the rising conservative movement. Though most conservative leaders espoused cutting taxes and budget deficits, many conservatives focused more closely on social issues like abortion and gay rights. Evangelical Protestants became an increasingly important voting bloc, and they generally supported Reagan. Reagan also won the backing of Reagan Democrats. Though he advocated socially conservative viewpoints, Reagan focused much of his campaign on attacks against Carter's foreign policy.\nIn August, Reagan gave a speech at the Neshoba County Fair, stating his belief in states' rights. Historians like Joseph Crespino argue that the visit was designed to incite racial animus in white Southern voters, and some also saw these actions as an extension of the Southern strategy to garner white support for Republican candidates. Allies and supporters of Reagan have said that this was his typical anti-big government rhetoric, without racial context or intent. In the October 28 debate, Carter chided Reagan for being against national health insurance. Reagan replied, \"There you go again\", though the audience laughed and viewers found him more appealing. Reagan later asked the audience if they were better off than they were four years ago, slightly paraphrasing Roosevelt's words in 1934. In 1983, Reagan's campaign managers were revealed to having obtained Carter's debate briefing book before the debates. On November 4, 1980, Reagan won in a decisive victory in the Electoral College over Carter, carrying 44 states and receiving 489 electoral votes to Carter's 49 in six states and the District of Columbia. He won the popular vote by a narrower margin, receiving nearly 51 percent to Carter's 41 percent and Anderson's 7 percent. Republicans won a majority of seats in the Senate for the first time since 1952 while Democrats retained the House of Representatives.\nPresidency (1981\u20131989).\nFirst inauguration.\nReagan was inaugurated as the 40th president of the United States on January 20, 1981. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger administered the presidential oath of office. In his , Reagan commented on the country's economic malaise, arguing, \"In this present crisis, government is not the solution to our problem, government is the problem\". As a final insult to President Carter, Iran waited until Reagan had been sworn in before announcing the release of their American hostages.\n\"Reaganomics\" and the economy.\nReagan advocated a \"laissez-faire\" philosophy, and promoted a set of neoliberal reforms dubbed \"Reaganomics\", which included monetarism and supply-side economics.\nTaxation.\nReagan worked with the boll weevil Democrats to pass tax and budget legislation in a Congress led by Tip O'Neill, a liberal who strongly criticized Reaganomics. He lifted federal oil and gasoline price controls on January 28, 1981, and in August, he signed the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 to dramatically lower federal income tax rates and require exemptions and brackets to be indexed for inflation starting in 1985. Amid growing concerns about the mounting federal debt, Reagan signed the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, one of the eleven times Reagan raised taxes. The bill doubled the federal cigarette tax, rescinded a portion of the corporate tax cuts from the 1981 tax bill, and according to Paul Krugman, \"a third of the 1981 cut\" overall. Many of his supporters condemned the bill, but Reagan defended his preservation of cuts on individual income tax rates. By 1983, the amount of federal tax had fallen for all or most taxpayers, with taxes for higher-income people decreasing the most.\nThe Tax Reform Act of 1986 reduced the number of tax brackets and top tax rate, and almost doubled personal exemptions.\nTo Reagan, the tax cuts would not have increased the deficit as long as there was enough economic growth and spending cuts. His policies proposed that economic growth would occur when the tax cuts spurred investments. This theoretical relationship has been illustrated by some with the controversial Laffer curve. Critics labeled this \"trickle-down economics\", the belief that tax policies that benefit the wealthy will spread to the poor. Milton Friedman and Robert Mundell argued that these policies invigorated America's economy and contributed to the economic boom of the 1990s.\nInflation and unemployment.\nReagan took office in the midst of stagflation. The economy briefly experienced growth before plunging into a recession in July 1981. As Federal Reserve chairman, Paul Volcker fought inflation by pursuing a tight money policy of high interest rates, which restricted lending and investment, raised unemployment, and temporarily reduced economic growth. In December 1982, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) measured the unemployment rate at 10.8 percent. Around the same time, economic activity began to rise until its end in 1990, setting the record for the (then) longest peacetime expansion. In 1983, the recession ended and Reagan nominated Volcker to a second term in fear of damaging confidence in the economic recovery.\nReagan appointed Alan Greenspan to succeed Volcker in 1987. Greenspan raised interest rates in another attempt to curb inflation, setting off the Black Monday stock market crash, although the markets eventually recovered. By 1989, the BLS measured unemployment at 5.3 percent. The inflation rate dropped from 12 percent during the 1980 election to under 5 percent in 1989. Likewise, the interest rate dropped from 15 percent to under 10 percent. Yet, not all shared equally in the economic recovery, and both economic inequality and the number of homeless individuals increased during the 1980s. Critics have contended that a majority of the jobs created during this decade paid the minimum wage.\nGovernment spending.\nIn 1981, in an effort to keep it solvent, Reagan approved a plan for cuts to Social Security. He later backed off due to public backlash. He then created the Greenspan Commission to keep Social Security financially secure, and in 1983 he signed amendments to raise both the program's payroll taxes and retirement age for benefits. He had signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 to cut funding for federal assistance such as food stamps, unemployment benefits, subsidized housing and the Aid to Families with Dependent Children, and would discontinue the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act. On the other side, defense spending doubled between 1981 and 1985. During Reagan's presidency, Project Socrates operated within the Defense Intelligence Agency to discover why the United States was unable to maintain its economic competitiveness. According to program director Michael Sekora, their findings helped the country surpass the Soviets in terms of missile defense technology.\nDeregulation.\nReagan sought to loosen federal regulation of economic activities, and he appointed key officials who shared this agenda. William Leuchtenburg writes that by 1986, the Reagan administration eliminated almost half of the federal regulations that had existed in 1981. The 1982 Garn\u2013St. Germain Depository Institutions Act deregulated savings and loan associations by letting them make a variety of loans and investments outside of real estate. After the bill's passage, savings and loans associations engaged in riskier activities, and the leaders of some institutions embezzled funds. The administration's inattentiveness toward the industry contributed to the savings and loan crisis and costly bailouts.\nDeficits.\nThe deficits were exacerbated by the early 1980s recession, which cut into federal revenue. The national debt tripled between the fiscal years of 1980 and 1989, and the national debt as a percentage of the gross domestic product rose from 33 percent in 1981 to 53 percent by 1989. During his time in office, Reagan never fulfilled his 1980 campaign promise of submitting a balanced budget. The United States borrowed heavily to cover newly spawned federal budget deficits. Reagan described the tripled debt the \"greatest disappointment of his presidency\". Jeffrey Frankel opined that the deficits were a major reason why Reagan's successor, Bush, reneged on by raising taxes through the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990.\nAssassination attempt.\nOn March 30, 1981, Reagan was shot by John Hinckley Jr. outside the Washington Hilton. Although \"right on the margin of death\" upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, Reagan underwent surgery and recovered quickly from a broken rib, punctured lung, and internal bleeding. Later, Reagan came to believe that God had spared his life \"for a chosen mission\".\nSupreme Court appointments.\nReagan appointed three Associate Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States: Sandra Day O'Connor in 1981, which fulfilled a campaign promise to name the first female justice to the Court, Antonin Scalia in 1986, and Anthony Kennedy in 1988. He also elevated William Rehnquist from Associate Justice to Chief Justice in 1986. The direction of the Supreme Court's reshaping has been described as conservative.\nPublic sector labor union fights.\nEarly in August 1981, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) went on strike, violating a federal law prohibiting government unions from striking. On August 3, Reagan said that he would fire air traffic controllers if they did not return to work within 48 hours; according to him, 38 percent did not return. On August 13, Reagan fired roughly 12,000 striking air traffic controllers who ignored his order. He used military controllers and supervisors to handle the nation's commercial air traffic until new controllers could be hired and trained. The breaking of the PATCO strike demoralized organized labor, and the number of strikes fell greatly in the 1980s. With the assent of Reagan's sympathetic National Labor Relations Board appointees, many companies also won wage and benefit cutbacks from unions, especially in the manufacturing sector. During Reagan's presidency, the share of employees who were part of a labor union dropped from approximately one-fourth of the total workforce to approximately one-sixth of the total workforce.\nCivil rights.\nDespite Reagan having opposed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which he long-deemed \"humiliating to the South\", the bill was extended for 25 years in 1982. He initially opposed the establishment of Martin Luther King Jr. Day, believing that the momentum for establishing the holiday was \"based on an image, not reality,\" but signed a bill to create the holiday in 1983 after it passed both houses of Congress with veto-proof margins. In 1984, he signed legislation intended to impose fines for fair housing discrimination offenses. In March 1988, Reagan vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1987, but Congress overrode his veto. He had argued that the bill unreasonably increased the federal government's power and undermined the rights of churches and business owners. In doing so, Reagan was the first U.S. president to veto civil rights legislation since Andrew Johnson vetoed the Civil Rights Act of 1866, which was also overridden by Congress. Later in September, legislation was passed to correct loopholes in the Fair Housing Act of 1968.\nEarly in his presidency, Reagan appointed Clarence M. Pendleton Jr., known for his opposition to affirmative action and equal pay for men and women, as chair of the United States Commission on Civil Rights. Pendleton and Reagan's subsequent appointees greatly eroded the enforcement of civil rights law, arousing the ire of civil rights advocates. In 1987, Reagan unsuccessfully nominated Robert Bork to the Supreme Court as a way to achieve his civil rights policy that could not be fulfilled during his presidency; his administration had opposed affirmative action, particularly in education, federal assistance programs, housing and employment, but Reagan reluctantly continued these policies. In housing, Reagan's administration saw considerably fewer fair housing cases filed than the three previous administrations.\nWar on drugs.\nIn response to concerns about the increasing crack epidemic, Reagan intensified the war on drugs in 1982. While the American public did not see drugs as an important issue then, the FBI, Drug Enforcement Administration and the United States Department of Defense all increased their anti-drug funding immensely. Reagan's administration publicized the campaign to gain support after crack became widespread in 1985. Reagan signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 and 1988 to specify penalties for drug offenses. Both bills have been criticized in the years since for promoting racial disparities. Nancy Reagan founded the \"Just Say No\" campaign to discourage others from engaging in recreational drug use and raise awareness about the dangers of drugs. A 1988 study showed 39 percent of high school seniors using illegal drugs compared to 53 percent in 1980, but Scott Lilienfeld and Hal Arkowitz say that the success of these types of campaigns has not been affirmatively proven.\nEscalation of the Cold War.\nReagan ordered a massive defense buildup; he revived the B-1 Lancer program that had been rejected by the Carter administration, and deployed the MX missile. In response to Soviet deployment of the SS-20, he oversaw NATO's deployment of the Pershing missile in Western Europe. In 1982, Reagan tried to cut off the Soviet Union's access to hard currency by impeding its proposed gas line to Western Europe. This hurt the Soviet economy, but also caused ill will among American allies in Europe who counted on the resulting revenue; he later retreated on this issue. In March 1983, Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) to protect the United States from space intercontinental ballistic missiles. He believed that this defense shield could protect the country from nuclear destruction in a hypothetical nuclear war with the Soviet Union. There was much disbelief among the scientific community surrounding the program's scientific feasibility, leading opponents to dub the SDI \"Star Wars\", although Soviet leader Yuri Andropov said it would lead to \"an extremely dangerous path\".\nIn a 1982 address to the British Parliament, Reagan said, \"the march of freedom and democracy... will leave Marxism\u2013Leninism on the ash heap of history\". Dismissed by the American press as \"wishful thinking\", Margaret Thatcher called the address a \"triumph\". David Cannadine says of Thatcher that \"Reagan had been grateful for her interest in him at a time when the British establishment refused to take him seriously\", with the two agreeing on \"building up stronger defenses against Soviet Russia\" and both believing in outfacing \"what Reagan would later call 'the evil empire'\", in reference to the Soviet Union, during a speech to the National Association of Evangelicals in March 1983. After Soviet fighters downed Korean Air Lines Flight 007 in September, which included Congressman Larry McDonald and 61 other Americans, Reagan expressed outrage towards the Soviet Union. The next day, reports suggested that the Soviets had fired on the plane by mistake. In spite of the harsh, discordant rhetoric, Reagan's administration continued discussions with the Soviet Union on START I.\nAlthough the Reagan administration agreed with the communist government in China to reduce the sale of arms to Taiwan in 1982, Reagan was the first U.S. president to explicitly reject containment and \"d\u00e9tente\", instead advancing the idea that the Soviet Union could be defeated rather than managed through negotiation. His covert aid to Afghan mujahideen forces through Pakistan against the Soviets has been given credit for assisting in ending the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. However, the United States was subjected to blowback in the form of the Taliban that opposed them in the war in Afghanistan. In his 1985 State of the Union Address, Reagan proclaimed, \"Support for freedom fighters is self-defense.\" Through the Reagan Doctrine, his administration supported anti-communist movements that fought against groups backed by the Soviet Union in an effort to rollback Soviet-backed communist governments and reduce Soviet influence across the world. The Reagan administration ignored human rights violations in the countries they backed and held a narrow definition of human rights. Other human rights concerns include the genocide in Guatemala, as well as mass killings in Chad.\nInvasion of Grenada.\nOn October 19, 1983, Maurice Bishop was overthrown and murdered by one of his colleagues. Several days later, Reagan ordered American forces to invade Grenada. Reagan cited a regional threat posed by a Soviet-Cuban military build-up and concern for the safety of hundreds of American medical students at St. George's University. Two days of fighting commenced, resulting in an American victory. While the invasion enjoyed public support in the United States, it was criticized internationally, with the United Nations General Assembly voting to censure the American government. Cannon later noted that throughout Reagan's 1984 presidential campaign, the invasion overshadowed the 1983 Beirut barracks bombings, which killed 241 Americans taking part in an international peacekeeping operation during the Lebanese Civil War.\n1984 election.\nReagan announced his reelection campaign on January 29, 1984, declaring, \"America is back and standing tall\". In February, his administration reversed the unpopular decision to send the United States Marine Corps to Lebanon, thus eliminating a political liability for him. Reagan faced minimal opposition in the Republican primaries, and he and Bush accepted the nomination at the Dallas convention in August. In the general election, his campaign ran the commercial, \"Morning in America\". At a time when the American economy was already recovering, former vice president Walter Mondale was attacked by Reagan's campaign as a \"tax-and-spend Democrat\", while Mondale criticized the deficit, the SDI, and Reagan's civil rights policy. However, Reagan's age induced his campaign managers to minimize his public appearances. Mondale's campaign believed that Reagan's age and mental health were issues before the October presidential debates.\nFollowing Reagan's performance in the first debate where he struggled to recall statistics, his age was brought up by the media in negative fashion. Reagan's campaign changed his tactics for the second debate where he quipped, \"I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent's youth and inexperience\". This remark generated applause and laughter, even from Mondale. At that point, Broder suggested that age was no longer a liability for Reagan, and Mondale's campaign felt that \"the election was over\". In November, Reagan won a landslide reelection victory with 59 percent of the popular vote and 525 electoral votes from 49 states. Mondale won 41 percent of the popular vote and 13 electoral votes from the District of Columbia and his home state of Minnesota.\nResponse to the AIDS epidemic.\nThe AIDS epidemic began to unfold in 1981, and AIDS was initially difficult to understand for physicians and the public. As the epidemic advanced, according to White House physician and later physician to the president, brigadier general John Hutton, Reagan thought of AIDS as though \"it was the measles and would go away\". The October 1985 death of the President's friend Rock Hudson affected Reagan's view; Reagan approached Hutton for more information on the disease. Still, between September 18, 1985, and February 4, 1986, Reagan did not mention AIDS in public.\nIn 1986, Reagan asked C. Everett Koop to develop a report on AIDS. Koop angered many evangelical conservatives, both in and out of the Reagan administration, by stressing the importance of sex education including condom usage in schools. A year later, Reagan, who reportedly had not read the report, gave his first speech on the epidemic when 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with AIDS, and 20,849 had died of it. Reagan called for increased testing (including routine testing for marriage applicants) and mandatory testing of select groups (including federal prisoners). Even after this speech, however, Reagan remained reluctant to publicly address AIDS.\nScholars and AIDS activists have argued that the Reagan administration largely ignored the AIDS crisis. Randy Shilts and Michael Bronski said that AIDS research was chronically underfunded during Reagan's administration, and Bronski added that requests for more funding by doctors at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention were routinely denied. In a September 1985 press conference (soon after Hollywood celebrity Rock Hudson had announced his AIDS diagnosis) Reagan called a government AIDS research program a \"top priority\", but also cited budgetary constraints. Between the fiscal years of 1984 and 1989, federal spending on AIDS totaled $5.6\u00a0billion. The Reagan administration proposed $2.8\u00a0billion during this time period, but pressure from congressional Democrats resulted in the larger amount.\nAddressing apartheid.\nPopular opposition to apartheid increased during Reagan's first term in office and the disinvestment from South Africa movement achieved critical mass after decades of growing momentum. Criticism of apartheid was particularly strong on college campuses and among mainline Protestant denominations. President Reagan was opposed to divestiture because he personally thought, as he wrote in a letter to Sammy Davis Jr., it \"would hurt the very people we are trying to help and would leave us no contact within South Africa to try and bring influence to bear on the government\". He also noted the fact that the \"American-owned industries there employ more than 80,000 blacks\" and that their employment practices were \"very different from the normal South African customs\".\nThe Reagan administration developed constructive engagement with the South African government as a means of encouraging it to gradually move away from apartheid and to give up its nuclear weapons program. It was part of a larger initiative designed to foster peaceful economic development and political change throughout southern Africa. This policy, however, engendered much public criticism, and renewed calls for the imposition of stringent sanctions. Desmond Tutu described Reagan administration as \"an unmitigated disaster for us blacks\", and Reagan himself as \"a racist pure and simple\".\nIn response, Reagan announced the imposition of new sanctions on the South African government, including an arms embargo in late 1985. These sanctions were seen as weak by anti-apartheid activists and as insufficient by the president's opponents in Congress. In 1986, Congress approved the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, which included tougher sanctions; Reagan's veto was overridden by Congress. Afterward, he remained opposed to apartheid and unsure of \"how best to oppose it\". Several European countries, as well as Japan, also imposed their sanctions on South Africa soon after.\nLibya bombing.\nContentious relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were revived in the West Berlin discotheque bombing that killed an American soldier and injured dozens of others on April 5, 1986. Stating that there was irrefutable evidence that Libya had a direct role in the bombing, Reagan authorized the use of force against the country. On April 14, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya. Thatcher allowed the United States Air Force to use Britain's air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the United Kingdom was supporting America's right to self-defense under Article 51 of the Charter of the United Nations. The attack was, according to Reagan, designed to halt Muammar Gaddafi's \"ability to export terrorism\", offering him \"incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior\". The attack was condemned by many countries; by an overwhelming vote, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution to condemn the attack and deem it a violation of the Charter and international law.\nIran\u2013Contra affair.\nReagan authorized William J. Casey to arm the Contras, fearing that Communists would take over Nicaragua if it remained under the leadership of the Sandinistas. Congress passed the 1982 Boland Amendment, prohibiting the CIA and Department of Defense from using their budgets to provide aid to the Contras. Still, the Reagan administration raised funds for the Contras from private donors and foreign governments. When Congress learned that the CIA had secretly placed naval mines in Nicaraguan harbors, Congress passed a second Boland Amendment that barred granting any assistance to the Contras. By mid-1985, Hezbollah began to take American hostages in Lebanon, holding seven of them in reaction to the United States' support of Israel.\nReagan procured the release of seven American hostages held by Hezbollah by selling American arms to Iran, then engaged in the Iran\u2013Iraq War, in hopes that Iran would pressure Hezbollah to release the hostages. The Reagan administration sold over 2,000 missiles to Iran without informing Congress; Hezbollah released four hostages but captured an additional six Americans. On Oliver North's initiative, the administration redirected the proceeds from the missile sales to the Contras. The transactions were exposed by \"Ash-Shiraa\" in early November 1986. Reagan initially denied any wrongdoing, but on November 25, he announced that John Poindexter and North had left the administration and that he would form the Tower Commission to investigate the transactions. A few weeks later, Reagan asked a panel of federal judges to appoint a special prosecutor who would conduct a separate investigation.\nThe Tower Commission released a report in February 1987 confirming that the administration had traded arms for hostages and sent the proceeds of the weapons sales to the Contras. The report laid most of the blame on North, Poindexter, and Robert McFarlane, but it was also critical of Donald Regan and other White House staffers. Investigators did not find conclusive proof that Reagan had known about the aid provided to the Contras, but the report noted that Reagan had \"created the conditions which made possible the crimes committed by others\" and had \"knowingly participated or acquiesced in covering up the scandal\". The affair damaged the administration and raised questions about Reagan's competency and the wisdom of conservative policies. The administration's credibility was also badly damaged on the international stage as it had violated its own arms embargo on Iran.\nThe USS \"Stark\" incident.\nIn the context of the Tanker War on May 17, 1987, an Iraqi fighter jet hit the with two Exocet missiles, killing 37 sailors. Three days later, President Reagan declared a \"policy of self-defense\" would now be ordered, as he accepted Iraq's official apology: \"Our ships are deployed in the Persian Gulf in order to protect U.S. interests and maintain free access and maintain freedom of navigation and access to the area's oil supplies. It is a vital mission, but our ships need to protect themselves and they will. [From now on] if aircraft approach any of our ships in a way that appears hostile, there is one order of battle. Defend yourselves. Defend American lives.. We're going to do what has to be done to keep the Persian Gulf open. It's international waters. No country there has a right to try and close it off and take it for itself. And the villain in the piece really is Iran. And so they're delighted with what has just happened.\"\nSoviet decline and thaw in relations.\nAlthough the Soviets did not accelerate military spending in response to Reagan's military buildup, their enormous military expenses, in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing, were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy. At the same time, the prices of oil, the primary source of Soviet export revenues, fell to one third of the previous level in 1985. These factors contributed to a stagnant economy during the tenure of Mikhail Gorbachev as Soviet leader.\nReagan's foreign policy towards the Soviets wavered between brinkmanship and cooperation. Reagan appreciated Gorbachev's revolutionary change in the direction of the Soviet policy and shifted to diplomacy, intending to encourage him to pursue substantial arms agreements. They held four summit conferences between 1985 and 1988. Reagan believed that if he could persuade the Soviets to allow for more democracy and free speech, this would lead to reform and the end of communism. The critical summit was in Reykjav\u00edk in 1986, where they agreed to abolish all nuclear weapons. However, Gorbachev added the condition that SDI research must be confined to laboratories during the ten-year period when disarmament would take place. Reagan refused, stating that it was defensive only and that he would share the secrets with the Soviets, thus failing to reach a deal.\nIn June 1987, Reagan addressed Gorbachev during a speech at the Berlin Wall, demanding that he \"tear down this wall\". The remark was ignored at the time, but after the wall fell in November 1989, it was retroactively recast as a soaring achievement. In December, Reagan and Gorbachev met again at the Washington Summit to sign the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, committing to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles. The treaty established an inspections regime designed to ensure that both parties honored the agreement. In May 1988, the U.S. Senate overwhelmingly voted in favor of ratifying the treaty, providing a major boost to Reagan's popularity in the aftermath of the Iran\u2013Contra affair. A new era of trade and openness between the two powers commenced, and the United States and Soviet Union cooperated on international issues such as the Iran\u2013Iraq War.\nPost-presidency (1989\u20132004).\nUpon leaving the presidency on January 20, 1989, at the age of 77, Reagan became the oldest president at the end of his tenure. This distinction eventually passed to president Joe Biden, who was 82 years old when he left office in 2025.\nIn retirement, Ronald and Nancy Reagan lived at 668 St. Cloud Road in Bel Air, in addition to Rancho del Cielo in Santa Barbara. He received multiple awards and honors in addition to generous payments for speaking engagements. In 1989 he supported repealing the Twenty-second Amendment's presidential term limits. In 1991, the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library opened. Reagan also addressed the 1992 Republican National Convention \"to inspire allegiance to the party regulars\", and favored a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget.\nSupport for Brady Bill.\nReagan publicly favored the Brady Bill, drawing criticism from gun control opponents. In 1989, in his first public appearance after leaving office and shortly after the Stockton schoolyard shooting, he stated: \"I do not believe in taking away the right of the citizen to own guns for sporting, for hunting, and so forth, or for home defense. But I do believe that an AK-47, a machine gun, is not a sporting weapon or needed for the defense of the home\".\nIn March 1991, Reagan wrote an op-ed in the \"New York Times\", titled \"Why I'm for the Brady Bill\". In May 1994, Reagan, Gerald Ford, and Jimmy Carter sent a letter to House members, urging them to support the controversial Federal Assault Weapons Ban.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nReagan's final public speech occurred on February 3, 1994, during a tribute to him in Washington, D.C.; his last major public appearance was at the funeral of Richard Nixon on April 27, 1994. In August 1994, Reagan was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, which he announced through a handwritten letter in November. There was speculation over how long he had demonstrated symptoms of mental degeneration, but lay observations that he suffered from Alzheimer's while still in office have been disputed by medical experts. His doctors said that he first began exhibiting overt symptoms of the illness in late 1992&lt;ref name=\"NYT_2004/06/15\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; or 1993. Over time, the disease destroyed Reagan's mental capacity. By 1997, he was reported to recognize few people other than his wife, though he continued to walk through parks and on beaches, play golf, and visit his office in nearby Century City. Eventually, his family decided that he would live in quiet semi-isolation with his wife. By the end of 2003, Reagan had lost his ability to speak and was mostly confined to his bed, no longer able to recognize family members.\nDeath and funeral.\nReagan died of pneumonia, complicated by Alzheimer's, at his home in Los Angeles, on June 5, 2004. President George W. Bush called Reagan's death \"a sad hour in the life of America\". His public funeral was held in the Washington National Cathedral, where eulogies were given by Margaret Thatcher, Brian Mulroney, George H. W. Bush, and George W. Bush. Other world leaders attended including Mikhail Gorbachev and Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa. Reagan was interred at his presidential library.\nLegacy.\nApproval ratings.\nSimilar to previous presidents, Reagan began his presidency with approval ratings greater than 50 percent, peaking above 70 percent shortly after his attempted assassination, before declining by the end of his first year. Afterwards, his ratings fluctuated in the mid-30s and mid-40s in his second and third years, which has been attributed to the 1981\u20131982 recession. His approval ratings rebounded after the invasion of Grenada and by mid-1984 his approval rating neared 60 percent. In the first two years of his second term, his approval ratings were consistently above 60 percent but declined during the Iran\u2013Contra scandal, before beginning to recover in mid-1987. In the Gallup poll, Reagan finished his presidency with an approval rating of 63 percent, the third highest for a departing president in history, behind only Franklin D. Roosevelt and Bill Clinton, both of whom finished at 66 percent.\nIn 1990, a year after he left office, a Gallup survey found that 54 percent of Americans said they approved of the overall job Reagan did as president. The number of Americans who approved of the Reagan administration declined to 48 percent in 1992 but rebounded two years later to 52 percent. In recent years, favorability of Reagan's presidency reached its highest ever: 71 percent approval in 2006; 74 percent in 2010; 72 percent in 2018; and 69 percent in 2023. He is often found to be second-most popular president since World War II, with only John F. Kennedy having higher ratings.\nHistorical reputation.\nIn 2008, British historian M. J. Heale summarized that scholars had reached a broad consensus in which \"Reagan rehabilitated conservatism, turned the country to the right, practiced a 'pragmatic conservatism' that balanced ideology with the constraints of government, revived faith in the presidency and American self-respect, and contributed to critically ending the Cold War\", which ended with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Many conservative and liberal scholars have agreed that Reagan has been the most influential president since Roosevelt, leaving his imprint on American politics, diplomacy, culture, and economics through his effective communication of his conservative agenda and pragmatic compromising. During the initial years of Reagan's post-presidency, historical rankings placed his presidency in the twenties. Throughout the 2000s and 2010s, his presidency was often placed in the top ten.\nMany proponents, including his Cold War contemporaries, believe that his defense policies, economic policies, military policies, and hard-line rhetoric against the Soviet Union and communism, together with his summits with Gorbachev, played a significant part in ending the Cold War. Jeffrey Knopf argues that while Reagan's practice of referring to the Soviet Union as \"evil\" probably made no difference to the Soviet leaders, it possibly gave encouragement to Eastern European citizens who opposed their communist regimes. President Truman's policy of containment is also regarded as a force behind the fall of the Soviet Union, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan undermined the Soviet system itself. Nevertheless, Melvyn P. Leffler called Reagan \"Gorbachev's minor, yet indispensable partner, setting the framework for the dramatic changes that neither anticipated happening anytime soon\".\nCritics, for example Paul Krugman, note Reagan's tenure as having begun a period of increased income inequality, sometimes called the \"Great Divergence\". Krugman also views Reagan as having initiated the ideology of the current-day Republican Party, which he feels is led by \"radicals\" who seek to \"undo the twentieth century\" gains in income equality and unionization. Others, such as Nixon's Secretary of Commerce Peter G. Peterson, also criticize what they feel was not just Reagan's fiscal irresponsibility, but also the ushering in of an era where tax cutting \"became the GOP's core platform\", with resulting deficits and GOP leaders (speciously in Peterson's opinion) arguing supply-side gains would enable the country to \"grow\" its way out of deficits.\nReagan was known for storytelling and humor, which involved puns and self-deprecation. Reagan also often emphasized family values, despite being the first president to have been divorced. He showed the ability to comfort Americans during the aftermath of the Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster. Reagan's ability to talk about substantive issues with understandable terms and to focus on mainstream American concerns earned him the laudatory moniker the \"Great Communicator\". He also earned the nickname \"Teflon President\" in that public perceptions of him were not substantially tarnished by the controversies that arose during his administration.\nPolitical influence.\nReagan led a new conservative movement, altering the political dynamic of the United States. Conservatism became the dominant ideology for Republicans, displacing the party's faction of liberals and moderates. Men began voting more Republican, and women began voting more Democrat \u2013 a gender distinction that has persisted. He was supported by young voters, an allegiance that shifted many of them to the party. He attempted to appeal to Black voters in 1980, but would receive the lowest Black vote for a Republican presidential candidate at the time. Throughout Reagan's presidency, Republicans were unable to gain complete control of Congress.\nThe period of American history most dominated by Reagan and his policies (particularly on taxes, welfare, defense, the federal judiciary, and the Cold War) is known as the Reagan era, which suggests that the \"Reagan Revolution\" had a lasting impact on the United States in domestic and foreign policy. The presidencies of George H. W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush are often treated as an extension of the era. Since 1988, Republican presidential candidates have invoked Reagan's policies and beliefs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nChapters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournal articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "25438", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25438", "title": "Role-playing games", "text": ""}
{"id": "25440", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25440", "title": "Robert J. Flaherty", "text": "American documentary filmmaker\nRobert Joseph Flaherty, (; February 16, 1884 \u2013 July 23, 1951) was an American filmmaker who directed and produced the first commercially successful feature-length documentary film, \"Nanook of the North\" (1922). The film made his reputation and nothing in his later life fully equaled its success, although he continued the development of this new genre of narrative documentary with \"Moana\" (1926), set in the South Seas, and \"Man of Aran\" (1934), filmed in Ireland's Aran Islands. Flaherty is considered the father of both the documentary and the ethnographic film.\nFlaherty was married to writer Frances H. Flaherty from 1914 until his death in 1951. Frances worked on several of her husband's films, and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Story for \"Louisiana Story\" (1948).\nEarly life.\nFlaherty was one of seven children born to prospector Robert Henry Flaherty (an Irish Protestant) and Susan Klockner (a German Catholic).\nDue to exposure from his father's work as an iron ore explorer, he developed a natural curiosity for people of other cultures. Flaherty was an acclaimed still-photographer in Toronto. His portraits of American Indians and wild life during his travels are what led to the creation of his critically acclaimed \"Nanook of the North\". It was his enthusiasm and interests in these people that sparked his need to create a new genre of film.\nIn 1914, he married his fianc\u00e9e Frances Hubbard. Hubbard came from a highly educated family, her father being a distinguished geologist. A graduate from Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, Hubbard studied music and poetry in Paris and was also secretary of the local Suffragette Society. Following their marriage, Frances Flaherty became a crucial part of Robert's success in film. Frances took on the role of director at times, and helped to edit and distribute her husband's films, even landing governmental film contracts for England.\nIn 1909 he shared stories about information he was told by an Inuk man named George Weetaltuk, grandfather of Mini Aodla Freeman. Flaherty said he met Weetaltuk while visiting the Hudson Bay in search of iron ore. In his Weetaltuk story, Flaherty published a detailed map of the Inuit region and shared information about the bay that Weetaltuk had told him. His writing about George Weetaltuk would go on to be published in his book, \"My Eskimo Friends: \"Nanook of the North\".\"\n\"Nanook of the North\".\nIn 1913, on Flaherty's expedition to prospect the Belcher Islands, his boss, Sir William Mackenzie, suggested that he take a motion picture camera along. He brought a Bell and Howell hand cranked motion picture camera. He was particularly intrigued by the life of the Inuit, and spent so much time filming them that he had begun to neglect his real work. When Flaherty returned to Toronto with 30,000 feet of film, the nitrate film stock was ignited in a fire started from his cigarette in his editing room. His film was destroyed and his hands were burned. Although his editing print was saved and shown several times, Flaherty was not satisfied with the results. \"It was utterly inept, simply a scene of this or that, no relation, no thread of story or continuity whatever, and it must have bored the audience to distraction. Certainly it bored me.\"\nFlaherty was determined to make a new film, one following a life of a typical Inuk and his family. In 1920, he secured funds from Revillon Fr\u00e8res, a French fur trade company to shoot what was to become \"Nanook of the North\". On August 15, 1920, Flaherty arrived in Port Harrison, Quebec to shoot his film. He brought two Akeley motion-picture cameras which the Inuit referred to as \"the aggie\". He also brought full developing, printing, and projection equipment to show the Inuit his film, while he was still in the process of filming. He lived in an attached cabin to the Revillon Fr\u00e8res trading post.\nIn making \"Nanook\", Flaherty cast various locals in parts in the film, in the way that one would cast actors in a work of fiction. With the aim of showing traditional Inuit life, he also staged some scenes, including the ending, where Allakariallak (who acts the part of Nanook) and his screen family are supposedly at risk of dying if they could not find or build shelter quickly enough. The half-igloo had been built beforehand, with a side cut away for light so that Flaherty's camera could get a good shot. Flaherty insisted that the Inuit not use rifles to hunt, though their use had by that time become common. He also pretended at one point that he could not hear the hunters' pleas for help, instead continuing to film their struggle and putting them in greater danger.\nMelanie McGrath writes that, while living in Northern Quebec for the year of filming \"Nanook\", Flaherty had an affair with his lead actress, the young Inuk woman who played Nanook's wife. A few months after he left, she gave birth to his son, Josephie (December 25, 1921 \u2013 1984), whom he never acknowledged. Josephie was one of the Inuit who were relocated in the 1950s to very difficult living conditions in Resolute and Grise Fiord, in the extreme north. Corroboration of McGrath's account is not readily available and Flaherty never discussed the matter.\n\"Nanook\" began a series of films that Flaherty made on the same theme of humanity against the elements. Others included \"Moana: A Romance of the Golden Age\", set in Samoa, and \"Man of Aran\", set in the Aran Islands of Ireland. All these films employ the same rhetorical devices: the dangers of nature and the struggle of the communities to eke out an existence.\nHollywood.\n\"Nanook of the North\" (1922) was a successful film, and Flaherty was in great demand afterwards. On a contract with Paramount to produce another film on the order of \"Nanook\", he went to Samoa to film \"Moana\" (1926). He shot the film in Safune on the island of Savai'i where he lived with his wife and family for more than a year. The studio heads repeatedly asked for daily rushes but Flaherty had nothing to show because he had not filmed anything yet \u2014 his approach was to try to live with the community, becoming familiar with their way of life before writing a story about it to film. He was also concerned that there was no inherent conflict in the islanders' way of life, providing further incentive not to shoot anything. Eventually he decided to build the film around the ritual of a boy's entry to manhood. Flaherty was in Samoa from April 1923 until December 1924, with the film completed in December 1925 and released the following month. The film, on its release, was not as successful as \"Nanook of the North\" domestically, but it did very well in Europe, inspiring John Grierson to coin the word \"documentary\".\nBefore the release of \"Moana\", Flaherty made two short films in New York City with private backing, \"The Pottery Maker\" (1925) and \"The Twenty-Four Dollar Island\" (1927). Irving Thalberg of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer invited Flaherty to film \"White Shadows in the South Seas\" (1928) in collaboration with W. S. Van Dyke, but their talents proved an uncomfortable fit, and Flaherty resigned from the production. Moving to Fox Film Corporation, Flaherty spent eight months working on the Native American documentary \"Acoma the Sky City\" (1929), but the production was shut down, and subsequently Flaherty's footage was lost in a studio vault fire. He then agreed to collaborate with F. W. Murnau on another South Seas picture, \"Tabu\" (1931). However, this combination proved even more volatile, and while Flaherty did contribute significantly to the story, the finished film, originally released by Paramount Pictures, is essentially Murnau's.\nBritain.\nAfter \"Tabu\", Flaherty was considered finished in Hollywood, and Frances Flaherty contacted John Grierson of the Empire Marketing Board Film Unit in London, who assigned Flaherty to the documentary \"Industrial Britain\" (1931). By comparison to Grierson and his unit, Flaherty's habitual working methods involved shooting relatively large amounts of film in relation to the planned length of the eventual finished movie, and the ensuing cost overruns obliged Grierson to take Flaherty off the project, which was edited by other hands into three shorter films.\nFlaherty wrote a novel about the sea called \"The Captain's Chair\" which was published in 1938 by Scribner. This was presented on BBC Television in November that year, under the title \"The Last Voyage of Captain Grant\", adapted and directed by Denis Johnston.\nFlaherty's career in Britain ended when producer Alexander Korda removed him from the production \"Elephant Boy\" (1937), re-editing it into a commercial entertainment picture.\nIreland.\nProducer Michael Balcon took Flaherty on to direct \"Man of Aran\" (1934), which portrayed the harsh traditional lifestyle of the occupants of the isolated Aran Islands off the west coast of Ireland. The film was a major critical success, and for decades was considered in some circles an even greater achievement than \"Nanook\". As with \"Nanook\", \"Man of Aran\" showed human beings' efforts to survive under extreme conditions: in this case, an island whose soils were so thin that the inhabitants carried seaweed up from the sea to construct fields for cultivation. Flaherty again cast locals in the various fictionalized roles, and made use of dramatic recreation of anachronistic behaviors: in this case, a sequence showing the hunting of sharks from small boats with harpoons, which the islanders had by then not practiced for several decades. He also staged the film's climactic sequence, in which three men in a small boat strive to row back to shore through perilously high, rock-infested seas.\nLast years.\nBack in the United States, Pare Lorentz of the United States Film Service hired Flaherty to film a documentary about US agriculture, a project which became \"The Land\". Flaherty and his wife covered some 100,000 miles, shooting 25,000 feet of film, and captured a series of striking images of rural America. Among the themes raised by Flaherty's footage were the challenge of the erosion of agricultural land and the Dust Bowl (as well as the beginning of effective responses via improved soil conservation practices), mechanization and rural unemployment, and large-scale migration from the Great Plains to California. In the latter context, Flaherty highlighted competition for agricultural jobs between native-born Americans and migrants from Mexico and the Philippines.\nThe film encountered a series of obstacles. After production had begun, Congress abolished the United States Film Service, and the project was shunted to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). With America's entry to World War II approaching, USDA officials (and the film's editor Helen van Dongen) attempted to reconcile Flaherty's footage with rapidly changing official messages (including a reversal of concern from pre-war rural unemployment to wartime labor shortages). Following the attack on Pearl Harbor, officials grew apprehensive that the film could project an unduly negative image of the US internationally, and although a prestige opening was held at the Museum of Modern Art in 1942, the film was never authorized for general release.\n\"Louisiana Story\" (1948) was a Flaherty documentary shot by himself and Richard Leacock, about the installation of an oil rig in a Louisiana swamp. The film stresses the rig's peaceful and unproblematic coexistence with the surrounding environment, and it was in fact funded by Standard Oil, a petroleum company. The main character of the film is a Cajun boy. The poetry of childhood and nature, some critics argue, is used to make exploration for oil look beautiful. Virgil Thomson composed the music for the film.\nFlaherty was one of the makers of \"\" (1950), which won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. The film was a re-edited version of the German/Swiss film originally titled \"Michelangelo: Life of a Titan\" (1938), directed by Curt Oertel. The re-edited version put a new English narration by Fredric March and musical score onto a shorter edit of the existing film. The new credits include Richard Lyford as director and Robert Snyder as producer. The film was edited by Richard Lyford.\nAlso in the early 1950s, Lowell Thomas, an investor and the most prominent promotor of Cinerama, was eager to secure his \"good friend\" Flaherty's endorsement of this pioneer film technology. Reportedly, Flaherty was very excited about Cinerama's promise, and for about a month, he tested the camera invented by Fred Waller. But \"just as he was to set forth round the world\" to shoot Cinerama footage with Waller's camera, he died, which prompted Thomas to find and hire a new film crew and also join forces with Mike Todd.\nLegacy.\nFlaherty is considered a pioneer of documentary film. He was one of the first to combine documentary subjects with a fiction-film-like narrative and poetic treatment.\nA self-proclaimed explorer, Flaherty was inducted into the Royal Geographic Society of England for his (re)discovery of the main island of the Belcher group in Hudson Bay in 1914.\nFlaherty Island, one of the Belcher Islands in Hudson Bay, is named in his honor.\nThe Flaherty Seminar is an annual international forum for independent filmmakers and film-lovers, held in rural upstate New York at Colgate University in mid June. The festival was founded in Flaherty's honor by his widow in 1955.\nFlaherty's contribution to the advent of the documentary is scrutinized in the 2010 British Universities Film &amp; Video Council award-winning and FOCAL International award-nominated documentary \"A Boatload of Wild Irishmen\", written by Professor Brian Winston of University of Lincoln, UK, and directed by Mac Dara \u00d3 Curraidh\u00edn. The film explores the nature of \"controlled actuality\" and sheds new light on thinking about Flaherty. The argument is made that the impact of Flaherty's films on the indigenous peoples portrayed changes over time, as the films become valuable records for subsequent generations of now-lost ways of life. The film's title derives from Flaherty's statement that he had been accused, in the staged climactic sequence of \"Man of Aran\", of \"trying to drown a boatload of wild Irishmen\".\nIn 1994, Flaherty was portrayed by Charles Dance in the Canadian drama film \"Kabloonak\", a dramatization of the making of \"Nanook of the North\" from an Inuit perspective.\nThe wife of Robert Joseph Flaherty's grandson, Louise Flaherty, is the co-founder of Canada's first independent Inuk publishing house, Inhabit Media. She is also an author, educator and politician.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25441", "revid": "1021774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25441", "title": "Rolling Stone", "text": "American monthly music magazine\nRolling Stone is an American monthly magazine that focuses on music, politics, and popular culture. It was founded in San Francisco, California, in 1967 by Jann Wenner and the music critic Ralph J. Gleason.\nThe magazine was first known for its coverage of rock music and political reporting by Hunter S. Thompson. In the 1990s, the magazine broadened and shifted its focus to a younger readership interested in youth-oriented television shows, film actors, and popular music. It has since returned to its traditional mix of content, including music, entertainment, and politics.\nThe first magazine was released in 1967 and featured John Lennon on the cover, and was then published every two weeks. It is known for provocative photography and its cover photos, featuring musicians, politicians, athletes, and actors. In addition to its print version in the United States, it publishes content through Rollingstone.com and numerous international editions.\nThe magazine experienced a rapid rise during the 1970s, followed by a sharp decline into financial turmoil in the 21st century, leading Jann Wenner to sell 49 percent of the magazine to BandLab Technologies in 2016 and 51 percent to Penske Media Corporation (PMC) in 2017. PMC eventually acquired the 49 percent stake from BandLab Technologies in 2019, giving it full ownership of the magazine.\nHistory.\n1967\u20131979: Founding and early history.\n\"Rolling Stone\" was founded in San Francisco in 1967 by Jann Wenner and Ralph J. Gleason. To pay for the setup costs, Wenner borrowed $7,500 () from his family and the parents of his soon-to-be wife, Jane Schindelheim. The first issue was released on November 9, 1967, and featured John Lennon in costume for the film \"How I Won the War\" on the cover. It was in newspaper format with a lead article on the Monterey International Pop Festival. The cover price was 25\u00a2 (equivalent to $2.27 in 2023) and it was published bi-weekly.\nIn the first issue, Wenner explained the magazine's title and mission:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You're probably wondering what we're trying to do. It's hard to say: sort of a magazine and sort of a newspaper. The name of it is \"Rolling Stone\", which comes from an old saying, \"A rolling stone gathers no moss.\" Muddy Waters used the name for a song he wrote. The Rolling Stones took their name from Muddy's song. \"Like a Rolling Stone\" was the title of Bob Dylan's first rock and roll record. We have begun a new publication reflecting what we see are the changes in rock and roll and the changes related to rock and roll.\nSome authors have attributed the name solely to Dylan's hit single: \"At [Ralph] Gleason's suggestion, Wenner named his magazine after a Bob Dylan song.\"\n\"Rolling Stone\" initially identified with and reported the hippie counterculture of the era. It distanced itself, however, from the underground newspapers of the time, such as the \"Berkeley Barb\", embracing more traditional journalistic standards and avoiding the radical politics of the underground press. In the first edition, Wenner wrote that \"Rolling Stone\" \"is not just about the music, but about the things and attitudes that music embraces\". In a 2017 article celebrating the publication's 50th anniversary, \"Rolling Stone\"'s David Browne stated that the magazine's name was a nod to the Rolling Stones in an addition to \"Rollin' Stone\" and \"Like a Rolling Stone\".\nThe magazine's long-running slogan, \"All the news that fits\", was provided by early contributor, manager, and sometime editor Susan Lydon. She lifted it from an April Fools issue of the \"Columbia Daily Spectator\" which posted \"All the news that fits we print\", a parody of \"The New York Times\"' slogan, \"All The News That's Fit To Print\". The first appearance of the rubric was in 1969.\nIn the 1970s, \"Rolling Stone\" began to make a mark with its political coverage, with the likes of gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson writing for the magazine's political section. Thompson first published his most famous work, \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1971), within the pages of \"Rolling Stone\", where he remained a contributing editor until his death in 2005. In the 1970s, the magazine also helped launch the careers of many prominent authors, including Cameron Crowe, Lester Bangs, Joe Klein, Joe Eszterhas, Ben Fong-Torres, Patti Smith and P. J. O'Rourke. It was at this point that the magazine ran some of its most famous stories. The January 21, 1970, issue covered the Altamont Free Concert and the killing of Meredith Hunter, which won a Specialized Journalism award at the National Magazine Awards in 1971. Later in 1970, \"Rolling Stone\" published a 30,000-word feature on Charles Manson by David Dalton and David Felton, including their interview of Manson when he was in the L.A. County Jail awaiting trial, which won \"Rolling Stone\" its first National Magazine Award. Four years later, they also covered the Patty Hearst abduction odyssey. One interviewer, speaking for many of his peers, said that he bought his first copy of the magazine upon initial arrival on his college campus, describing it as a \"rite of passage\".\nIn 1972, Wenner assigned Tom Wolfe to cover the launch of NASA's last Moon mission, Apollo 17. He published a four-part series in 1973 titled \"Post-Orbital Remorse\", about the depression that some astronauts experienced after having been in space. After the series, Wolfe began researching the whole of the space program, in what became a seven-year project from which he took time to write \"The Painted Word\" (1975), a book on art, and to complete \"Mauve Gloves &amp; Madmen, Clutter &amp; Vine\" (1976), a collection of shorter pieces and eventually \"The Right Stuff\" (1979).\nThe magazine began running the photographs of Annie Leibovitz in 1970. In 1973, she became its chief photographer, and her images appeared on more than 140 covers. \"Rolling Stone\" recruited writers from smaller music magazines, including Paul Nelson from \"Sing Out!\", who became record reviews editor from 1978 to 1983, and Dave Marsh from \"Creem\". In 1977, the magazine moved its headquarters from San Francisco to New York City. Editor Jann Wenner said that San Francisco had become \"a cultural backwater\".\n1980\u20131999: Change to entertainment magazine.\nKurt Loder joined \"Rolling Stone\" in May 1979 and spent nine years there, including as editor. Timothy White joined as a writer from \"Crawdaddy\" and David Fricke from \"Musician\". Tom Wolfe wrote to Wenner to propose an idea drawn from Charles Dickens and William Makepeace Thackeray: to serialize a novel. Wenner offered Wolfe around $200,000 to serialize his work. The frequent deadline pressure gave Wolfe the motivation he had sought, and from July 1984 to August 1985, he published a new installment in each biweekly issue of \"Rolling Stone\". Later Wolfe was unhappy with his \"very public first draft\" and thoroughly revised his work, even changing his protagonist, Sherman McCoy, and published it as \"The Bonfire of the Vanities\" in 1987.\n\"Rolling Stone\" was known for its musical coverage and for Thompson's political reporting and in 1985, they hired an advertising agency to refocus its image under the series \"Perception/Reality\" comparing Sixties symbols to those of the Eighties, which led to an increase in advertising revenue and pages. It also shifted to more of an entertainment magazine in the 1980s. It still had music as the main topic but began to increase its coverage of celebrities, films, and pop culture. It also began releasing its annual \"Hot Issue\". In the 1990s, the magazine changed its format to appeal to a younger readership interested in youth-oriented television shows, film actors, and popular music. This led to criticism that the magazine was emphasizing style over substance.\n2000\u20132015: Expansion of readership.\nAfter years of declining readership, the magazine experienced a major resurgence of interest and relevance with the work of two young journalists in the late 2000s, Michael Hastings and Matt Taibbi. Rob Sheffield also joined from \"Spin\". In 2005, Dana Leslie Fields, former publisher of \"Rolling Stone\", who had worked at the magazine for 17 years, was an inaugural inductee into the Magazine Hall of Fame. In 2009, Taibbi unleashed an acclaimed series of scathing reports on the financial meltdown of the time. He famously described Goldman Sachs as \"a great vampire squid\".\nIn December 2009, the \"Los Angeles Times\" reported that the owners of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine planned to open a \"Rolling Stone\" restaurant in the Hollywood &amp; Highland Center in Hollywood in the spring of 2010. The expectation was that the restaurant could become the first of a national chain if it was successful. As of November 2010, the \"soft opening\" of the restaurant was planned for December 2010. In 2011, the restaurant was open for lunch and dinner as well as a full night club downstairs on the weekends. The restaurant closed in February 2013.\nBigger headlines came at the end of June 2010. \"Rolling Stone\" caused a controversy in the White House by publishing in the July issue an article by journalist Michael Hastings entitled \"The Runaway General\", quoting criticism by General Stanley A. McChrystal, commander of the International Security Assistance Force and U.S. Forces-Afghanistan commander, about Vice President Joe Biden and other Administration members of the White House. McChrystal resigned from his position shortly after his statements went public. In 2010, Taibbi documented illegal and fraudulent actions by banks in the foreclosure courts, after traveling to Jacksonville, Florida and sitting in on hearings in the courtroom. His article, \"Invasion of the Home Snatchers\", also documented attempts by the judge to intimidate a homeowner fighting foreclosure and the attorney Taibbi accompanied into the court.\nIn January 2012, the magazine ran exclusive excerpts from Hastings' book just prior to publication. The book, \"The Operators: The Wild and Terrifying Inside Story of America's War in Afghanistan\", provided a much more expansive look at McChrystal and the culture of senior American military and how they become embroiled in such wars. The book reached Amazon.com's bestseller list in the first 48 hours of release, and it received generally favorable reviews. \"Salon\"'s Glenn Greenwald described it as \"superb\", \"brave\" and \"eye-opening\". In 2012, Taibbi, through his coverage of the Libor scandal, emerged as an expert on that topic, which led to media appearances outside \"Rolling Stone\". On November 9, 2012, the magazine published its first Spanish-language section on Latino music and culture, in the issue dated November 22.\n2016\u2013present: New ownership.\nIn September 2016, \"Advertising Age\" reported that Wenner was in the process of selling a 49% stake of the magazine to a company from Singapore called BandLab Technologies. The new investor had no direct involvement in the editorial content of the magazine.\nIn September 2017, Wenner Media announced that the remaining 51% of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine was up for sale. In December 2017, Penske Media acquired the remaining stake from Wenner Media. It became a monthly magazine from the July 2018 issue. On January 31, 2019, Penske acquired BandLab's 49% stake in \"Rolling Stone\", gaining full ownership of the magazine.\nIn January 2021, a Chinese edition of the magazine was launched, while in September 2021, \"Rolling Stone\" launched a dedicated UK edition in conjunction with Attitude magazine publisher Stream Publishing. The new British \"Rolling Stone\" launched into a marketplace which already featured titles like \"Mojo\" and BandLab Technologies's monthly music magazine \"Uncut\". The first issue had a choice of three cover stars (including music acts Bastille and Sam Fender, as well as \"No Time To Die\" actor Lashana Lynch), with the magazine due to be a bi-monthly publication.\nIn February 2022, Rolling Stone announced the acquisition of Life Is Beautiful, saying, \"Live events are an integral part of Rolling Stone's future.\"\nIn 2023 \"Rolling Stone\" was nominated for its first-ever Emmy award in the \"Outstanding Interactive Media\" category for its investigation into \"The DJ and the War Crimes\". The piece also won a National Magazine Award for digital design and an Overseas Press Club Award. In December 2023 \"Rolling Stone\" collected five National Arts &amp; Entertainment Journalism Awards, four Front Page Awards, and a Deadline Club award.\nIn August 2025, \"Rolling Stone\" named Sean Woods and Shirley Halperin as co-editors in chief, with Halperin also becoming the magazine's head of music. Halperin is \"Rolling Stone\"'s first female editor-in-chief.\nCovers.\nSome artists have been featured on the cover many times, and some of these pictures went on to become iconic. The Beatles, for example, have appeared on the cover more than 30 times, either individually or as a band. The magazine is known for provocative photography and has featured musicians and celebrities on the cover throughout its history. The cover of the issue from January 22, 1981, featuring John Lennon and Yoko Ono, has been called the \"Greatest \"Rolling Stone\" Cover Ever\" by \"Vanity Fair\".\nThe first ten issues featured, in order of appearance:\nThe magazine spent $1\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) on the 3-D hologram cover of the special 1,000th issue (May 18, 2006) displaying multiple celebrities and other personalities.\nPrint format.\nThe printed format has gone through several changes. The first publications, in 1967 to 1972, were in folded tabloid newspaper format, with no staples, only black ink text, and a single color highlight that changed each edition. From 1973 onwards, editions were produced on a four-color press with a different newsprint paper size. In 1979, the bar code appeared. In 1980, it became a gloss-paper, large-format (10 \u00d7 12 inch) magazine. Editions switched to the standard 8 \u00d7 11 inch magazine size starting on October 30, 2008. Starting with the new monthly July 2018 issue, it returned to the previous 10 \u00d7 12 inch large format. In June 2024, the magazine was redesigned with new exclusive fonts and a grittier paper stock.\nWebsite.\nThe publication's site at one time had an extensive message-board forum. By the late 1990s, this had developed into a thriving community, with many regular members and contributors worldwide. However, the site was also plagued with numerous Internet trolls, who vandalized the forum substantially. The magazine abruptly deleted the forum in May 2004, then began a new, much more limited message board community on their site in late 2005, only to remove it again in 2006. In March 2008, the website started a new message board section once again, then deleted it in April 2010.\n\"Rolling Stone\" devotes one of its table of contents pages to promoting material currently appearing on its website, listing detailed links to the items.\nOn April 19, 2010, the website underwent a redesign and began featuring the complete archives of \"Rolling Stone\". The archive was first launched under a for-pay model, but has since transitioned to a free-with-print-subscription model. In the spring of 2012, \"Rolling Stone\" launched a federated search feature, which searches both the website and the archive.\nThe website has become an interactive source of biographical information on music artists in addition to historical rankings from the magazine. Users can cross-reference lists and they are also provided with historical insights. For example, one group that is listed on both Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time and Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time is Toots and the Maytals, with biographical details that explain how the band coined the term \"reggae\" in their song \"Do the Reggay\". For biographical information on all artists, the website contains a directory listed alphabetically.\n\"Glixel\".\nIn May 2016, Wenner Media announced plans to create a separate online publication dedicated to the coverage of video games and video game culture. Gus Wenner, Jann Wenner's son and head of digital for the publication at the time, told \"The New York Times\" that \"gaming is today what rock 'n' roll was when \"Rolling Stone\" was founded\". \"Glixel\" was originally hosted on \"Rolling Stone\"'s website, and transitioned to its own domain by October 2016. Stories from \"Glixel\" are included on the \"Rolling Stone\" website, while writers for \"Rolling Stone\" were also able to contribute to \"Glixel\". The site was headed by John Davison, and its offices were located in San Francisco. In June 2017, \"Rolling Stone\" closed down the \"Glixel\" offices and fired the entire staff, citing the difficulties of working with the remote site from their main New York office. Brian Crecente, founder of Kotaku and co-founder of Polygon, was hired as editorial director, and ran the site from the main New York office. Following the sale of \"Rolling Stone\"'s assets to Penske Media Corporation, the \"Glixel\" content was merged into the routine publishing of \"Variety\", with Crecente remaining as editorial director.\nPolitical alignment.\nIn 2017, Graham Ruddick of \"The Guardian\" described \"Rolling Stone\" as a \"rock'n'roll magazine turned liberal cheerleader\". Bruce Schulman wrote in \"The Washington Post\" that \"Rolling Stone\" has \"routinely support[ed] liberal candidates and causes\" since the 1990s.\nIn 2008, conservative columnist Jonah Goldberg stated that \"Rolling Stone\" had \"essentially become the house organ of the Democratic National Committee\". \"Rolling Stone\" editor Jann Wenner has made all of his political donations to Democrats, and has conducted high-profile interviews for the magazine with Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack Obama. \"Rolling Stone\" endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election.\n\"Rolling Stone\" has criticized Republican Presidents George W. Bush and Donald Trump. In 2006, it described Bush as the \"worst president in history\". In August 2017, the cover of the magazine featured Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau with the headline \"Why can't he be our president?\"\nCriticism and controversies.\nOne major criticism of \"Rolling Stone\" involves its generational bias toward the 1960s and 1970s. One critic referred to the magazine's \"500 Greatest Songs\" list as an example of \"unrepentant rockist fogeyism\". In further response to this issue, rock critic Jim DeRogatis, a former \"Rolling Stone\" editor, published a thorough critique of the magazine's lists in a book called \"Kill Your Idols: A New Generation of Rock Writers Reconsiders the Classics\", which featured differing opinions from many younger critics.\n\"Rolling Stone\" has been criticized for reconsidering many classic albums that it had previously dismissed, and for frequent use of the 3.5-star rating. For example, Led Zeppelin was largely written off by \"Rolling Stone\" critics during the band's most active years in the 1970s, but by 2006, a cover story on the band honored them as \"the Heaviest Band of All Time\". A critic for \"Slate\" magazine described a conference at which 1984's \"The Rolling Stone Record Guide\" was scrutinized. As he described it, \"The guide virtually ignored hip-hop and ruthlessly panned heavy metal, the two genres that within a few years would dominate the pop charts. In an auditorium packed with music journalists, you could detect more than a few anxious titters: How many of us will want our record reviews read back to us 20 years hence?\"\nThe hiring of former \"FHM\" editor Ed Needham in 2002 further enraged critics who alleged that \"Rolling Stone\" had lost its credibility.\nThe 2003 \"100 Greatest Guitarists of all Time\" list, which named only two female musicians, resulted in \"Venus Zine\" answering with their own list, entitled \"The Greatest Female Guitarists of All Time\".\n\"Rolling Stone\" film critic Peter Travers has been criticized for his high number of repetitively used blurbs.\nHomosexual HIV story.\nIn 2003, the article \"\" claimed that homosexuals who intentionally sought to be infected with HIV accounted for 25% of new cases each year. However, the physicians cited in the article later denied making such statements.\nAnti-vaccine article.\nIn 2005, the article \"Deadly Immunity\", by anti-vaxxine activist Robert F. Kennedy Jr., attracted criticism for quoting material out of context, and \"Rolling Stone\" eventually amended the story with corrections in response to these and other criticisms.\nTsarnaev cover.\nThe August 2013 \"Rolling Stone\" cover, featuring then-accused (and later convicted) Boston Marathon bomber Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, drew widespread criticism for \"glamorizing terrorism\", and was called a \"slap in the face to the great city of Boston\". The online edition of the article was accompanied by a short editorial stating that the story \"falls within the traditions of journalism and \"Rolling Stone\"'s long-standing commitment to serious and thoughtful coverage of the most important political and cultural issues of our day\". The controversial cover photograph that was used by \"Rolling Stone\" had previously featured on the front page of \"The New York Times\" on May 5, 2013.\nIn response to the outcry, New England\u2013based CVS Pharmacy and Tedeschi Food Shops banned their stores from carrying the issue. They were later joined by Walgreens, Rite Aid, Kmart, Roche Bros., Stop &amp; Shop, H-E-B, Walmart, 7-Eleven, Hy-Vee, Rutter's Farm, United Supermarkets, Cumberland Farms, Market Basket, and Shaw's.\nBoston mayor Thomas Menino sent a letter to \"Rolling Stone\" publisher Jann Wenner, calling the cover \"ill-conceived, at best[...] [it] reaffirms a message that destruction gains fame for killers and their 'causes'.\" Menino also wrote, \"To respond to you in anger is to feed into your obvious market strategy\", and that Wenner could have written about the survivors or the people who came to help after the bombings instead. In conclusion he wrote, \"The survivors of the Boston Marathon deserve \"Rolling Stone\" cover stories, though I no longer feel that \"Rolling Stone\" deserves them.\"\nDefamatory false rape story and lawsuit.\nOn November 19, 2014, the magazine ran the story \"A Rape on Campus\", about an alleged gang rape on the campus of the University of Virginia. Separate inquiries by Phi Kappa Psi, the fraternity accused by \"Rolling Stone\" of facilitating the alleged rape, and \"The Washington Post\" revealed major errors, omissions and discrepancies in the story. Reporter Sabrina Erdely's story was subject to intense media criticism. \"The Washington Post\" and \"Boston Herald\" issued calls for magazine staff involved in the report to be fired. \"Rolling Stone\" subsequently issued three apologies for the story.\nOn December 5, 2014, \"Rolling Stone\"'s managing editor, Will Dana, apologized for not fact-checking the story. The magazine commissioned an outside investigation of the story and its problems by the dean of the Columbia School of Journalism. The report uncovered journalistic failure in the UVA story and institutional problems with reporting at \"Rolling Stone\". \"Rolling Stone\" retracted the story on April 5, 2015. The next day, following the investigation and retraction of the story, Phi Kappa Psi announced plans to pursue all available legal action against \"Rolling Stone\", including claims of defamation.\nOn May 12, 2015, UVA associate dean Nicole Eramo, chief administrator for handling sexual assault issues at the school, filed a $7.5 million defamation lawsuit in Charlottesville Circuit Court against \"Rolling Stone\" and Erdely, claiming damage to her reputation and emotional distress. Said the filing, \"\"Rolling Stone\" and Erdely's highly defamatory and false statements about Dean Eramo were not the result of an innocent mistake. They were the result of a wanton journalist who was more concerned with writing an article that fulfilled her preconceived narrative about the victimization of women on American college campuses, and a malicious publisher who was more concerned about selling magazines to boost the economic bottom line for its faltering magazine, than they were about discovering the truth or actual facts.\" On November 4, 2016, after 20 hours of deliberation, a jury consisting of eight women and two men found \"Rolling Stone\", the magazine's publisher and Erdely liable for defaming Eramo, and awarded Eramo $3 million.\nOn July 29, 2015, three graduates of the fraternity Phi Kappa Psi filed a lawsuit against \"Rolling Stone\", its publisher Wenner Media, and a journalist for defamation and infliction of emotional distress. The same day, and just months after the controversy began, \"The New York Times\" reported that managing editor Will Dana was departing the magazine with his last date recorded as August 7, 2015. On November 9, 2015, the Phi Kappa Psi Fraternity filed suit for $25\u00a0million for damages to its reputation caused by the magazine's publication of the story, \"with reckless disregard for the truth\". \"Rolling Stone\" paid the fraternity $1.65 million to settle the suit out of court.\nEthics controversy over El Chapo interview.\nIn 2016, \"Rolling Stone\" commissioned Sean Penn to write a feature on Joaqu\u00edn \"El Chapo\" Guzm\u00e1n in what was billed as a landmark story and Guzm\u00e1n's first-ever interview. Penn met Guzm\u00e1n, then wanted by Mexican and U.S. authorities, at a jungle hideout for an interview, which was agreed to by Guzm\u00e1n on the condition he have final editorial control over the article. Upon publication, the article, characterized by the Associated Press as \"long and rambling\", was extensively mocked by social media users and prompted a discussion about the magazine's ethical standards. Andrew Seaman, chairman of the ethics committee of the Society of Professional Journalists, called the decision to allow a source pre-approval of an article \"inexcusable\", while the Poynter Institute's chief ethicist Kelly McBride opined that the article evidenced several failures of editorial control by \"Rolling Stone\". In an interview with NPR, Alfredo Corchado, a former Mexico City bureau chief for the \"Dallas Morning News\", said that pre-approval rights meant the story was not real journalism: \"It's business, it's Hollywood. It's more in the lines of what a public relations firm would do.\"\nQuestions also arose as to whether relaxed security procedures by the magazine helped authorities track and capture Guzm\u00e1n, who was arrested several days after the interview was conducted. Meanwhile, Kate del Castillo, who arranged the meeting, said that she had to flee the country after the article's publication, and charged that Penn had \"used me as a bait, and then he never protected me. And risked my life and my parents' life and my sister's life and everybody surrounding me.\"\nPenn later said his article \"had failed\", noting that discussion about the ethics of the story overshadowed the actual report.\nFalse ivermectin story.\nIn September 2021, \"Rolling Stone\" picked up a story published by Oklahoma news outlet KFOR which claimed that so many people had been hospitalized due to ivermectin overdoses in Oklahoma that there was no room in intensive care units for other patients, including those with gunshot wounds. However, an Oklahoma hospital said in a statement that there was no shortage of beds due to ivermectin overdoses, and the doctor who had been interviewed by KFOR had not said that ivermectin cases were crowding out other patients, but the initial story and subsequent coverage had linked separate comments about ivermectin overdoses and scarce beds. CNN fact-checker Daniel Dale stated that \"Rolling Stone\" had \"[run] an adaptation of the KFOR story without appearing to do sufficient research to make sure the local report was sound\". \"Rolling Stone\" subsequently added an editor's note that retracted the core point of its story.\nKyle Smith of \"National Review\" called \"Rolling Stone\"'s correction \"so humiliating, it's a wonder the place doesn't shut its doors immediately, liquidate all assets, and deny that it ever existed.\" Robby Soave of \"Reason\" said that the correct story was \"something \"Rolling Stone\" could have figured out on its own had the magazine bothered to contact any hospitals in Oklahoma, but alas.\" Alex Shephard of \"The New Republic\" wrote, \"For mainstream and, particularly, liberal media this should be a stark reminder of the value of due diligence and checking sources. At the very least, make a phone call.\"\nJames Gordon Meek child pornography case.\nOn January 31, 2023, ABC News reporter James Gordon Meek was arrested by the FBI and charged with transporting child pornography. \"Rolling Stone\" initially broke the story, but did not mention the child sexual abuse images that led to the investigation, which were known to the reporters. Instead, it suggested that Meek had been \"targeted\" by the US government for his reporting on national security issues, writing that \"Meek appears to be on the wrong side of the national-security apparatus\". In the following months, it was revealed that \"Rolling Stone\" editor Noah Shachtman, who personally knows Meek and is considered friendly with him, had the story rewritten before publication to exclude all mentions of the child sexual abuse material, without the original journalist Tatiana Siegel's knowledge.\nIn popular culture.\nGeorge Harrison's 1975 song \"This Guitar (Can't Keep from Crying)\", a lyrical sequel to his Beatles track \"While My Guitar Gently Weeps\" (1968), references the magazine in its second verse: \"Learned to get up when I fall / Can even climb \"Rolling Stone\" walls\". The song was written in response to some highly unfavorable reviews from \"Rolling Stone\" and other publications for Harrison's 1974 North American tour and his album \"Dark Horse\".\nThe 2000 film \"Almost Famous\" centers on a teenage journalist writing for the magazine in the early 1970s while covering the fictional band Stillwater. The film was directed by Cameron Crowe and was based on his own experiences as a young journalist for the magazine in the same time period.\n\"The Cover of Rolling Stone\" is a song written by Shel Silverstein and first recorded by American rock band Dr. Hook &amp; the Medicine Show. The song satirizes success in the music business; the song's narrator laments that his band, despite having the superficial attributes of a successful rock star (including drug usage, \"teenage groupies, who'll do anything we say\", and a frenetic guitar solo), has been unable to \"get their pictures on the cover of the \"Rolling Stone\"\".\nThe title track of Pink Floyd's album \"The Final Cut\" features the line, \"Would you sell your story to \"Rolling Stone\"?\"\nThe track \"Baker Street Muse\" on Jethro Tull's album \"Minstrel in the Gallery\" includes the line \"I have no time for \"Time\" Magazine or \"Rolling Stone\"\".\nCharlie Robison's 1998 song \"Sunset Boulevard\" name-drops the magazine with the line, \"Well, I wish I had my picture on the \"Rolling Stone\" today\".\nIn Stephen King's novel \"Firestarter\", the protagonists decide to tell their story to \"Rolling Stone\".\nIn Joni Mitchell's song \"California\", the magazine is referenced in the line, \"Reading \"Rolling Stone\" reading \"Vogue\"\".\nIn May 2022, the off-Broadway play \"Retraction\", adapted from the \"A Rape on Campus\" article controversy and resulting legal battles, premiered at Theatre Four at Theatre Row in New York City.\nInternational editions.\nAs of 2025, 15 international editions of \"Rolling Stone\" are in operation, the first international edition of the magazine was \"Rolling Stone Australia\" launched in 1969 and the latest is \"Rolling Stone Philippines\" launched in print in 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25445", "revid": "44900216", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25445", "title": "Romania", "text": "Country in Europe\nRomania is a country located at the crossroads of Central, Eastern and Southeast Europe. It borders Ukraine to the north and east, Hungary to the west, Serbia to the southwest, Bulgaria to the south, Moldova to the east, and the Black Sea to the southeast. It has a mainly continental climate, and an area of with a population of 19 million people. Romania is the twelfth-largest country in Europe and the sixth-most populous member state of the European Union. Europe's second-longest river, the Danube, empties into the Danube Delta in the southeast of the country. The Carpathian Mountains cross Romania from the north to the southwest and include Moldoveanu Peak, at an altitude of . Bucharest is the country's capital, largest urban area, and financial centre. Other major urban areas include Cluj-Napoca, Timi\u0219oara, Ia\u0219i, Constan\u021ba and Bra\u0219ov.\nSettlement in the territory of modern Romania began in the Lower Paleolithic, later becoming the Dacian Kingdom before Roman conquest and Romanisation. The modern Romanian state was formed in 1859 with the unification of Moldavia and Wallachia under Alexandru Ioan Cuza, becoming the Kingdom of Romania in 1881 under Carol I of Romania. Romania gained independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1877, formalised by the Treaty of Berlin. After World War I, Transylvania, Banat, Bukovina, and Bessarabia joined the Old Kingdom, forming Greater Romania, which reached its largest territorial extent. In 1940, under Axis pressure, Romania lost territories to Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Soviet Union. Following the 1944 Romanian coup d'\u00e9tat, Romania switched sides to join the Allies. After World War II, it regained Northern Transylvania through the Paris Peace Treaties. Under Soviet occupation, King Michael I was forced to abdicate, and Romania became a socialist republic and Warsaw Pact member. After the uniquely violent Romanian revolution in December 1989, Romania began a transition to liberal democracy and a market economy.\nRomania is a developing country with a high-income economy. It is a unitary republic with a multi-party system and a semi-presidential representative democracy. It is home to 11 UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Romania is a net exporter of automotive and vehicle parts worldwide and has established a growing reputation as a technology centre, with some of the fastest internet speeds globally. Romania is a member of several international organisations, including the European Union, NATO, and the BSEC.\nEtymology.\n\"Romania\" derives from the local name for Romanian (), which in turn derives from Latin \"romanus\", meaning \"Roman\" or \"of Rome\". This ethnonym for Romanians is first attested in the sixteenth century by Italian humanists travelling in Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia. The oldest known surviving document written in Romanian that can be precisely dated, a 1521 letter known as the \"Letter of Neac\u0219u from C\u00e2mpulung\", is notable for including the first documented occurrence of \"Romanian\" in a country name: Wallachia is mentioned as .\nHistory.\nDacia and the Roman Empire.\nIt is believed that the tribes responsible for creating the Bronze Age culture on the territory of modern Romania belonged to the Indo-European group of Thracians. Strabo, in \"Geographica\", notes that the Getae spoke the same language as the Thracians, and the Dacians the same language as the Getae. However, the earliest account of the Getae is attributed to Herodotus. The Roman Empire's conquest of Dacia led to the fusion of two cultures\u2014the Daco-Romans became the ancestors of the Romanian people. After Dacia became a province of the Roman Empire, elements of Roman culture and civilisation\u2014most notably Vulgar Latin, which laid the foundation for the development of the Romanian language\u2014were introduced.\nBased on information from the inscription at Dionysupolis and the account of Jordanes, it is known that under the rule of Burebista, assisted by the great priest Deceneus, the first Geto-Dacian state was formed. In 44 BC, Burebista was assassinated by one of his servants. After his death, the Geto-Dacian state fragmented into four, and later five, kingdoms. The core of the state remained in the area of the \u0218ureanu Mountains, where successive rulers such as Deceneu, Comosicus, and Coryllus held power. The centralised Dacian state reached the peak of its development under Decebalus. During this period, a series of conflicts with the Roman Empire continued, with part of the Dacian state being conquered in 106 AD by the Roman emperor Trajan. Dacia was evacuated by the Romans between 271 and 275 AD, under Emperor Aurelian.\nPeriod of the Principalities and the Phanariot Era.\nIn the first millennium, waves of nomads swept across the territory of Romania: the Goths during the 3rd\u20134th centuries, the Huns in the 4th century, the Gepids in the 5th century, the Avars in the 6th century, the Slavs in the 7th century, the Magyars in the 9th century, the Pechenegs, the Cumans, the Uzes and the Alans during the 10th\u201312th centuries, and the Tatars in the 13th century. In 1054, a series of ecclesiastical differences and theological disputes between the Greek East and Latin West caused the Great Schism, eventually resulting in Romania adopting Orthodoxy.\nIn the 13th century, the first bearers of the Slavic noble title Knyaz south of the Carpathian Mountains are attested. Later, in the context of the crystallisation of feudal relations, as a result of the creation of favourable internal and external conditions (the weakening of Hungarian pressure and the diminishing of Tatars domination), autonomous feudal states emerged south and east of the Carpathians \u2013 Wallachia in 1310, under Basarab I of Wallachia, and Moldova in 1359, under Bogdan the Founder. Among the Romanian rulers who played a more important role can be mentioned: Alexander the Good, Stephen the Great, Petru Rare\u0219, and Dimitrie Cantemir in Moldova; Mircea the Elder, Vlad the Impaler, Michael the Brave, and Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu in Wallachia; and John Hunyadi in Transylvania.\nBeginning in the late 15th century, the two principalities gradually came under the influence of the Ottoman Empire. Transylvania, which throughout the Middle Ages was part of the Kingdom of Hungary, governed by voivodes, became part of the Eastern Hungarian Kingdom from 1526 and later a self-governing Principality of Transylvania and a vassal of the Ottoman Empire from 1570. For a very brief period at the turn of the 16th and 17th centuries, Michael the Brave ruled over a large part of present-day Romania's territory.\nEarly modern times and national awakening.\nThe Kingdom of Hungary collapsed, and the Ottomans occupied parts of Banat and Cri\u0219ana in 1541. Transylvania and Maramure\u0219, along with the rest of Banat and Cri\u0219ana, developed into a new state under Ottoman suzerainty, the Principality of Transylvania. The Reformation, initiated in Germany by Martin Luther in 1517, encouraged the rise of Protestantism, and four denominations\u2014Calvinism, Lutheranism, Unitarianism, and Roman Catholicism\u2014were officially acknowledged in 1568. The Romanians' Orthodox faith remained only tolerated, although they made up more than one-third of the population, according to 17th-century estimates.\nThe princes of Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia joined the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire in 1594. The Wallachian prince, Michael the Brave, united the three principalities under his rule in May\u00a01600. The neighbouring powers forced him to abdicate in September, but he became a symbol of the unification of the Romanian lands in the 19th\u00a0century. Although the rulers of the three principalities continued to pay tribute to the Ottomans, the most talented princes\u2014Gabriel Bethlen of Transylvania, Matei Basarab of Wallachia, and Vasile Lupu of Moldavia\u2014strengthened their autonomy.\nThe united armies of the Holy League expelled the Ottoman troops from Central Europe between 1684 and 1699, and the Principality of Transylvania was integrated into the Habsburg monarchy. The Habsburgs supported the Catholic clergy and persuaded the Orthodox Romanian prelates to accept the union with the Roman Catholic Church in 1699. In the 18th century, Moldavia and Wallachia maintained their internal autonomy, but in 1711 and 1716, respectively, the period of the Phanariots began, with rulers appointed directly by the Porte from among the noble families of Greek origin in Constantinople. With the signing of the Ausgleich in 1867, Transylvania quickly lost its remaining political autonomy, being politically and administratively incorporated into the Kingdom of Hungary. The Church Union strengthened the Romanian intellectuals' devotion to their Roman heritage. The Orthodox Church was restored in Transylvania only after Orthodox monks stirred up revolts in 1744 and 1759. The organisation of the Transylvanian Military Frontier caused further disturbances, especially among the Sz\u00e9kelys in 1764.\nPrinces Dimitrie Cantemir of Moldavia and Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu of Wallachia concluded alliances with the Habsburg Monarchy and Russia against the Ottomans, but they were dethroned in 1711 and 1714, respectively. The sultans lost confidence in the native princes and appointed Orthodox merchants from the Phanar district of Istanbul to rule Moldova and Wallachia. The Phanariot princes pursued oppressive fiscal policies and dissolved the army. The neighbouring powers took advantage of the situation: the Habsburg Monarchy annexed the northwestern part of Moldavia, or Bukovina, in 1775, and the Russian Empire seized the eastern half of Moldavia, or Bessarabia, in 1812.\nA census revealed that the Romanians were more numerous than any other ethnic group in Transylvania in 1733, but legislation continued to use contemptuous adjectives (such as \"tolerated\" and \"admitted\") when referring to them. The Uniate bishop, Inocen\u021biu Micu-Klein, who demanded recognition of the Romanians as the fourth privileged nation, was forced into exile. Uniate and Orthodox clerics and laymen jointly signed a plea for the Transylvanian Romanians' emancipation in 1791, but the monarch and the local authorities refused to grant their requests.\nThe Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca authorised the Russian ambassador in Istanbul to defend the autonomy of Moldavia and Wallachia (known as the Danubian Principalities) in 1774. Taking advantage of the Greek War of Independence, a Wallachian lesser nobleman, Tudor Vladimirescu, stirred up a revolt against the Ottomans in January\u00a01821, but he was murdered in June by Phanariot Greeks. After a new Russo-Turkish War, the Treaty of Adrianople strengthened the autonomy of the Danubian Principalities in\u00a01829, although it also acknowledged the sultan's right to confirm the election of the princes.\nMihail Kog\u0103lniceanu, Nicolae B\u0103lcescu and other leaders of the 1848 revolutions in Moldavia and Wallachia demanded the emancipation of the peasants and the union of the two principalities, but Russian and Ottoman troops crushed their revolt. The Wallachian revolutionists were the first to adopt the blue, yellow and red tricolour as the national flag. In Transylvania, most Romanians supported the imperial government against the Hungarian revolutionaries after the Diet passed a law concerning the union of Transylvania and Hungary. Bishop Andrei \u0218aguna proposed the unification of the Romanians of the Habsburg Monarchy in a separate duchy, but the central government refused to change the internal borders.\nUnification and the Kingdom of Romania.\nFrom the Little Union to the Great War.\nThe modern Romanian state was created through the unification of the principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia, accepted as a federative structure by the Great Powers following the Paris Convention of 1858, and later cemented by the simultaneous election as ruler of both states of the unionist Alexandru Ioan Cuza. After carrying out numerous reforms that laid the foundations for the modernisation of the state, he was forced in 1866 by a broad coalition of the political parties of the time, also known as the \"Monstrous coalition\", to abdicate and leave the country.\nThe union was at one time in peril, but the political leaders of the era succeeded in placing on the princely throne Carol I of Romania, who accepted the Constitution and took the oath on 10 May 1866. Eleven years later, on 10 May 1877, Romania proclaimed its independence\u2014achieved on the battlefield\u2014and in 1881, on the same day of the year, Carol was crowned as King of Romania. In 1913, Romania entered the Second Balkan War against Bulgaria, at the end of which it obtained Southern Dobruja. In 1914, King Carol I died, and his nephew, Ferdinand I, succeeded him on the throne.\nWorld War\u00a0I and the Great Union.\nIn 1916, Romania entered World War\u00a0I on the side of the Entente Powers. Although the Romanian forces did not perform well militarily, by the end of the war the Austrian and Russian Empires had disintegrated; the National Assembly in Transylvania, and the Sfatul \u021a\u0103rii in Bessarabia and Bukovina proclaimed their union with Romania, and King Ferdinand I and Queen Maria were crowned sovereign of all Romanians in Alba Iulia on 15 October 1922. \nAfter World War I, the union of Bukovina with Romania was ratified in 1919 by the Treaty of Saint Germain. Most of the territories claimed by Romania from the Kingdom of Hungary\u2014Cri\u0219ana, Transylvania and parts of Banat and Maramure\u0219\u2014were annexed to the Kingdom of Romania. This act was ratified in 1920 by the Treaty of Trianon, which defined the new border between Hungary and Romania.\nInterwar period.\nAfter having left the country and renounced his claim to the throne in 1925, Carol II returned in 1930 and usurped his son\u2019s throne; influenced by his inner circle\u2014referred to by historians as the \"Royal Camarilla\"\u2014he gradually undermined the democratic system, and in 1938 he assumed dictatorial powers. Although he was pro-Western (especially Anglophile), Carol attempted to appease extreme centrifugal forces by appointing nationalist governments that adopted anti-Semitic measures, such as the Goga cabinet and the one led by the Orthodox Patriarch Miron Cristea.\nWorld War\u00a0II: Positions and territorial losses.\nFollowing the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact of 1939, in June 1940 Romania accepted the loss of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina and the Hertsa region in favour of the USSR (as stipulated in the Soviet ultimatum of 28 June 1940). Unaware of the details of the Soviet\u2013German pact, Carol attempted to secure an alliance with Nazi Germany, and appointed Ion Gigurtu as President of the Council of Ministers, who declared that he would pursue a Nazi pro-Axis (Berlin\u2013Rome) policy that was anti-Semitic and fascist-totalitarian in nature. Between 4 July and 4 September 1940, by accepting Hitler's arbitration over Transylvania (after Gigurtu declared on radio that Romania must make territorial sacrifices to justify its Nazi orientation and full adherence to the Berlin\u2013Rome Axis), Romania ceded Northern Transylvania\u2014including the city of Cluj\u2014to Hungary. The vast territories in Transylvania ceded by Ion Gigurtu to Hungary contained important natural resources, including gold mines. Ion Gigurtu also initiated negotiations to cede 8,000 km2 of Southern Dobruja to Bulgaria, these negotiations were interrupted by Antonescu's unconditional acceptance of the territorial cession.\nIn response to the chaotic withdrawal from Bessarabia, the territorial cessions, public discontent, and protests from political leaders, King Carol II suspended the 1938 Constitution of Romania and appointed General Ion Antonescu as Prime Minister. This measure, supported by the Iron Guard, demanded that the king abdicate in favour of his son, Mihai. Subsequently, Antonescu assumed dictatorial powers and became President of the Council of Ministers, as the self-titled \"Leader\" of the state.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1941, as an ally of Nazi Germany, Romania entered World War\u00a0II by declaring war on the Soviet Union. A shift in fortunes only became discernible after the defeat at Stalingrad and the subsequent change of the USSR from a defensive to an offensive posture. On 23 August 1944, with the Soviet army having been present in northern Moldova since March, King Mihai I forcibly removed Marshal Ion Antonescu from power, as he refused to sign an armistice with the Allies of World War II. Following Antonescu's outright refusal, King Mihai I ordered the dismissal and arrest of the marshal, and Romania switched sides to join the Allies.\nSocialist Romania (1947\u20131989).\nLess than three years after the Soviet occupation of Romania, in 1947, King Michael I was forced to abdicate and the People's Republic of Romania\u2014a state of \"popular democracy\"\u2014was proclaimed. The newly established communist regime, led by the Romanian Workers' Party, consolidated its power through a Stalinist-type policy aimed at suppressing any political opposition and transforming the economic and social structures of the old bourgeois regime.\nIn the early 1960s, the Romanian government began asserting a certain degree of independence from the Soviet Union in its foreign policy, although it did not abandon its repressive policies (which it labeled \"revolutionary conquests\") in domestic affairs. In 1965, communist leader Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej died, ushering in a period of change in Romania. After a brief power struggle, Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu emerged as the head of the communist party, becoming General Secretary of the Romanian Communist Party in 1965, President of the State Council in 1967, and President of the Socialist Republic of Romania in 1974. Ceau\u0219escu's rule from 1965 to 1989 grew increasingly authoritarian during the 1980s.\nRomania since 1989.\nIn the context of the fall of communism throughout Eastern Europe during the revolutions of 1989, a protest in support of Reformed pastor L\u00e1szl\u00f3 T\u0151k\u00e9s that began in December 1989 in Timi\u0219oara quickly escalated into a national uprising against the communist regime, ultimately resulting in the execution of Ceau\u0219escu and his wife Elena on 25 December 1989.\nAn interim council composed of figures from civil society and former communist officials assumed control of the government, and Ion Iliescu became the provisional president of the country. The new government reversed many of the authoritarian communist policies and dismissed several leaders of the former regime, although still influenced by members of the former regime (the basis for the Golaniad\",\" and Mineriads).\nReturn to democracy.\nIn May 1990, the first free elections in Romania since the 1937 elections were held, with Iliescu of the National Salvation Front winning the presidency with 85% of the vote. In 1992, he was reelected in the first election after the adoption of a permanent constitution via a referendum held the previous year. Illiescu lost the 1996 election to Emil Constantinescu, but returned to power in 2000. Traian B\u0103sescu was elected president in 2004 and 2009, serving until 2014 at which point Klaus Iohannis succeeded him, being re-elected in 2019 and serving until 2025. During these years several events occurred. In 2009, the country was bailed out by the International Monetary Fund as result of the Great Recession in Europe following the 2008 financial crisis.\nThe post-1989 period has been characterised by the privatisation and closure of several former industrial and economic enterprises from the communist period, while corruption has been a major issue in contemporary politics.\nA National Anticorruption Directorate was formed in the country in 2002. During the 2000s, Romania had one of the highest economic growth rates in Europe and has been referred at times as \"the Tiger of Eastern Europe\". This has been accompanied by a significant improvement in living standards as the country successfully reduced domestic poverty and established a functional democratic state. However, Romania's development suffered a major setback during the late 2000s' recession leading to a large gross domestic product contraction and a budget deficit in 2009. This led to Romania borrowing from the International Monetary Fund. Worsening economic conditions led to unrest and triggered a political crisis in 2012.\nSince 2014, Romania launched an anti-corruption effort that led to the prosecution of medium- and high-level political, judicial and administrative offenses by the National Anticorruption Directorate. In 2015, massive anti-corruption protests which developed in the wake of the Colectiv nightclub fire led to the resignation of prime minister Victor Ponta. During 2017\u20132019, in response to measures which were perceived to weaken the fight against corruption, some of the biggest post-1989 protests took place in Romania, with over 500,000 people protesting nationwide.\nThe 2021 Romanian political crisis led to the ousting of Florin C\u00ee\u021bu's incumbent government. The Ciuc\u0103 Cabinet then took power, with Romania since having experienced a shift towards authoritarianism and illiberalism, as well as an increased corruption. Around this time, Romania was also hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. In the 2024 presidential election, Independent candidate C\u0103lin Georgescu achieved a surprise win in the first round. However, the Constitutional Court annulled the election results, citing Russian meddling. The cancellation led to far-right protests, criticism by the Trump administration, and Ilie Bolojan becoming acting president in February 2025 as Iohannis resigned to political pressure. In the subsequent 2025 Romanian presidential election, Bucharest Mayor Nicu\u0219or Dan was elected president.\nGeography.\nRomania is the largest country in Southeastern Europe and the twelfth-largest in Europe, having an area of . It lies between latitudes 43\u00b0 and 49\u00b0 N and longitudes 20\u00b0 and 30\u00b0 E. The terrain is distributed roughly equally between mountains, hills, and plains. The Carpathian Mountains dominate the centre of Romania, with 14 mountain ranges reaching above \u2014the highest is Moldoveanu Peak at . They are surrounded by the Moldavian and Transylvanian plateaus, the Pannonian Plain and the Wallachian plains.\nRomania is home to six terrestrial ecoregions: Balkan mixed forests, Central European mixed forests, East European forest steppe, Pannonian mixed forests, Carpathian montane conifer forests, and Pontic steppe. Natural and semi-natural ecosystems cover about 47% of the country's land area. There are almost (about 5% of the total area) of protected areas in Romania covering 13\u00a0national parks and three biosphere reserves. The Danube river forms a large part of the border with Serbia and Bulgaria, and flows into the Black Sea, forming the Danube Delta, which is the second-largest and best-preserved delta in Europe, and a biosphere reserve and a biodiversity World Heritage Site. At , the Danube Delta is the largest continuous marshland in Europe, and supports 1,688 different plant species alone.\nRomania has one of the largest areas of undisturbed forest in Europe, covering almost 27% of its territory. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 5.95/10, ranking it 90th globally out of 172 countries. Some 3,700 plant species have been identified in the country, from which to date 23 have been declared natural monuments, 74\u00a0extinct, 39\u00a0endangered, 171\u00a0vulnerable, and 1,253\u00a0rare.\nThe fauna of Romania consists of 33,792 species of animals, 33,085 invertebrate and 707 vertebrate, with almost 400 unique species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians, including about 50% of Europe's (excluding Russia) brown bears and 20% of its wolves.\nClimate.\nOwing to its distance from open sea and its position on the southeastern portion of the European continent, Romania has a climate that is continental, with four distinct seasons. The average annual temperature is \u00a0in the south and \u00a0in the north. In summer, average maximum temperatures in Bucharest rise to , and temperatures over are fairly common in the lower-lying areas of the country. In winter, the average maximum temperature is below . Precipitation is average, with over per year only on the highest western mountains, while around Bucharest it drops to approximately .\nThere are some regional differences: in western sections, such as Banat, the climate is milder and has some Mediterranean influences; the eastern part of the country has a more pronounced continental climate. In Dobruja, the Black Sea also exerts an influence over the region's climate.\nPolitics.\nRomania is a unitary semi-presidential representative democratic republic with a structured system of governance and an active civil society. The President, elected by popular vote, serves as the head of state, representing the country in international affairs, safeguarding constitutional order, and acting as supreme commander of the Romanian Armed Forces. The Prime Minister, appointed by the President and confirmed by the Parliament, acts as the head of government, responsible for overseeing the executive branch, implementing domestic and foreign policies, and managing public administration. Legislative authority is vested in a bicameral Parliament, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate, whose members are elected through a proportional representation system. The judiciary operates independently, with the High Court of Cassation and Justice as the highest court of appeal.\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Romania performs in the mid- range on overall democratic measures, with particular strengths in inclusive suffrage and elected government.\nGovernment.\nRomania has a democratic, multi-party system, with legislative power vested in the government and the two chambers of the Parliament, more specifically the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. The latter is elected by popular vote for a maximum of two terms of five years and appoints the prime minister who in turn appoints the Council of Ministers. The legislative branch of the government, collectively known as the Parliament (residing at the Palace of the Parliament), consists of two chambers (Senate and Chamber of Deputies) whose members are elected every four years by simple plurality.\nThe justice system is independent of the other branches of government and is made up of a hierarchical system of courts with the High Court of Cassation and Justice being the supreme court of Romania. There are also courts of appeal, county courts and local courts. The Romanian judicial system is strongly influenced by the French model, is based on civil law and is inquisitorial in nature. The Constitutional Court (\"Curtea Constitu\u021bional\u0103\") is responsible for judging the compliance of laws and other state regulations with the constitution, which is the fundamental law of the country and can be amended only through a public referendum. Romania's 2007 entry into the EU has been a significant influence on its domestic policy, and including judicial reforms, increased judicial cooperation with other member states, and measures to combat corruption. The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Romania as a \"hybrid regime\" in 2024.\nForeign relations.\nSince December 1989, Romania has pursued a policy of strengthening relations with the West in general, more specifically with the United States and the EU, albeit with limited relations involving the Russian Federation. It joined NATO on 29\u00a0March 2004, the EU on 1\u00a0January 2007, while it joined the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in 1972, and is a founding member of the World Trade Organization. Romania is recognised as a middle power for its military capabilities, as well as its active diplomatic engagement on the global stage.\nRecent governments have stated that their goals include strengthening ties with and helping other countries (in particular Moldova, Ukraine, and Georgia) with better integration with the rest of the West. Romania has also made clear since the late 1990s that it supports NATO and EU membership for the democratic former Soviet republics in Eastern Europe and the Caucasus.\nRomania applied to join to the Schengen Area in 2007, acquiring full membership in 2025 along with Bulgaria. In December 2005, President Traian B\u0103sescu and United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice signed an agreement that would allow a U.S. military presence at several Romanian facilities primarily in the eastern part of the country. In 2009, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton referred to Romania as \"one of the most trustworthy and respectable\" US allies\". However, by 2025, relations had worsen, with US vice president JD Vance in February scolding \"flimsy suspicions\" and \"enormous pressure from its continental neighbours\" for causing the annulment of the 2024 Romanian presidential election in which C\u0103lin Georgescu won the first round.\nRelations with Moldova are a special case given that the two countries share the same language and a common history. A movement for unification of Moldova and Romania appeared in the early 1990s after both countries achieved emancipation from communist rule but lost ground in the mid-1990s when a new Moldovan government pursued an agenda towards preserving a Moldovan republic independent of Romania. After the 2009 protests in Moldova and the subsequent removal of Communists from power, relations between the two countries have improved considerably.\nMilitary.\nThe Romanian Armed Forces consist of land, air, and naval forces led by a Commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of National Defence, and by the president as the Supreme Commander during wartime. The Armed Forces consist of approximately 55,000 reservists and 71,500 active military personnel\u201435,800 for land, 10,700 for air, 6,600 for naval forces, and 16,500 in other fields. Total defence spending in 2023 accounted for 2.44%\u00a0of total national GDP, or approximately US$8.48\u00a0billion, with a total of $9\u00a0billion intended to be spent until 2026 for modernisation and acquisition of new equipment. Conscription stopped in 2007, when Romania switched to a volunteer army.\nThe Air Force operates F-16AM/BM MLU fighters, C-27J Spartan and C-130 Hercules transport aircraft, as well as IAR 330 and IAR 316 helicopters. A procurement programme for F-35 fifth-generation fighters is also currently being carried out. The Naval Forces operate three frigates, of which two are Type 22 frigates acquired from the British Royal Navy, as well as four corvettes. The River Flotilla operates Mihail Kog\u0103lniceanu and Sm\u00e2rdan-class river monitors.\nRomania contributed troops to the international coalition in Afghanistan beginning in 2002, with a peak deployment of 1,600 troops in 2010 (which was the 4th\u00a0largest contribution according to the US). Its combat mission in the country concluded in 2014. Romanian troops participated in the occupation of Iraq, reaching a peak of 730 soldiers before being slowly drawn down to 350 soldiers. Romania terminated its mission in Iraq and withdrew its last troops on 24\u00a0July 2009, among the last countries to do so. The frigate the \"Regele Ferdinand\" participated in the 2011 military intervention in Libya.\nIn December 2011, the Romanian Senate unanimously adopted the draft law ratifying the Romania-United States agreement signed in September of the same year that would allow the establishment and operation of a US land-based ballistic missile defence system in Romania as part of NATO's efforts to build a continental missile shield. The Aegis Ashore missile system based at Deveslu became operational in 2016.\nIn 2024, construction work started on expanding the Mihail Kog\u0103lniceanu Air Base (RoAF 57th Air Base). The air base is set to become the largest NATO base in Europe after the implementation of a project spanning 20 years.\nAdministrative divisions.\nRomania is divided into 41 counties (\"jude\u021be\") and the municipality of Bucharest. Each county is administered by a county council, responsible for local affairs, as well as a prefect responsible for the administration of national affairs at the county level. The prefect is appointed by the central government but cannot be a member of any political party. Each county is subdivided further into cities and communes, which have their own mayor and local council. There are a total of 320\u00a0cities and 2,861\u00a0communes in Romania. A total of 103\u00a0of the larger cities have municipality status, which gives them greater administrative power over local affairs. The municipality of Bucharest is a special case, as it enjoys a status on par to that of a county. It is further divided into six sectors and has a prefect, a general mayor (\"primar general\"), and a general city council.\nThe NUTS-3 (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics) level divisions of the EU reflect Romania's administrative-territorial structure and correspond to the 41\u00a0counties plus Bucharest. The cities and communes correspond to the NUTS-5 level divisions, but there are no current NUTS-4 level divisions. The NUTS-1 (four macroregions) and NUTS-2 (eight development regions) divisions exist but have no administrative capacity and are used instead for coordinating regional development projects and statistical purposes.\nEconomy.\nIn 2024, Romania had a GDP (PPP) of around $894\u00a0billion and a GDP per capita (PPP) of $47,203. According to the World Bank, Romania is a high-income economy. According to Eurostat, Romania's GDP per capita (PPS) was 77%\u00a0of the EU average (100%) in 2022, an increase from 44%\u00a0in 2007 (the year of Romania's accession to the EU), making Romania one of the fastest growing economies in the EU.\nThe Bucharest Stock Exchange (BVB) is the stock exchange of Romania, located in Bucharest. In 2024, the BVB boasted a $74 billion market capitalisation and a trading volume of $7.2 billion. As of 2024, 86 companies were listed on the exchange. In September 2020, FTSE Russell upgraded the BVB from a Frontier market to a Secondary Emerging Market.\nAfter 1989 the country experienced a decade of economic instability and decline, led in part by an obsolete industrial base and a lack of structural reform. From 2000 onwards, however, the Romanian economy was transformed into one of relative macroeconomic stability, characterised by high growth, low unemployment and declining inflation. In 2006, according to the Romanian Statistics Office, GDP growth in real terms was recorded at 7.7%,\u00a0one of the highest rates in Europe. However, the Great Recession forced the government to borrow externally, including an IMF \u20ac20\u00a0billion bailout programme. According to The World Bank, GDP per capita in purchasing power parity grew from $13,703 in 2007 to $47,903 in 2023.\nRomania's main exports are vehicles, software, clothing and textiles, industrial machinery, electrical and electronic equipment, metallurgic products, raw materials, military equipment, pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and agricultural products (fruits, vegetables, and flowers). Trade is mostly centred on the member states of the EU, with Germany, Italy and France being the country's single largest trading partners.\nIn 2005, the government replaced Romania's progressive tax system with a flat tax of 16%\u00a0for both personal income and corporate profit, among the lowest rates in the EU. The economy is based predominantly on services, which account for 56.2%\u00a0of the country's total GDP as of 2017, with industry and agriculture accounting for 30%\u00a0and 4.4%\u00a0respectively.\nApproximately 25.8%\u00a0of the Romanian workforce is employed in agriculture, one of the highest rates in Europe.\nRomania has attracted increasing amounts of foreign investment following the end of communism, with the stock of foreign direct investment (FDI) in Romania rising to \u20ac83.8\u00a0billion in June 2019. Romania's FDI outward stock (an external or foreign business either investing in or purchasing the stock of a local economy) amounted to $745\u00a0million in December 2018, the lowest value among the 28 EU member states.\nSince 1867 the official currency has been the Romanian \"leu\" (\"lion\"), which \"was redenominated, with the exchange rate set at 1 new leu = 10,000 old lei\" in 2005 according to the National Bank of Romania. As it joined the EU in 2007, Romania plans to adopt the euro in 2029.\nInfrastructure.\nAccording to the Romania's National Institute of Statistics (INS), Romania's total road network was estimated in 2015 at . The World Bank estimates the railway network at of track, the fourth-largest railway network in Europe. Romania's rail transport experienced a dramatic decline after 1989 and was estimated at 99\u00a0million passenger journeys in 2004, but has experienced a recent (2013) revival due to infrastructure improvements and partial privatisation of lines, accounting for 45%\u00a0of all passenger and freight movements in the country. Bucharest Metro, the only underground railway system, was opened in 1979 and measures with an average ridership in 2021 of 720,000 passengers during the workweek in the country. There are sixteen international commercial airports in service today. Over 12.8\u00a0million passengers flew through Bucharest's Henri Coand\u0103 International Airport in 2017.\nRomania is a net exporter of electrical energy and is 52nd worldwide in terms of consumption of electric energy. Around a third of the produced energy comes from renewable sources, mostly as hydroelectric power. It has one of the largest refining capacities in Eastern Europe, even though oil and natural gas production has been decreasing for more than a decade. With one of the largest reserves of crude oil and shale gas in Europe it is among the most energy-independent countries in the EU, and is looking to expand its nuclear power plant at Cernavod\u0103 further.\nThere were almost 18.3\u00a0million connections to the Internet in June 2014. According to Bloomberg, in 2013 Romania ranked fifth in the world, and according to \"The Independent\", it ranks number one in Europe at Internet speeds, with Timi\u0219oara ranked among the highest in the world.\nTourism.\nTourism is a significant contributor to the Romanian economy, generating around 5%\u00a0of GDP. The number of tourists has been rising steadily, reaching 9.33\u00a0million foreign tourists in 2016, according to the Worldbank. Tourism in Romania attracted \u20ac400\u00a0million in investments in 2005. More than 60%\u00a0of the foreign visitors in 2007 were from other EU countries. The popular summer attractions of Mamaia and other Black Sea Resorts attracted 1.3\u00a0million tourists in 2009.\nMost popular skiing resorts are along the Valea Prahovei and in Poiana Bra\u0219ov. Castles, fortifications, or strongholds as well as preserved medieval Transylvanian cities or towns such as Cluj-Napoca, Sibiu, Bra\u0219ov, Alba Iulia, Baia Mare, Bistri\u021ba, Media\u0219, Cisn\u0103die, Sebe\u0219, or Sighi\u0219oara also attract a large number of tourists. Bran Castle, near Bra\u0219ov, is one of the most famous attractions in Romania, drawing hundreds of thousands of tourists every year as it is often (falsely) advertised as being Dracula's Castle. Other attractions include the Danube Delta or the Sculptural Ensemble of Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i at T\u00e2rgu Jiu.\nRural tourism, focusing on getting visitors acquainted with local folklore and customs, has become an important alternative, and is targeted to promote such sites as Bran and its Dracula's Castle, the painted churches of northern Moldavia, and the wooden churches of Maramure\u0219, or the villages with fortified churches in Transylvania. The Via Transilvanica long-distance hiking and cycling trail, which crosses 10 counties in the Transylvania, Banat and Bukovina regions of the country further promotes rural slow tourism.\nIn 2014, Romania had 32,500 companies active in the hotel and restaurant industry, with a total turnover of \u20ac2.6\u00a0billion. More than 1.9\u00a0million foreign tourists visited Romania in 2014, 12%\u00a0more than in 2013. According to the country's National Statistics Institute, some 77%\u00a0came from Europe (particularly from Germany, Italy, and France), 12%\u00a0from Asia, and less than 7%\u00a0from North America.\nScience and technology.\nHistorically, Romanian researchers and inventors have made notable contributions to several fields. In the history of flight, Traian Vuia built the first aeroplane to take off under its own power and Aurel Vlaicu built and flew some of the earliest successful aircraft, while Henri Coand\u0103 discovered the Coand\u0103 effect of fluidics. Victor Babe\u0219 discovered more than 50\u00a0types of bacteria; biologist Nicolae Paulescu developed an extract of the pancreas and showed that it lowers blood sugar in diabetic dogs, thus being significant in the history of insulin; while Emil Palade received the Nobel Prize for his contributions to cell biology. Laz\u0103r Edeleanu was the first chemist to synthesise amphetamine, and he also invented the procedure of separating valuable petroleum components with selective solvents.\nDuring the 1990s and 2000s, the development of research was hampered by several factors, including corruption, low funding, and a considerable brain drain. In recent years, Romania has ranked the lowest or second-lowest in the EU by research and development spending as a percentage of GDP, standing at roughly 0.5%\u00a0in 2016 and 2017, substantially below the EU average of just over\u00a02%. The country joined the European Space Agency (ESA) in 2011, and CERN in 2016. In 2018, however, Romania lost its voting rights in the ESA due to a failure to pay \u20ac56.8\u00a0million in membership contributions to the agency.\nIn the early 2010s, the situation for science in Romania was characterised as \"rapidly improving\" albeit from a low base. In January 2011, Parliament passed a law that enforces \"strict quality control on universities and introduces tough rules for funding evaluation and peer review\". Romania was ranked 49th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nThe nuclear physics facility of the EU's proposed Extreme Light Infrastructure (ELI) laser will be built in Romania. In early 2012, Romania launched its first satellite from the Centre Spatial Guyanais in French Guiana. Starting in December 2014, Romania became a co-owner of the International Space Station.\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2021 Romanian census, Romania's population was 19,053,815. Like other countries in the region, its population is expected to decline gradually as a result of sub-replacement fertility rates and negative net migration rate. According to the 2021 Romanian census, Romanians made up 89.33%\u00a0of the population, Hungarians 6.05% and the Roma 3.44% of the population, but many ethnicities are not recorded, as they do not have ID cards. International sources give higher figures for Roma than the official census. According to the Council of Europe, the Roma make up 8.32%\u00a0of the population; this figure is difficult to verify due to the mobility of Roma and the reluctance of some of them to disclose their ethnicity. Hungarians constitute a majority in the counties of Harghita and Covasna. Other minorities include Ukrainians, Germans, Turks, Lipovans, Aromanians, Tatars, and Serbs. In 1930, there were 745,421 Germans living in Romania, but only about 36,000 remained in the country to this day. As of 2009[ [update]], there were also approximately 133,000 immigrants living in Romania, primarily from Moldova and China.\nThe total fertility rate (TFR) in 2018 was estimated at 1.36\u00a0children born per woman, which is below the replacement rate of 2.1,\u00a0and one of the lowest in the world; it remains considerably below the high of 5.82\u00a0children born per woman in 1912. In 2014, 31.2%\u00a0of births were to unmarried women.\nThe birth rate (9.49\u2030,\u00a02012) is much lower than the mortality rate (11.84\u2030,\u00a02012), resulting in a shrinking (\u22120.26%\u00a0per year, 2012) and aging population (median age: 41.6\u00a0years, 2018), one of the oldest populations in the world, with approximately 16.8%\u00a0of total population aged 65\u00a0years and over. The life expectancy in 2015 was estimated at 74.92\u00a0years (71.46\u00a0years male, 78.59\u00a0years female).\nThe number of Romanians and individuals with ancestors born in Romania living abroad is estimated at 12\u00a0million. After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, a significant number of Romanians emigrated to other European countries, North America or Australia. For example, in 1990, 96,919 Romanians permanently settled abroad.\nLanguages.\nThe official language is Romanian, a Romance language (the most widely spoken of the Eastern Romance branch), which presents a consistent degree of similarity to Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, and Istro-Romanian, but shares many features equally with the rest of the Western Romance languages, specifically Italian, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Catalan. The Romanian alphabet contains the same 26\u00a0letters of the standard Latin alphabet, as well as five additional ones (namely \"\u0103\", \"\u00e2\", \"\u00ee\", \"\u021b\", and \"\u0219\"), totalling 31.\nRomanian is spoken as a first language by 91.55%\u00a0of the entire population, while Hungarian and Vlax Romani are spoken by 6.28%\u00a0and 1.20%\u00a0of the population, respectively. There are also 40,861 native speakers of Ukrainian (concentrated in some compact regions near the border, where they form local majorities), 17,101 native speakers of Turkish, 15,943 native speakers of German, and 14,414 native speakers of Russian living in Romania.\nAccording to the Constitution, local councils ensure linguistic rights to all minorities. In localities with ethnic minorities of over\u00a020%, that minority's language can be used in the public administration, justice system, and education. Foreign citizens and stateless persons who live in Romania have access to justice and education in their own language. English and French are the main foreign languages taught in schools. In 2010, the identified 4,756,100 French speakers in the country. According to the 2012 Eurobarometer, English is spoken by 31%\u00a0of Romanians, French is spoken by\u00a017%, and Italian and German, each by\u00a07%.\nReligion.\nRomania is a secular state and has no state religion. An overwhelming majority of the population identify themselves as Christians. At the country's 2021 census, 73.60%\u00a0of respondents identified as Orthodox Christians, with 73.42%\u00a0belonging to the Romanian Orthodox Church. Other denominations include Protestantism\u00a0(6.22%), Roman Catholicism\u00a0(3.89%), and Greek Catholicism\u00a0(0.61%). From the remaining population 128,291 people belong to other Christian denominations or have another religion, which includes 58,347 Muslims (mostly of Turkish and Tatar ethnicity) and 2,708 Jewish (Jews once constituted 4%\u00a0of the Romanian population\u2014728,115 persons in the 1930 census). Additionally, 71,430 people are irreligious, 57,229 are atheist, 25,485 are agnostic, and 2,658,165 people chose to not declare their religion.\nThe Romanian Orthodox Church is an autocephalous Eastern Orthodox Church in full communion with other Orthodox churches, with a Patriarch as its leader. It is the third-largest Eastern Orthodox Church in the world, and unlike other Orthodox churches, it functions within a Latin culture and uses a Romance liturgical language. Its canonical jurisdiction covers the territories of Romania and Moldova. Romania has the world's third-largest Eastern Orthodox population.\nUrbanisation.\nAlthough 54.0%\u00a0of the population lived in urban areas in 2011, this percentage has been declining since 1996. Counties with over &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 urban population are Hunedoara, Bra\u0219ov and Constan\u021ba, while those with less than a third are D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba\u00a0(30.06%) and Giurgiu and Teleorman. Bucharest is the capital and the largest city in Romania, with a population of over 1.7\u00a0million in 2021. Its larger urban zone has a population of almost 2.2\u00a0million, which are planned to be included into a metropolitan area up to 20\u00a0times the area of the city proper.\nAnother 17\u00a0cities have a population of over 100,000, with Cluj-Napoca, Ia\u0219i, Constan\u021ba and Timi\u0219oara having more than 250,000 inhabitants, and Craiova, Bra\u0219ov and Gala\u021bi with over 200,000 inhabitants. Metropolitan areas have been constituted for most of these cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEducation.\nSince the Romanian revolution of 1989, the Romanian educational system has been in a continuous process of reform that has received mixed criticism. In 2004, some 4.4\u00a0million individuals were enrolled in school. Of these, 650,000 were in kindergarten\u00a0(three-six years), 3.11\u00a0million in primary and secondary level, and 650,000 in tertiary level (universities). In 2018, the adult literacy rate was\u00a098.8%. Kindergarten is optional between three and five years. Since 2020, compulsory schooling starts at age 5 with the last year of kindergarten (grupa mare) and is compulsory until twelfth grade. Primary and secondary education is divided into 12 or 13 grades. There is also a semi-legal, informal private tutoring system used mostly during secondary school, which prospered during the Communist regime.\nAs of 2025, Babe\u0219-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca and the University of Bucharest are included in the QS World University Rankings' top 800.\nRomania ranks fifth in the all-time medal count at the International Mathematical Olympiad with 316 total medals, dating back to 1959. Ciprian Manolescu managed to write a perfect paper (42 points) for a gold medal more times than anybody else in the history of the competition, in 1995, 1996 and 1997. Romania has achieved the highest team score in the competition, after China, Russia, the United States and Hungary. Romania also ranks sixth in the all-time medal count at the International Olympiad in Informatics with 107 total medals, dating back to 1989.\nHealthcare.\nHealthcare in Romania is mainly provided by the public sector, which runs most hospitals and offers national health insurance to nearly all citizens. In 2021, healthcare costs were US$16. 7 billion, or US$2,385 per person, making up 5.69\u20ac of GDP. Government spending is higher than in markets like Bulgaria but lower than Hungary. Spending is expected to rise by 7. US$5 billion (+37. 68%) from 2024 to 2028, reaching 27. US$3 billion by 2028.\nThe Romanian National Institute of Statistics reports over 65,000 health units in Romania, with 53,000 in urban areas and 12,000 in rural areas. There are 543 hospitals, including 488 in urban and 55 in rural areas, along with 160 other hospital-like establishments. Nearly 50% of these are large facilities with over 100 beds, while 39% are small with fewer than 50 beds. The total number of inpatient beds is 135,085, allocated mainly to psychiatry, surgery, and internal medicine among other specialties.\nCulture.\nArts and monuments.\nArchitecture\nThe topic of the origin of Romanian culture began to be discussed by the end of the 18th\u00a0century among the Transylvanian School scholars. Several writers rose to prominence in the 19th\u00a0century, including: George Co\u0219buc, Ioan Slavici, Mihail Kog\u0103lniceanu, Vasile Alecsandri, Nicolae B\u0103lcescu, Ion Luca Caragiale, Ion Creang\u0103, and Mihai Eminescu, the later being considered the greatest and most influential Romanian poet, particularly for the poem \"Luceaf\u0103rul\".\nIn the 20th\u00a0century, a number of Romanian artists and writers achieved international acclaim, including: Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco, Mircea Eliade, Nicolae Grigorescu, Marin Preda, Liviu Rebreanu, Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco, Emil Cioran, and Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i. Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i has a sculptural ensemble in T\u00e2rgu Jiu, while his sculpture \"Bird in Space\", was auctioned in 2005 for $27.5\u00a0million. Romanian-born Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, while Banat Swabian writer Herta M\u00fcller received the 2009 Nobel Prize in Literature.\nProminent Romanian painters include: Nicolae Grigorescu, \u0218tefan Luchian, Ion Andreescu Nicolae Tonitza, and Theodor Aman. Notable Romanian classical composers of the 19th\u00a0and 20th\u00a0centuries include: Ciprian Porumbescu, Anton Pann, Eduard Caudella, Mihail Jora, Dinu Lipatti, and especially George Enescu. The annual George Enescu Festival is held in Bucharest in honour of the 20th-century composer.\nContemporary musicians like Angela Gheorghiu, Gheorghe Zamfir, Inna, Alexandra Stan, and many others have achieved various levels of international acclaim. From the late 2000s through the early 2010s, the Romanian popcorn music style had established itself in the international mainstream. At the Eurovision Song Contest Romanian singers achieved third place in 2005 and 2010.\nIn cinema, several movies of the Romanian New Wave have achieved international acclaim. At the Cannes Film Festival, \"The Death of Mr. Lazarescu\" by Cristi Puiu won the in 2005, while \"4\u00a0Months, 3\u00a0Weeks and 2\u00a0Days\" by Cristian Mungiu won the festival's top prize, the , in 2007. At the Berlin International Film Festival, \"Child's Pose\" by C\u0103lin Peter Netzer won the Golden Bear in 2013.\nThe list of World Heritage Sites includes six cultural sites located within Romania, including eight painted churches of northern Moldavia, eight wooden churches of Maramure\u0219, seven villages with fortified churches in Transylvania, the Horezu Monastery, and the Historic Centre of Sighi\u0219oara. The city of Sibiu, with its Brukenthal National Museum, was selected as the 2007 European Capital of Culture and the 2019 European Region of Gastronomy. Multiple castles exist in Romania, including the popular tourist attractions of Pele\u0219 Castle, Corvin Castle, and Bran Castle or \"Dracula's Castle\".\nHolidays, traditions, and cuisine.\nThere are 12 non-working public holidays, including the Great Union Day, celebrated on 1\u00a0December in commemoration of the 1918 union of Transylvania with Romania. Winter holidays include the Christmas and New Year festivities during which various unique folklore dances and games are common: \"plugu\u0219orul\", \"sorcova\", \"ursul\", and \"capra\". The traditional Romanian dress that otherwise has largely fallen out of use during the 20th\u00a0century, is a popular ceremonial vestment worn on these festivities, especially in rural areas. There are sacrifices of live pigs during Christmas and lambs during Easter that has required a special exemption from EU law after 2007. In the Easter, traditions such as painting the eggs are very common. On 1\u00a0March \"\" gifting is featured, which is a tradition whereby females are gifted with a type of talisman that is given for good luck.\nRomanian cuisine has been influenced by Austrian and German cuisine (especially in the historical regions that had been formerly administered by the Habsburg monarchy), but also shares some similarities with other cuisines in the Balkan region such as Greek, Bulgarian, and Serbian cuisine. \"Ciorb\u0103\" includes a wide range of sour soups, while ', ' (similar to polenta), and \"sarmale\" are featured commonly in main courses.\nPork, chicken, and beef are the preferred types of meat, but lamb and fish are also quite popular. Certain traditional recipes are made in direct connection with the holidays: ', ' and ' at Christmas; ', ' and ' at Easter and other Romanian holidays. \"\u021auic\u0103\" is a strong plum brandy reaching a 70%\u00a0alcohol content which is the country's traditional alcoholic beverage, taking as much as 75%\u00a0of the national crop (Romania is one of the largest plum producers in the world). Traditional alcoholic beverages also include wine, \"rachiu\", \"palinc\u0103\" and \"vi\u0219inat\u0103\", but beer consumption has increased dramatically over recent years.\nSports.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Romania with over 219,000 registered players as of 2018[ [update]]. The market for professional football in Romania is roughly \u20ac740\u00a0million according to UEFA.\nThe governing body is the Romanian Football Federation, which belongs to UEFA. The Romania national football team played its first match in 1922 and is one of only four national teams to have taken part in the first three FIFA World Cups, the other three being Brazil, France, and Belgium. Overall, it has played in seven World Cups and had its most successful period during the 1990s, when it finished 6th at the 1994 FIFA World Cup, eventually being ranked 3rd by FIFA in 1997.\nThe most successful club is Steaua Bucure\u0219ti, who were the first Eastern European team to win the UEFA Champions League in 1986, and were runners-up in 1989. Dinamo Bucure\u0219ti reached the UEFA Champions League semi-final in 1984 and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup semi-final in 1990. Other important Romanian football clubs are Rapid Bucure\u0219ti, UTA Arad, Universitatea Craiova, Petrolul Ploie\u0219ti, CFR Cluj, Astra Giurgiu, and Viitorul Constan\u021ba (the latter having recently merged with FCV Farul Constan\u021ba).\nTennis is the second most popular sport. Romania reached the Davis Cup finals three times in 1969, 1971 and 1972. The second most popular team sport is handball. The men's team won the handball world championship in 1961, 1964, 1970, 1974 making them the third most successful nation ever in the tournament. The women's team won the world championship in 1962 and have enjoyed more success than their male counterparts in recent years. In the club competition Romanian teams have won the EHF Champions League a total of three times, Steaua Bucure\u0219ti won in 1968 as well as 1977 and Dinamo Bucure\u0219ti won in 1965. In women's handball, powerhouse CSM Bucure\u0219ti lifted the EHF Champions League trophy in 2016.\nPopular individual sports include combat sports, martial arts, and swimming. In professional boxing, Romania has produced many world champions across the weight divisions internationally recognised by governing bodies. Another popular combat sport is professional kickboxing, which has produced prominent practitioners including.\nRomania's 306 all-time Summer Olympics medals would rank 12th most among all countries, while its 89 gold medals would be 14th most. The 1984 Summer Olympics was their most successful run, where they won 53 medals in total, 20 of them gold, ultimately placing 2nd to the hosts United States in the medal rankings. Amongst countries who have never hosted the event themselves, they are second in the total number of medals earned. Gymnastics is the country's major medal-producing sport.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25446", "revid": "11630810", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25446", "title": "Robert Chambers (publisher, born 1802)", "text": "Scottish publisher and writer\nRobert Chambers (; 10 July 1802 \u2013 17 March 1871) was a Scottish publisher, geologist, evolutionary thinker, author and journal editor who, like his elder brother and business partner William Chambers, was highly influential in mid-19th-century scientific and political circles.\nChambers was an early phrenologist in the Edinburgh Phrenological Society. He was also the anonymous author of \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\", which was so controversial that his authorship was not acknowledged until after his death.\nEarly life.\nChambers was born in Peebles in the Scottish Borders 10 July 1802 to Jean Gibson (\"c\". 1781\u20131843) and James Chambers, a cotton manufacturer. He was their second son of six children. The town had changed little in centuries. The town had old and new parts, each consisting of little more than a single street. Peebles was mainly inhabited by weavers and labourers living in thatched cottages. His father, James Chambers, made his living as a cotton manufacturer. Their slate-roofed house was built by James Chambers's father as a wedding gift for his son, and the ground floor served as the family workshop.\nA small circulating library in the town, run by Alexander Elder, introduced Robert to books and developed his literary interests when he was young. Occasionally his father would buy books for the family library, and one day Robert found a complete set of the fourth edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" hidden away in a chest in the attic. He eagerly read this for many years. Near the end of his life, Chambers remembered feeling \"a profound thankfulness that such a convenient collection of human knowledge existed, and that here it was spread out like a well-plenished table before me.\" Robert's older brother, William, later recalled that for Robert, \"the acquisition of knowledge was with him the highest of earthly enjoyments.\"\nRobert was sent to local schools and showed unusual literary taste and ability, though he found his schooling to be uninspiring. His education was typical for the day. The country school, directed by James Gray, taught the boys reading, writing, and, for an additional charge, arithmetic. In grammar school it was the classics\u2014Latin and Ancient Greek, with some English composition. Boys bullied one another and the teacher administered corporal punishment in the classroom for unruly behaviour. Although uninspired by the school, Robert made up for this at the bookseller.\nBoth Robert and William were born with six fingers on each hand and six toes on each foot. Their parents attempted to correct this abnormality through operations, and while William's was successful Robert was left partially lame. So while other boys roughed it outside, Robert was content to stay indoors and study his books.\nRobert surpassed his elder brother in his education, which he continued for several years beyond William's. Robert had been destined for the ministry, but at the age of fifteen he dropped this intended career. The arrival of the power loom suddenly threatened James Chambers's cotton business, forcing him to close it down and become a draper. During this time, James began to socialise with a number of French prisoners of war on parole who were stationed in Peebles. Unfortunately, James Chambers lent these exiles a large amount of credit, and when they were abruptly transferred away he was forced to declare bankruptcy. The family moved to Edinburgh in 1813. Robert continued his education at the High School, and William became a bookseller's apprentice. In 1818 Robert, at sixteen years old, began his own business as a bookstall-keeper on Leith Walk. At first, his entire stock consisted of some old books belonging to his father, amounting to thirteen feet of shelf space and worth no more than a few pounds. By the end of the first year the value of his stock went up to twelve pounds, and modest success came gradually.\nEarly works.\nWhile Robert built up a business, his brother William expanded his own by purchasing a home-made printing press and publishing pamphlets as well as creating his own type. Soon afterwards, Robert and William decided to join forces\u2014with Robert writing and William printing. Their first joint venture was a magazine series called \"The Kaleidoscope, or Edinburgh Literary Amusement\", sold for threepence. This was issued every two weeks between 6 October 1821 and 12 January 1822. It was followed by \"Illustrations of the Author of Waverley\" (1822), which offered sketches of individuals believed to have been the inspirations for some of the characters in Walter Scott's works of fiction. The last book to be printed on William's old press was \"Traditions of Edinburgh\" (1824), derived from Robert's enthusiastic interest in the history and antiquities of Edinburgh. He followed this with \"Walks in Edinburgh\" (1825), \"Popular Rhymes of Scotland\" (1826) and \"Picture of Scotland\" (1826). This was followed by five volumes of Scottish history to form part of \"Constable's Miscellany\". In 1832 he compiled \"Gazetteer of Scotland\".\nThese books gained him the approval and personal friendship of Walter Scott. After Scott's death, Robert paid tribute to him by writing a \"Life of Sir Walter Scott\" (1832). Robert also wrote a \"History of the Rebellions in Scotland from 1638 to 1745\" (5 vols, 1828) and numerous other works on Scotland and Scottish traditions.\nMarriage.\nOn 7 December 1829 Robert married Anne Kirkwood, the only child of Jane and John Kirkwood. Together they had 14\u00a0children, three of whom died in infancy. Excluding these three, their children were Robert (Robert Chambers Jr.), Nina (Mrs. Frederick Lehmann, and mother of Rudolf Chambers Lehmann), Mary (Mrs. Alexander Mackenzie Edwards, mother of satirist Bob Edwards), Anne (Mrs. Dowie, mother of M\u00e9nie Muriel Dowie), Janet, Eliza (Mrs. William Overend Priestley), Amelia (Mrs. Rudolf Lehmann), James, William, Phoebe (Mrs. Zeigler), and Alice.\nW. &amp; R. Chambers.\nAt the beginning of 1832 Robert's brother William Chambers started a weekly publication entitled \"Chambers's Edinburgh Journal\", which speedily gained a large circulation. Robert was at first only a contributor, but after 14\u00a0volumes had appeared, he became joint editor with his brother, and his collaboration contributed more perhaps than anything else to the success of the \"Journal\". The two brothers eventually united as partners in the firm of W. &amp; R. Chambers Publishers.\nAt the same time Robert ran a bookshop and circulating library from 48 Hanover Street with his younger brother, James Chambers. Meanwhile, William ran his shop from 47 Broughton Street. Robert at this time was living close to the shop, at 27 Elder Street (demolished in the 1960s to improve access to Edinburgh Bus Station).\nAmong the other numerous works of which Robert was in whole or in part the author, the \"Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen\" (4 vols., Glasgow, 1832\u20131835), the \"Cyclop\u00e6dia of English Literature\" (1844), the \"Life and Works of Robert Burns\" (4 vols., 1851), \"Ancient Sea Margins\" (1848), the \"Domestic Annals of Scotland\" (1859\u20131861) and the \"Book of Days\" (2 vols., 1862\u20131864) were the most important.\n\"Chambers's Encyclopaedia\" (1859\u20131868), with Dr Andrew Findlater as editor, was carried out under the superintendence of the brothers. The \"Cyclop\u00e6dia of English Literature\" contains a series of admirably selected extracts from the best authors of every period, \"set in a biographical and critical history of the literature itself.\" For the \"Life of Burns\" he made diligent and laborious original investigations, gathering many hitherto unrecorded facts from the poet's sister, Mrs Begg, to whose benefit the whole profits of the work were generously devoted.\n\"Vestiges\".\nDuring the 1830s, Robert Chambers took a particularly keen interest in the then rapidly expanding field of geology, and he was elected a fellow of the Geological Society of London in 1844. Prior to this, he was elected a member of the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1840, which connected him through correspondence to numerous scientific men. William later recalls that \"His mind had become occupied with speculative theories which brought him into communication with Sir Charles Bell, George Combe, his brother Dr. Andrew Combe, Dr. Neil Arnott, Professor Edward Forbes, Dr. Samuel Brown, and other thinkers on physiology and mental philosophy.\" In 1848 Chambers published his first geological book on \"Ancient Sea Margins.\" Later, he toured Scandinavia and Canada for the purpose of geological exploration. The results of his travels were published in \"Tracings of the North of Europe\" (1851) and \"Tracings in Iceland and the Faroe Islands\" (1856).\nHowever, his most popular book, influenced by his geological studies and interest in speculative theories, was a work to which he never openly attached his name. In 1844, Chambers completed the dictation of his \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\" to his wife, Anne Kirkwood, as he recuperated from depression at his holiday home in St Andrews. The composition of \"Vestiges\" may have served a therapeutic purpose. Chambers had been an enthusiastic phrenologist in Edinburgh in the 1830s, and the anonymously authored \"Vestiges\" became an international bestseller and a powerful public influence, subsequent to Combe's \"Constitution of Man\" (1828), and anticipating the publication of Charles Darwin's \"Origin of Species\" in 1859. The first edition of \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\" was released in 1844 and published anonymously. Literary anonymity was not uncommon at the time, especially in periodical journalism. However, in the science genre, anonymity was especially rare, not least because science writers typically wanted to achieve priority for their findings.\nThe reason for Chambers's anonymity was clear enough as soon as one began reading the text. The book was arguing for a developmental view of the cosmos combining stellar evolution with progressive transmutation of species in the same spirit as the late Frenchman Jean-Baptiste Lamarck. Lamarck had been discredited among intellectuals by this time, and evolutionary (or development) theories were exceedingly unpopular, except among political radicals, and materialists. Chambers, however, tried to explicitly distance his own theory from that of Lamarck's by denying Lamarck's evolutionary mechanism any plausibility. \"Now it is possible that wants and the exercise of faculties have entered in some manner into the production of the phenomena which we have been considering; but certainly not in the way suggested by Lamarck, whose whole notion is obviously so inadequate to account for the rise of the organic kingdoms, that we only can place it with pity among the follies of the wise.\" Additionally, his work was far more sweeping in scope than any of his predecessors. \"The book, as far as I am aware,\" he writes in his concluding chapter, \"is the first attempt to connect the natural sciences in a history of creation.\"\nRobert Chambers was aware of the storm that would probably be raised by his treatment of the subject, and he did not wish to get his and his brother's publishing firm involved in any kind of scandal. The arrangements for publication, therefore, were made through a friend named Alexander Ireland, of Manchester. To further prevent the possibility of any unwanted revelations, Chambers only disclosed his authorship to four people: his wife, his brother William, Ireland, and George Combe's nephew, Robert Cox. All correspondence to and from Chambers passed through Ireland's hands first, and all letters and manuscripts were dutifully transcribed in Mrs. Chambers's hand to prevent the possibility of anyone recognizing Robert's handwriting.\nBy implying that God might not actively sustain the natural and social hierarchies, the book threatened the social order and provided ammunition to Chartists and revolutionaries. Anglican clergymen and naturalists attacked the book. The geologist Adam Sedgwick predicted \"ruin and confusion in such a creed\" which, if taken up by the working classes, \"will undermine the whole moral and social fabric\" bringing \"discord and deadly mischief in its train\". In contrast, many Quakers and Unitarians liked the book. The Unitarian physiologist William Benjamin Carpenter called it \"a very beautiful and a very interesting book\", and helped Chambers to correct later editions. Critics thanked God that the author began \"in ignorance and presumption\", for the revised versions \"would have been much more dangerous\". Nevertheless, the book caused a sensation and quickly went through a number of new editions. \"Vestiges\" brought widespread discussion of evolution out of the streets and gutter presses and into the drawing rooms of respectable men and women.\nOther activities.\nChambers gave a talk on ancient beaches at the British Association for the Advancement of Science meeting at Oxford in May 1847. An observer named Andrew Crombie Ramsay at the meeting reported that Chambers \"pushed his conclusions to a most unwarrantable length and got roughly handled on account of it by Buckland, De la Beche, Sedgwick, Murchison, and Lyell. The last told me afterwards that he did so purposely that [Chambers] might see that reasonings in the style of the author of the Vestiges would not be tolerated among scientific men.\" On the Sunday Samuel Wilberforce, Bishop of Oxford, used his sermon at St. Mary's Church on \"the wrong way of doing science\" to deliver a stinging attack obviously aimed at Chambers. The church, \"crowded to suffocation\" with geologists, astronomers and zoologists, heard jibes about the \"half-learned\" seduced by the \"foul temptation\" of speculation looking for a self-sustaining universe in a \"mocking spirit of unbelief\", showing a failure to understand the \"modes of the Creator's acting\" or to meet the responsibilities of a gentleman. Chambers denounced this as an attempt to stifle progressive opinion, but others thought he must have gone home \"with the feeling of a martyr\".\nNear the close of autumn 1848, Chambers allowed himself to be brought forward as a candidate for the administrative position of Lord Provost of Edinburgh. The timing was especially poor, with others seeking any means possible to try and discredit his character. His adversaries found the perfect opportunity to do so in the swirling allegations that he was the author of the much reviled \"Vestiges\". William Chambers, in his \"Memoir of Robert Chambers\", still sworn to secrecy despite his brother's recent passing, makes his only mention of \"Vestiges\" in connection with this affair: \"(Robert) might have been well assured that a rumor to the effect that he was the author of 'Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation' would be used to his disadvantage, and that anything he might say on the subject would be unavailing.\" Robert withdrew his candidacy in disgust.\nIn 1851 Chambers was one of a group of writers who joined the publisher John Chapman in reinvigorating the \"Westminster Review\" as a flagship of free thought and reform, spreading the ideas of evolutionism.\nRobert Chambers was a golfer and was elected an honorary member of the Musselburgh Golf Club (now Royal Musselburgh Golf Club) on 14 September 1833. His son, who followed him into the publishing business, was a renowned player and became Champion Golfer in 1858 as a member of Bruntsfield Links Golfing Society.\n\"Book of Days\".\nThe \"Book of Days\" was Chambers's last major publication, and perhaps his most elaborate. It was a miscellany of popular antiquities in connection with the calendar, and it is supposed that his excessive labour in connexion with this book hastened his death. Two years before, the University of St Andrews had conferred on him the degree of Doctor of Laws, and he was elected a member of the Athenaeum Club in London.\nDeath.\nRobert Chambers died on 17 March 1871 in St Andrews. He was buried in the Cathedral burial ground in the interior of the old Church of St. Regulus, according to his wishes. The grave lies against the southern wall of the structure attaching the roofless section, east of the tower. A memorial window was also erected to Robert by his brother William in St Giles Cathedral next to a larger window to William himself, placed at the time of his restoration of the cathedral. The pair of windows lie in the northern transept.\nA year after Robert's death, his brother William published a biography under the title \"Memoir of Robert Chambers; With Autobiographical Reminiscences of William Chambers\". However, the book did not reveal Robert's authorship of the \"Vestiges\". Milton Millhauser, in his 1959 book \"Just Before Darwin\", wrote the following about William's memoir: \"The fraternal \"Memoir of Robert Chambers\" might have been an excellent biography had not the author been concerned to keep the \"Vestiges\" secret and one or two others. Despite the author's intelligence and sympathy, such omissions inevitably produced a distorted picture\" (p.\u00a0191, note 7). The book contains some reminiscences by Robert of his early life, with the rest of the narration filled in by William.\nAlexander Ireland, in 1884, issued a 12th edition of \"Vestiges\" with Robert Chambers finally listed as the author and a preface giving an account of its authorship. Ireland felt that there was no longer any reason for concealing the author's name.\nWorks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrincipal writings.\nA collection of Robert Chambers's books is available free at https://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25447", "revid": "319909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25447", "title": "Rhetoric", "text": "Art of persuasion\nRhetoric is the art of persuasion. It is one of the three ancient arts of discourse (trivium) along with grammar and logic/dialectic. As an academic discipline within the humanities, rhetoric aims to study the techniques that speakers or writers use to inform, persuade, and motivate their audiences. Rhetoric also provides heuristics for understanding, discovering, and developing arguments for particular situations.\nAristotle defined rhetoric as \"the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion\", and since mastery of the art was necessary for victory in a case at law, for passage of proposals in the assembly, or for fame as a speaker in civic ceremonies, he called it \"a combination of the science of logic and of the ethical branch of politics\". Aristotle also identified three persuasive audience appeals: logos, pathos, and ethos. The five canons of rhetoric, or phases of developing a persuasive speech, were first codified in classical Rome: invention, arrangement, style, memory, and delivery.\nFrom Ancient Greece to the late 19th century, rhetoric played a central role in Western education and Islamic education in training orators, lawyers, counsellors, historians, statesmen, and poets.\nUses.\nScope.\nScholars have debated the scope of rhetoric since ancient times. Although some have limited rhetoric to the specific realm of political discourse, to many modern scholars it encompasses every aspect of culture. Contemporary studies of rhetoric address a much more diverse range of domains than was the case in ancient times. While classical rhetoric trained speakers to be effective persuaders in public forums and in institutions such as courtrooms and assemblies, contemporary rhetoric investigates human discourse writ large. Rhetoricians have studied the discourses of a wide variety of domains, including the natural and social sciences, fine art, religion, journalism, digital media, fiction, history, cartography, and architecture, along with the more traditional domains of politics and the law.\nBecause the ancient Greeks valued public political participation, rhetoric emerged as an important curriculum for those desiring to influence politics. Rhetoric is still associated with its political origins. However, even the original instructors of Western speech\u2014the Sophists\u2014disputed this limited view of rhetoric. According to Sophists like Gorgias, a successful rhetorician could speak convincingly on a topic in any field, regardless of his experience in that field. This suggested rhetoric could be a means of communicating any expertise, not just politics. In his \"Encomium to Helen\", Gorgias even applied rhetoric to fiction by seeking, for his amusement, to prove the blamelessness of the mythical Helen of Troy in starting the Trojan War.\nPlato defined the scope of rhetoric by discarding any connotation of religious ritual or magical incantation, simply taking the term in its literal sense, which means \"leading the soul\" through words. He criticized the Sophists for using rhetoric to deceive rather than to discover truth. In \"Gorgias\", one of his Socratic Dialogues, Plato defines rhetoric as the persuasion of ignorant masses within the courts and assemblies. Rhetoric, in Plato's opinion, is merely a form of flattery and functions similarly to culinary arts, which mask the undesirability of unhealthy food by making it taste good. Plato considered any speech of lengthy prose aimed at flattery as within the scope of rhetoric. Some scholars, however, contest the idea that Plato despised rhetoric and instead view his dialogues as a dramatization of complex rhetorical principles. Socrates explained the relationship between rhetoric in flattery when he maintained that a rhetorician who teaches anyone how to persuade people in an assembly to do what he wants, without knowledge of what is just or unjust, engages in a kind of flattery (\"kolakeia\") that constitutes an image (\"eidolon\") of a part of the art of politics.\nAristotle both redeemed rhetoric from Plato and narrowed its focus by defining three genres of rhetoric\u2014deliberative, forensic or judicial, and epideictic. Yet, even as he provided order to existing rhetorical theories, Aristotle generalized the definition of rhetoric to be the ability to identify the appropriate means of persuasion in a given situation based upon the art of rhetoric (\"techn\u00ea\"). This made rhetoric applicable to all fields, not just politics. Aristotle viewed the enthymeme based upon logic (especially, based upon the syllogism) as the basis of rhetoric.\nAristotle also outlined generic constraints that focused the rhetorical art squarely within the domain of public political practice. He restricted rhetoric to the domain of the contingent or probable: those matters that admit multiple legitimate opinions or arguments.\nSince the time of Aristotle, logic has changed. For example, modal logic has undergone a major development that also modifies rhetoric.\nThe contemporary neo-Aristotelian and neo-Sophistic positions on rhetoric mirror the division between the Sophists and Aristotle. Neo-Aristotelians generally study rhetoric as political discourse, while the neo-Sophistic view contends that rhetoric cannot be so limited. Rhetorical scholar Michael Leff characterizes the conflict between these positions as viewing rhetoric as a \"thing contained\" versus a \"container\". The neo-Aristotelian view threatens the study of rhetoric by restraining it to such a limited field, ignoring many critical applications of rhetorical theory, criticism, and practice. Simultaneously, the neo-Sophists threaten to expand rhetoric beyond a point of coherent theoretical value.\nIn more recent years, people studying rhetoric have tended to enlarge its object domain beyond speech. Kenneth Burke asserted humans use rhetoric to resolve conflicts by identifying shared characteristics and interests in symbols. People engage in identification, either to assign themselves or another to a group. This definition of rhetoric as identification broadens the scope from strategic and overt political persuasion to the more implicit tactics of identification found in an immense range of sources. Burke focused on the interplay of identification and division, maintaining that identification compensates for an original division by preventing a strict separation between objects, people, and spaces. This is achieved by assigning to them common properties through linguistic symbols.\nAmong the many scholars who have since pursued Burke's line of thought, James Boyd White sees rhetoric as a broader domain of social experience in his notion of constitutive rhetoric. Influenced by theories of social construction, White argues that culture is \"reconstituted\" through language. Just as language influences people, people influence language. Language is socially constructed, and depends on the meanings people attach to it. Because language is not rigid and changes depending on the situation, the very usage of language is rhetorical. An author, White would say, is always trying to construct a new world and persuading his or her readers to share that world within the text.\nPeople engage in rhetoric any time they speak or produce meaning. Even in the field of science, via practices which were once viewed as being merely the objective testing and reporting of knowledge, scientists persuade their audience to accept their findings by sufficiently demonstrating that their study or experiment was conducted reliably and resulted in sufficient evidence to support their conclusions.\nThe vast scope of rhetoric is difficult to define. Political discourse remains the paradigmatic example for studying and theorizing specific techniques and conceptions of persuasion or rhetoric.\nAs a civic art.\nThroughout European History, rhetoric meant persuasion in public and political settings such as assemblies and courts. Because of its associations with democratic institutions, rhetoric is commonly said to flourish in open and democratic societies with rights of free speech, free assembly, and political enfranchisement for some portion of the population. Those who classify rhetoric as a civic art believe that rhetoric has the power to shape communities, form the character of citizens, and greatly affect civic life.\nRhetoric was viewed as a civic art by several of the ancient philosophers. Aristotle and Isocrates were two of the first to see rhetoric in this light. In \"Antidosis\", Isocrates states, \"We have come together and founded cities and made laws and invented arts; and, generally speaking, there is no institution devised by man which the power of speech has not helped us to establish.\" With this statement he argues that rhetoric is a fundamental part of civic life in every society and that it has been necessary in the foundation of all aspects of society. He further argues in \"Against the Sophists\" that rhetoric, although it cannot be taught to just anyone, is capable of shaping the character of man. He writes, \"I do think that the study of political discourse can help more than any other thing to stimulate and form such qualities of character.\" Aristotle, writing several years after Isocrates, supported many of his arguments and argued for rhetoric as a civic art.\nIn the words of Aristotle, in the \"Rhetoric\", rhetoric is \"...the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion\". According to Aristotle, this art of persuasion could be used in public settings in three different ways: \"A member of the assembly decides about future events, a juryman about past events: while those who merely decide on the orator's skill are observers. From this it follows that there are three divisions of oratory\u2014(1) political, (2) forensic, and (3) the ceremonial oratory of display\". Eugene Garver, in his critique of Aristotle's \"Rhetoric\", confirms that Aristotle viewed rhetoric as a civic art. Garver writes, \"\"Rhetoric\" articulates a civic art of rhetoric, combining the almost incompatible properties of and appropriateness to citizens.\" Each of Aristotle's divisions plays a role in civic life and can be used in a different way to affect the .\nBecause rhetoric is a public art capable of shaping opinion, some of the ancients, including Plato found fault in it. They claimed that while it could be used to improve civic life, it could be used just as easily to deceive or manipulate. The masses were incapable of analyzing or deciding anything on their own and would therefore be swayed by the most persuasive speeches. Thus, civic life could be controlled by whoever could deliver the best speech. Plato explores the problematic moral status of rhetoric twice: in \"Gorgias\" and in \"The Phaedrus\", a dialogue best-known for its commentary on love.\nMore trusting in the power of rhetoric to support a republic, the Roman orator Cicero argued that art required something more than eloquence. A good orator needed also to be a good person, enlightened on a variety of civic topics. In \"De Oratore\", modeled on Plato's dialogues, Cicero emphasized that effective rhetoric comes from a combination of wisdom (sapientia) and eloquence (eloquentia). According to Cicero, the ideal orator must demonstrate not only stylistic skill but also moral integrity and broad learning, thus uniting theory and practice for the betterment of the state. Influenced by Aristotelian ideas, Cicero advanced the tradition by systematizing the five canons of rhetoric\u2014inventio (invention), dispositio (arrangement), elocutio (style), memoria (memory), and pronuntiatio (delivery)\u2014which he saw as key to crafting persuasive discourse. In this view, a well-trained orator, who draws from philosophy, law, and other disciplines, is best able to address civic and ethical challenges, thus underscoring Cicero's vision of rhetoric as both an intellectual and ethical pursuit.\nModern works continue to support the claims of the ancients that rhetoric is an art capable of influencing civic life. In \"Political Style\", Robert Hariman claims that \"questions of freedom, equality, and justice often are raised and addressed through performances ranging from debates to demonstrations without loss of moral content\". James Boyd White argues that rhetoric is capable not only of addressing issues of political interest but that it can influence culture as a whole. In his book, \"When Words Lose Their Meaning\", he argues that words of persuasion and identification define community and civic life. He states that words produce \"the methods by which culture is maintained, criticized, and transformed\".\nRhetoric remains relevant as a civic art. In speeches, as well as in non-verbal forms, rhetoric continues to be used as a tool to influence communities from local to national levels.\nAs a political tool.\nPolitical parties employ \"manipulative rhetoric\" to advance their party-line goals and lobbyist agendas. They use it to portray themselves as champions of compassion, freedom, and culture, all while implementing policies that appear to contradict these claims. It serves as a form of political propaganda, presented to sway and maintain public opinion in their favor, and garner a positive image, potentially at the expense of suppressing dissent or criticism. An example of this is the government's actions in freezing bank accounts and regulating internet speech, ostensibly to protect the vulnerable and preserve freedom of expression, despite contradicting values and rights.\nGoing back to the fifth century BCE, the term rhetoric originated in Ancient Greece. During this period, a new government (democracy) had been formed and as speech was the main method of information, an effective communication strategy was needed. Sophists, a group of intellectuals from Sicily, taught the ancient Greeks the art of persuasive speech in order to be able to navigate themselves in the court and senate. This new technique was then used as an effective method of speech in political speeches and throughout government. Consequently people began to fear that persuasive speech would overpower truth. However, Aristotle argued that speech can be used to classify, study, and interpret speeches and as a useful skill. Aristotle believed that this technique was an art, and that persuasive speech could have truth and logic embedded within it. In the end, rhetoric speech still remained popular and was used by many scholars and philosophers.\nAs a course of study.\nThe study of rhetoric trains students to speak and/or write effectively, and to critically understand and analyze discourse. It is concerned with how people use symbols, especially language, to reach agreement that permits coordinated effort.\nRhetoric as a course of study has evolved since its ancient beginnings, and has adapted to the particular exigencies of various times, venues, and applications ranging from architecture to literature. Although the curriculum has transformed in a number of ways, it has generally emphasized the study of principles and rules of composition as a means for moving audiences.\nRhetoric began as a civic art in Ancient Greece where students were trained to develop tactics of oratorical persuasion, especially in legal disputes. Rhetoric originated in a school of pre-Socratic philosophers known as the Sophists c.. Demosthenes and Lysias emerged as major orators during this period, and Isocrates and Gorgias as prominent teachers. Modern teachings continue to reference these rhetoricians and their work in discussions of classical rhetoric and persuasion.\nRhetoric was taught in universities during the Middle Ages as one of the three original liberal arts or trivium (along with logic and grammar). During the medieval period, political rhetoric declined as republican oratory died out and the emperors of Rome garnered increasing authority. With the rise of European monarchs, rhetoric shifted into courtly and religious applications. Augustine exerted strong influence on Christian rhetoric in the Middle Ages, advocating the use of rhetoric to lead audiences to truth and understanding, especially in the church. The study of liberal arts, he believed, contributed to rhetorical study: \"In the case of a keen and ardent nature, fine words will come more readily through reading and hearing the eloquent than by pursuing the rules of rhetoric.\" Poetry and letter writing became central to rhetorical study during the Middle Ages. After the fall of the Roman republic, poetry became a tool for rhetorical training since there were fewer opportunities for political speech.131 Letter writing was the primary way business was conducted both in state and church, so it became an important aspect of rhetorical education.\nRhetorical education became more restrained as style and substance separated in 16th-century France, and attention turned to the scientific method. Influential scholars like Peter Ramus argued that the processes of invention and arrangement should be elevated to the domain of philosophy, while rhetorical instruction should be chiefly concerned with the use of figures and other forms of the ornamentation of language. Scholars such as Francis Bacon developed the study of \"scientific rhetoric\" which rejected the elaborate style characteristic of classical oration. This plain language carried over to John Locke's teaching, which emphasized concrete knowledge and steered away from ornamentation in speech, further alienating rhetorical instruction\u2014which was identified wholly with such ornamentation\u2014from the pursuit of knowledge.\nIn the 18th century, rhetoric assumed a more social role, leading to the creation of new education systems (predominantly in England): \"Elocution schools\" in which girls and women analyzed classic literature, most notably the works of William Shakespeare, and discussed pronunciation tactics.\nThe study of rhetoric underwent a revival with the rise of democratic institutions during the late 18th and early 19th centuries. Hugh Blair was a key early leader of this movement. In his most famous work, \"Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres\", he advocates rhetorical study for common citizens as a resource for social success. Many American colleges and secondary schools used Blair's text throughout the 19th century to train students of rhetoric.\nPolitical rhetoric also underwent renewal in the wake of the U.S. and French revolutions. The rhetorical studies of ancient Greece and Rome were resurrected as speakers and teachers looked to Cicero and others to inspire defenses of the new republics. Leading rhetorical theorists included John Quincy Adams of Harvard, who advocated the democratic advancement of rhetorical art. Harvard's founding of the Boylston Professorship of Rhetoric and Oratory sparked the growth of the study of rhetoric in colleges across the United States. Harvard's rhetoric program drew inspiration from literary sources to guide organization and style, and studies the rhetoric used in political communication to illustrate how political figures persuade audiences. William G. Allen became the first American college professor of rhetoric, at New-York Central College, 1850\u20131853.\nDebate clubs and lyceums also developed as forums in which common citizens could hear speakers and sharpen debate skills. The American lyceum in particular was seen as both an educational and social institution, featuring group discussions and guest lecturers. These programs cultivated democratic values and promoted active participation in political analysis.\nThroughout the 20th century, rhetoric developed as a concentrated field of study, with the establishment of rhetorical courses in high schools and universities. Courses such as public speaking and speech analysis apply fundamental Greek theories (such as the modes of persuasion: , , and ) and trace rhetorical development through history. Rhetoric earned a more esteemed reputation as a field of study with the emergence of Communication Studies departments and of Rhetoric and Composition programs within English departments in universities, and in conjunction with the linguistic turn in Western philosophy. Rhetorical study has broadened in scope, and is especially used by the fields of marketing, politics, and literature.\nAnother area of rhetoric is the study of cultural rhetorics, which is the communication that occurs between cultures and the study of the way members of a culture communicate with each other. These ideas can then be studied and understood by other cultures, in order to bridge gaps in modes of communication and help different cultures communicate effectively with each other. James Zappen defines cultural rhetorics as the idea that rhetoric is concerned with negotiation and listening, not persuasion, which differs from ancient definitions. Some ancient rhetoric was disparaged because its persuasive techniques could be used to teach falsehoods. Communication as studied in cultural rhetorics is focused on listening and negotiation, and has little to do with persuasion. Cultural rhetoric is not a singular definition or any one thing, but instead an approach to rhetoric that highlights the connection of culture and rhetoric. The article \u201cInterfacing Cultural Rhetorics: A History and a Call\u201d argues that culture and rhetoric should not be viewed only individually, as they often overlap. Culture can be studied both as a process and as a context, while rhetoric highlights how these cultural processes and contexts are expressed and negotiated. An important theme from the article is that cultural rhetorics emphasized listening and negotiating. Bacon\u2019s analysis of coming out narratives highlights how rhetorics are not simply for persuasion, but can help create meaning and \u201cwrite new bodies into existence\u201d. Indigenous rhetoricians, including Malea Powell and Angela Haas, emphasize the importance of place, story, and relationships in cultural rhetorics, highlighting their decolonial nature.\nCanons.\nRhetorical education focused on five canons. The &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Five Canons of Rhetoric serve as a guide to creating persuasive messages and arguments:\nMemory was added much later to the original four canons.\nMusic.\nDuring the Renaissance rhetoric enjoyed a resurgence, and as a result nearly every author who wrote about music before the Romantic era discussed rhetoric. Joachim Burmeister wrote in 1601, \"there is only little difference between music and the nature of oration\". Christoph Bernhard in the latter half of the century said \"...until the art of music has attained such a height in our own day, that it may indeed be compared to a rhetoric, in view of the multitude of figures\".\nKnowledge.\nEpistemology and rhetoric have been compared to one another for decades, but the specifications of their similarities have gone undefined. Since scholar Robert L. Scott stated that, \"rhetoric is epistemic,\" rhetoricians and philosophers alike have struggled to concretely define the expanse of implications these words hold. Those who have identified this inconsistency maintain the idea that Scott's relation is important, but requires further study.\nThe root of the issue lies in the ambiguous use of the term rhetoric itself, as well as the epistemological terms knowledge, certainty, and truth. Though counterintuitive and vague, Scott's claims are accepted by some academics, but are then used to draw different conclusions. Sonja K. Foss, for example, takes on the view that, \"rhetoric creates knowledge,\" whereas James Herrick writes that rhetoric assists in people's ability to form beliefs, which are defined as knowledge once they become widespread in a community.\nIt is unclear whether Scott holds that certainty is an inherent part of establishing knowledge, his references to the term abstract. He is not the only one, as the debate's persistence in philosophical circles long predates his addition of rhetoric. There is an overwhelming majority that does support the concept of certainty as a requirement for knowledge, but it is at the definition of certainty where parties begin to diverge. One definition maintains that certainty is subjective and feeling-based, the other that it is a byproduct of justification.\nThe more commonly accepted definition of rhetoric claims it is synonymous with persuasion. For rhetorical purposes, this definition, like many others, is too broad. The same issue presents itself with definitions that are too narrow. Rhetoricians in support of the epistemic view of rhetoric have yet to agree in this regard.\nPhilosophical teachings refer to knowledge as a justified true belief. However, the Gettier Problem explores the room for fallacy in this concept. Therefore, the Gettier Problem impedes the effectivity of the argument of Richard A. Cherwitz and James A. Hikins, who employ the justified true belief standpoint in their argument for rhetoric as epistemic. Celeste Condit Railsback takes a different approach, drawing from Ray E. McKerrow's system of belief based on validity rather than certainty.\nWilliam D. Harpine refers to the issue of unclear definitions that occurs in the theories of \"rhetoric is epistemic\" in his 2004 article \"What Do You Mean, Rhetoric Is Epistemic?\". In it, he focuses on uncovering the most appropriate definitions for the terms \"rhetoric\", \"knowledge\", and \"certainty\". According to Harpine, certainty is either objective or subjective. Although both Scotts and Cherwitz and Hikins theories deal with some form of certainty, Harpine believes that knowledge is not required to be neither objectively nor subjectively certain. In terms of \"rhetoric\", Harpine argues that the definition of rhetoric as \"the art of persuasion\" is the best choice in the context of this theoretical approach of rhetoric as epistemic. Harpine then proceeds to present two methods of approaching the idea of rhetoric as epistemic based on the definitions presented. One centers on Alston's view that one's beliefs are justified if formed by one's normal doxastic while the other focuses on the causal theory of knowledge. Both approaches manage to avoid Gettier's problems and do not rely on unclear conceptions of certainty.\nIn \u201cWhat Do You Mean, Rhetoric Is Epistemic?\u201d (1992), William D. Harpine explores the idea that rhetoric not only communicates knowledge but helps to create it. Based on the work of Robert L. Scott, Harpine argues that knowledge is formed through persuasion, dialogue, and reasoning within communities rather than found as fixed truth. He explains how certainty is subjective, shaped by individual and cultural belief rather than by absolute objectivity. Harpine also connects to the Gettier Problem, which challenges the idea that \u201cjustified true belief\u201d is equal to knowledge. By emphasizing communication and collaboration, Harpine closes that rhetoric functions as a social process in which people build, test, and revise what they accept as knowledge. \nIn the discussion of rhetoric and epistemology, comes the question of ethics. Is it ethical for rhetoric to present itself in the branch of knowledge? Scott rears this question, addressing the issue, not with ambiguity in the definitions of other terms, but against subjectivity regarding certainty. Ultimately, according to Thomas O. Sloane, rhetoric and epistemology exist as counterparts, working towards the same purpose of establishing knowledge, with the common enemy of subjective certainty.\nHistory and development.\nRhetoric is a persuasive speech that holds people to a common purpose and therefore facilitates collective action. During the fifth century BCE, Athens had become active in metropolis and people all over there. During this time the Greek city state had been experimenting with a new form of government\u2014democracy, \"demos\", \"the people\". Political and cultural identity had been tied to the city area\u2014the citizens of Athens formed institutions to the red processes: are the Senate, jury trials, and forms of public discussions, but people needed to learn how to navigate these new institutions. With no forms of passing on the information, other than word of mouth the Athenians needed an effective strategy to inform the people. A group of wandering Sicilians, later known as the Sophists, began teaching the Athenians persuasive speech, with the goal of navigating the courts and senate. The sophists became speech teachers known as \"Sophia;\" Greek for \"wisdom\" and root for philosophy, or \"love of wisdom\"\u2014the sophists came to be common term for someone who sold wisdom for money. Although there is no clear understanding why the Sicilians engaged to educating the Athenians persuasive speech. It is known that the Athenians did, indeed rely on persuasive speech, more during public speak, and four new political processes, also increasing the sophists trainings leading too many victories for legal cases, public debate, and even a simple persuasive speech. This ultimately led to concerns rising on falsehood over truth, with highly trained, persuasive speakers, knowingly, misinforming.\nRhetoric has its origins in Mesopotamia. Some of the earliest examples of rhetoric can be found in the Akkadian writings of the princess and priestess Enheduanna (c.). As the first named author in history, Enheduanna's writing exhibits numerous rhetorical features that would later become canon in Ancient Greece. Enheduanna's \"The Exaltation of Inanna\", includes an exordium, argument, and peroration, as well as elements of , , and , and repetition and metonymy. She is also known for describing her process of invention in \"The Exaltation of Inanna\", moving between first- and third-person address to relate her composing process in collaboration with the goddess Inanna, reflecting a mystical enthymeme in drawing upon a Cosmic audience.\nLater examples of early rhetoric can be found in the Neo-Assyrian Empire during the time of Sennacherib (\u00a0BCE).\nIn ancient Egypt, rhetoric had existed since at least the Middle Kingdom period (c.). The five canons of eloquence in ancient Egyptian rhetoric were silence, timing, restraint, fluency, and truthfulness. The Egyptians held eloquent speaking in high esteem. Egyptian rules of rhetoric specified that \"knowing when not to speak is essential, and very respected, rhetorical knowledge\", making rhetoric a \"balance between eloquence and wise silence\". They also emphasized \"adherence to social behaviors that support a conservative status quo\" and they held that \"skilled speech should support, not question, society\".\nIn ancient China, rhetoric dates back to the Chinese philosopher, Confucius (\u00a0BCE). The tradition of Confucianism emphasized the use of eloquence in speaking.\nThe use of rhetoric can also be found in the ancient Biblical tradition.\nAncient Greece.\nIn Europe, organized thought about public speaking began in ancient Greece.\nIn ancient Greece, the earliest mention of oratorical skill occurs in Homer's \"Iliad\", in which heroes like Achilles, Hector, and Odysseus were honored for their ability to advise and exhort their peers and followers (the or army) to wise and appropriate action. With the rise of the democratic , speaking skill was adapted to the needs of the public and political life of cities in ancient Greece. Greek citizens used oratory to make political and judicial decisions, and to develop and disseminate philosophical ideas. For modern students, it can be difficult to remember that the wide use and availability of written texts is a phenomenon that was just coming into vogue in Classical Greece. In Classical times, many of the great thinkers and political leaders performed their works before an audience, usually in the context of a competition or contest for fame, political influence, and cultural capital. In fact, many of them are known only through the texts that their students, followers, or detractors wrote down. was the Greek term for \"orator\": A was a citizen who regularly addressed juries and political assemblies and who was thus understood to have gained some knowledge about public speaking in the process, though in general facility with language was often referred to as , \"skill with arguments\" or \"verbal artistry\".\nPossibly the first study about the power of language may be attributed to the philosopher Empedocles (d. c.), whose theories on human knowledge would provide a basis for many future rhetoricians. The first written manual is attributed to Corax and his pupil Tisias. Their work, as well as that of many of the early rhetoricians, grew out of the courts of law; Tisias, for example, is believed to have written judicial speeches that others delivered in the courts.\nRhetoric evolved as an important art, one that provided the orator with the forms, means, and strategies for persuading an audience of the correctness of the orator's arguments. Today the term \"rhetoric\" can be used at times to refer only to the form of argumentation, often with the pejorative connotation that rhetoric is a means of obscuring the truth. Classical philosophers believed quite the contrary: the skilled use of rhetoric was essential to the discovery of truths, because it provided the means of ordering and clarifying arguments.\nSophists.\nTeaching in oratory was popularized in \u00a0BCE by itinerant teachers known as sophists, the best known of whom were Protagoras (c.), Gorgias (c.), and Isocrates (\u00a0BCE). Aspasia of Miletus is believed to be one of the first women to engage in private and public rhetorical activities as a Sophist. The Sophists were a disparate group who travelled from city to city, teaching in public places to attract students and offer them an education. Their central focus was on , or what we might broadly refer to as discourse, its functions and powers. They defined parts of speech, analyzed poetry, parsed close synonyms, invented argumentation strategies, and debated the nature of reality. They claimed to make their students better, or, in other words, to teach virtue. They thus claimed that human excellence was not an accident of fate or a prerogative of noble birth, but an art or \"\" that could be taught and learned. They were thus among the first humanists.\nSeveral Sophists also questioned received wisdom about the gods and the Greek culture, which they believed was taken for granted by Greeks of their time, making these Sophists among the first agnostics. For example, some argued that cultural practices were a function of convention or rather than blood or birth or . They argued further that the morality or immorality of any action could not be judged outside of the cultural context within which it occurred. The well-known phrase, \"Man is the measure of all things\" arises from this belief. One of the Sophists' most famous, and infamous, doctrines has to do with probability and counter arguments. They taught that every argument could be countered with an opposing argument, that an argument's effectiveness derived from how \"likely\" it appeared to the audience (its probability of seeming true), and that any probability argument could be countered with an inverted probability argument. Thus, if it seemed likely that a strong, poor man were guilty of robbing a rich, weak man, the strong poor man could argue, on the contrary, that this very likelihood (that he would be a suspect) makes it unlikely that he committed the crime, since he would most likely be apprehended for the crime. They also taught and were known for their ability to make the weaker (or worse) argument the stronger (or better). Aristophanes famously parodies the clever inversions that sophists were known for in his play \"The Clouds\".\nThe word \"sophistry\" developed negative connotations in ancient Greece that continue today, but in ancient Greece, Sophists were popular and well-paid professionals, respected for their abilities and also criticized for their excesses.\nAccording to William Keith and Christian Lundberg, as the Greek society shifted towards more democratic values, the Sophists were responsible for teaching the newly democratic Greek society the importance of persuasive speech and strategic communication for its new governmental institutions.\nIsocrates.\nIsocrates (\u00a0BCE), like the Sophists, taught public speaking as a means of human improvement, but he worked to distinguish himself from the Sophists, whom he saw as claiming far more than they could deliver. He suggested that while an art of virtue or excellence did exist, it was only one piece, and the least, in a process of self-improvement that relied much more on honing one's talent, desire, constant practice, and the imitation of good models. Isocrates believed that practice in speaking publicly about noble themes and important questions would improve the character of both speaker and audience while also offering the best service to a city. Isocrates was an outspoken champion of rhetoric as a mode of civic engagement. He thus wrote his speeches as \"models\" for his students to imitate in the same way that poets might imitate Homer or Hesiod, seeking to inspire in them a desire to attain fame through civic leadership. His was the first permanent school in Athens and it is likely that Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum were founded in part as a response to Isocrates. Though he left no handbooks, his speeches (\"Antidosis\" and \"Against the Sophists\" are most relevant to students of rhetoric) became models of oratory and keys to his entire educational program. He was one of the canonical \"Ten Attic Orators\". He influenced Cicero and Quintilian, and through them, the entire educational system of the west.\nPlato.\nPlato (\u00a0BCE) outlined the differences between true and false rhetoric in a number of dialogues\u2014particularly the \"Gorgias\" and \"Phaedrus\", dialogues in which Plato disputes the sophistic notion that the art of persuasion (the Sophists' art, which he calls \"rhetoric\"), can exist independent of the art of dialectic. Plato claims that since Sophists appeal only to what seems probable, they are not advancing their students and audiences, but simply flattering them with what they want to hear. While Plato's condemnation of rhetoric is clear in the \"Gorgias\", in the \"Phaedrus\" he suggests the possibility of a true art wherein rhetoric is based upon the knowledge produced by dialectic. He relies on a dialectically informed rhetoric to appeal to the main character, Phaedrus, to take up philosophy. Thus Plato's rhetoric is actually dialectic (or philosophy) \"turned\" toward those who are not yet philosophers and are thus unready to pursue dialectic directly. Plato's animosity against rhetoric, and against the Sophists, derives not only from their inflated claims to teach virtue and their reliance on appearances, but from the fact that his teacher, Socrates, was sentenced to death after Sophists' efforts.\nSome scholars, however, see Plato not as an opponent of rhetoric but rather as a nuanced rhetorical theorist who dramatized rhetorical practice in his dialogues and imagined rhetoric as more than just oratory.\nAristotle.\nAristotle: Rhetoric is an antistrophes to dialectic. \"Let rhetoric [be defined as] an ability [dynamis], in each [particular] case, to see the available means of persuasion.\" \"Rhetoric is a counterpart of dialectic\" \u2014 an art of practical civic reasoning, applied to deliberative, judicial, and \"display\" speeches in political assemblies, lawcourts, and other public gatherings.\nAristotle (\u00a0BCE) was a student of Plato who set forth an extended treatise on rhetoric that still repays careful study today. In the first sentence of \"The Art of Rhetoric\", Aristotle says that \"rhetoric is the of dialectic\".I.1 As the \" of a Greek ode responds to and is patterned after the structure of the \"\" (they form two sections of the whole and are sung by two parts of the chorus), so the art of rhetoric follows and is structurally patterned after the art of dialectic because both are arts of discourse production. While dialectical methods are necessary to find truth in theoretical matters, rhetorical methods are required in practical matters such as adjudicating somebody's guilt or innocence when charged in a court of law, or adjudicating a prudent course of action to be taken in a deliberative assembly.\nFor Plato and Aristotle, dialectic involves persuasion, so when Aristotle says that rhetoric is the of dialectic, he means that rhetoric as he uses the term has a domain or scope of application that is parallel to, but different from, the domain or scope of application of dialectic. Claude Pavur explains that \"[t]he Greek prefix 'anti' does not merely designate opposition, but it can also mean 'in place of'\".\nAristotle's treatise on rhetoric systematically describes civic rhetoric as a human art or skill (). It is more of than it is an interpretive theory with a rhetorical tradition. Aristotle's art of rhetoric emphasizes persuasion as the purpose of rhetoric. His definition of rhetoric as \"the faculty of observing in any given case the available means of persuasion\", essentially a mode of discovery, limits the art to the inventional process; Aristotle emphasizes the logical aspect of this process. A speaker supports the probability of a message by logical, ethical, and emotional proofs.\nAristotle identifies three steps or \"offices\" of rhetoric\u2014invention, arrangement, and style\u2014and three different types of rhetorical proof:I.2\nAristotle emphasized \"enthymematic reasoning\" as central to the process of rhetorical invention, though later rhetorical theorists placed much less emphasis on it. An \"enthymeme\" follows the form of a syllogism, however it excludes either the major or minor premise. An enthymeme is persuasive because the audience provides the missing premise. Because the audience participates in providing the missing premise, they are more likely to be persuaded by the message.\nAristotle identified three different types or genres of civic rhetoric:I.3\nAnother Aristotelian doctrine was the idea of topics (also referred to as common topics or commonplaces). Though the term had a wide range of application (as a memory technique or compositional exercise, for example) it most often referred to the \"seats of argument\"\u2014the list of categories of thought or modes of reasoning\u2014that a speaker could use to generate arguments or proofs. The topics were thus a heuristic or inventional tool designed to help speakers categorize and thus better retain and apply frequently used types of argument. For example, since we often see effects as \"like\" their causes, one way to invent an argument (about a future effect) is by discussing the cause (which it will be \"like\"). This and other rhetorical topics derive from Aristotle's belief that there are certain predictable ways in which humans (particularly non-specialists) draw conclusions from premises. Based upon and adapted from his dialectical Topics, the rhetorical topics became a central feature of later rhetorical theorizing, most famously in Cicero's work of that name.\nIndia.\n\"India's Struggle for Independence\" offers a vivid description of the culture that sprang up around the newspaper in village India of the early 1870s:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A newspaper would reach remote villages and would then be read by a reader to tens of others. Gradually library movements sprung up all over the country. A local 'library' would be organized around a single newspaper. A table, a bench or two or a \"charpoy\" would constitute the capital equipment. Every piece of news or editorial comment would be read or heard and thoroughly discussed. The newspaper not only became the political educator; reading or discussing it became a form of political participation.\nThis reading and discussion was the focal point of origin of the modern Indian rhetorical movement. Much before this, ancients such as Kautilya, Birbal, and the like indulged in a great deal of discussion and persuasion.\nKeith Lloyd argued that much of the recital of the Vedas can be likened to the recital of ancient Greek poetry. Lloyd proposed including the \"Ny\u0101ya S\u016btras\" in the field of rhetorical studies, exploring its methods within their historical context, comparing its approach to the traditional logical syllogism, and relating it to modern perspectives of Stephen Toulmin, Kenneth Burke, and Chaim Perelman.\n is a Sanskrit word which means \"just\" or \"right\" and refers to \"the science of right and wrong reasoning\".\n is also a Sanskrit word which means string or thread. Here sutra refers to a collection of aphorism in the form of a manual. Each sutra is a short rule usually consisted of one or two sentences. An example of a sutra is: \"Reality is truth, and what is true is so, irrespective of whether we know it is, or are aware of that truth.\" The \"Ny\u0101ya S\u016btras\" is an ancient Indian Sanskrit text composed by Aksapada Gautama. It is the foundational text of the Nyaya school of Hindu philosophy. It is estimated that the text was composed between \u00a0BCE and \u00a0CE. The text may have been composed by more than one author, over a period of time. Radhakrishan and Moore placed its origin in the \u00a0BCE \"though some of the contents of the Nyaya Sutra are certainly a post-Christian era\".36 The ancient school of Nyaya extended over a period of one thousand years, beginning with Gautama about \u00a0BCE and ending with Vatsyayana about \u00a0CE.\nNyaya provides insight into Indian rhetoric. Nyaya presents an argumentative approach with which a rhetor can decide about any argument. In addition, it proposes an approach to thinking about cultural tradition which is different from Western rhetoric. Whereas Toulmin emphasizes the situational dimension of argumentative genre as the fundamental component of any rhetorical logic; Nyaya views this situational rhetoric .\nSome of India's famous rhetors include Kabir Das, Rahim Das, Chanakya, and Chandragupt Maurya.\nRome.\nCicero.\nFor the Romans, oration became an important part of public life. Cicero (\u00a0BCE) was chief among Roman rhetoricians and remains the best known ancient orator and the only orator who both spoke in public and produced treatises on the subject. \"Rhetorica ad Herennium\", formerly attributed to Cicero but now considered to be of unknown authorship, is one of the most significant works on rhetoric and is still widely used as a reference today. It is an extensive reference on the use of rhetoric, and in the Middle Ages and Renaissance, it achieved wide publication as an advanced school text on rhetoric.\nCicero charted a middle path between the competing Attic and Asiatic styles to become considered second only to Demosthenes among history's orators. His works include the early and very influential \"De Inventione\" (On Invention, often read alongside \"Ad Herennium\" as the two basic texts of rhetorical theory throughout the Middle Ages and into the Renaissance), \"De Oratore\" (a fuller statement of rhetorical principles in dialogue form), \"Topics\" (a rhetorical treatment of common topics, highly influential through the Renaissance), \"Brutus\" (a discussion of famous orators), and \"Orator\" (a defense of Cicero's style). Cicero also left a large body of speeches and letters which would establish the outlines of Latin eloquence and style for generations.\nThe rediscovery of Cicero's speeches (such as the defense of Archias) and letters (to Atticus) by Italians like Petrarch helped to ignite the Renaissance.\nCicero championed the learning of Greek (and Greek rhetoric), contributed to Roman ethics, linguistics, philosophy, and politics, and emphasized the importance of all forms of appeal (emotion, humor, stylistic range, irony, and digression in addition to pure reasoning) in oratory. But perhaps his most significant contribution to subsequent rhetoric, and education in general, was his argument that orators learn not only about the specifics of their case (the \"hypothesis\") but also about the general questions from which they derived (the \"theses\"). Thus, in giving a speech in defense of a poet whose Roman citizenship had been questioned, the orator should examine not only the specifics of that poet's civic status, he should also examine the role and value of poetry and of literature more generally in Roman culture and political life. The orator, said Cicero, needed to be knowledgeable about all areas of human life and culture, including law, politics, history, literature, ethics, warfare, medicine, and even arithmetic and geometry. Cicero gave rise to the idea that the \"ideal orator\" be well-versed in all branches of learning: an idea that was rendered as \"liberal humanism\", and that lives on today in liberal arts or general education requirements in colleges and universities around the world.\nQuintilian.\nQuintilian (\u00a0CE) began his career as a pleader in the courts of law; his reputation grew so great that Vespasian created a chair of rhetoric for him in Rome. The culmination of his life's work was the \"Institutio Oratoria\" (\"Institutes of Oratory,\" or alternatively, \"The Orator's Education\"), a lengthy treatise on the training of the orator, in which he discusses the training of the \"perfect\" orator from birth to old age and, in the process, reviews the doctrines and opinions of many influential rhetoricians who preceded him.\nIn the \"Institutes\", Quintilian organizes rhetorical study through the stages of education that an aspiring orator would undergo, beginning with the selection of a nurse. Aspects of elementary education (training in reading and writing, grammar, and literary criticism) are followed by preliminary rhetorical exercises in composition (the ) that include maxims and fables, narratives and comparisons, and finally full legal or political speeches. The delivery of speeches within the context of education or for entertainment purposes became widespread and popular under the term \"declamation\".\nThis work was available only in fragments in medieval times, but the discovery of a complete copy at the Abbey of St. Gall in 1416 led to its emergence as one of the most influential works on rhetoric during the Renaissance.\nQuintilian's work describes not just the art of rhetoric, but the formation of the perfect orator as a politically active, virtuous, publicly minded citizen. His emphasis was on the ethical application of rhetorical training, in part in reaction against the tendency in Roman schools toward standardization of themes and techniques. At the same time that rhetoric was becoming divorced from political decision making, rhetoric rose as a culturally vibrant and important mode of entertainment and cultural criticism in a movement known as the \"Second Sophistic\", a development that gave rise to the charge (made by Quintilian and others) that teachers were emphasizing style over substance in rhetoric.\nMedieval to Enlightenment.\nAfter the breakup of the western Roman Empire, the study of rhetoric continued to be central to the study of the verbal arts. However the study of the verbal arts went into decline for several centuries, followed eventually by a gradual rise in formal education, culminating in the rise of medieval universities. Rhetoric transmuted during this period into the arts of letter writing () and sermon writing (). As part of the , rhetoric was secondary to the study of logic, and its study was highly scholastic: students were given repetitive exercises in the creation of discourses on historical subjects () or on classic legal questions ().\nAlthough he is not commonly regarded as a rhetorician, St. Augustine (354\u2013430) was trained in rhetoric and was at one time a professor of Latin rhetoric in Milan. After his conversion to Christianity, he became interested in using these \"pagan\" arts for spreading his religion. He explores this new use of rhetoric in \"De doctrina Christiana\", which laid the foundation of what would become homiletics, the rhetoric of the sermon. Augustine asks why \"the power of eloquence, which is so efficacious in pleading either for the erroneous cause or the right\", should not be used for righteous purposes.\nOne early concern of the medieval Christian church was its attitude to classical rhetoric itself. Jerome (d. 420) complained, \"What has Horace to do with the Psalms, Virgil with the Gospels, Cicero with the Apostles?\" Augustine is also remembered for arguing for the preservation of pagan works and fostering a church tradition that led to conservation of numerous pre-Christian rhetorical writings.\nRhetoric would not regain its classical heights until the Renaissance, but new writings did advance rhetorical thought. Boethius (c.\u2009480\u2013524), in his brief \"Overview of the Structure of Rhetoric\", continues Aristotle's taxonomy by placing rhetoric in subordination to philosophical argument or dialectic. The introduction of Arab scholarship from European relations with the Muslim empire (in particular Al-Andalus) renewed interest in Aristotle and Classical thought in general, leading to what some historians call the 12th century Renaissance. A number of medieval grammars and studies of poetry and rhetoric appeared.\nLate medieval rhetorical writings include those of St. Thomas Aquinas (c.\u20091225\u20131274), Matthew of Vend\u00f4me (\"Ars Versificatoria\", c.\u20091175), and Geoffrey of Vinsauf (\"Poetria Nova\", 1200\u20131216). Pre-modern female rhetoricians, outside of Socrates' friend Aspasia, are rare; but medieval rhetoric produced by women either in religious orders, such as Julian of Norwich (d. 1415), or the very well-connected Christine de Pizan (c.\u20091364\u2013c.\u20091430), did occur although it was not always recorded in writing.\nIn his 1943 Cambridge University doctoral dissertation in English, Canadian Marshall McLuhan (1911\u20131980) surveys the verbal arts from approximately the time of Cicero down to the time of Thomas Nashe (1567\u2013c.\u20091600). His dissertation is still noteworthy for undertaking to study the history of the verbal arts together as the trivium, even though the developments that he surveys have been studied in greater detail since he undertook his study. As noted below, McLuhan became one of the most widely publicized communication theorists of the 20th century.\nAnother interesting record of medieval rhetorical thought can be seen in the many animal debate poems popular in England and the continent during the Middle Ages, such as \"The Owl and the Nightingale\" (13th century) and Geoffrey Chaucer's \"Parliament of Fowls\".\nSixteenth century.\nRenaissance humanism defined itself broadly as disfavoring medieval scholastic logic and dialectic and as favoring instead the study of classical Latin style and grammar and philology and rhetoric.\nOne influential figure in the rebirth of interest in classical rhetoric was Erasmus (c.\u20091466\u20131536). His 1512 work, \"De Duplici Copia Verborum et Rerum\" (also known as \"\"), was widely published (it went through more than 150 editions throughout Europe) and became one of the basic school texts on the subject. Its treatment of rhetoric is less comprehensive than the classic works of antiquity, but provides a traditional treatment of (matter and form). Its first book treats the subject of , showing the student how to use schemes and tropes; the second book covers . Much of the emphasis is on abundance of variation ( means \"plenty\" or \"abundance\", as in copious or cornucopia), so both books focus on ways to introduce the maximum amount of variety into discourse. For instance, in one section of the \"De Copia\", Erasmus presents two hundred variations of the sentence \"Always, as long as I live, I shall remember you\" (\"\") Another of his works, the extremely popular \"The Praise of Folly\", also had considerable influence on the teaching of rhetoric in the later 16th century. Its orations in favour of qualities such as madness spawned a type of exercise popular in Elizabethan grammar schools, later called adoxography, which required pupils to compose passages in praise of useless things.\nJuan Luis Vives (1492\u20131540) also helped shape the study of rhetoric in England. A Spaniard, he was appointed in 1523 to the Lectureship of Rhetoric at Oxford by Cardinal Wolsey, and was entrusted by Henry VIII to be one of the tutors of Mary. Vives fell into disfavor when Henry VIII divorced Catherine of Aragon and left England in 1528. His best-known work was a book on education, ', published in 1531, and his writings on rhetoric included ' (1533), ' (1533), and a treatise on letter writing, ' (1536).\nIt is likely that many well-known English writers were exposed to the works of Erasmus and Vives (as well as those of the Classical rhetoricians) in their schooling, which was conducted in Latin (not English), often included some study of Greek, and placed considerable emphasis on rhetoric.\nThe mid-16th century saw the rise of vernacular rhetorics\u2014those written in English rather than in the Classical languages. Adoption of works in English was slow, however, due to the strong scholastic orientation toward Latin and Greek. Leonard Cox's \"The Art or Crafte of Rhetoryke\" (c.\u20091524\u20131530; second edition published in 1532) is the earliest text on rhetorics in English; it was, for the most part, a translation of the work of Philipp Melanchthon. Thomas Wilson's ' (1553) presents a traditional treatment of rhetoric, for instance, the standard five canons of rhetoric. Other notable works included Angel Day's ' (1586, 1592), George Puttenham's ' (1589), and Richard Rainholde's ' (1563).\nDuring this same period, a movement began that would change the organization of the school curriculum in Protestant and especially Puritan circles and that led to rhetoric losing its central place. A French scholar, Petrus Ramus (1515\u20131572), dissatisfied with what he saw as the overly broad and redundant organization of the trivium, proposed a new curriculum. In his scheme of things, the five components of rhetoric no longer lived under the common heading of rhetoric. Instead, invention and disposition were determined to fall exclusively under the heading of dialectic, while style, delivery, and memory were all that remained for rhetoric. Ramus was martyred during the French Wars of Religion. His teachings, seen as inimical to Catholicism, were short-lived in France but found a fertile ground in the Netherlands, Germany, and England.\nOne of Ramus' French followers, Audomarus Talaeus (Omer Talon) published his rhetoric, \"Institutiones Oratoriae\", in 1544. This work emphasized style, and became so popular that it was mentioned in John Brinsley's (1612) \"; \" as being the \"\". Many other Ramist rhetorics followed in the next half-century, and by the 17th century, their approach became the primary method of teaching rhetoric in Protestant and especially Puritan circles. John Milton (1608\u20131674) wrote a textbook in logic or dialectic in Latin based on Ramus' work.\nRamism could not exert any influence on the established Catholic schools and universities, which remained loyal to Scholasticism, or on the new Catholic schools and universities founded by members of the Society of Jesus or the Oratorians, as can be seen in the Jesuit curriculum (in use up to the 19th century across the Christian world) known as the . If the influence of Cicero and Quintilian permeates the , it is through the lenses of devotion and the militancy of the Counter-Reformation. The was indeed imbued with a sense of the divine, of the incarnate logos, that is of rhetoric as an eloquent and humane means to reach further devotion and further action in the Christian city, which was absent from Ramist formalism. The Ratio is, in rhetoric, the answer to Ignatius Loyola's practice, in devotion, of \"spiritual exercises\". This complex oratorical-prayer system is absent from Ramism.\nSeventeenth century.\nIn New England and at Harvard College (founded 1636), Ramus and his followers dominated. However, in England, several writers influenced the course of rhetoric during the 17th century, many of them carrying forward the dichotomy that had been set forth by Ramus and his followers during the preceding decades. This century also saw the development of a modern, vernacular style that looked to English, rather than to Greek, Latin, or French models.\nFrancis Bacon (1561\u20131626), although not a rhetorician, contributed to the field in his writings. One of the concerns of the age was to find a suitable style for the discussion of scientific topics, which needed above all a clear exposition of facts and arguments, rather than an ornate style. Bacon in his \"The Advancement of Learning\" criticized those who are preoccupied with style rather than \"the weight of matter, worth of subject, soundness of argument, life of invention, or depth of judgment\". On matters of style, he proposed that the style conform to the subject matter and to the audience, that simple words be employed whenever possible, and that the style should be agreeable.\nThomas Hobbes (1588\u20131679) also wrote on rhetoric. Along with a shortened translation of Aristotle's \"Rhetoric\", Hobbes also produced a number of other works on the subject. Sharply contrarian on many subjects, Hobbes, like Bacon, also promoted a simpler and more natural style that used figures of speech sparingly.\nPerhaps the most influential development in English style came out of the work of the Royal Society (founded in 1660), which in 1664 set up a committee to improve the English language. Among the committee's members were John Evelyn (1620\u20131706), Thomas Sprat (1635\u20131713), and John Dryden (1631\u20131700). Sprat regarded \"fine speaking\" as a disease, and thought that a proper style should \"reject all amplifications, digressions, and swellings of style\" and instead \"return back to a primitive purity and shortness\".\nWhile the work of this committee never went beyond planning, John Dryden is often credited with creating and exemplifying a new and modern English style. His central tenet was that the style should be proper \"to the occasion, the subject, and the persons\". As such, he advocated the use of English words whenever possible instead of foreign ones, as well as vernacular, rather than Latinate, syntax. His own prose (and his poetry) became exemplars of this new style.\nEighteenth century.\nArguably one of the most influential schools of rhetoric during the 18th century was Scottish Belletristic rhetoric, exemplified by such professors of rhetoric as Hugh Blair whose \"Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres\" saw international success in various editions and translations, and Lord Kames with his influential \"Elements of Criticism\".\nAnother notable figure in 18th century rhetoric was Maria Edgeworth, a novelist and children's author whose work often parodied the male-centric rhetorical strategies of her time. In her 1795 \"An Essay on the Noble Science of Self-Justification,\" Edgeworth presents a satire of Enlightenment rhetoric's science-centrism and the Belletristic Movement. She was called \"the great Maria\" by Sir Walter Scott, with whom she corresponded, and by modern scholars is noted as \"a transgressive and ironic reader\" of the 18th century rhetorical norms.\nModern.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, there was a revival of rhetorical study manifested in the establishment of departments of rhetoric and speech at academic institutions, as well as the formation of national and international professional organizations. The early interest in rhetorical studies was a movement away from elocution as taught in English departments in the United States, and an attempt to refocus rhetorical studies from delivery-only to civic engagement and a \"rich complexity\" of the nature of rhetoric.\nBy the 1930s, advances in mass media technology led to a revival of the study of rhetoric, language, persuasion, and political rhetoric and its consequences. The linguistic turn in philosophy also contributed to this revival. The term rhetoric came to be applied to media forms other than verbal language, e.g. visual rhetoric, \"temporal rhetorics\", and the \"temporal turn\" in rhetorical theory and practice.\nThe rise of advertising and of mass media such as photography, telegraphy, radio, and film brought rhetoric more prominently into people's lives. The discipline of rhetoric has been used to study how advertising persuades, and to help understand the spread of fake news and conspiracy theories on social media.\nMethods of analysis.\nCriticism seen as a method.\nRhetoric can be analyzed by a variety of methods and theories. One such method is criticism. When those using criticism analyze instances of rhetoric what they do is called rhetorical criticism &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;. According to rhetorical critic Jim A. Kuypers, \"The use of rhetoric is an art, and as such, it does not lend itself well to scientific methods of analysis. Criticism is an art as well, and as such is particularly well suited for examining rhetorical creations.\" He asserts that criticism is a method of generating knowledge just as the scientific method is a method for generating knowledge: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The way the Sciences and the Humanities study the phenomena that surround us differ greatly in the amount of researcher personality allowed to influence the results of the study. For example, in the Sciences researchers purposefully adhere to a strict method (the scientific method)... Generally speaking, the researcher's personality, likes and dislikes, and religious and political preferences are supposed to be as far removed as possible from the actual study...\nIn sharp contrast, criticism (one of many Humanistic methods of generating knowledge) actively involves the personality of the researcher. The very choices of what to study, and how and why to study a rhetorical artifact are heavily influenced by the personal qualities of the researcher... In the Humanities, methods of research may also take many forms\u2014criticism, ethnography, for example\u2014but the personality of the researcher is an integral component of the study. Further personalizing criticism, we find that rhetorical critics use a variety of means when examining a particular rhetorical artifact, with some critics even developing their own unique perspective to better examine a rhetorical artifact.14\nEdwin Black wrote on this point that, \"Methods, then, admit of varying degrees of personality. And criticism, on the whole, is near the indeterminate, contingent, personal end of the methodological scale. In consequence of this placement, it is neither possible nor desirable for criticism to be fixed into a system, for critical techniques to be objectified, for critics to be interchangeable for purposes of replication, or for rhetorical criticism to serve as the handmaiden of quasi-scientific theory.\"\nJim A. Kuypers sums this idea of criticism as art in the following manner: \"In short, criticism is an art, not a science. It is not a scientific method; it uses subjective methods of argument; it exists on its own, not in conjunction with other methods of generating knowledge (i.e., social scientific or scientific)... [I]nsight and imagination top statistical applications when studying rhetorical action.\"14\u201315\nStrategies.\n\"Rhetorical strategies\" are the efforts made by authors or speakers to persuade or inform their audiences. According to James W. Gray, there are various argument strategies used in writing. He describes four of these as argument from analogy, argument from absurdity, thought experiments, and inference to the best explanation.\nCriticism.\nModern rhetorical criticism explores the relationship between text and context; that is, how an instance of rhetoric relates to circumstances. Since the aim of rhetoric is to be persuasive, the level to which the rhetoric in question persuades its audience is what must be analyzed, and later criticized. In determining the extent to which a text is persuasive, one may explore the text's relationship with its audience, purpose, ethics, argument, evidence, arrangement, delivery, and style.\nIn his \"Rhetorical Criticism: A Study in Method\", Edwin Black states, \"It is the task of criticism not to measure... discourses dogmatically against some parochial standard of rationality but, allowing for the immeasurable wide range of human experience, to see them as they really are.\"131 While \"as they really are\" is debatable, rhetorical critics explain texts and speeches by investigating their rhetorical situation, typically placing them in a framework of speaker/audience exchange. The antithetical view places the rhetor at the center of creating that which is considered the extant situation; i.e., the agenda and spin.\nAdditional theoretical approaches.\nFollowing the neo-Aristotelian approaches to criticism, scholars began to derive methods from other disciplines, such as history, philosophy, and the social sciences. The importance of critics' personal judgment while the analytical dimension of criticism began to gain momentum. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, methodological pluralism replaced the singular neo-Aristotelian method. Methodological rhetorical criticism is typically done by deduction, in which is used to examine a specific case of rhetoric. include:\n Ideological criticism also treats ideology as an artifact of discourse, one that is embedded in key terms (called \"ideographs\") as well as material resources and discursive embodiment.\n This means identifying terms that are \"clustered\" around key symbols in the rhetorical artifact and the patterns in which they appear.\n In short, how they make certain facts more noticeable than others. It is particularly useful for analyzing products of the news media.\n It studies rhetoric in different times and locations, looking at similarities in the rhetorical situation and the rhetoric that responds to them. Examples include eulogies, inaugural addresses, and declarations of war.\n Narrative criticism focuses on the story itself and how the construction of the narrative directs the interpretation of the situation.\nBy the mid-1980s the study of rhetorical criticism began to move away from precise methodology towards conceptual issues. Conceptually-driven criticism operates more through abduction, according to scholar James Jasinski, who argues that this type of criticism can be thought of as a back-and-forth between the text and the concepts, which are being explored at the same time. The concepts remain \"works in progress\", and understanding develops through the analysis of a text.256\nCriticism is considered rhetorical when it focuses on the way some types of discourse react to situational exigencies\u2014problems or demands\u2014and constraints. Modern rhetorical criticism concerns how the rhetorical case or object persuades, defines, or constructs the audience. In modern terms, rhetoric includes, but it is not limited to, speeches, scientific discourse, pamphlets, literary work, works of art, and pictures. Contemporary rhetorical criticism has maintained aspects of early neo-Aristotelian thinking through close reading, which attempts to explore the organization and stylistic structure of a rhetorical object. Using close textual analysis means rhetorical critics use the tools of classical rhetoric and literary analysis to evaluate the style and strategy used to communicate the argument.\nPurpose of criticism.\nRhetorical criticism serves several purposes. For one, it hopes to help form or improve public taste. It helps educate audiences and develops them into better judges of rhetorical situations by reinforcing ideas of value, morality, and suitability. Rhetorical criticism can thus contribute to the audience's understanding of themselves and society.\nAccording to Jim A. Kuypers, a second purpose for performing criticism should be to enhance our appreciation and understanding. \"[W]e wish to enhance both our own and others' understanding of the rhetorical act; we wish to share our insights with others, and to enhance their appreciation of the rhetorical act. These are not hollow goals, but quality of life issues. By improving understanding and appreciation, the critic can offer new and potentially exciting ways for others to see the world. Through understanding we also produce knowledge about human communication; in theory this should help us to better govern our interactions with others.\" Criticism is a humanizing activity in that it explores and highlights qualities that make us human.13\nAnimal rhetoric.\nRhetoric is practiced by social animals in a variety of ways. For example, birds use song, various animals warn members of their species of danger, chimpanzees have the capacity to deceive through communicative keyboard systems, and deer stags compete for the attention of mates. While these might be understood as rhetorical actions (attempts at persuading through meaningful actions and utterances), they can also be seen as rhetorical fundamentals shared by humans and animals. The study of animal rhetoric has been called \"biorhetorics\".\nThe self-awareness required to practice rhetoric might be difficult to notice and acknowledge in some animals. However, some animals are capable of acknowledging themselves in a mirror, and therefore, they might be understood to be self-aware and therefore, argue philosophers such as Diane Davis, are able to engage with rhetoric when practicing some form of language.\nAnthropocentrism plays a significant role in human-animal relationships, reflecting and perpetuating binaries in which humans assume they are beings that have extraordinary qualities while they regard animals as beings that lack those qualities. This dualism is manifested in other forms as well, such as reason and sense, mind and body, ideal and phenomenal in which the first category of each pair (reason, mind, and ideal) represents and belongs to only humans. By becoming aware of and overcoming these dualistic conceptions including the one between humans and animals, humans will be able to more easily engage with and communicate with animals, with the understanding that animals are capable of reciprocating communication. The relationship between humans and animals (as well as the rest of the natural world) is often defined by the human rhetorical act of naming and categorizing animals through scientific and folk labeling. The act of naming partially defines the rhetorical relationships between humans and animals, though both may engage in rhetoric beyond human naming and categorizing.\nSome animals have a sort of which enables them to \"learn and receive instruction\" with rudimentary understanding of some significant signs. Those animals practice deliberative, judicial, and epideictic rhetoric deploying , , and with gesture and preen, sing and growl. Since animals offer models of rhetorical behavior and interaction that are physical, even instinctual, but perhaps no less artful, transcending our accustomed focus on verbal language and consciousness concepts will help people interested in rhetoric and communication to promote human-animal rhetoric.\nComparative rhetoric.\nComparative rhetoric is a practice and methodology that developed in the late twentieth century to broaden the study of rhetoric beyond the dominant rhetorical tradition that has been constructed and shaped in western Europe and the U.S. As a research practice, comparative rhetoric studies past and present cultures across the globe to reveal diversity in the uses of rhetoric and to uncover rhetorical perspectives, practices, and traditions that have been historically underrepresented or dismissed. As a methodology, comparative rhetoric constructs a culture's rhetorical perspectives, practices, and traditions on their own terms, in their own contexts, as opposed to using European or American theories, terminology, or framing.\nComparative rhetoric is comparative in that it illuminates how rhetorical traditions relate to one another, while seeking to avoid binary depictions or value judgments. This can reveal issues of power within and between cultures as well as new or under-recognized ways of thinking, doing, and being that challenge or enrich the dominant Euro-American tradition and provide a fuller account of rhetorical studies.\nRobert T. Oliver is credited as the first scholar who recognized the need to study non-Western rhetorics in his 1971 publication \"Communication and Culture in Ancient India and China\". George A. Kennedy has been credited for the first cross-cultural overview of rhetoric in his 1998 publication \"Comparative Rhetoric: An Historical and Cross-cultural Introduction\". Though Oliver's and Kennedy's works contributed to the birth of comparative rhetoric, given the newness of the field, they both used Euro-American terms and theories to interpret non-Euro-American cultures' practices.\nLuMing Mao, Xing Lu, Mary Garrett, Arabella Lyon, Bo Wang, Hui Wu, and Keith Lloyd have published extensively on comparative rhetoric, helping to shape and define the field. In 2013, LuMing Mao edited a special issue on comparative rhetoric in \"Rhetoric Society Quarterly\", focusing on comparative methodologies in the age of globalization. In 2015, LuMing Mao and Bo Wang coedited a symposium featuring position essays by a group of leading scholars in the field. In their introduction, Mao and Wang emphasize the fluid and cross-cultural nature of rhetoric, \"Rhetorical knowledge, like any other knowledge, is heterogeneous, multidimentional, and always in the process of being created.\"241 The symposium includes \"A Manifesto: The What and How of Comparative Rhetoric\", demonstrating the first collective effort to identify and articulate comparative rhetoric's definition, goals, and methodologies. The tenets of this manifesto are engaged within many later works that study or utilize comparative rhetoric.\nAutomatic detection of rhetorical figures.\nAs natural language processing has developed, so has interest in automatically detecting rhetorical figures. The major focus has been to detect specific figures, such as chiasmus, epanaphora, and epiphora using classifiers trained with labeled data. A major shortcoming to achieving high accuracy with these systems is the shortage of labeled data for these tasks, but with recent advances in language modeling, such as few-shot learning, it may be possible to detect more rhetorical figures with less data.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe for Greek and Latin primary texts on rhetoric is the Loeb Classical Library of the Harvard University Press, published with an English translation on the facing page.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25448", "revid": "40891983", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25448", "title": "Red tide", "text": ""}
{"id": "25449", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25449", "title": "Ricard Wagner", "text": ""}
{"id": "25452", "revid": "19241170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25452", "title": "Richard Wagner", "text": "German composer (1813\u20131883)\nWilhelm Richard Wagner ( ; ; 22 May 1813\u00a0\u2013 13 February 1883) was a German composer, theatre director, essayist, and conductor, best known for his operas\u2014although his mature works are often referred to as \"music dramas\". Unlike most composers, Wagner wrote both the libretti and the music for all of his stage works. He first achieved recognition with works in the Romantic tradition of Carl Maria von Weber and Giacomo Meyerbeer, but revolutionised the genre through his concept of the \"Gesamtkunstwerk\" (\"total work of art\"), which sought to unite poetic, musical, visual, and dramatic elements. In this approach, the drama unfolds as a continuously sung narrative, with the music evolving organically from the text rather than alternating between arias and recitatives. Wagner outlined these ideas in a series of essays published between 1849 and 1852, most fully realising them in the first half of his four-opera cycle \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\" (\"The Ring of the Nibelung\").\nWagner's compositions, particularly in his later period, have complex textures, rich harmonies and orchestration, and elaborate leitmotifs\u2014musical phrases associated with individual characters, places, ideas, or plot elements. His advances in musical language, such as extreme chromaticism and quickly shifting tonal centres, greatly influenced the development of classical music; his \"Tristan und Isolde\" is regarded as an important precursor to modernist music. Later in life, he softened his ideological stance against traditional operatic forms (e.g., arias, ensembles and choruses), reintroducing them into his last few stage works, including \"Die Meistersinger von N\u00fcrnberg\" (\"The Mastersingers of Nuremberg\") and \"Parsifal\".\nTo fully realise his artistic vision, Wagner had his own opera house built to his specifications: the Bayreuth Festspielhaus, which featured many innovations designed to immerse the audience in the drama. It hosted the premieres of \"The Ring\" and \"Parsifal\", and remains entirely devoted to staging his mature works at the annual Bayreuth Festival. After Wagner\u2019s death, his wife Cosima assumed leadership; it has since remained under the management of their descendants.\nWagner's unorthodox operas, provocative essays, and contentious personal conduct engendered considerable controversy during his lifetime, and continue to do so. Declared a \"genius\" by some and a \"disease\" by others, his views on religion, politics, and society remain debated\u2014most notably the extent to which his antisemitism finds expression in his stage and prose works. Despite this, his operas and music remain central to the repertoire of major opera houses and concert halls worldwide. His ideas can be traced across many art forms throughout the 20th century; his influence extended beyond composition into conducting, philosophy, literature, the visual arts, and theatre.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nRichard Wagner was born on 22 May 1813 to an ethnic German family in Leipzig, then part of the Confederation of the Rhine. His family lived at No 3, the Br\u00fchl (\"The House of the Red and White Lions\") in Leipzig's Jewish quarter. He was baptised at St. Thomas Church. He was the ninth, and youngest, child of Carl Friedrich Wagner, a clerk in the Leipzig police service, and his wife, Johanna Rosine Wagner, the daughter of a baker. Wagner's father Carl died of typhoid fever six months after Richard's birth. Afterwards, his mother Johanna lived with Carl's friend, the actor and playwright Ludwig Geyer. In August 1814 Johanna and Geyer probably married, although no documentation of this has been found in the Leipzig church registers. She and her family moved to Geyer's residence in Dresden. Until he was fourteen, Wagner was known as Wilhelm Richard Geyer. He almost certainly thought that Geyer was his biological father.\nGeyer's love of the theatre came to be shared by his stepson, and Wagner took part in his performances. In his autobiography \"Mein Leben\" Wagner recalled once playing the part of an angel. In late 1820, Wagner was enrolled at Pastor Wetzel's school at Possendorf, near Dresden, where he received some piano instruction from his Latin teacher. He struggled to play a proper scale at the keyboard and preferred playing theatre overtures by ear. Following Geyer's death in 1821, Richard was sent to the Kreuzschule, the boarding school of the Dresdner Kreuzchor, at the expense of Geyer's brother. At the age of nine he was hugely impressed by the Gothic elements of Carl Maria von Weber's opera \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\", which he saw Weber conduct. At this period Wagner entertained ambitions as a playwright. His first creative effort, listed in the \"Wagner-Werk-Verzeichnis\" (the standard listing of Wagner's works) as WWV 1, was a tragedy called \"Leubald\". Begun when he was in school in 1826, the play was strongly influenced by Shakespeare and Goethe. Wagner was determined to set it to music and persuaded his family to allow him music lessons.\nBy 1827, the family had returned to Leipzig. Wagner's first lessons in harmony were taken during 1828\u20131831 with Christian Gottlieb M\u00fcller. In January 1828 he first heard Beethoven's 7th Symphony and then, in March, the same composer's 9th Symphony, both at the Gewandhaus. Beethoven became a major inspiration, and Wagner wrote a piano transcription of the 9th Symphony. He was also greatly impressed by a performance of Mozart's \"Requiem.\" Wagner's early piano sonatas and his first attempts at orchestral overtures date from this period.\nIn 1829 he saw a performance by dramatic soprano Wilhelmine Schr\u00f6der-Devrient, who became his ideal of the fusion of drama and music in opera. In \"Mein Leben\" Wagner wrote, \"When I look back across my entire life I find no event to place beside this in the impression it produced on me,\" and claimed that the \"profoundly human and ecstatic performance of this incomparable artist\" kindled in him an \"almost demonic fire\".\nIn 1831, Wagner enrolled at the Leipzig University, where he became a member of the Saxon student fraternity. He took composition lessons with the Thomaskantor Theodor Weinlig. Weinlig was so impressed with Wagner's musical ability that he refused any payment for his lessons. He arranged for his pupil's Piano Sonata in B-flat major (which was consequently dedicated to him) to be published as Wagner's Op. 1. A year later, Wagner composed his Symphony in C major, a Beethovenesque work performed in Prague in 1832 and at the Leipzig Gewandhaus in 1833. He then began to work on an opera, \"Die Hochzeit\" (\"The Wedding\"), which he never completed.\nEarly career and marriage (1833\u20131842).\nIn 1833, Wagner's brother Albert managed to obtain for him a position as choirmaster at the Theatre W\u00fcrzburg. In the same year, at the age of 20, Wagner composed his first complete opera, \"Die Feen\" (\"The Fairies\"). This work, which imitated the style of Weber, went unproduced until half a century later, when it was premiered in Munich shortly after the composer's death in 1883.\nHaving returned to Leipzig in 1834, Wagner held a brief appointment as musical director at the opera house in Magdeburg during which he wrote \"Das Liebesverbot\" (\"The Ban on Love\"), based on Shakespeare's \"Measure for Measure\". This was staged at Magdeburg in 1836 but closed before the second performance; this, together with the financial collapse of the theatre company employing him, left the composer in bankruptcy. Wagner had fallen for one of the leading ladies at Magdeburg, the actress Christine Wilhelmine \"Minna\" Planer, and after the disaster of \"Das Liebesverbot\" he followed her to K\u00f6nigsberg, where she helped him to get an engagement at the theatre. \nThe two married in Tragheim Church on 24 November 1836. In May 1837, Minna left Wagner for another man, and this was only the first d\u00e9b\u00e2cle of a tempestuous marriage. In June 1837, Wagner moved to Riga (then in the Russian Empire), where he became music director of the local opera; having in this capacity engaged Minna's sister Amalie (also a singer) for the theatre, he presently resumed relations with Minna during 1838.\nBy 1839, the couple had amassed such large debts that they fled Riga on the run from creditors. Debts plagued Wagner for most of his life. Initially the pair took a stormy sea passage to London, from which Wagner drew the inspiration for his opera \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" (\"The Flying Dutchman\"), with a plot based on a sketch by Heinrich Heine. \nThe Wagners settled in Paris in September 1839 and stayed there until 1842. During these years, Wagner is believed to have attended Fran\u00e7ois Delsarte's \"Cours d'esth\u00e9tique appliqu\u00e9e,\" which arguably influenced his aesthetic writings and compositional style. Wagner made a scant living by writing articles and short novelettes such as \"A pilgrimage to Beethoven\", which sketched his growing concept of \"music drama\", and \"An end in Paris\", where he depicts his own miseries as a German musician in the French metropolis. He also provided arrangements of operas by other composers, largely on behalf of the Schlesinger publishing house. During this stay he completed his third and fourth operas \"Rienzi\" and \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\".\nDresden (1842\u20131849).\nWagner had completed \"Rienzi\" in 1840. With the strong support of Giacomo Meyerbeer, it was accepted for performance by the Dresden Court Theatre (\"Hofoper\") in the Kingdom of Saxony, and in 1842 Wagner moved to Dresden. His relief at returning to Germany was recorded in his \"Autobiographic Sketch\" of 1842, where he wrote that, en route from Paris, \"For the first time I saw the Rhine\u2014with hot tears in my eyes, I, poor artist, swore eternal fidelity to my German fatherland.\" \"Rienzi\" was staged to considerable acclaim on 20 October.\nWagner lived in Dresden for the next six years, eventually being appointed the Royal Saxon Court Conductor. During this period, he staged there \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" (2 January 1843) and \"Tannh\u00e4user\" (19 October 1845), the first two of his three middle-period operas. Wagner also mixed with artistic circles in Dresden, including the composer Ferdinand Hiller and the architect Gottfried Semper.\nWagner's involvement in left-wing politics abruptly ended his welcome in Dresden. Wagner was active among socialist German nationalists there, regularly receiving such guests as the conductor and radical editor August R\u00f6ckel and the Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin. He was also influenced by the ideas of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Ludwig Feuerbach. Widespread discontent came to a head in 1849, when the unsuccessful May Uprising in Dresden broke out, in which Wagner played a minor supporting role. Warrants were issued for the revolutionaries' arrest. Wagner had to flee, first visiting Paris and then settling in Z\u00fcrich where he at first took refuge with a friend, Alexander M\u00fcller.\nIn exile: Switzerland (1849\u20131858).\nWagner was to spend the next twelve years in exile from Germany. He had completed \"Lohengrin\", the last of his middle-period operas, before the Dresden uprising, and now wrote desperately to his friend Franz Liszt to have it staged in his absence. Liszt conducted the premiere in Weimar in August 1850.\nNevertheless, Wagner was in grim personal straits, isolated from the German musical world and without any regular income. In 1850, Julie, the wife of his friend Karl Ritter, began to pay him a small pension which she maintained until 1859. With help from her friend Jessie Laussot, this was to have been augmented to an annual sum of 3,000 thalers per year, but the plan was abandoned when Wagner began an affair with Mme. Laussot. Wagner even plotted an elopement with her in 1850, which her husband prevented. Meanwhile, Wagner's wife Minna, who had disliked the operas he had written after \"Rienzi\", was falling into a deepening depression. Wagner fell victim to ill health, according to Ernest Newman \"largely a matter of overwrought nerves\", which made it difficult for him to continue writing.\nWagner's primary published output during his first years in Z\u00fcrich was a set of essays. In \"The Artwork of the Future\" (1849), he described a vision of opera as \"Gesamtkunstwerk\" (total work of art), in which music, song, dance, poetry, visual arts and stagecraft were unified. \"Judaism in Music\" (1850) was the first of Wagner's writings to feature antisemitic views. In this polemic Wagner asserted\u2014often with vulgar, abusive language\u2014that Jews lived as \"outsiders\" amid European societies and were disconnected from the national spirit (\"Volksgeist\") of these countries, thus capable of producing only shallow and artificial imitations of European art music, despite having achieved technical proficiency in its study. According to Wagner, Jews such as Meyerbeer commercialised music catered to the masses in order to achieve fame and financial success, rather than creating genuine works of art.\nIn \"Opera and Drama\" (1851), Wagner described the aesthetics of music drama that he was using to create the \"Ring\" cycle. Before leaving Dresden, Wagner had drafted a scenario that eventually became \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\". He initially for a single opera, \"Siegfrieds Tod\" (\"Siegfried's Death\"), in 1848. After arriving in Z\u00fcrich, he expanded the story with \"Der junge Siegfried\" (\"Young Siegfried\"), which explored the hero's background. He completed the text of the cycle by writing the libretti for \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" (\"The Valkyrie\") and \"Das Rheingold\" (\"The Rhine Gold\") and revising the other libretti to conform to his new concept, completing them in 1852. The concept of opera expressed in \"Opera and Drama\" and in other essays effectively renounced all the operas he had previously written through \"Lohengrin.\" Partly in an attempt to explain his change of views, Wagner published in 1851 the autobiographical \"A Communication to My Friends\". This included his first public announcement of what was to become the \"Ring\" cycle:\nI shall never write an \"Opera\" more. As I have no wish to invent an arbitrary title for my works, I will call them Dramas\u00a0...\nI propose to produce my myth in three complete dramas, preceded by a lengthy Prelude (Vorspiel)...\nAt a specially-appointed Festival, I propose, some future time, to produce those three Dramas with their Prelude, \"in the course of three days and a fore-evening\" [emphasis in original].\nWagner began composing the music for \"Das Rheingold\" between November 1853 and September 1854, following it immediately with \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" (written between June 1854 and March 1856). He began work on the third \"Ring\" drama, which he now called simply \"Siegfried\", probably in September 1856, but by June 1857 he had completed only the first two acts. He decided to put the work aside to concentrate on a new idea: \"Tristan und Isolde\", based on the Arthurian love story \"Tristan and Iseult\".\nOne source of inspiration for \"Tristan und Isolde\" was the philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer, notably his \"The World as Will and Representation\", to which Wagner had been introduced in 1854 by his poet friend Georg Herwegh. Wagner later called this the most important event of his life. His personal circumstances certainly made him an easy convert to what he understood to be Schopenhauer's philosophy, sometimes categorised as \"philosophical pessimism\". He remained an adherent of Schopenhauer for the rest of his life.\nOne of Schopenhauer's key doctrines was that music is supreme among the arts as a direct expression of the world's essence, which he described as a blind and impulsive will. This view challenged Wagner's position at the time, as expressed in \"Opera and Drama,\" where he criticized the traditional operatic hierarchy that prioritized music over drama and advocated the organic unification of the arts\u2014music, poetry, and gesture (expressive stage action)\u2014as equal partners serving a cohesive whole. Wagner scholars have argued that Schopenhauer's influence caused Wagner to assign a more commanding role to music in his later operas, including the latter half of the \"Ring\" cycle, which he had yet to compose. Aspects of Schopenhauerian doctrine found their way into Wagner's subsequent libretti.\nA second source of inspiration was Wagner's infatuation with the poet-writer Mathilde Wesendonck, the wife of the silk merchant Otto Wesendonck. Wagner met the Wesendoncks, who were both great admirers of his music, in Z\u00fcrich in 1852. From May 1853 onwards Wesendonck made several loans to Wagner to finance his household expenses in Z\u00fcrich, and in 1857 placed a cottage on his estate at Wagner's disposal, which became known as the \"Asyl\" (\"asylum\" or \"place of rest\"). During this period, Wagner's growing passion for his patron's wife inspired him to put aside work on the \"Ring\" cycle (which was not resumed for the next twelve years) and begin work on \"Tristan\". While planning the opera, Wagner composed the \"Wesendonck Lieder\", five songs for voice and piano, setting poems by Mathilde. Two of these settings are explicitly subtitled by Wagner as \"studies for \"Tristan und Isolde\"\".\nAmong the conducting engagements that Wagner undertook for revenue during this period, he gave several concerts in 1855 with the Philharmonic Society of London, including one before Queen Victoria. The Queen enjoyed his \"Tannh\u00e4user\" overture and spoke with Wagner after the concert, writing in her diary that Wagner was \"short, very quiet, wears spectacles &amp; has a very finely-developed forehead, a hooked nose &amp; projecting chin.\"\nIn exile: Venice and Paris (1858\u20131862).\nWagner's uneasy affair with Mathilde collapsed in 1858, when Minna intercepted a letter to Mathilde from him. After the resulting confrontation with Minna, Wagner left Z\u00fcrich alone, bound for Venice, where he rented an apartment in the Palazzo Giustinian, while Minna returned to Germany. Wagner's attitude to Minna had changed; the editor of his correspondence with her, John Burk, has said that she was to him \"an invalid, to be treated with kindness and consideration, but, except at a distance, [was] a menace to his peace of mind.\" Wagner continued his correspondence with Mathilde and his friendship with her husband Otto, who maintained his financial support of the composer. In an 1859 letter to Mathilde, Wagner wrote, half-satirically, of \"Tristan\": \"Child! This Tristan is turning into something \"terrible\". This final act!!!\u2014I fear the opera will be banned\u00a0... only mediocre performances can save me! Perfectly good ones will be bound to drive people mad.\"\nIn November 1859, Wagner once again moved to Paris to oversee production of a new revision of \"Tannh\u00e4user\", staged thanks to the efforts of Princess Pauline von Metternich, whose husband, Richard von Metternich, was the Austrian ambassador in Paris. The performances of the Paris \"Tannh\u00e4user\" in 1861 were a notable fiasco. This was partly a consequence of the conservative tastes of the Jockey Club, which organised demonstrations in the theatre to protest at the presentation of the ballet feature in Act\u00a01 (instead of its traditional location in the second act); but the opportunity was also exploited by those who wanted to use the occasion as a veiled political protest against the pro-Austrian policies of Napoleon III. It was during this visit that Wagner met the French poet Charles Baudelaire, who wrote an appreciative brochure, \"\". The opera was withdrawn after the third performance and Wagner left Paris soon after. He had sought a reconciliation with Minna during this Paris visit, and although she joined him there, the reunion was not successful and they again parted from each other when Wagner left.\nReturn and resurgence (1862\u20131871).\nThe political ban that had been placed on Wagner in the North German Confederation after he had fled Dresden was fully lifted in 1862. The composer settled in Biebrich, on the Rhine near Wiesbaden in Hesse. Here Minna visited him for the last time: they parted irrevocably, though Wagner continued to give financial support to her while she lived in Dresden until her death in 1866.\nIn Biebrich, Wagner, at last, began work on \"Die Meistersinger von N\u00fcrnberg\", his only mature comedy. Wagner wrote a first draft of the libretto in 1845, and he had resolved to develop it during a visit he had made to Venice with the Wesendoncks in 1860, where he was inspired by Titian's painting \"The Assumption of the Virgin\". Throughout this period (1861\u20131864) Wagner sought to have \"Tristan und Isolde\" produced in Vienna. Despite many rehearsals, the opera remained unperformed, and gained a reputation as being \"impossible\" to sing, which added to Wagner's financial problems.\nWagner's fortunes took a dramatic upturn in 1864, when King Ludwig II succeeded to the throne of Bavaria at the age of 18. The young king, an ardent admirer of Wagner's operas, had the composer brought to Munich. The King, who was homosexual, \nexpressed in his correspondence a passionate personal adoration for Wagner, and Wagner in his responses had no scruples about feigning reciprocal feelings. Ludwig settled Wagner's considerable debts and proposed to stage \"Tristan\", \"Die Meistersinger\", the \"Ring\", and the other operas Wagner planned. Wagner also began to dictate his autobiography, \"Mein Leben\", at the King's request. Wagner noted that his rescue by Ludwig coincided with news of the death of his earlier mentor (but later supposed enemy) Giacomo Meyerbeer, and regretted that \"this operatic master, who had done me so much harm, should not have lived to see this day.\"\nAfter grave difficulties in rehearsal, \"Tristan und Isolde\" premiered at the National Theatre Munich on 10 June 1865, the first Wagner opera premiere in almost 15 years. (The premiere had been scheduled for 15 May, but was delayed by bailiffs acting for Wagner's creditors, and also because the Isolde, Malvina Schnorr von Carolsfeld, was hoarse and needed time to recover.) The conductor of this premiere was Hans von B\u00fclow, whose wife, Cosima, had given birth in April that year to a daughter, named Isolde, a child not of B\u00fclow but of Wagner.\nCosima was 24 years younger than Wagner and was herself illegitimate, the daughter of the Countess Marie d'Agoult, who had left her husband for Franz Liszt. Liszt initially disapproved of his daughter's involvement with Wagner, though nevertheless the two men were friends. \nThe indiscreet affair scandalised Munich, and Wagner also fell into disfavour with many leading members of the court, who were suspicious of his influence on the King. \nIn December 1865, Ludwig was finally forced to ask the composer to leave Munich. He apparently also toyed with the idea of abdicating to follow his hero into exile, but Wagner quickly dissuaded him.\nLudwig installed Wagner at the Villa Tribschen, beside Switzerland's Lake Lucerne. \"Die Meistersinger\" was completed at Tribschen in 1867, and premiered in Munich on 21 June the following year. \nAt Ludwig's insistence, \"special previews\" of the first two works of the \"Ring\", \"Das Rheingold\" and \"Die Walk\u00fcre\", were performed at Munich in 1869 and 1870, but Wagner retained his dream, first expressed in \"A Communication to My Friends\", to present the first complete cycle at a special festival with a new, dedicated, opera house.\nMinna died of a heart attack on 25 January 1866 in Dresden. Wagner did not attend the funeral. Following Minna's death Cosima wrote to Hans von B\u00fclow several times asking him to grant her a divorce, but B\u00fclow refused to concede this. He consented only after she had two more children with Wagner: another daughter, named Eva, after the heroine of \"Meistersinger\", and a son Siegfried, named after the hero of the \"Ring\". The divorce was finally sanctioned, after delays in the legal process, by a Berlin court on 18 July 1870. \nRichard and Cosima's wedding took place on 25 August 1870. On Christmas Day 1870, Wagner arranged a surprise performance (its premiere) of the \"Siegfried Idyll\" for Cosima's birthday. The marriage to Cosima lasted to the end of Wagner's life.\nWagner, settled into his new-found domesticity, turned his energies towards completing the \"Ring\" cycle. He had not abandoned polemics: he republished his 1850 pamphlet \"Judaism in Music\", originally issued under a pseudonym, under his own name in 1869, extending the introduction and adding a lengthy final section. The publication led to several public protests at early performances of \"Die Meistersinger\" in Vienna and Mannheim.\nBayreuth (1871\u20131876).\nIn 1871, Wagner decided to move to Bayreuth, which was to be the location of his new opera house. The town council donated a large plot of land\u2014the \"Green Hill\"\u2014as a site for the theatre. The Wagners moved to the town the following year, and the foundation stone for the Bayreuth Festspielhaus (\"Festival Theatre\") was laid. Wagner initially announced the first Bayreuth Festival, at which for the first time the \"Ring\" cycle was presented complete, for 1873, but since Ludwig had declined to finance the project, the start of building was delayed and the proposed date for the festival was deferred. To raise funds for the construction, \"Wagner societies\" were formed in several cities, and Wagner began touring Germany conducting concerts. By the spring of 1873, only a third of the required funds had been raised; further pleas to Ludwig were initially ignored, but early in 1874, with the project on the verge of collapse, the King relented and provided a loan. The full building programme included the family home, \"Wahnfried\", into which Wagner, with Cosima and the children, moved from their temporary accommodation on 18 April 1874. The theatre was completed in 1875, and the festival was scheduled for the following year. Commenting on the struggle to finish the building, Wagner remarked to Cosima: \"Each stone is red with my blood and yours.\"\nFor the design of the Festspielhaus, Wagner appropriated some of the ideas of his former colleague, Gottfried Semper, which he had previously solicited for a proposed new opera house in Munich. Wagner was responsible for several theatrical innovations at Bayreuth; these include darkening the auditorium during performances, and placing the orchestra in a pit out of view of the audience.\nThe Festspielhaus finally opened on 13 August 1876 with \"Das Rheingold\", at last taking its place as the first evening of the complete \"Ring\" cycle; the 1876 Bayreuth Festival therefore saw the premiere of the complete cycle, performed as a sequence as the composer had intended. The 1876 Festival consisted of three full \"Ring\" cycles (under the baton of Hans Richter). At the end, critical reactions ranged between that of the Norwegian composer Edvard Grieg, who thought the work \"divinely composed\", and that of the French newspaper , which called the music \"the dream of a lunatic\". The disillusioned included Wagner's (then) friend Friedrich Nietzsche, who, having published his eulogistic essay \"Richard Wagner in Bayreuth\" before the festival as part of his \"Untimely Meditations\", was bitterly disappointed by what he saw as Wagner's pandering to increasingly exclusivist German nationalism; his breach with Wagner began at this time. The festival firmly established Wagner as an artist of European, and indeed world, importance: attendees included Kaiser Wilhelm I, the Emperor Pedro II of Brazil, Anton Bruckner, Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.\nWagner was far from satisfied with the Festival; Cosima recorded that months later his attitude towards the productions was \"Never again, never again!\" Moreover, the festival finished with a deficit of about 150,000 marks. The expenses of Bayreuth and of Wahnfried meant that Wagner still sought further sources of income by conducting or taking on commissions such as the \"Centennial March\" for America, for which he received $5,000.\nLast years (1876\u20131883).\nFollowing the first Bayreuth Festival, Wagner began work on \"Parsifal\", his final opera. The composition took four years, much of which Wagner spent in Italy for health reasons. From 1876 to 1878 Wagner also embarked on the last of his documented emotional liaisons, this time with Judith Gautier, whom he had met at the 1876 Festival. Wagner was also much troubled by problems of financing \"Parsifal\", and by the prospect of the work being performed by other theatres than Bayreuth. He was once again assisted by the liberality of King Ludwig, but was still forced by his personal financial situation in 1877 to sell the rights of several of his unpublished works (including the \"Siegfried Idyll\") to the publisher Schott.\nWagner wrote several articles in his later years, often on political topics, and often reactionary in tone, repudiating some of his earlier, more liberal, views. These include \"Religion and Art\" (1880) and \"Heroism and Christianity\" (1881), which were printed in the journal \"Bayreuther Bl\u00e4tter\", published by his supporter Hans von Wolzogen. Wagner's sudden interest in Christianity at this period, which infuses \"Parsifal\", was contemporary with his increasing alignment with German nationalism, and required on his part, and the part of his associates, \"the rewriting of some recent Wagnerian history\", so as to represent, for example, the \"Ring\" as a work reflecting Christian ideals. Many of these later articles, including \"What is German?\" (1878, but based on a draft written in the 1860s), repeated Wagner's antisemitic preoccupations.\nWagner completed \"Parsifal\" in January 1882, and a second Bayreuth Festival was held for the new opera, which premiered on 26 May. Wagner was by this time extremely ill, having suffered a series of increasingly severe angina attacks. During the sixteenth and final performance of \"Parsifal\" on 29 August, he entered the pit unseen during act 3, took the baton from conductor Hermann Levi, and led the performance to its conclusion.\nAfter the festival, the Wagner family journeyed to Venice for the winter. Wagner died of a heart attack at the age of 69 on 13 February 1883 at Ca' Vendramin Calergi, a 16th-century palazzo on the Grand Canal. The legend that the attack was prompted by an argument with Cosima over Wagner's supposedly amorous interest in the singer Carrie Pringle, who had been a Flower-maiden in \"Parsifal\" at Bayreuth, is without credible evidence. After a funerary gondola bore Wagner's remains over the Grand Canal, his body was taken to Germany where it was buried in the garden of the Villa Wahnfried in Bayreuth.\nWorks.\nWagner's musical output is listed by the \"Wagner-Werk-Verzeichnis\" (WWV) as comprising 113 works, including fragments and projects. The first complete scholarly edition of his musical works in print was commenced in 1970 under the aegis of the Bavarian Academy of Fine Arts and the Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur of Mainz, and is presently under the editorship of Egon Voss. It will consist of 21 volumes (57 books) of music and 10 volumes (13 books) of relevant documents and texts. As at October 2017, three volumes remain to be published. The publisher is Schott Music.\nOperas.\nWagner's operatic works are his primary artistic legacy. Unlike most opera composers, who generally left the task of writing the libretto (the text and lyrics) to others, Wagner wrote his own libretti, which he referred to as \"poems\".\nFrom 1849 onwards, he urged a new concept of opera often referred to as \"music drama\" (although he later rejected this term), in which all musical, poetic and dramatic elements were to be fused together\u2014the \"Gesamtkunstwerk\". Wagner developed a compositional style in which the importance of the orchestra is equal to that of the singers. The orchestra's dramatic role in the later operas includes the use of leitmotifs, musical phrases that can be interpreted as announcing specific characters, locales, and plot elements; their complex interweaving and evolution illuminate the progression of the drama. These operas are still, despite Wagner's reservations, referred to by many writers as \"music dramas\".\nEarly works (to 1842).\nWagner's earliest attempts at opera were often uncompleted. Abandoned works include a pastoral opera based on Goethe's \"\" (\"The Infatuated Lover's Caprice\"), written at the age of 17, \"Die Hochzeit\" (\"The Wedding\"), on which Wagner worked in 1832, and the singspiel \"M\u00e4nnerlist gr\u00f6\u00dfer als Frauenlist\" (\"Men are More Cunning than Women\", 1837\u20131838). \"Die Feen\" (\"The Fairies\", 1833) was not performed in the composer's lifetime, and \"Das Liebesverbot\" (\"The Ban on Love\", 1836) was withdrawn after its first performance. \"Rienzi\" (1842) was Wagner's first opera to be successfully staged. The compositional style of these early works was conventional\u2014the relatively more sophisticated \"Rienzi\" showing the clear influence of Grand Opera \"\u00e0 la\" Spontini and Meyerbeer\u2014and did not exhibit the innovations that would mark Wagner's place in musical history. Later in life, Wagner said that he did not consider these works to be part of his \"oeuvre\", and they have been performed only rarely in the last hundred years, although the overture to \"Rienzi\" is an occasional concert-hall piece. \"Die Feen\", \"Das Liebesverbot\", and \"Rienzi\" were performed at both Leipzig and Bayreuth in 2013 to mark the composer's bicentenary.\n\"Romantic operas\" (1843\u20131851).\nWagner's middle stage output began with \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" (\"The Flying Dutchman\", 1843), followed by \"Tannh\u00e4user\" (1845) and \"Lohengrin\" (1850). These three operas are sometimes referred to as Wagner's \"romantic operas\". They reinforced the reputation, among the public in Germany and beyond, that Wagner had begun to establish with \"Rienzi\". Although distancing himself from the style of these operas from 1849 onwards, he nevertheless reworked both \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" and \"Tannh\u00e4user\" on several occasions. These three operas are considered to represent a significant developmental stage in Wagner's musical and operatic maturity as regards thematic handling, portrayal of emotions and orchestration. They are the earliest works included in the Bayreuth canon, the mature operas that Cosima staged at the Bayreuth Festival after Wagner's death in accordance with his wishes. All three (including the differing versions of \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" and \"Tannh\u00e4user\") continue to be regularly performed throughout the world and have been frequently recorded. They were also the operas by which his fame spread during his lifetime.\n\"Music dramas\" (1851\u20131882).\nStarting the \"Ring\".\nWagner's late dramas are considered his masterpieces. \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\", commonly referred to as the \"Ring\" or \"\"Ring\" cycle\", is a set of four operas based loosely on figures and elements of Germanic mythology\u2014particularly from the later Norse mythology\u2014notably the Old Norse \"Poetic Edda\" and \"Volsunga Saga\", and the Middle High German \"Nibelungenlied\". Wagner specifically developed the libretti for these operas according to his interpretation of \"Stabreim\", highly alliterative rhyming verse-pairs used in old Germanic poetry. They were also influenced by Wagner's concepts of ancient Greek drama, in which tetralogies were a component of Athenian festivals, and which he had amply discussed in his essay \"Oper und Drama\".\nThe first two components of the \"Ring\" cycle were \"Das Rheingold\" (\"The Rhinegold\"), which was completed in 1854, and \"Die Walk\u00fcre\" (\"The Valkyrie\"), which was finished in 1856. In \"Das Rheingold\", with its \"relentlessly talky 'realism' [and] the absence of lyrical 'numbers'\", Wagner came very close to the musical ideals of his 1849\u20131851 essays. \"Die Walk\u00fcre\", which contains what is virtually a traditional aria (Siegmund's \"Winterst\u00fcrme\" in the first act), and the quasi-choral appearance of the Valkyries themselves, shows more \"operatic\" traits, but has been assessed by Barry Millington as \"the music drama that most satisfactorily embodies the theoretical principles of 'Oper und Drama'...\u00a0A thoroughgoing synthesis of poetry and music is achieved without any notable sacrifice in musical expression.\"\n\"Tristan und Isolde\" and \"Die Meistersinger\".\nWhile composing the opera \"Siegfried\", the third part of the \"Ring\" cycle, Wagner interrupted work on it and between 1857 and 1864 wrote the tragic love story \"Tristan und Isolde\" and his only mature comedy \"Die Meistersinger von N\u00fcrnberg\" (\"The Mastersingers of Nuremberg\"), two works that are also part of the regular operatic canon.\n\"Tristan\" is often granted a special place in musical history; many see it as the beginning of the move away from conventional harmony and tonality and consider that it lays the groundwork for the direction of classical music in the 20th century. Wagner felt that his musico-dramatical theories were most perfectly realised in this work with its use of \"the art of transition\" between dramatic elements and the balance achieved between vocal and orchestral lines. Completed in 1859, the work was given its first performance in Munich, conducted by B\u00fclow, in June 1865.\n\"Die Meistersinger\" was originally conceived by Wagner in 1845 as a sort of comic pendant to \"Tannh\u00e4user\". Like \"Tristan\", it was premiered in Munich under the baton of B\u00fclow, on 21 June 1868, and became an immediate success. Millington describes \"Meistersinger\" as \"a rich, perceptive music drama widely admired for its warm humanity.\"\nCompleting the \"Ring\".\nWhen Wagner returned to writing the music for the last act of \"Siegfried\" and for \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" (\"Twilight of the Gods\") as the final part of the \"Ring\", his style had changed once more to something more recognisable as \"operatic\" than the aural world of \"Rheingold\" and \"Walk\u00fcre\", though it was still thoroughly stamped with his own originality as a composer and suffused with leitmotifs. This was in part because the libretti of the four \"Ring\" operas had been written in reverse order, so that the book for \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" was conceived more \"traditionally\" than that of \"Rheingold\"; still, the self-imposed strictures of the \"Gesamtkunstwerk\" had become relaxed. The differences also result from Wagner's development as a composer during the period in which he wrote \"Tristan\", \"Meistersinger\" and the Paris version of \"Tannh\u00e4user\". From Act\u00a03 of \"Siegfried\" onwards, the \"Ring\" becomes more chromatic melodically, more complex harmonically and more developmental in its treatment of leitmotifs.\nWagner took 26 years from writing the first draft of a libretto in 1848 until he completed \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\" in 1874. The \"Ring\" takes about 15 hours to perform and is the only undertaking of such size to be regularly presented on the world's stages.\n\"Parsifal\".\nWagner's final opera, \"Parsifal\" (1882), which was his only work written especially for his Bayreuth Festspielhaus and which is described in the score as a \"B\u00fchnenweihfestspiel\" (\"festival play for the consecration of the stage\"), has a storyline suggested by elements of the legend of the Holy Grail. It also carries elements of Buddhist renunciation suggested by Wagner's readings of Schopenhauer. Wagner described it to Cosima as his \"last card\". It remains controversial because of its treatment of Christianity, its eroticism, and its expression, as perceived by some commentators, of German nationalism and antisemitism. Despite the composer's own description of the opera to King Ludwig as \"this most Christian of works\", Ulrike Kienzle has commented that \"Wagner's turn to Christian mythology, upon which the imagery and spiritual contents of \"Parsifal\" rest, is idiosyncratic and contradicts Christian dogma in many ways.\" Musically the opera has been held to represent a continuing development of the composer's style, and Millington describes it as \"a diaphanous score of unearthly beauty and refinement\".\nNon-operatic music.\nApart from his operas, Wagner composed relatively few pieces of music. These include his Symphony in C major (written at the age of 19), the \"Faust Overture\" (the only completed part of an intended symphony on the subject), some concert overtures, and choral and piano pieces. His most commonly performed work that is not an extract from an opera is the \"Siegfried Idyll\" for chamber orchestra, which has several motifs in common with the \"Ring\" cycle. The \"Wesendonck Lieder\" are also often performed, either in the original piano version or with orchestral accompaniment. More rarely performed are the \"American Centennial March\" (1876), and \"Das Liebesmahl der Apostel\" (\"The Love Feast of the Apostles\"), a piece for male choruses and orchestra composed in 1843 for the city of Dresden.\nAfter completing \"Parsifal\", Wagner expressed his intention to turn to the writing of symphonies, and several sketches dating from the late 1870s and early 1880s have been identified as work towards this end. The overtures and certain orchestral passages from Wagner's middle- and late-stage operas are commonly played as concert pieces. For most of these, Wagner wrote or rewrote short passages to ensure musical coherence. The \"Bridal Chorus\" from \"Lohengrin\" is frequently played as the bride's processional wedding march in English-speaking countries.\nProse writings.\nWagner was an extremely prolific writer, authoring many books, poems, and articles, as well as voluminous correspondence. His writings covered a wide range of topics, including autobiography, politics, philosophy, and detailed analyses of his own operas.\nWagner planned for a collected edition of his publications as early as 1865; he believed that such an edition would help the world understand his intellectual development and artistic aims. The first such edition was published between 1871 and 1883, but was doctored to suppress or alter articles that were an embarrassment to him (e.g. those praising Meyerbeer), or by altering dates on some articles to reinforce Wagner's own account of his progress. Wagner's autobiography \"Mein Leben\" was originally published for close friends only in a very small edition (15\u201318 copies per volume) in four volumes between 1870 and 1880. The first public edition (with many passages suppressed by Cosima) appeared in 1911; the first attempt at a full edition (in German) appeared in 1963.\nThere have been modern complete or partial editions of Wagner's writings, including a centennial edition in German edited by Dieter Borchmeyer (which, however, omitted the essay \"Das Judenthum in der Musik\" and \"Mein Leben\"). The English translations of Wagner's prose in eight volumes by William Ashton Ellis (1892\u20131899) are still in print and commonly used, despite their deficiencies. The first complete historical and critical edition of Wagner's prose works was launched in 2013 at the Institute for Music Research at the University of W\u00fcrzburg; this will result in at least eight volumes of text and several volumes of commentary, totalling over 5,000 pages. It was originally anticipated that the project will be completed by 2030.\nA complete edition of Wagner's correspondence, estimated to amount to between 10,000 and 12,000 items, is underway under the supervision of the University of W\u00fcrzburg. As of January 2021, 25 volumes have appeared, covering the period to 1873.\nInfluence and legacy.\nInfluence on music.\nWagner's later musical style introduced new ideas in harmony, melodic process (leitmotif) and operatic structure. Notably from \"Tristan und Isolde\" onwards, he explored the limits of the traditional tonal system, which gave keys and chords their identity, pointing the way to atonality in the 20th century. Some music historians date the beginning of modern classical music to the first notes of \"Tristan\", which include the so-called Tristan chord.\nWagner inspired great devotion. For an extended period, many composers were inclined to align themselves with or against Wagner's music. Anton Bruckner and Hugo Wolf were greatly indebted to him, as were C\u00e9sar Franck, Henri Duparc, Ernest Chausson, Jules Massenet, Richard Strauss, Alexander von Zemlinsky, Hans Pfitzner and many others. Gustav Mahler was devoted to Wagner and his music: he sought him out on his 1875 visit to Vienna at the age of 15, and became a renowned Wagner conductor; his compositions were seen by Richard Taruskin as extending Wagner's \"maximalization\" of \"the temporal and the sonorous\" in music to the world of the symphony. The harmonic revolutions of Claude Debussy and Arnold Schoenberg (both of whose \"oeuvres\" contain examples of tonal and atonal modernism) have often been traced back to \"Tristan\" and \"Parsifal\". The Italian form of operatic realism known as verismo owed much to the Wagnerian concept of musical form.\nWagner made a major contribution to the principles and practice of conducting. His essay \"About Conducting\" (1869) advanced Hector Berlioz's technique of conducting and claimed that conducting was a means by which a musical work could be re-interpreted, rather than simply a mechanism for achieving orchestral unison. He exemplified this approach in his own conducting, which was significantly more flexible than the disciplined approach of Felix Mendelssohn; in his view, this also justified practices that were later frowned upon, such as the rewriting of scores. Wilhelm Furtw\u00e4ngler felt that Wagner and B\u00fclow, through their interpretative approach, inspired a whole new generation of conductors (including Furtw\u00e4ngler himself).\nAmong those from the late 20th century and beyond claiming inspiration from Wagner's music are the German band Rammstein; Jim Steinman, who wrote songs for Meat Loaf, Bonnie Tyler, Air Supply, Celine Dion and others; and the electronic composer Klaus Schulze, whose 1975 album \"Timewind\" consists of two 30-minute tracks, \"Bayreuth Return\" and \"Wahnfried 1883\". Joey DeMaio of the band Manowar has described Wagner as \"the father of heavy metal\". The Slovenian group Laibach created the 2009 suite \"VolksWagner\", using material from Wagner's operas. Phil Spector's Wall of Sound recording technique was, it has been claimed, heavily influenced by Wagner.\nInfluence on literature, philosophy and the visual arts.\nWagner's influence on literature and philosophy is significant. Millington has commented:[Wagner's] protean abundance meant that he could inspire the use of literary motif in many a novel employing interior monologue;\u00a0... the Symbolists saw him as a mystic hierophant; the Decadents found many a frisson in his work.Friedrich Nietzsche was a member of Wagner's inner circle during the early 1870s. Nietzsche's first published work, \"The Birth of Tragedy\", proposed Wagner's music as the Dionysian \"rebirth\" of European culture in opposition to Apollonian rationalist \"decadence\". Nietzsche broke with Wagner following the first Bayreuth Festival in 1876, believing that Wagner's final phase represented a pandering to Christian pieties and a surrender to the new German Reich. Nevertheless, in \"Thus Spoke Zarathustra\", Nietzsche alluded to Wagner as the \"old sorcerer\", a reference to the captivating power of Wagner's music. Nietzsche expressed his displeasure with the later Wagner in \"The Case of Wagner\" and \"Nietzsche contra Wagner\".\nThe poets Charles Baudelaire, St\u00e9phane Mallarm\u00e9 and Paul Verlaine worshipped Wagner. \u00c9douard Dujardin, whose influential novel \"Les Lauriers sont coup\u00e9s\" is in the form of an interior monologue inspired by Wagnerian music, founded a journal dedicated to Wagner, \"La Revue wagn\u00e9rienne\", to which J. K. Huysmans and T\u00e9odor de Wyzewa contributed. In a list of major cultural figures influenced by Wagner, Bryan Magee includes D. H. Lawrence, Aubrey Beardsley, Romain Rolland, G\u00e9rard de Nerval, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, Rainer Maria Rilke and several others.\nIn the 20th century, W. H. Auden once called Wagner \"perhaps the greatest genius that ever lived\", while Thomas Mann and Marcel Proust were heavily influenced by him and discussed Wagner in their novels. He is also discussed in some of the works of James Joyce, as well as W. E. B. Du Bois, who featured \"Lohengrin\" in \"The Souls of Black Folk\". Wagnerian themes inhabit T. S. Eliot's \"The Waste Land\", which contains lines from \"Tristan und Isolde\" and \"G\u00f6tterd\u00e4mmerung\"; and Verlaine's poem on \"Parsifal\".\nMany of Wagner's concepts, including his speculation about dreams, predated their investigation by Sigmund Freud. Wagner had publicly analysed the Oedipus myth before Freud was born in terms of its psychological significance, insisting that incestuous desires are natural and normal, and perceptively exhibiting the relationship between sexuality and anxiety. Georg Groddeck considered the \"Ring\" as the first manual of psychoanalysis.\nInfluence on cinema.\nWagner's use of leitmotifs and the integrated musical expression they can enable has influenced many 20th- and 21st-century film scores. The critic Theodor Adorno has noted that the Wagnerian leitmotif \"leads directly to cinema music where the sole function of the leitmotif is to announce heroes or situations so as to allow the audience to orient itself more easily\". Film scores citing Wagnerian themes include the \"Looney Tunes\" short \"What's Opera, Doc?\" and Francis Ford Coppola's \"Apocalypse Now\", which both feature a version of the Ride of the Valkyries; Trevor Jones's soundtrack to John Boorman's film \"Excalibur\"; and the 2011 films \"A Dangerous Method\" (dir. David Cronenberg) and \"Melancholia\" (dir. Lars von Trier). Hans-J\u00fcrgen Syberberg's 1977 film \"\"'s visual style and set design are strongly inspired by \"Der Ring des Nibelungen\", musical excerpts from which are frequently used in the film's soundtrack.\nOpponents and supporters.\nNot all reactions to Wagner were positive. For a time, German musical life divided into two factions, supporters of Wagner and supporters of Johannes Brahms; the latter, with the support of the powerful critic Eduard Hanslick (of whom Beckmesser in \"Meistersinger\" is in part a caricature), championed traditional forms and led the conservative front against Wagnerian innovations. They were supported by the conservative leanings of some German music schools, including the conservatories at Leipzig under Ignaz Moscheles and at Cologne under the direction of Ferdinand Hiller. Another Wagner detractor was the French composer Charles-Valentin Alkan, who wrote to Hiller after attending Wagner's Paris concert on 25 January 1860, at which Wagner conducted the overtures to \"Der fliegende Holl\u00e4nder\" and \"Tannh\u00e4user\", the preludes to \"Lohengrin\" and \"Tristan und Isolde\", and six other extracts from \"Tannh\u00e4user\" and \"Lohengrin\": \"I had imagined that I was going to meet music of an innovative kind but was astonished to find a pale imitation of Berlioz\u00a0... I do not like all the music of Berlioz while appreciating his marvellous understanding of certain instrumental effects\u00a0... but here he was imitated and caricatured\u00a0... Wagner is not a musician, he is a disease.\"\nEven those who, like Debussy, opposed Wagner (\"this old poisoner\") could not deny his influence. Indeed, Debussy was one of many composers, including Tchaikovsky, who felt the need to break with Wagner precisely because his influence was so unmistakable and overwhelming. \"Golliwogg's Cakewalk\" from Debussy's \"Children's Corner\" piano suite contains a deliberately tongue-in-cheek quotation from the opening bars of \"Tristan\". Others who proved resistant to Wagner's operas included Gioachino Rossini, who said \"Wagner has wonderful moments, and dreadful quarters of an hour.\" In the 20th century Wagner's music was parodied by Paul Hindemith and Hanns Eisler, among others.\nWagner's followers (known as Wagnerians or Wagnerites) have formed many societies dedicated to Wagner's life and work.\nFilm and stage portrayals.\nWagner has been the subject of many biographical films. The earliest was a silent film made by Carl Froelich in 1913 and featured in the title role the composer Giuseppe Becce, who also wrote the score for the film (as Wagner's music, still in copyright, was not available). Other film portrayals of Wagner include: Alan Badel in \"Magic Fire\" (1955), Lyndon Brook in \"Song Without End\" (1960), Trevor Howard in \"Ludwig\" (1972), Paul Nicholas in \"Lisztomania\" (1975), and Richard Burton in \"Wagner\" (1983).\nJonathan Harvey's opera \"Wagner Dream\" (2007) intertwines the events surrounding Wagner's death with the story of Wagner's uncompleted opera outline \"Die Sieger (The Victors)\".\nBayreuth Festival.\nSince Wagner's death, the Bayreuth Festival, which has become an annual event, has been successively directed by his widow, his son Siegfried, the latter's widow Winifred Wagner, their two sons Wieland and Wolfgang Wagner, and, presently, two of the composer's great-granddaughters, Eva Wagner-Pasquier and Katharina Wagner. Since 1973, the festival has been overseen by the Richard-Wagner-Stiftung (Richard Wagner Foundation), the members of which include some of Wagner's descendants.\nNazi appropriation.\nAdolf Hitler was an admirer of Wagner's music and saw in his operas an embodiment of his own vision of the German nation; in a 1922 speech he claimed that Wagner's works glorified \"the heroic Teutonic nature\u00a0... Greatness lies in the heroic.\" Hitler visited Bayreuth frequently from 1923 onwards and attended the productions at the theatre. There continues to be debate about the extent to which Wagner's views might have influenced Nazi thinking. Houston Stewart Chamberlain (1855\u20131927), who married Wagner's daughter Eva in 1908 but never met Wagner, was the author of \"The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century\", approved by the Nazi movement. Chamberlain met Hitler several times between 1923 and 1927 in Bayreuth, but cannot credibly be regarded as a conduit of Wagner's own views. The Nazis used those parts of Wagner's thought that were useful for propaganda and ignored or suppressed the rest.\nWhile Bayreuth presented a useful front for Nazi culture, and Wagner's music was used at many Nazi events, the Nazi hierarchy as a whole did not share Hitler's enthusiasm for Wagner's operas and resented attending these lengthy epics at Hitler's insistence. Some Nazi ideologists, most notably Alfred Rosenberg, rejected \"Parsifal\" as excessively Christian and pacifist.\nGuido Fackler has researched evidence that indicates that it is possible that Wagner's music was used at the Dachau concentration camp in 1933\u20131934 to \"reeducate\" political prisoners by exposure to \"national music\". There has been no evidence to support claims, sometimes made, that his music was played at Nazi death camps during the Second World War, and Pamela Potter has noted that Wagner's music was explicitly off-limits in the camps.\nBecause of the associations of Wagner with antisemitism and Nazism, the performance of his music in the State of Israel has been a source of controversy.\nViews.\nWagner's operas, writings, politics, beliefs and unorthodox lifestyle made him a controversial figure during his lifetime. Following his death, debate about his ideas and their interpretation, particularly in Germany during the 20th century, has continued.\nRacism and antisemitism.\nWagner's hostile writings on Jews, including \"Jewishness in Music\", correspond to some existing trends of thought in Germany during the 19th century. Despite his very public views on this topic, throughout his life Wagner had Jewish friends, colleagues and supporters. There have been frequent suggestions that antisemitic stereotypes are represented in Wagner's operas. The characters of Alberich and Mime in the \"Ring\", Sixtus Beckmesser in \"Die Meistersinger\", and Klingsor in \"Parsifal\" are sometimes claimed as Jewish representations, though they are not identified as such in the librettos of these operas. The topic is further complicated by claims, which may have been credited by Wagner, that he himself was of Jewish ancestry, via his supposed father Geyer; however, there is no evidence that Geyer had Jewish ancestors.\nLate in his life, in the early 1880s, Wagner developed a friendship with Arthur de Gobineau, whose racialist philosophy was used by the Nazi Party. Their friendship was tempestuous; while Gobineau considered the world's outlook one of hopeless decline through irreparable blood tainting, Wagner maintained belief that humanity could be united through self-knowledge, spiritual awakening and cultural renewal, transcending biological racial distinctions\u2014as outlined in his essay \"Know Thyself\" (1881).\nOther interpretations.\nWagner's ideas are amenable to socialist interpretations; many of his ideas on art were being formulated at the time of his revolutionary inclinations in the 1840s. Thus, for example, George Bernard Shaw wrote in \"The Perfect Wagnerite\" (1883):\n[Wagner's] picture of Niblunghome under the reign of Alberic is a poetic vision of unregulated industrial capitalism as it was made known in Germany in the middle of the 19th century by Engels's book \"The Condition of the Working Class in England\".\nLeft-wing interpretations of Wagner also inform the writings of Theodor Adorno among other Wagner critics. Walter Benjamin gave Wagner as an example of \"bourgeois false consciousness\", alienating art from its social context. Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs contended that the ideas of the early Wagner represented the ideology of the \"true socialists\" (\"wahre Sozialisten\"), a movement referenced in Karl Marx's \"Communist Manifesto\" as belonging to the left wing of German bourgeois radicalism and associated with Feuerbachianism and Karl Theodor Ferdinand Gr\u00fcn, while Anatoly Lunacharsky said about the later Wagner: \"The circle is complete. The revolutionary has become a reactionary. The rebellious petty bourgeois now kisses the slipper of the Pope, the keeper of order.\"\nThe writer Robert Donington has produced a detailed, if controversial, Jungian interpretation of the \"Ring\" cycle, described as \"an approach to Wagner by way of his symbols\", which, for example, sees the character of the goddess Fricka as part of her husband Wotan's \"inner femininity\". Millington notes that Jean-Jacques Nattiez has also applied psychoanalytical techniques in an evaluation of Wagner's life and works.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks and chapters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nOperas\nWritings\nScores\nOther"}
{"id": "25453", "revid": "32694456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25453", "title": "Rheology", "text": "Study of the flow of matter, primarily in a fluid state\nRheology (; from el \" \"\u1fe5\u03ad\u03c9\" (rh\u00e9\u014d)\"\u00a0'flow' and \" \"-\u03bbo\u03b3\u03af\u03b1\" (-logia)\"\u00a0'study of') is the study of the flow of matter, primarily in a fluid (liquid or gas) state but also as \"soft solids\" or solids under conditions in which they respond with plastic flow rather than deforming elastically in response to an applied force. Rheology is the branch of physics that deals with the deformation and flow of materials, both solids and liquids.\nThe term \"rheology\" was coined by Eugene C. Bingham, a professor at Lafayette College, in 1920 from a suggestion by a colleague, Markus Reiner. The term was inspired by the aphorism of Heraclitus (often mistakenly attributed to Simplicius), (, 'everything flows') and was first used to describe the flow of liquids and the deformation of solids. It applies to substances that have a complex microstructure, such as muds, sludges, suspensions, and polymers and other glass formers (e.g., silicates), as well as many foods and additives, bodily fluids (e.g., blood) and other biological materials, and other materials that belong to the class of soft matter such as food.\nNewtonian fluids can be characterized by a single coefficient of viscosity for a specific temperature. Although this viscosity will change with temperature, it does not change with the strain rate. Only a small group of fluids exhibit such constant viscosity. The large class of fluids whose viscosity changes with the strain rate (the relative flow velocity) are called non-Newtonian fluids.\nRheology generally accounts for the behavior of non-Newtonian fluids by characterizing the minimum number of functions that are needed to relate stresses with rate of change of strain or strain rates. For example, ketchup can have its viscosity reduced by shaking (or other forms of mechanical agitation, where the relative movement of different layers in the material actually causes the reduction in viscosity), but water cannot. Ketchup is a shear-thinning material, like yogurt and emulsion paint (US terminology latex paint or acrylic paint), exhibiting thixotropy, where an increase in relative flow velocity will cause a reduction in viscosity, for example, by stirring. Some other non-Newtonian materials show the opposite behavior, rheopecty (viscosity increasing with relative deformation), and are called shear-thickening or dilatant materials. Since Sir Isaac Newton originated the concept of viscosity, the study of liquids with strain-rate-dependent viscosity is also often called \"Non-Newtonian fluid mechanics\".\nThe experimental characterisation of a material's rheological behaviour is known as \"rheometry\", although the term \"rheology\" is frequently used synonymously with rheometry, particularly by experimentalists. Theoretical aspects of rheology are the relation of the flow/deformation behaviour of material and its internal structure (e.g., the orientation and elongation of polymer molecules) and the flow/deformation behaviour of materials that cannot be described by classical fluid mechanics or elasticity.\nScope.\nIn practice, rheology is principally concerned with extending continuum mechanics to characterize the flow of materials that exhibit a combination of elastic, viscous and plastic behavior by properly combining elasticity and (Newtonian) fluid mechanics. It is also concerned with predicting mechanical behavior (on the continuum mechanical scale) based on the micro- or nanostructure of the material, e.g. the molecular size and architecture of polymers in solution or the particle size distribution in a solid suspension.\nMaterials with the characteristics of a fluid will flow when subjected to a stress, which is defined as the force per area. There are different sorts of stress (e.g. shear, torsional, etc.), and materials can respond differently under different stresses. Much of theoretical rheology is concerned with associating external forces and torques with internal stresses, internal strain gradients, and flow velocities.\nRheology unites the seemingly unrelated fields of plasticity and non-Newtonian fluid dynamics by recognizing that materials undergoing these types of deformation are unable to support a stress (particularly a shear stress, since it is easier to analyze shear deformation) in static equilibrium. In this sense, a solid undergoing plastic deformation is a fluid, although no viscosity coefficient is associated with this flow. Granular rheology refers to the continuum mechanical description of granular materials.\nOne of the major tasks of rheology is to establish by measurement the relationships between strains (or rates of strain) and stresses, although a number of theoretical developments (such as assuring frame invariants) are also required before using the empirical data. These experimental techniques are known as rheometry and are concerned with the determination of well-defined \"rheological material functions\". Such relationships are then amenable to mathematical treatment by the established methods of continuum mechanics.\nThe characterization of flow or deformation originating from a simple shear stress field is called shear rheometry (or shear rheology). The study of extensional flows is called extensional rheology. Shear flows are much easier to study and thus much more experimental data are available for shear flows than for extensional flows.\nDimensionless numbers.\nDeborah number.\nOn one end of the spectrum we have an inviscid or a simple Newtonian fluid and on the other end, a rigid solid; thus the behavior of all materials fall somewhere in between these two ends. The difference in material behavior is characterized by the level and nature of elasticity present in the material when it deforms, which takes the material behavior to the non-Newtonian regime. The non-dimensional Deborah number is designed to account for the degree of non-Newtonian behavior in a flow. The Deborah number is defined as the ratio of the characteristic time of relaxation (which purely depends on the material and other conditions like the temperature) to the characteristic time of experiment or observation. Small Deborah numbers represent Newtonian flow, while non-Newtonian (with both viscous and elastic effects present) behavior occurs for intermediate range Deborah numbers, and high Deborah numbers indicate an elastic/rigid solid. Since Deborah number is a relative quantity, the numerator or the denominator can alter the number. A very small Deborah number can be obtained for a fluid with extremely small relaxation time or a very large experimental time, for example.\nReynolds number.\nIn fluid mechanics, the Reynolds number is a measure of the ratio of inertial forces (formula_1) to viscous forces (formula_2) and consequently it quantifies the relative importance of these two types of effect for given flow conditions. Under low Reynolds numbers viscous effects dominate and the flow is laminar, whereas at high Reynolds numbers inertia predominates and the flow may be turbulent. However, since rheology is concerned with fluids which do not have a fixed viscosity, but one which can vary with flow and time, calculation of the Reynolds number can be complicated.\nIt is one of the most important dimensionless numbers in fluid dynamics and is used, usually along with other dimensionless numbers, to provide a criterion for determining dynamic similitude. When two geometrically similar flow patterns, in perhaps different fluids with possibly different flow rates, have the same values for the relevant dimensionless numbers, they are said to be dynamically similar.\nTypically it is given as follows:\nformula_3\nwhere:\nMeasurement.\nRheometers are instruments used to characterize the rheological properties of materials, typically fluids that are melts or solution. These instruments impose a specific stress field or deformation to the fluid, and monitor the resultant deformation or stress. Instruments can be run in steady flow or oscillatory flow, in both shear and extension.\nApplications.\nRheology has applications in materials science, engineering, geophysics, physiology, human biology and pharmaceutics. Materials science is utilized in the production of many industrially important substances, such as cement, paint, and chocolate, which have complex flow characteristics. In addition, plasticity theory has been similarly important for the design of metal forming processes. The science of rheology and the characterization of viscoelastic properties in the production and use of polymeric materials has been critical for the production of many products for use in both the industrial and military sectors.\nStudy of flow properties of liquids is important for pharmacists working in the manufacture of several dosage forms, such as simple liquids, ointments, creams, pastes etc. The flow behavior of liquids under applied stress is of great relevance in the field of pharmacy. Flow properties are used as important quality control tools to maintain the superiority of the product and reduce batch to batch variations.\nMaterials science.\nPolymers.\nExamples may be given to illustrate the potential applications of these principles to practical problems in the processing and use of rubbers, plastics, and fibers. Polymers constitute the basic materials of the rubber and plastic industries and are of vital importance to the textile, petroleum, automobile, paper, and pharmaceutical industries. Their viscoelastic properties determine the mechanical performance of the final products of these industries, and also the success of processing methods at intermediate stages of production.\nIn viscoelastic materials, such as most polymers and plastics, the presence of liquid-like behaviour depends on the properties of and so varies with rate of applied load, i.e., how quickly a force is applied. The silicone toy 'Silly Putty' behaves quite differently depending on the time rate of applying a force. Pull on it slowly and it exhibits continuous flow, similar to that evidenced in a highly viscous liquid. Alternatively, when hit hard and directly, it shatters like a silicate glass.\nIn addition, conventional rubber undergoes a glass transition (often called a \"rubber-glass transition\"). E.g. The Space Shuttle \"Challenger\" disaster was caused by rubber O-rings that were being used well below their glass transition temperature on an unusually cold Florida morning, and thus could not flex adequately to form proper seals between sections of the two solid-fuel rocket boosters.\nSol-gel.\nWith the viscosity of a sol adjusted into a proper range, both optical quality glass fiber and refractory ceramic fiber can be drawn which are used for fiber-optic sensors and thermal insulation, respectively. The mechanisms of hydrolysis and condensation, and the rheological factors that bias the structure toward linear or branched structures are the most critical issues of sol-gel science and technology.\nGeophysics.\nThe scientific discipline of geophysics includes study of the flow of molten lava and study of debris flows (fluid mudslides). This disciplinary branch also deals with solid Earth materials which only exhibit flow over extended time-scales. Those that display viscous behaviour are known as rheids. For example, granite can flow plastically with a negligible yield stress at room temperatures (i.e. a viscous flow). Long-term creep experiments (~10 years) indicate that the viscosity of granite and glass under ambient conditions are on the order of 1020 poises.\nPhysiology.\nPhysiology includes the study of many bodily fluids that have complex structure and composition, and thus exhibit a wide range of viscoelastic flow characteristics. In particular there is a specialist study of blood flow called hemorheology. This is the study of flow properties of blood and its elements (plasma and formed elements, including red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets). Blood viscosity is determined by plasma viscosity, hematocrit (volume fraction of red blood cell, which constitute 99.9% of the cellular elements) and mechanical behaviour of red blood cells. Therefore, red blood cell mechanics is the major determinant of flow properties of blood.(The ocular Vitreous humor is subject to rheologic observations, particularly during studies of age-related vitreous liquefaction, or synaeresis.)\nThe leading characteristic for hemorheology has been shear thinning in steady shear flow. Other non-Newtonian rheological characteristics that blood can demonstrate includes pseudoplasticity, viscoelasticity, and thixotropy.\nRed blood cell aggregation.\nThere are two current major hypotheses to explain blood flow predictions and shear thinning responses. The two models also attempt to demonstrate the drive for reversible red blood cell aggregation, although the mechanism is still being debated. There is a direct effect of red blood cell aggregation on blood viscosity and circulation. The foundation of hemorheology can also provide information for modeling of other biofluids. The bridging or \"cross-bridging\" hypothesis suggests that macromolecules physically crosslink adjacent red blood cells into rouleaux structures. This occurs through adsorption of macromolecules onto the red blood cell surfaces. The depletion layer hypothesis suggests the opposite mechanism. The surfaces of the red blood cells are bound together by an osmotic pressure gradient that is created by depletion layers overlapping. The effect of rouleaux aggregation tendency can be explained by hematocrit and fibrinogen concentration in whole blood rheology. Some techniques researchers use are optical trapping and microfluidics to measure cell interaction in vitro.\nDisease and diagnostics.\nChanges to viscosity has been shown to be linked with diseases like hyperviscosity, hypertension, sickle cell anemia, and diabetes. Hemorheological measurements and genomic testing technologies act as preventative measures and diagnostic tools.\nHemorheology has also been correlated with aging effects, especially with impaired blood fluidity, and studies have shown that physical activity may improve the thickening of blood rheology.\nZoology.\nMany animals make use of rheological phenomena, for example sandfish that exploit the granular rheology of dry sand to \"swim\" in it or land gastropods that use snail slime for adhesive locomotion. Certain animals produce specialized endogenous complex fluids, such as the sticky slime produced by velvet worms to immobilize prey or the fast-gelling underwater slime secreted by hagfish to deter predators.\nFood rheology.\nFood rheology is important in the manufacture and processing of food products, such as cheese and gelato. An adequate rheology is important for the indulgence of many common foods, particularly in the case of sauces, dressings, yogurt, or fondue.\nThickening agents, or thickeners, are substances which, when added to an aqueous mixture, increase its viscosity without substantially modifying its other properties, such as taste. They provide body, increase stability, and improve suspension of added ingredients. Thickening agents are often used as food additives and in cosmetics and personal hygiene products. Some thickening agents are gelling agents, forming a gel. The agents are materials used to thicken and stabilize liquid solutions, emulsions, and suspensions. They dissolve in the liquid phase as a colloid mixture that forms a weakly cohesive internal structure. Food thickeners frequently are based on either polysaccharides (starches, vegetable gums, and pectin), or proteins.\nConcrete rheology.\nConcrete's and mortar's workability is related to the rheological properties of the fresh cement paste. The mechanical properties of hardened concrete increase if less water is used in the concrete mix design, however reducing the water-to-cement ratio may decrease the ease of mixing and application. To avoid these undesired effects, superplasticizers are typically added to decrease the apparent yield stress and the viscosity of the fresh paste. Their addition highly improves concrete and mortar properties.\nFilled polymer rheology.\nThe incorporation of various types of fillers into polymers is a common means of reducing cost and to impart certain desirable mechanical, thermal, electrical and magnetic properties to the resulting material. The advantages that filled polymer systems have to offer come with an increased complexity in the rheological behavior.\nUsually when the use of fillers is considered, a compromise has to be made between the improved mechanical properties in the solid state on one side and the increased difficulty in melt processing, the problem of achieving uniform dispersion of the filler in the polymer matrix and the economics of the process due to the added step of compounding on the other. The rheological properties of filled polymers are determined not only by the type and amount of filler, but also by the shape, size and size distribution of its particles. The viscosity of filled systems generally increases with increasing filler fraction. This can be partially ameliorated via broad particle size distributions via the Farris effect. An additional factor is the stress transfer at the filler-polymer interface. The interfacial adhesion can be substantially enhanced via a coupling agent that adheres well to both the polymer and the filler particles. The type and amount of surface treatment on the filler are thus additional parameters affecting the rheological and material properties of filled polymeric systems.\nIt is important to take into consideration wall slip when performing the rheological characterization of highly filled materials, as there can be a large difference between the actual strain and the measured strain.\nRheologist.\nA rheologist is an interdisciplinary scientist or engineer who studies the flow of complex liquids or the deformation of soft solids. It is not a primary degree subject; there is no qualification of rheologist as such. Most rheologists have a qualification in mathematics, the physical sciences (e.g. chemistry, physics, geology, biology), engineering (e.g. mechanical, chemical, materials science, plastics engineering and engineering or civil engineering), medicine, or certain technologies, notably materials or food. Typically, a small amount of rheology may be studied when obtaining a degree, but a person working in rheology will extend this knowledge during postgraduate research or by attending short courses and by joining a professional association.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25455", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25455", "title": "Richard M Stallman", "text": ""}
{"id": "25456", "revid": "50688284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25456", "title": "Rifle", "text": "Common long range firearm\nA rifle is a long-barreled firearm designed for accurate shooting, distinguished by having a barrel cut with a helical or spiralling pattern of grooves (rifling). Most rifles are designed to be held with both hands and braced against the shoulder via a buttstock for stability. Rifles are used in warfare, law enforcement, hunting and target shooting sports.\nThe invention of rifling separated such firearms from the earlier smoothbore weapons (e.g., arquebuses, muskets, and other long guns), greatly elevating their accuracy and general effectiveness. The raised areas of a barrel's rifling are called \"lands\"; they make contact with and exert torque on the projectile as it moves down the bore, imparting a spin. When the projectile leaves the barrel, this spin persists and lends gyroscopic stability to the projectile due to conservation of angular momentum, increasing accuracy and hence effective range. The class of firearm was originally termed the rifled gun, with the verb \"to rifle\" referring to the early modern machining process of creating grooves with cutting tools.\nLike all typical firearms, a rifle's projectile (bullet) is propelled by the contained deflagration of a combustible propellant compound (originally black powder and now nitrocellulose and other smokeless powders), although other propulsive means are used, such as compressed air in air rifles, which are popular for vermin control, small game hunting, competitive target shooting and casual sport shooting (\"plinking\").\nTerminology.\nHistorically, rifles only fired a single projectile with each squeeze of the trigger. Modern rifles are commonly classified as single-shot, bolt-action, semi-automatic, or automatic. Single-shot, bolt-action, and semi-automatic rifles are limited by their designs to fire a single shot for each trigger pull. Only automatic rifles are capable of firing more than one round per trigger squeeze; however, some automatic rifles are limited to fixed bursts of two, three, or more rounds per squeeze.\nModern automatic rifles overlap to some extent in design and function with machine guns. In fact, many light machine guns are adaptations of existing automatic rifle designs, such as the RPK and M27 Infantry Automatic Rifle. A military's light machine guns are typically chambered for the same caliber ammunition as its service rifles. Generally, the difference between an automatic rifle and a machine gun comes down to weight, cooling system, and ammunition feed system. Rifles, with their relatively lighter components (which overheat quickly) and smaller capacity magazines, are incapable of sustained automatic fire in the way that machine guns are; they trade this capability in favor of increased mobility. Modern military rifles are fed by magazines, while machine guns are generally belt-fed. Many machine guns allow the operator to quickly exchange barrels in order to prevent overheating, whereas rifles generally do not. Most machine guns fire from an open bolt in order to reduce the danger of \"cook-off\", while almost all rifles fire from a closed bolt for accuracy. Machine guns are often crewed by more than one soldier; the rifle is an individual weapon.\nThe term \"rifle\" is sometimes used to describe larger rifled crew-served weapons firing explosive shells, for example, recoilless rifles and naval rifles.\nIn many works of fiction \"rifle\" refers to any weapon that has a stock and is shouldered before firing, even if the weapon is not rifled or does not fire solid projectiles (e.g. \"laser rifle\").\nHistorical overview.\nThe origins of rifling are difficult to trace, but some of the earliest European experiments seem to have been carried out during the 15th century. Archers had long realized that a twist added to the tail feathers of their arrows gave them greater accuracy. Early muskets produced large quantities of smoke and soot, which had to be cleaned from the action and bore of the musket frequently, either through the action of repeated bore scrubbing, or a deliberate attempt to create \"soot grooves\" that would allow for more shots to be fired from the firearm. \nSome of the earliest examples of European grooved gun barrels were reportedly manufactured during 1440, and further developed by Gaspard Kollner of Vienna c.\u20091498, although other scholars allege they were a joint effort between Kollner and Augustus Kotter of Nuremberg c.\u20091520. Military commanders preferred smoothbore weapons for infantry use because rifles were much more prone to problems due to powder fouling the barrel and because they took longer to reload and fire than muskets.\nRifles were created as an improvement in the accuracy of smoothbore muskets. In the early 18th century, Benjamin Robins, an English mathematician, realized that an elongated bullet would retain the momentum and kinetic energy of a musket ball, but would slice through the air with greater ease. The black powder used in early muzzle-loading rifles quickly fouled the barrel, making loading slower and more difficult. The greater range of the rifle was considered to be of little practical use since the smoke from black powder quickly obscured the battlefield and made it almost impossible to aim the weapon from a distance. Since musketeers could not afford to take the time to stop and clean their barrels in the middle of a battle, rifles were limited to use by sharpshooters and non-military uses like hunting.\nMuskets were smoothbore, large caliber weapons using spherical ammunition fired at relatively low velocity. Due to the high cost and great difficulty of precision manufacturing, and the need to load readily from the muzzle, the musket ball was a loose fit in the barrel. Consequently, on firing the ball bounced off the sides of the barrel when fired and the final direction on leaving the muzzle was unpredictable.\nThe performance of early muskets defined the style of warfare at the time. Due to the lack of accuracy, soldiers were deployed in long lines (thus line infantry) to fire at the opposing forces. Precise aim was thus not necessary to hit an opponent. Muskets were used for comparatively rapid, imprecisely aimed volley fire, and the average soldier could be easily trained to use them.\nIn the Province of Pennsylvania, British America, one of the most successful early rifles, the long rifle, was developed over the course of the 18th century. Compared to the more common Brown Bess, these Pennsylvania and Kentucky rifles had a tighter bore with no space between bullet and barrel, and still used balls instead of conical bullets. The balls the long rifle used were smaller, allowing the production of more rounds for a given amount of lead. These rifles also had longer barrels, allowing more accuracy, which were rifled with a helical groove. These first started appearing sometime before 1740, one early example being made by Jacob Dickert, a German immigrant. By 1750 there were a number of such manufacturers in the area. The longer barrel was a departure by local gunsmiths from their German roots, allowing bullets to achieve a higher speed (as the burning gunpowder was contained longer) before emerging from the barrel.\nDuring the 1700s (18th century), colonial settlers, particularly those immigrating from Germany and Switzerland, adapted and improved upon their European rifles. The improved long rifles were used for precise shooting, aiming, and firing at individual targets, instead of the musket's use for imprecise fire. During the American Revolution, the colonist troops favoured these more accurate rifles while their use was resisted by the British and Hessian troops.\nBy the time of the American Revolutionary War, these rifles were commonly used by frontiersmen, and Congress authorized the establishment of ten companies of riflemen. One of the most critical units was Morgan's Riflemen, led by Daniel Morgan. This sharpshooting unit eventually proved itself integral to the Battle of Saratoga, and in the southern states where General Morgan commanded as well. Taking advantage of the rifle's improved accuracy, Morgan's sharpshooters picked off cannoneers and officers, reducing the impact of enemy artillery. This kind of advantage was considered pivotal in many battles, such as the battles of Cowpens, Saratoga, and King's Mountain.\nLater during the Napoleonic Wars, the British 95th Regiment (Green Jackets) and 60th Regiment, (Royal American), as well as sharpshooters and riflemen during the War of 1812, used the rifle to great effect during skirmishing. Because of a slower loading time than a musket, they were not adopted by the whole army. Since rifles were used by sharpshooters who did not routinely fire over other men's shoulders, long length was not required to avoid the forward line. A shorter length made a handier weapon in which tight-fitting balls did not have to be rammed so far down the barrel.\nThe invention of the Mini\u00e9 ball in the 1840s solved the slow loading problem, and in the 1850s and 1860s rifles quickly replaced muskets on the battlefield. Many rifles, often referred to as rifled muskets, were very similar to the muskets they replaced, but the military also experimented with other designs. Breech-loading weapons proved to have a much faster rate of fire than muzzleloaders, causing military forces to abandon muzzle loaders in favor of breech-loading designs in the late 1860s. In the later part of the 19th century, rifles were generally single-shot, breech-loading guns, designed for aimed, discretionary fire by individual soldiers. Then, as now, rifles had a stock, either fixed or folding, to be braced against the shoulder when firing.\nThe adoption of cartridges and breech-loading in the 19th century was concurrent with the general adoption of rifles. In the early part of the 20th century, soldiers were trained to shoot accurately over long ranges with high-powered cartridges. World War I Lee\u2013Enfield rifles (among others) were equipped with long-range 'volley sights' for massed firing at ranges of up to . Individual shots were unlikely to hit, but a platoon firing repeatedly could produce a 'beaten ground' effect similar to light artillery or machine guns.\nCurrently, rifles are the most common firearm in general use for hunting (with the exception of bird hunting, where shotguns are favored). Rifles derived from military designs have long been popular with civilian shooters.\n19th century.\nDuring the Napoleonic Wars the British army established several experimental units known as \"Rifles\", armed with the Baker rifle. These Rifle Regiments were deployed as skirmishers during the Peninsular War of 1807 to 1814 in Spain and Portugal, and proved more effective than skirmishers armed with muskets due to their accuracy and long range.\nIn Central Asia, Uzbeks, Kazakhs and Tadjiks in the course of the 19th century adopted a form of large-calibre rifle: the \"karamultuk\" or \"karamultyk\".\nMuzzle-loading.\nGradually, rifles appeared with cylindrical barrels cut with helical grooves, the surfaces between the grooves being \"lands\". The innovation was shortly followed by the mass adoption of breech-loading weapons, as it was not practical to push an overbore bullet down through a rifled barrel. The dirt and grime from prior shots were pushed down ahead of a tight bullet or ball (which may have been a looser fit in the clean barrel before the first shot), and loading was far more difficult, as the lead had to be deformed to go down in the first place, reducing the accuracy due to deformation. Several systems were tried to deal with the problem, usually by resorting to an under-bore bullet that expanded upon firing.\nThe original muzzle-loading rifle, with a closely fitting ball to take the rifling grooves, was loaded with difficulty, particularly when foul, and for this reason was not generally used for military purposes. With the advent of rifling, the bullet itself did not initially change but was wrapped in a greased, cloth patch to grip the rifling grooves.\nThe first half of the 19th century saw a distinct change in the shape and function of the bullet. In 1826 Henri-Gustave Delvigne, a French infantry officer, invented a breech with abrupt shoulders on which a spherical bullet was rammed down until it caught the rifling grooves. Delvigne's method, however, deformed the bullet and was inaccurate.\nSoon after, Louis-Etienne de Thouvenin invented the Carabine \u00e0 tige, which had a stem at the bottom of the barrel that would deform and expand the base of the bullet when rammed, therefore enabling accurate contact with the rifling. However, the area around the stem clogged and got dirty easily.\nMini\u00e9 system \u2013 the \"rifled musket\".\nThe famous Mini\u00e9 system, invented by French Army Captain Claude-\u00c9tienne Mini\u00e9, relied on a conical bullet (known as a Mini\u00e9 ball) with a hollow skirt at the base of the bullet. When fired, the skirt would expand from the pressure of the exploding charge and grip the rifling as the round was fired. The better seal gave more power, as less gas escaped past the bullet. Also, for the same bore (caliber) diameter a long bullet was heavier than a round ball. The extra grip also spun the bullet more consistently, which increased the range from about 50 yards for a smoothbore musket to about 300 yards for a rifle using the Mini\u00e9 system. The expanding skirt of the Mini\u00e9 ball also solved the problem that earlier tight-fitting bullets were difficult to load as black powder residue fouled the inside of the barrel. The Mini\u00e9 system allowed conical bullets to be loaded into rifles just as quickly as round balls in smooth bores, which allowed rifle muskets to replace muskets on the battlefield.\nMini\u00e9 system rifles, notably the U.S. Springfield and the British Enfield of the early 1860s featured prominently in the U.S. Civil War of 1861-1865, due to their enhanced power and accuracy. At the time of the Crimean War (1853-1856) the Mini\u00e9 rifle was considered the \"best in military use\".\nOver the 19th century, bullet design continued to evolve, the bullets becoming gradually smaller and lighter. By 1910 the standard blunt-nosed bullet had been replaced by the pointed, 'spitzer' bullet, an innovation that increased range and penetration. Cartridge design evolved from simple paper tubes containing black powder and shot, to sealed brass cases with integral primers for ignition, and black powder was replaced by cordite, and then by other nitro-cellulose-based smokeless powder mixtures, propelling bullets to higher velocities than before.\nThe increased velocity meant that new problems arose, and so bullets went from using soft lead to harder lead, then to copper-jacketed, in order to better engage the spiral grooves without \"stripping\" them in the same way that a screw or bolt thread would be stripped if subjected to extreme forces.\nBreech loading.\nFrom 1836, breech-loading rifles were introduced with the German Dreyse Needle gun, followed by the French Tabati\u00e8re in 1857, by the British Calisher and Terry carbine made in Birmingham and later in 1864 by the better known British Snider\u2013Enfield. Primitive chamber-locking mechanisms were soon replaced by bolt-action mechanisms, exemplified by the French Chassepot in 1866. Breech-loading was to have a major impact on warfare, as breech-loading rifles can be fired at a rate many times faster than muzzle-loaded rifles and - significantly - can be loaded from a prone rather than standing position. Firing prone (i.e., lying down) is more accurate than firing from a standing position, and a prone rifleman presents a much smaller target than a standing soldier. The higher accuracy and range, combined with reduced vulnerability generally benefited defense, while making the traditional battle between lines of standing and volleying infantrymen obsolete.\nRepeating rifle.\nThe mid-century drive for increased rates of fire led to the development of the first repeating rifles, a type of breechloader that can load multiple cartridges ahead of time to be stored on the weapon itself. This allowed for a continuous burst of fire during which the user could mechanically cycle in unused rounds without stopping to reload. Various enduring mechanisms would be invented, including bolt action, pump action, lever action, and revolving.\nMagazine-fed rifle.\nBolt, lever, and pump actions all allowed for the incorporation of a magazine to store pre-loaded shells. The Spencer repeating rifle was a breech-loading, manually operated lever-action rifle that was adopted by the United States. Over 20,000 were used during the American Civil War. It was the first adoption of a removable-magazine-fed infantry rifle. The design was completed by Christopher Spencer in 1860. It used copper rimfire cartridges stored in a removable seven-round tube magazine, enabling the rounds to be fired one after another. A rifleman could exchange an emptied magazine for another.\nThe Winchester repeating rifle was invented in 1866 as a lever action.\nRevolving rifle.\nRevolving rifles were an attempt to increase the rate of fire of rifles by combining them with the revolving firing mechanism that had been developed earlier for revolving pistols. Colt began experimenting with revolving rifles in the early-19th century, and other manufacturers like Remington later experimented with them as well. The Colt Revolving Rifle Model 1855, an early repeating rifle, became the first to be used by the U.S. Government and saw some limited action during the American Civil War. Revolvers, both rifles and pistols, tend to spray fragments of metal from the front of the cylinder.\nModern.\nIn the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905, military observers from Europe and the United States witnessed a major conflict fought with high velocity bolt-action rifles firing smokeless powder. The Battle of Mukden fought in 1905 consisted of nearly 343,000 Russian troops against over 281,000 Japanese troops. The Russian Mosin\u2013Nagant Model 1891 in 7.62\u00a0mm was pitted against the Japanese Arisaka Type 30 bolt-action rifle in 6.5\u00a0mm; both had velocities well over .\nUntil the late 19th century rifles tended to be very long, some long rifles reaching approximately in length to maximize accuracy, making early rifles impractical for use by cavalry. However, following the advent of more powerful smokeless powder, a shorter barrel did not impair accuracy as much. As a result, cavalry saw limited, but noteworthy, usage in 20th-century conflicts.\nThe advent of the massed, rapid firepower of the machine gun, submachine gun and rifled artillery was so quick as to outstrip the development of any way to attack a trench defended by riflemen and machine gunners. The carnage of World War I was perhaps the greatest vindication and vilification of the rifle as a military weapon.\nThe M1 Garand was a semi-automatic rapid-fire rifle developed for modern warfare use in World War II.\nDuring and after World War II it became accepted that most infantry engagements occurred at ranges of less than 300\u00a0m; the range and power of the large full-powered rifle cartridges were \"overkill\", requiring weapons heavier than otherwise necessary. This led to Germany's development of the 7.92\u00d733mm (short) round, the MKb-42, and ultimately, the assault rifle. Today, an infantryman's rifle is optimized for ranges of 300\u00a0m or less, and soldiers are trained to deliver individual rounds or bursts of fire within these distances. Typically, the application of accurate, long-range fire is the domain of the marksman and the sniper in warfare, and of enthusiastic target shooters in peacetime. The modern marksman rifle and sniper rifle are usually capable of accuracy better than 0.3 mrad at 100 yards (1 arcminute).\n3D printed rifle.\nThe Grizzly is a 3D-printed .22-caliber rifle created around August 2013. It was created using a Stratasys Dimension 1200es printer. It was created by a Canadian only known by the pseudonym \"Matthew\" who told The Verge that he was in his late 20s, and his main job was making tools for the construction industry.\nThe original Grizzly fired a single shot before breaking. Grizzly 2.0 fired fourteen bullets before getting damaged due to the strain.\nIn October 2020, another 3D-printed 9mm rifle known as the \"FGC-9mm\" was created. It is reported that it can be made in 2 weeks with $500 of tools. A second model was later made in April 2021.\nYouth rifle.\nA youth rifle is a rifle designed or modified for fitting children or other small-framed shooters. A youth rifle is often a single-shot .22 caliber rifle, or a bolt-action rifle, although some youth rifles are semi-automatic. They are usually very light, with a greatly shortened length of pull, which is necessary to accommodate children. Youth stocks are available for many popular rifles, such as the Ruger 10/22, a semi-automatic .22 LR rifle, allowing a youth rifle to be made from a standard rifle by simply changing the stock. The typical ages of shooters for such rifles vary from about age 5+.\nTechnical aspects.\nRifling.\nThe usual form of rifling was helical grooves in a round bore.\nSome early rifled firearms had barrels with a twisted polygonal bore. The Whitworth rifle was the first such type designed to spin the round for accuracy. Bullets for these guns were made to match the shape of the bore so the bullet would grip the rifle bore and take a spin that way. These were generally large caliber weapons, and the ammunition still did not fit tightly in the barrel. Many different shapes and degrees of spiraling were used in experimental designs. One widely produced example was the Metford rifling in the Pattern 1888 Lee\u2013Metford service rifle. Although uncommon, polygonal rifling is still used in some weapons today, one example being the Glock line of pistols (which fire standard bullets). Many of the early designs were prone to dangerous backfiring, which could lead to the destruction of the weapon and serious injury to the person firing it.\nBarrel wear.\nAs the bullet enters the barrel, it inserts itself into the rifling, a process that gradually wears down the barrel, and also causes the barrel to heat up more rapidly. Therefore, some machine guns are equipped with quick-change barrels that can be swapped every few thousand rounds, or in earlier designs, were water-cooled. Unlike older carbon steel barrels, which were limited to around 1,000 shots before the extreme heat caused accuracy to fade, modern stainless steel barrels for target rifles are much more resistant to wear, allowing many thousands of rounds to be fired before accuracy drops. (Many shotguns and small arms have chrome-lined barrels to reduce wear and enhance corrosion resistance. This is rare on rifles designed for extreme accuracy, as the plating process is difficult and liable to reduce the effect of the rifling.) Modern ammunition has a hardened lead core with a softer outer cladding or jacket, typically of an alloy of copper and nickel \u2013 cupro-nickel. Some ammunition is coated with molybdenum disulfide to further reduce internal friction \u2013 the so-called 'moly-coated' bullet.\nRate of fire.\nRifles were initially single-shot, muzzle-loading weapons. During the 18th century, breech-loading weapons were designed, which allowed the rifleman to reload while under cover, but defects in manufacturing and the difficulty in forming a reliable gas-tight seal prevented widespread adoption. During the 19th century, multi-shot repeating rifles using lever, pump or linear bolt actions became standard, further increasing the rate of fire and minimizing the fuss involved in loading a firearm. The problem of proper seal creation had been solved with the use of brass cartridge cases, which expanded in an elastic fashion at the point of firing and effectively sealed the breech while the pressure remained high, then relaxed back enough to allow for easy removal. By the end of the 19th century, the leading bolt-action design was that of Paul Mauser, whose action\u2014wedded to a reliable design possessing a five-shot magazine\u2014became a world standard through two world wars and beyond. The Mauser rifle was paralleled by Britain's ten-shot Lee\u2013Enfield and America's 1903 Springfield Rifle models. The American M1903 closely copied Mauser's original design.\nRange.\nBarrel rifling dramatically increased the range and accuracy of the musket. Indeed, throughout its development, the rifle's history has been marked by increases in range and accuracy. From the Mini\u00e9 rifle and beyond, the rifle has become ever more potent at long-range strikes.\nIn recent decades, large-caliber anti-materiel rifles, typically firing between 12.7\u00a0mm and 20\u00a0mm caliber cartridges, have been developed. The US Barrett M82A1 is probably the best-known such rifle. A second example is the AX50 by Accuracy International. These weapons are typically used to strike critical, vulnerable targets such as computerized command and control vehicles, radio trucks, radar antennae, vehicle engine blocks and the jet engines of enemy aircraft. Anti-materiel rifles can be used against human targets, but the much higher weight of rifle and ammunition, and the massive recoil and muzzle blast, usually make them less than practical for such use. The Barrett M82 is designed with a maximum effective range of , although it has a confirmed kill distance of in Afghanistan during Operation Anaconda in 2002. The record for the longest confirmed kill shot stands at , set by an unnamed soldier with Canada's elite special operations unit Joint Task Force 2 using a McMillan TAC-50 sniper rifle.\nBullet rotational speed (RPM).\nBullets leaving a rifled barrel can spin at a rotational speed of over 100,000 revolutions per minute (rpm) (or over about 1.67 kilohertz, since 1 RPM = 1/60\u00a0Hz). The rotational speed depends both on the muzzle velocity of the bullet and the pitch of the rifling. Excessive rotational speed can exceed the bullet's designed limits and the inadequate centripetal force will fail to keep the bullet from disintegrating in a radial fashion. The rotational speed of the bullet can be calculated by using the formula below.\nUsing metric units, the formula divides the number of millimeters in a meter (1000) by the barrel twist in millimeters (the length of travel along the barrel per full rotation). This number is then multiplied by the muzzle velocity in meters per second (m/s) and the number of seconds in a minute (60).\nFor example, using a barrel that has a twist rate of 190\u00a0mm with a muzzle velocity of 900\u00a0m/s:\nUsing imperial units, the formula divides the number of inches in a foot (12) by the rate of twist that the barrel has. This number is multiplied by the muzzle velocity (MV) and the number of seconds in a minute (60). For example, a bullet with a muzzle velocity of leaving a barrel that twists once per foot (1/12\") would rotate at 180,000rpm.\nFor example, using a barrel that has a twist rate of 1 turn in 8\" with a muzzle velocity of 3000\u00a0ft/s:\nCaliber.\nRifles may be chambered in a variety of calibers (bullet or barrel diameters), from as low as 4.4\u00a0mm (.17 inch) varmint calibers to as high as 20 mm (.80 caliber) in the case of the largest anti-tank rifles. The term caliber essentially refers to the width of the bullet fired through a rifle's barrel. Armies have consistently attempted to find and procure the most lethal and accurate caliber for their firearms.\nThe standard calibers used by the world's militaries tend to follow worldwide trends. These trends have significantly changed during the centuries of firearm design and re-design. Muskets were normally chambered for large calibers, such as .50 or .59 (12.7\u00a0mm or 15\u00a0mm), with the theory that these large bullets caused the most damage.\nDuring World War I and II, most rifles were chambered in .30 caliber (7.62\u00a0mm), a combination of power and speed. Examples would be the .303 British Lee\u2013Enfield, the American M1903 .30-06, and the German 8mm Mauser K98.\nAn exception was the Italian Modello 91 rifle, which used the 6.5\u00d752mm Mannlicher\u2013Carcano cartridge.\nDetailed study of infantry combat during and after World War II revealed that most small-arms engagements occurred within 100 meters, meaning that the power and range of the traditional .30-caliber weapons (designed for engagements at 500 meters and beyond) were essentially wasted. The single greatest predictor of an individual soldier's combat effectiveness was the number of rounds he fired. Weapons designers and strategists realized that service rifles firing smaller-caliber projectiles would allow troops to carry far more ammunition for the same weight. The lower recoil and more generous magazine capacities of small-caliber weapons also allow troops a much greater volume of fire, compared to historical battle rifles. Smaller, faster traveling, less stable projectiles have also demonstrated greater terminal ballistics and therein, a greater lethality than traditional .30-caliber rounds. Most modern service rifles fire a projectile of approximately 5.56\u00a0mm. Examples of firearms in this range are the American 5.56\u00a0mm M16 and the Russian 5.45\u00d739mm AK-74.\nTypes of rifle.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25457", "revid": "9337959", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25457", "title": "Republic of Texas", "text": "Historical republic, 1836\u20131846\nThe Republic of Texas (), or simply Texas, was a sovereign country in North America from March 2, 1836, to February 19, 1846. Texas was bordered by Mexico to the west and southwest, the Gulf of Mexico to the southeast, the two U.S. states of Louisiana and Arkansas to the east and northeast, and U.S. unorganized territory encompassing parts of the current U.S. states of Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, and Wyoming to the north. The Texas Revolution began when hostilities broke out on October 2, 1835, shortly before the regime of Mexican President and General Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna adopted a new Mexican constitution known as the Siete Leyes that abolished the authority of the states under the federal republic and established a centralized government. The revolution lasted for over six months. On March 2, 1836, delegates in convention proclaimed the Texas Declaration of Independence. Major fighting ended on April 21, 1836, with the Treaties of Velasco that ended the fighting and secured Texas' independence.\nThe Mexican Congress refused to recognize the independence of the Republic of Texas, as the Treaties of Velasco were signed by Santa Anna under duress as prisoner. The majority of the Mexican Congress did not approve the agreement. Much of its territory was controlled and disputed by Mexico or the Comancheria; Mexico considered it a rebellious province during its entire existence. The Anglo-American residents of the area and of the republic were referred to as Texians, while Texans of Mexican descent were referred to as Tejanos.\nHaving gained independence following the revolution, Texas engaged in complex relations with various countries. European powers (France and Britain), along with the United States, hesitated to recognize the new republic, in deference to established relations with Mexico. Over time, they eventually recognized Texas and adopted trade relations. Intermittent conflicts between Mexico and Texas continued into the 1840s.\nTexas was annexed by the United States on December 29, 1845, and was admitted to the Union as the 28th state on that day, with the transfer of power from the Republic to the new state of Texas formally taking place on February 19, 1846. However, the United States inherited the southern and western border disputes with Mexico, which had refused to recognize Texas' sovereignty or to accept U.S. offers to purchase the territory. Consequently, the annexation led to the Mexican\u2013American War.\nHistory.\nSpanish Texas.\nDuring the late Spanish colonial era, Texas had been one of the \"Provincias Internas\", and the region is known in the historiography as Spanish Texas. Though claimed by Spain, it was not formally colonized by the empire until competing French interests at Fort St. Louis were a catalyst for Spain to establish permanent settlements in the area.\nThe region was long occupied and claimed by the existing indigenous groups of Native Americans. During the period from the 1690s\u20131710s, sporadic missionary expeditions took place before the Spanish established San Antonio as a permanent civilian settlement.\nSpanish colonization in Texas was a slow process. Nevertheless, Spain tried to establish missions and presidios to spread Catholicism. They encountered challenges, however, because these lands were heavily populated with indigenous people/populations. Despite this, the Spanish influence has left a long-lasting mark on Texas, shaping its cultural landscape and laying the foundation for future settlements.\nFollowing defeats by the British in North America and Europe, in 1762 Bourbon France ceded to Bourbon Spain most of its claims to the interior of North America, including its claim to Texas, as well as the vast interior west of the Mississippi River, which became Spanish Louisiana. During the years 1799 to 1803, the height of the Napoleonic Empire in France, Spain returned Louisiana to France.\nFollowing the loss of numerous troops and failure to suppress the revolution by slaves and free people of color in Saint-Domingue, Napoleon decided to abandon North America; he sold what became known as the Louisiana Purchase to the United States. The status of Texas during these transfers was unclear and was not resolved until 1819, when the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty between Spain and the United States ceded Spanish Florida to the United States, and established a clear boundary between Texas and Louisiana.\nStarting in 1810 with the outbreak of the Mexican War of Independence, New Spain sought a different relationship with the Spanish crown. Some Anglo Americans fought on the side of Mexico against Spain in filibustering expeditions. One of these, the Guti\u00e9rrez\u2013Magee Expedition (also known as the Republican Army of the North), consisted of a group of about 130 Anglo Americans under the leadership of Bernardo Guti\u00e9rrez de Lara. Guti\u00e9rrez de Lara initiated Mexico's secession from Spain with efforts contributed by Augustus Magee. Bolstered by new recruits, and led by Samuel Kemper (who succeeded Magee after his death in battle in 1813), the expedition gained a series of victories against soldiers led by the Spanish governor, Manuel Mar\u00eda de Salcedo.\nTheir victory at the Battle of Rosillo Creek convinced Salcedo to surrender on April 1, 1813; he was executed two days later. On April 6, 1813, the victorious Republican Army of the North drafted a constitution and declared the independent Republic of Texas, with Guti\u00e9rrez as its president. Soon disillusioned with the Mexican leadership, the Anglo Americans under Kemper returned to the United States.\nThe ephemeral Republic of Texas came to an end on August 18, 1813, with the Battle of Medina, where the Spanish Army crushed the Republican Army of the North. The harsh reprisals against the Texas rebels created a deep distrust of the Royal Spanish authorities. Veterans of the Battle of Medina became leaders of the Texas Revolution and signatories of the Texas Declaration of Independence from Mexico 20 years later.\nAfter the failure of the expedition, there was no serious push for a \"Republic of Texas\" for another six years, until 1819. That year Virginian filibuster James Long invaded Spanish Texas in an attempt to liberate the region. The Americans were eager to gain territory where they could extend slavery for agricultural and other development.\nEli Harris led 120 men across the Sabine River to Nacogdoches. Long followed two weeks later with an additional 75 men. On June 22, the combined force declared a new government, with Long as president and a 21-member Supreme Council. The following day, they issued a declaration of independence, modeled on the United States Declaration of Independence. The document cited several grievances, including \"Spanish rapacity\" and \"odious tyranny\" and promised religious freedom, freedom of the press, and free trade. The council allocated 10 square miles of land to each member of the expedition, and authorized the sale of additional land to raise cash for the fledgling government. Within a month, the expedition had grown to 300 members.\nThe new government established trading outposts near Anahuac along the Trinity River and the Brazos River. Long's Republic of Texas also established the first English-language newspaper ever published in Texas, named the \"Texas Republican\". It operated only for the month of August 1819.\nLong contacted Jean Lafitte, a French pirate who ran a large smuggling operation on Galveston Island. His letter suggested that the new government establish an admiralty court at Galveston, and offered to appoint Lafitte governor of Galveston. Unbeknownst to Long, Lafitte was serving as a Spanish spy. While making numerous promises \u2013 and excuses \u2013 to Long, Lafitte gathered information about the expedition and passed it on to Spanish authorities. By July 16, the Spanish Consul in New Orleans had warned the viceroy in Mexico City that \"I am fully persuaded that the present is the most serious expedition that has threatened the Kingdom\".\nLafitte failed to assist the expedition, which soon ran low on provisions. Long dispersed his men to forage for food. Discipline began to break down, and many men, including James Bowie, returned home. In early October, Lafitte reached an agreement with Long to make Galveston an official port for the new country and name Lafitte as governor. Within weeks, 500 Spanish troops arrived in Texas and marched on Nacogdoches. Long and his men withdrew. Over 40 of his men were captured. Long escaped to Natchitoches, Louisiana. Others fled to Galveston and settled along Bolivar Peninsula.\nUndeterred in defeat, Long returned again in 1820. He joined the refugees at Bolivar Peninsula on April 6, 1820, leading more reinforcements. He continued to raise money to equip a second expedition. Fifty men attempted to join him from the United States, but they were arrested by American authorities as they tried to cross into Texas. The men who had joined Long were disappointed they were paid in scrip, and they gradually began to desert. By December 1820, Long commanded only 50 men.\nWith the aid of Ben Milam and others, Long revitalized the Supreme Council. He later broke with Milam. The expedition led an uncertain existence until September 19, 1821, when Long and 52 men marched inland to capture Presidio La Bah\u00eda. The town fell easily on October 4, but four days later Long was forced to surrender by Spanish troops. He was taken prisoner and sent to Mexico City; about six months later he was shot and killed by a guard, who reportedly was bribed to do so by Jos\u00e9 F\u00e9lix Trespalacios. The Long Expeditions were ended.\nMexican Texas.\nThese colonies were limited in quotas and to specific locations. Since Mexican independence had been ratified by Spain shortly thereafter, Austin later traveled to Mexico City to secure the support of the new country for his right to colonize. The establishment of Mexican Texas coincided with the Austin-led colonization, leading to animosity between Mexican authorities and the acceleration of American immigration to Texas. The First Mexican Empire was short-lived, being replaced by a republican form of government in 1823. In 1824, the sparsely populated territories of Texas and Coahuila were joined to form the state of Coahuila y Tejas. The capital was controversially located in southern Coahuila, the part farthest from Texas.\nMexico's independence from Spain in 1821, had Texas become part of the newly formed Mexican state. During this period, Stephen F. Austin led a group of American settlers, known as the Old Three Hundred, who were granted permission to establish colonies in Texas. However, tensions between the Mexican government and these American settlers grew, fueled by cultural differences, economic disparities, and the issue of slavery. The Mexican government's attempts to restrict American immigration and enforce its laws led to increased resentment among the settlers, culminating in the Texas Revolution.\nFollowing Austin's lead, additional groups of immigrants, known as Empresarios, continued to colonize Mexican Texas from the United States. A spike in the price of cotton, and the success of plantations in Mississippi, encouraged large numbers of white Americans to migrate to Texas and obtain slaves to try to replicate the plantation business model. In the Law of April 6, 1830, Mexican President Anastasio Bustamante outlawed American immigration to Texas, following several conflicts with the Empresarios over the status of slavery, which had been abolished in Mexico in 1829, but which the Texians refused to end. Texians replaced slavery with long-term indentured servitude contracts signed by \"liberated\" slaves in the United States to work around the abolition of slavery. Angered at the interference of the Mexican government, the Empresarios held the Convention of 1832, which was the first formal step in what became the Texas Revolution.\nTexas Revolution.\nBy 1834, American immigrants in the area greatly outnumbered Mexicans. Following a series of minor skirmishes between Mexican authorities and the immigrants, the Mexican government increased its military presence in Texas throughout 1834 and early 1835. Mexico created a new constitution formalized under President Antonio Santa Anna, called Siete Leyes, and began to strengthen the central government. American immigrants described it as restoring pre-enlightened forms of governance, depriving them of their rights and liberties. They objected to mandatory Catholicism and, when Santa Anna began enforcing anti-slavery laws, many feared religious coercion could be next.\nIn 1835, the central government split Coahuila y Tejas into two separate departments. The Texian leadership under Austin began to organize its own military, and hostilities broke out on October 2, 1835, at the Battle of Gonzales, the first engagement of the Texas Revolution. In November 1835, a provisional government known as the Consultation was established to oppose the Santa Anna regime (but stopped short of declaring independence from Mexico). On March 1, 1836, the Convention of 1836 came to order, and the next day declared independence from Mexico, establishing the Republic of Texas. The influences of English, Mexican, and American revolutionary traditions were embedded into the Texas Declaration of Independence.\nIndependent republic.\nPolitics.\nIn March 1836, David G. Burnet became the interim president of Texas, and appointed Lorenzo de Zavala as vice president at the same time, following a vote where Burnet won among convention delegates. Burnet declined to run for reelection, thereafter Sam Houston was elected as the new President of the Republic of Texas on September 5, 1836, with Burnet resigning. The second Congress of the Republic of Texas convened a month later, in October 1836, at Columbia (now West Columbia). Stephen F. Austin, known as the \"Father of Texas\", died December 27, 1836, after serving two months as Secretary of State for the new Republic.\nIn 1836, five sites served as temporary capitals of Texas (Washington-on-the-Brazos, Harrisburg, Galveston, Velasco and Columbia), before President Sam Houston moved the capital to Houston in 1837. The next president, Mirabeau B. Lamar, moved the capital to the new town of Austin in 1839.\nThe first flag of the republic was the \"Burnet Flag\" (a single gold star on an azure field), followed in 1839 by official adoption of the Lone Star Flag.\nInternal politics of the Republic were focused on two factions. The nationalist faction, led by Lamar, advocated the continued independence of Texas, the expulsion of the Native Americans, and the expansion of Texas to the Pacific Ocean . Their opponents, led by Houston, advocated the annexation of Texas to the United States and peaceful coexistence with the Native Americans where possible. The Congress of the Republic of Texas even passed a resolution over Houston's veto, claiming The Californias for Texas. The 1844 Republic of Texas presidential election split the electorate dramatically, with the newer western regions of the Republic preferring the nationalist candidate Edward Burleson, while the cotton country, particularly east of the Trinity River, went for Anson Jones.\nArmed conflicts.\nThe Comanche Indians, whose territory included northwest Texas, furnished the main tribal opposition to the Republic, manifested in multiple raids on Mexican, indigenous, and European settlements. In the late 1830s, Sam Houston negotiated peace between Texas and the Comanches. When Lamar ascended to presidency in 1838 he reversed the Houston administration's policy towards the Native Americans. War soon resumed with the Comanches and Lamar ordered an invasion of Comancheria itself. In retaliation, the Comanches attacked Texas in a series of raids. After peace talks in 1840 ended with the massacre of 34 Comanche leaders in San Antonio, the Comanches launched a major attack deep into Texas, known as the Great Raid of 1840. Under command of Potsanaquahip (Buffalo Hump), 500 to 700 Comanche cavalry warriors swept down the Guadalupe River valley, killing and plundering all the way to the shore of the Gulf of Mexico, where they sacked the towns of Victoria and Linnville. The Comanches retreated after being pursued by 186 rangers and were caught at the Battle of Plum Creek, in which they lost the plunder they had taken. Houston became president again in 1841 and, with both Texians and Comanches exhausted by war, a new peace was established.\nThe newly-founded Republic of Texas had ambitions to increase its territory, including the annexation of eastern New Mexico, and to control and plunder the trade along the Santa Fe Trail from the United States to New Mexico. In 1841, to those ends, President Lamar unofficially supported the Santa Fe Expedition. Texas merchants accompanied by 320 soldiers invaded New Mexico. The expedition failed; the participants were captured and imprisoned, although eventually released to return to Texas. In 1843, Texans, with the support of their government, conducted two large raids on New Mexico and commercial traffic on the Santa Fe Trail. Both raids failed. The raiders killed several Mexican citizens and soldiers, but were defeated by New Mexican ciboleros to end the first raid and forced to surrender to the U.S. army on the second.\nOn its part, Mexico refused to recognize Texas's independence. On March 5, 1842, a Mexican force of over 500 men, led by R\u00e1fael V\u00e1squez, invaded Texas for the first time since the revolution. They soon headed back to the Rio Grande after briefly occupying San Antonio. About 1,400 Mexican troops, led by the French mercenary general Adri\u00e1n Woll, launched a second attack and captured San Antonio on September 11, 1842. A Texas militia retaliated at the Battle of Salado Creek while simultaneously, a mile and a half away, Mexican soldiers massacred a militia of fifty-three Texas volunteers who had surrendered after a skirmish. That night, upon their defeat, the Mexican Army retreated from San Antonio, back to Mexico, while being pursued by Texas soldiers. The Texas Army took the city of Laredo, at which point they were given official orders from Sam Houston to return to San Antonio. Several soldiers ignored this order, and launched a failed battle to retake Ciudad Mier.\nThe Naval Battle of Campeche took place in two engagements on April 30, 1843, and May 16, 1843. The battle featured the most advanced warships of its day, including the Mexican steamer \"Guadalupe\" and the equally formidable \"Montezuma\" which engaged a squadron of vessels from the Republic of Yucatan and the Republic of Texas. The latter force consisted of the Texas Navy flagship sloop-of-war \"Austin\", commanded by Commodore Edwin Ward Moore, the brig \"Wharton\", and several schooners and five gunboats from the Republic of Yucat\u00e1n, commanded by former Texas Navy Captain James D. Boylan. The battles were inconclusive.A scene from this battle is engraved on the cylinder of every Colt 1851 Navy, 1860 Army, and 1861 Navy revolver.\nThe Republic of Texas's relationship with Native American tribes was marked by persistent conflict. Tribes such as the Comanche and the Cherokee occupied much of the territory claimed by the Republic, leading to significant controversy. Although some treaties were signed to establish peace, the terms were frequently violated, resulting in ongoing violence. The Republic struggled to maintain a strong military presence to defend its borders against these tribes due to limited resources. To resolve these tensions, Tehuacana Creek Councils, with the absence of the Comanches, led to a treaty. The negotiated treaty is known as the Treaty of Tehuacana Creek, which was signed in 1844. The agreement led to the effective dismantilation of the Tehuacana Creek Council, which included tribes such as, the Cherokees, Wacos, Caddos, Anadarkos, Hainas, Delawares, Shawnees, Tawakonis,Lipan Apaches, and southern Comanches.\nThe Treaty of Tehuacana Creek, while significant in its attempt to establish lasting peace, faced considerable challenges in implementation. The diverse tribal groups involved held varying levels of commitment to the agreement, and the Republic of Texas lacked the resources and manpower to consistently enforce its terms.\u00a0Furthermore, ongoing disputes over land and resources, coupled with the continued encroachment of settlers, fueled tensions and undermined the treaty's effectiveness.\u00a0The fragile peace established by the treaty ultimately proved short-lived, as conflicts between the Republic and various Native American tribes persisted throughout the remainder of the Republic's existence.\nConflicts between Texas and Mexico intensified conflicts between political factions, including an incident known as the Texas Archive War. To \"protect\" the Texas national archives, President Sam Houston ordered them removed from Austin. The archives were eventually returned to Austin, albeit at gunpoint. The Texas Congress admonished Houston for the incident, and this episode in Texas history solidified Austin as Texas's seat of government for the Republic and the future state.\nThere were also domestic disturbances. The Regulator\u2013Moderator War involved a land feud in Harrison and Shelby Counties in East Texas from 1839 to 1844. The feud eventually involved Nacogdoches, San Augustine, and other East Texas counties. Harrison County Sheriff John J. Kennedy and county judge Joseph U. Fields helped end the conflict, siding with the law-and-order party. Sam Houston ordered 500 militia to help end the feud.\nBorders.\nThe Republic of Texas claimed borders based upon the Treaties of Velasco between the newly created Republic of Texas and General Antonio L\u00f3pez de Santa Anna. The eastern boundary had been defined by the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty of 1819 between the United States and the Spanish Empire, which recognized the Sabine River as the eastern boundary of Spanish Texas and western boundary of the Missouri Territory.\nUnder that treaty, the United States had renounced its claim to Spanish land to the east of the Rocky Mountains and to the north of the Rio Grande, which it claimed to have acquired as part of the Louisiana Purchase of 1803.\nThe Texian leaders at first intended to extend their national boundaries to the Pacific Ocean, but ultimately decided to claim the Rio Grande as boundary, including much of New Mexico, which the Republic never controlled. They also hoped, after peace was made with Mexico, to run a railroad to the Gulf of California to give \"access to the East Indian, Peruvian and Chilean trade\". When negotiating for the possibility of annexation to the U.S. in late 1836, the Texian government instructed its minister Wharton in Washington that if the boundary were an issue, Texas was willing to settle for a boundary at the watershed between the Nueces River and Rio Grande, and leave out New Mexico.\nThe southern and western boundary of the Republic of Texas with Mexico was disputed throughout the republic's existence, since Mexico refused to acknowledge the independence of Texas. Texas claimed the Rio Grande as its southern boundary, while Mexico insisted that the Nueces River was the boundary. In practice, much of the disputed territory was occupied by the Comanche people and outside the control of either state. Texian claims included the eastern portions of New Mexico, which was administered by Mexico throughout this period. Some contested regions (such as modern Texas southwest of the Pecos River) remained essentially self-governing while sending representatives to both the Mexican and Texian Congresses.\nCriteria of citizenship.\nCitizenship was not automatically granted to all previous inhabitants of Texas, and some residents were not allowed to continue living legally within the Republic without the consent of Congress. The Constitution of the Republic of Texas (1836) established different rights according to the race and ethnicity of each individual. Section 10 of the General Provisions of the Constitution stated that all persons who resided in Texas on the day of the Declaration of Independence were considered citizens of the Republic, excepting \"Africans, the descendants of Africans, and Indians.\" For white immigrants, Section 6 established to become citizens, they needed to reside in Texas for at least six months and take an oath of loyalty to the Republic; in contrast, under Section 9, African slaves brought to Texas were to remain slaves and could not be emancipated without the consent of Congress. Furthermore, the Congress was not allowed to make laws banning or restricting either slavery or the slave trade. Section 9 also established that: \"No free person of African descent, either in whole or in part, shall be permitted to reside permanently in the Republic, without the consent of Congress.\"\nThe Republic of Texas experienced significant immigration from both the United States and Europe. Settlers from the southern states brought their cultural and social norms, which included slavery. Slavery became a \"cornerstone\" of the Texian economy particularly in the agricultural sector. The institution of slavery had fueled the economy but also was able to reinforce social inequality. While slavery was officially abolished in Mexico in 1829, many Texians continued to practice it. This led to tensions with the Mexican government.\nWomen in the Republic of Texas, while often marginalized, still played crucial roles in society. They contributed to the economy through domestic labor, agriculture, and business. However, their legal rights were very limited and they faced significant social and economic obstacles. While some women were able to challenge traditional gender roles, the majority of them were still very confined.\nThe gain of these settlers had a huge impact on Texas' society and it started to shape its economy, politics, and social structure over the years.\nGovernment.\nIn September 1836 Texas elected a Congress of 14 senators and 29 representatives. The Constitution allowed the first president to serve for two years and subsequent presidents for three years. To hold an office or vote, a man had to be a citizen of the Republic.\nThe first Congress of the Republic of Texas convened in October 1836 at Columbia (now West Columbia). Stephen F. Austin, often referred to as the \"Father of Texas\", died on December 27, 1836, after serving just two months as the republic's secretary of state. Due mainly to the ongoing war for independence, five sites served as temporary capitals of Texas in 1836: (Washington-on-the-Brazos, Harrisburg, Galveston, Velasco and Columbia). The capital was moved to the new city of Houston in 1837.\nIn 1839, a small pioneer settlement situated on the Colorado River in central Texas was chosen as the republic's seventh and final capital. Incorporated under the name Waterloo, the town was renamed Austin shortly thereafter in honor of Stephen F. Austin.\nThe Republic of Texas established a robust legal system, including a Supreme Court to interpret and uphold the Constitution. The Constitution itself could be amended through a two-thirds vote in both houses of Congress, followed by ratification by the people. Major constitutional changes during this period often related to issues of land grants, taxation, and the powers of the executive and legislative branches. The court system inaugurated by Congress included a Supreme Court consisting of a chief justice appointed by the president and four associate justices, elected by a joint ballot of both houses of Congress for four-year terms and eligible for re-election. The associates also presided over four judicial districts. Houston nominated James Collinsworth to be the first chief justice. The county-court system consisted of a chief justice and two associates, chosen by a majority of the justices of the peace in the county. Each county was also to have a sheriff, a coroner, justices of the peace, and constables to serve two-year terms. Congress formed 23 counties, whose boundaries generally coincided with the existing municipalities. In 1839, Texas became the first nation in the world to enact a homestead exemption, under which creditors cannot seize a person's primary residence.\nThe Republic's political landscape was marked by factionalism with two primary groups emerging, the War Party and the Peace Party. The War Party, led by figures like Mirabeau B. Lamar, advocated for a more aggressive stance against Native American tribes and Mexico which favoring expansion and military action. The Peace Party, associated with Sam Houston prioritized diplomacy, compromise, and a more cautious approach to foreign policy. These factions often clashed over key issues shaping the Republic's domestic and foreign policies/affairs. \"Prior to this time, factions were the order of the day. Before the Revolution, there was the \"Peace Party\" and the \"War Party\". Once the path to Revolution was clear, the \"Peace\" faction was subsumed by the \"War\" faction, and for a brief time, Texians seemed to agree with each other, at least in terms of politics\" (65).\nEducation.\nPresident Anson Jones signed the charter for Baylor University in the fall of 1845. Henry Lee Graves was elected Baylor's first president. It is believed to be the oldest university in Texas; however, Rutersville College was chartered in 1840 with land and the town of Rutersville. Chauncey Richardson was elected Rutersville first president. The college later became Southwestern University in Georgetown, Williamson county. University of Mary Hardin-Baylor was also chartered by the Republic of Texas in 1845, and received lands in Belton, Texas. Wesleyan College, chartered in 1844 and signed by president Sam Houston, another predecessor to Southwestern did not survive long due to competition from other colleges. Mirabeau Lamar signed a charter in 1844 for the Herman University for medicine but classes never started due to lack of funds. The University of San Augustine was chartered June 5, 1837, but did not open until 1842 when Marcus A. Montrose became president. There were as many as 150 students enrolled. However, attendance declined to 50 in 1845, and further situations including animosity and embittered factions in the community closed the university in 1847. Later it became the University of East Texas, and soon after that became the Masonic Institute of San Augustine in 1851. Guadalupe College at Gonzales was approved January 30, 1841; however, no construction efforts ensued for the next eleven years.\nDiplomatic relations and foreign trade.\nDuring its existence, the Republic of Texas received diplomatic recognition from only six nations: Belgium, France, the Netherlands, the Republic of Yucat\u00e1n, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America. Texas' status as a slaveholding country and Mexico's claim on the territory caused significant problems in the foreign relations of Texas with other nations.\nDespite this, these nations adopted trade relations with Texas, and in turn, provided for friendly relations with them. Its main exports were predominantly crops, such as cotton and corn. Raw materials like iron, as well as machinery and other consumer goods like tea, beer, and chocolate were traded as well. Outside of these countries, Texas did export some goods to Denmark, and in some instances, to Russia and Spain, though amounts were minimal.\nAlthough it was supported by the vast majority of Texians at the time of independence, annexation by the United States was prevented by the leadership of both major U.S. political parties, the Democrats and the Whigs, who opposed the introduction of a vast slave-holding region into a country already divided into pro- and anti-slavery sections and wished to avoid a war with Mexico.\nOn March 3, 1837, U.S. President Andrew Jackson appointed Alc\u00e9e La Branche as \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\" to the Republic of Texas, thus officially recognizing Texas as an independent republic. France granted official recognition of Texas on September 25, 1839, appointing Alphonse Dubois de Saligny to serve as \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\". The French Legation was built in 1841, and still stands in Austin as the oldest frame structure in the city. Conversely, the Republic of Texas embassy in Paris was located in what is now the H\u00f4tel de Vend\u00f4me, adjacent to the Place Vend\u00f4me in the 1st arrondissement of Paris. The Kingdom of Denmark gave recognition to Texas in turn for free trade. Although no embassy was established, Texas had created a legation in Austin.\nThe United Kingdom hesitated to grant official recognition to the Republic of Texas due to its own friendly relations with Mexico, but nevertheless admitted Texian goods into British ports. In London, opposite the gates to St. James's Palace, the original Embassy of the Republic of Texas is now a hat shop but is clearly marked with a large plaque and there was a nearby restaurant in Trafalgar Square called the Texas Embassy Cantina, which closed in June 2012. A plaque on the exterior of 3 St. James's Street in London notes that the upper floors of the building housed the Texas Legation.\nThe United Kingdom eventually recognized Texas in the 1840s after a cotton price crash, in a failed attempt to coerce Texas to give up slavery (replacing slave-produced cotton from southern U.S. states) and to stop expansion of the United States to the southwest. The cotton price crash of the 1840s bankrupted the Republic, increasing the urgency of finding foreign allies who could help prevent a reconquest by Mexico.\nThe Republic of Texas faced significant economic challenges, including the establishment of a stable financial system.While some banks were established, the lack of a centralized banking system and the volatility of the Texas dollar made financial transactions difficult. Private banking played a crucial role, but it was often unregulated and subject to fluctuations in the market.\nAnnexation by the U.S..\nOn February 28, 1845, the U.S. Congress passed a bill that authorized the United States to annex the Republic of Texas. On March 1, U.S. President John Tyler signed the bill. The legislation set the date for annexation for December 29 of the same year. Faced with imminent American annexation of Texas, Charles Elliot and Alphonse de Saligny, the British and French ministers to Texas, were dispatched to Mexico City by their governments. Meeting with Mexico's foreign secretary, they signed a \"Diplomatic Act\" in which Mexico offered to recognize an independent Texas with boundaries determined with French and British mediation. Texas President Anson Jones forwarded both offers to a specially elected convention meeting at Austin, and the American proposal was accepted with only one dissenting vote. The Mexican proposal was never put to a vote. Following the previous decree of President Jones, the proposal was then put to a vote throughout the republic.\nOn October 13, 1845, a large majority of voters in the republic approved both the American offer and the proposed constitution that specifically endorsed slavery and emigrants bringing slaves to Texas. This constitution was later accepted by the U.S. Congress, making Texas a U.S. state on the same day annexation took effect, December 29, 1845 (therefore bypassing a territorial phase). One of the motivations for annexation was the huge debts which the Republic of Texas government had incurred. As part of the Compromise of 1850, in return for $10,000,000 in Federal bonds, Texas dropped claims to territory that included parts of present-day Colorado, Kansas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Wyoming.\nThe resolution included two unique provisions: First, it said up to four additional states could be created from Texas' territory with the consent of the State of Texas and pursuant to the admissions process of the federal constitution. New states north of the Missouri Compromise Line would be free states, while those south of the line could opt to become slave states. Though the resolution did not make exceptions to the constitution, the U.S. Constitution does not require Congressional consent to the creation of new states to be \"ex post\" to applications, nor does the U.S. Constitution require applications to expire. Second, Texas did not have to surrender its public lands to the federal government. While Texas did cede all territory outside of its current area to the federal government in 1850, it did not cede any public lands within its current boundaries. Consequently, the lands in Texas that the federal government owns are those it subsequently purchased. This also means the state government controls oil reserves, which it later used to fund the state's public university system through the Permanent University Fund. In addition, the state's control over offshore oil reserves in Texas runs out to 3 nautical leagues (9 nautical miles, 10.357 statute miles, 16.668\u00a0km) rather than three nautical miles (3.45 statute miles, 5.56\u00a0km) as with other states.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25458", "revid": "6766874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25458", "title": "Rome", "text": "Capital and largest city of Italy\nRome is the capital city and most populated (municipality) of Italy. It is also the administrative centre of the Lazio region and of the Metropolitan City of Rome. A special named with 2,746,984 residents in , Rome is the third most populous city in the European Union by population within city limits. The Metropolitan City of Rome Capital, with a population of 4,223,885 residents, is the most populous metropolitan city in Italy. Its metropolitan area is the third-most populous within Italy. Rome is located in the central-western portion of the Italian Peninsula, within Lazio (Latium), along the shores of the Tiber Valley. Vatican City (the smallest country in the world and headquarters of the worldwide Catholic Church under the governance of the Holy See) is an independent country inside the city boundaries of Rome, the only existing example of a country within a city. Rome is often referred to as the City of Seven Hills due to its geography, and also as the \"Eternal City\". Rome is generally considered to be one of the cradles of Western civilization and Western Christian culture, and the centre of the Catholic Church.\nRome's history spans 28 centuries. While Roman mythology dates the founding of Rome at around 753\u00a0BC, the site has been inhabited for much longer, making it a major human settlement for over three millennia and one of the oldest continuously occupied cities in Europe. The city's early population originated from a mix of Latins, Etruscans, and Sabines. Eventually, the city successively became the capital of the Roman Kingdom, the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, and is regarded by many as the first-ever Imperial city and metropolis. It was first called \"The Eternal City\" (; ) by the Roman poet Tibullus in the 1st century BC, and the expression was also taken up by Ovid, Virgil, and Livy. Rome is also called (Capital of the World).\nAfter the fall of the Empire in the west, which marked the beginning of the Middle Ages, Rome slowly fell under the political control of the Papacy, and in the 8th century, it became the capital of the Papal States, which lasted until 1870. Beginning with the Renaissance, almost all popes since Nicholas V (1447\u20131455) pursued a coherent architectural and urban programme over four hundred years, aimed at making the city the artistic and cultural centre of the world. In this way, Rome first became one of the major centres of the Renaissance and then became the birthplace of both the Baroque style and Neoclassicism. Famous artists, painters, sculptors, and architects made Rome the centre of their activity, creating masterpieces throughout the city. In 1871, Rome became the capital of the Kingdom of Italy, which, in 1946, became the Italian Republic. It hosted the Summer Olympics in 1960.\nIn 2019, Rome was the 14th most visited city in the world, with 8.6 million tourists, the third most visited city in the European Union, and the most popular tourist destination in Italy. Its historic centre is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. Rome is also the seat of several specialised agencies of the United Nations, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Food Programme and the International Fund for Agricultural Development. The city also hosts the Secretariat of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Union for the Mediterranean, as well as the headquarters of several Italian multinational companies such as Eni, Enel, TIM, Leonardo, and banks such as BNL. Numerous companies are based within Rome's EUR business district, such as the luxury fashion house Fendi located in the Palazzo della Civilt\u00e0 Italiana. The presence of renowned international brands in the city has made Rome an important centre of fashion and design, and the Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios have been the set of many Academy Award\u2013winning movies.\nName and symbol.\nEtymology.\nAccording to the Ancient Romans' founding myth, the name \"Roma\" came from the city's founder and first king, Romulus.\nHowever, it is possible that the name Romulus was actually derived from Rome itself. As early as the 4th century, there have been alternative theories proposed on the origin of the name \"Roma\". Several hypotheses have been advanced focusing on its linguistic roots which however remain uncertain:\nOther names and symbols.\nRome has also been called in ancient times simply \"Urbs\" (central city), from \"urbs roma\", or identified with its ancient Roman initialism of SPQR, the symbol of Rome's constituted republican government. In 192, emperor Commodus renamed the city \"Colonia Lucia Annia Commodiana\" after himself. The name was reverted to Rome after his assassination at the end of the year. Furthermore, Rome has been called Urbs Aeterna\u00a0(The Eternal City), Caput Mundi\u00a0(The Capital of the world), Throne of St. Peter and Roma Capitale.\nDionysius of Halicarnassus states that the lagobolon was a symbol of the settlement of the city of Rome, and recounts that following the destruction by fire of a sacred hut of Mars on the Palatine Hill, a lagobolon, which Romulus used to delineate the regions for taking auspices when founding the city, was found miraculously preserved among the ashes.\nHistory.\nEarliest history.\nWhile there have been discoveries of archaeological evidence of human occupation of the Rome area from approximately 14,000 years ago, the dense layer of much younger debris obscures Palaeolithic and Neolithic sites. Evidence of stone tools, pottery, and stone weapons attest to about 10,000 years of human presence. Several excavations support the view that Rome grew from pastoral settlements on the Palatine Hill built above the area of the future Roman Forum. Between the end of the Bronze Age and the beginning of the Iron Age, each hill between the sea and the Capitoline Hill was topped by a village (on the Capitoline, a village is attested since the end of the 14th century BC). However, none of them yet had an urban quality.\nNowadays, there is a wide consensus that the city developed gradually through the aggregation (\"synoecism\") of several villages around the largest one, placed above the Palatine. This aggregation was facilitated by the increase of agricultural productivity above the subsistence level, which also allowed the establishment of secondary and tertiary activities. These, in turn, boosted the development of trade with the Greek colonies of southern Italy (mainly Ischia and Cumae). These developments, which according to archaeological evidence took place during the mid-eighth century BC, can be considered as the \"birth\" of the city. Despite recent excavations at the Palatine hill, the view that Rome was founded deliberately in the middle of the eighth century BC, as the legend of Romulus suggests, remains a fringe hypothesis.\nLegend of the founding of Rome.\nTraditional stories handed down by the ancient Romans themselves explain the earliest history of their city in terms of legend and myth. The most familiar of these myths, and perhaps the most famous of all Roman myths, is the story of Romulus and Remus, the twins who were suckled by a she-wolf. They decided to build a city, but after an argument, Romulus killed his brother and the city took his name. According to the Roman annalists, this happened on 21 April 753 BC. This legend had to be reconciled with a dual tradition, set earlier in time, that had the Trojan refugee Aeneas escape to Italy and found the line of Romans through his son Iulus, the namesake of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. This was accomplished by the Roman poet Virgil in the first century BC. In addition, Strabo mentions an older story, that the city was an Arcadian colony founded by Evander. Strabo also writes that Lucius Coelius Antipater believed that Rome was founded by Greeks.\nMonarchy and republic.\nAfter the foundation by Romulus (according to a legend), Rome was ruled for a period of 244 years by a monarchy. The first rulers were of Latin and Sabine origin, and later ones were Etruscan. The tradition handed down seven kings: Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius and Lucius Tarquinius Superbus.\nIn 509 BC, the Romans expelled the last king from their city and established an oligarchic republic led by two annually elected consuls. Rome then began a period characterised by internal struggles between patricians (aristocrats) and plebeians (small landowners), and by constant warfare against the populations of central Italy: Etruscans, Latins, Volsci, Aequi, and Marsi. After becoming master of Latium, Rome led several wars (against the Gauls, Osci-Samnites and the Greek colony of Taranto, allied with Pyrrhus, king of Epirus) whose result was the conquest of the Italian peninsula, from the central area up to Magna Graecia.\nThe 3rd and 4th century\u00a0BC saw the establishment of Roman hegemony over the Mediterranean and the Balkans through the three Punic Wars (264\u2013146\u00a0BC) fought against Carthage and the three Macedonian Wars (212\u2013168\u00a0BC) against Macedonia. The first Roman provinces were established at this time: Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica, Hispania, Macedonia, Achaea and Africa.\nFrom the beginning of the 2nd century\u00a0BC, power was contested between two groups of aristocrats: the optimates, representing the conservative part of the Senate, and the populares, who relied on the help of the plebs (urban lower class) to gain power. In the same period, the bankruptcy of the small farmers and the establishment of large slave estates caused large-scale migration to the city. The continuous warfare led to the establishment of a professional army, which turned out to be more loyal to its generals than to the republic. Because of this, in the late 2nd and early 1st century\u00a0BC there were several conflicts both abroad and internally: after the failed attempt of social reform of the populares Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus, and the war against Jugurtha, there was a civil war from which the general Sulla emerged victorious. A major slave revolt under Spartacus followed, and then the establishment of the first Triumvirate with Caesar, Pompey and Crassus.\nCaesar's conquest of Gaul made him immensely powerful and popular, which led to a civil war against the Senate and Pompey. After his victory, Caesar established himself as dictator for life. His assassination in 44\u00a0BC led to a second Triumvirate among Octavian (Caesar's grandnephew and heir), Mark Antony and Lepidus, and to a final civil war between Octavian and Antony.\nEmpire.\nIn 27\u00a0BC, Octavian was named \"Augustus\" and \"princeps\", founding the principate, a diarchy between the \"princeps\" and the senate. Over time, the new monarch came to be known as the \"imperator\" (hence emperor), meaning \"commander\". During the reign of Nero, two thirds of the city was ruined after the Great Fire of Rome, and the persecution of Christians commenced. Rome's empire reached its greatest expansion in the second century under the Emperor Trajan. Rome was known as the caput Mundi, i.e. the capital of the known world, an expression which had already been used in the Republican period. During its first two centuries, the empire was ruled by emperors of the Julio-Claudian, Flavian (who built an eponymous amphitheatre known as the Colosseum), and Antonine dynasties. This time was also characterised by the spread of the Christian religion, preached by Jesus Christ in Judea in the first half of the first century (under Tiberius) and popularised by his apostles through the empire and beyond. The Antonine age is considered the zenith of the Empire, whose territory ranged from the Atlantic Ocean to the Euphrates and from Britain to Egypt.\nAfter the end of the Severan dynasty in AD\u00a0235, the Empire entered into a 50-year period known as the Crisis of the Third Century, during which numerous generals fought for power and the central authority in Rome weakened dramatically. Around the same time, the Plague of Cyprian (c. 250\u2013270) afflicted the Mediterranean. Instability caused economic deterioration, and there was a rapid rise in inflation as the government debased the currency in order to meet expenses. The Germanic tribes along the Rhine and north of the Balkans made serious uncoordinated incursions that were more like giant raiding parties rather than attempts to settle. The Persian Empire invaded from the east several times during the 230s to 260s but were eventually defeated. The civil wars ended in 285 with the final victory of Diocletian, who undertook the restoration of the State. He ended the Principate and introduced a new authoritarian model known as the Dominate, derived from his title of \"dominus\" (\"lord\"). His most marked feature was the unprecedented intervention of the State down to the city level: whereas the State had submitted a tax demand to a city and allowed it to allocate the charges, from his reign the State did this down to the village level. In a vain attempt to control inflation, he imposed price controls which did not last.\nDiocletian divided the empire in 286, ruling over the eastern half from Nicomedia, while his co-emperor Maximian ruled the western half from Mediolanum (when not on the move). The empire was further divided in 293, when Diocletian named two caesar, one for each augustus (emperor). Diocletian tried to turn into a system of non-dynastic succession, similar to the Antonine dynasty. Upon abdication in 305, both caesars succeeded and they, in turn, appointed two colleagues for themselves. However, a series of civil wars between rival claimants to power resulted in the unification of the empire under Constantine the Great in 324. Hereditary succession was restored, but the east\u2013west division was maintained. Constantine undertook a major reform of the bureaucracy, not by changing the structure but by rationalising the competencies of the several ministries. The so-called Edict of Milan of 313, actually a fragment of a letter from his co-emperor Licinius to the governors of the eastern provinces, granted freedom of worship to everyone, including Christians, and ordered the restoration of confiscated church properties upon petition to the newly created vicars of dioceses. He funded the building of several churches and allowed clergy to act as arbitrators in civil suits (a measure that did not outlast him but which was restored in part much later). In 330, he transformed Byzantium into Constantinople, which became his new capital. However, it was not officially anything more than an imperial residence like Milan, Trier or Nicomedia until given a city prefect in 359 by Constantius II.\nConstantine, following Diocletian's reforms, regionalised the administration, which fundamentally changed the way it was governed by creating regional dioceses. The existence of regional fiscal units from 286 served as the model for this unprecedented innovation. The emperor quickened the process of removing military command from governors. Henceforth, civilian administration and military command would be separate. He gave governors more fiscal duties and placed them in charge of the army logistical support system as an attempt to control it by removing the support system from its control.\nChristianity in the form of the Nicene Creed became the official religion of the empire in 380, via the Edict of Thessalonica issued in the name of three emperors \u2013 Gratian, Valentinian II, and Theodosius I \u2013 with Theodosius clearly the driving force behind it. He was the last emperor of a unified empire: after his death in 395, his young children, Honorius and Arcadius, inherited the western and eastern empires respectively. The seat of government in the Western Roman Empire was transferred to Ravenna in 408, but from 450 the emperors mostly resided in Rome.\nRome, which had lost its central role in the administration of the empire, was sacked in 410 by the Visigoths led by Alaric I, but very little physical damage was done, most of which was repaired. What could not be so easily replaced were portable items such as artwork in precious metals and items for domestic use (loot). The popes embellished the city with large basilicas, such as Santa Maria Maggiore (with the collaboration of the emperors). The population of the city had fallen from 800,000 to 450\u2013500,000 by the time the city was sacked in 455 by Genseric, king of the Vandals. The weak emperors of the fifth century could not stop the decay, leading to the deposition of Romulus Augustus, who resided on Ravenna, on 4 September 476. This marked the end of the Western Roman Empire and, for many historians, the beginning of the Middle Ages.\nThe decline of the city's population was caused by the loss of grain shipments from North Africa, from 440 onward, and the unwillingness of the senatorial class to maintain donations to support a population that was too large for the resources available. Even so, strenuous efforts were made to maintain the monumental centre, the palatine, and the largest baths, which continued to function until the Gothic siege of 537. The large baths of Constantine on the Quirinale were even repaired in 443, and the extent of the damage exaggerated and dramatised.\nHowever, the city gave an appearance overall of shabbiness and decay because of the large abandoned areas due to population decline. The population declined to 500,000 by 452 and 100,000 by AD 500 (perhaps larger, though no certain figure can be known). After the Gothic siege of 537, the population dropped to 30,000 but had risen to 90,000 by the papacy of Gregory the Great. The population decline coincided with the general collapse of urban life in the West in the fifth and sixth centuries, with few exceptions. Subsidized state grain distributions to the poorer members of society continued right through the sixth century and probably prevented the population from falling further. The figure of 450,000\u2013500,000 is based on the amount of pork, 3,629,000 lbs. distributed to poorer Romans during five winter months at the rate of five Roman lbs per person per month, enough for 145,000 persons or 1/4 or 1/3 of the total population. Grain distribution to 80,000 ticket holders at the same time suggests 400,000 (Augustus set the number at 200,000 or one-fifth of the population).\nMiddle Ages.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire in AD\u00a0476, Rome was first under the control of Odoacer and then became part of the Ostrogothic Kingdom before returning to East Roman control after the Gothic War, which devastated the city in 546 and 550. Its population declined from more than a million in AD\u00a0210 to 500,000 in AD\u00a0273 to 35,000 after the Gothic War (535\u2013554), reducing the sprawling city to groups of inhabited buildings interspersed among large areas of ruins, vegetation, vineyards and market gardens. It is generally thought the population of the city until AD\u00a0300 was 1 million (estimates range from 2 million to 750,000) declining to 750\u2013800,000 in AD\u00a0400, then 450\u2013500,000 in AD\u00a0450 and down to 80\u2013100,000 in AD\u00a0500 (though it may have been twice this).\nThe Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, was important since the early days of Christianity because of the martyrdom of both the apostles Peter and Paul there. The Bishops of Rome were also seen (and still are seen by Catholics) as the successors of Peter, who is considered the first Bishop of Rome. The city thus became of increasing importance as the centre of the Catholic Church.\nAfter the Lombard invasion of Italy (569\u2013572), the city remained nominally Byzantine, but in reality, the popes pursued a policy of equilibrium between the Byzantines, the Franks, and the Lombards. In 729, the Lombard king Liutprand donated the north Latium town of Sutri to the Church, starting its temporal power. In 756, Pepin the Short, after having defeated the Lombards, gave the Pope temporal jurisdiction over the Duchy of Rome and the Exarchate of Ravenna, thus creating the Papal States. Since this period, three powers tried to rule the city: the pope, the nobility (together with the chiefs of militias, the judges, the Senate and the populace), and the Frankish king, as king of the Lombards, patricius, and Emperor. These three parties (theocratic, republican, and imperial) were a characteristic of Roman life during the entire Middle Ages. On Christmas night of 800, Charlemagne was crowned in Rome as Emperor by Pope Leo III: on that occasion, the city hosted for the first time the two powers whose struggle for control was to be a constant of the Middle Ages. This event marks the beginning of the Carolingian Empire, the first phase of the Holy Roman Empire.\nIn 846, Muslim Arabs unsuccessfully stormed the city's walls, but managed to loot St. Peter's and St. Paul's basilica, both outside the city wall. After the decay of Carolingian power, Rome fell prey to feudal chaos: several noble families fought against the pope, the emperor, and each other. These were the times of Theodora and her daughter Marozia, concubines and mothers of several popes, and of Crescentius, a powerful feudal lord, who fought against the Emperors Otto II and Otto III. The scandals of this period forced the papacy to reform itself: the election of the pope was reserved to the cardinals, and reform of the clergy was attempted. The driving force behind this renewal was the monk Ildebrando da Soana, who once elected pope under the name of Gregory VII became involved into the Investiture Controversy against Emperor Henry IV. Subsequently, Rome was sacked and burned by the Normans under Robert Guiscard who had entered the city in support of the Pope, then besieged in Castel Sant'Angelo.\nDuring this period, the city was autonomously ruled by a \"senatore\" or \"patrizio\". In the 12th century, this administration, like other European cities, evolved into the commune, a new form of social organisation controlled by the new wealthy classes. Pope Lucius II fought against the Roman commune, and the struggle was continued by his successor Pope Eugenius III: by this stage, the commune, allied with the aristocracy, was supported by Arnaldo da Brescia, a monk who was a religious and social reformer. After the pope's death, Arnaldo was taken prisoner by Adrianus IV, which marked the end of the commune's autonomy. Under Pope Innocent III, whose reign marked the apogee of the papacy, the commune liquidated the senate, and replaced it with a \"Senatore\", who was subject to the pope.\nIn this period, the papacy played a role of secular importance in Western Europe, often acting as arbitrators between Christian monarchs and exercising additional political powers.\nIn 1266, Charles of Anjou, who was heading south to fight the Hohenstaufen on behalf of the pope, was appointed Senator. Charles founded the Sapienza, the university of Rome. In that period the pope died, and the cardinals, summoned in Viterbo, could not agree on his successor. This angered the people of the city, who then unroofed the building where they met and imprisoned them until they had nominated the new pope; this marked the birth of the conclave. In this period the city was also shattered by continuous fights between the aristocratic families: Annibaldi, Caetani, Colonna, Orsini, Conti, nested in their fortresses built above ancient Roman edifices, fought each other to control the papacy.\nPope Boniface VIII, born Caetani, was the last pope to fight for the church's universal domain; he proclaimed a crusade against the Colonna family and, in 1300, called for the first Jubilee of Christianity, which brought millions of pilgrims to Rome. However, his hopes were crushed by the French king Philip the Fair, who took him prisoner and held him hostage for three days at Anagni. The Pope was able to return to Rome, but died a month later, it was said of shock and grief. Afterwards, a new pope faithful to the French was elected, and the papacy was briefly relocated to Avignon (1309\u20131377). During this period Rome was neglected, until a plebeian man, Cola di Rienzo, came to power. An idealist and a lover of ancient Rome, Cola dreamed about a rebirth of the Roman Empire: after assuming power with the title of \"Tribuno\", his reforms were rejected by the populace. Forced to flee, Cola returned as part of the entourage of Cardinal Albornoz, who was charged with restoring the Church's power in Italy. Back in power for a short time, Cola was soon lynched by the populace, and Albornoz took possession of the city. In 1377, Rome became the seat of the papacy again under Gregory XI. The return of the pope to Rome in that year unleashed the Western Schism (1377\u20131418), and for the next forty years, the city was affected by the divisions which rocked the Church.\nEarly modern history.\nIn 1418, the Council of Constance settled the Western Schism, and a Roman pope, Martin V, was elected. This brought to Rome a century of internal peace, which marked the beginning of the Renaissance. The ruling popes until the first half of the 16th century, from Nicholas V, founder of the Vatican Library, to Pius II, humanist and literate, from Sixtus IV, a warrior pope, to Alexander VI, immoral and nepotist, from Julius II, soldier and patron, to Leo X, who gave his name to this period (\"the century of Leo X\"), all devoted their energy to the greatness and the beauty of the Eternal City and to the patronage of the arts.\nDuring those years, the centre of the Italian Renaissance moved to Rome from Florence. Majestic works, as the new Saint Peter's Basilica, the Sistine Chapel and \"Ponte Sisto\" (the first bridge to be built across the Tiber since antiquity, although on Roman foundations) were created. To accomplish that, the Popes engaged the best artists of the time, including Michelangelo, Perugino, Raphael, Ghirlandaio, Luca Signorelli, Botticelli, and Cosimo Rosselli.\nThe period was also infamous for papal corruption, with many Popes fathering children, and engaging in nepotism and simony. The corruption of the Popes and the huge expenses for their building projects led, in part, to the Reformation and, in turn, the Counter-Reformation. Under extravagant and rich popes, Rome was transformed into a centre of art, poetry, music, literature, education and culture. Rome became able to compete with other major European cities of the time in terms of wealth, grandeur, the arts, learning and architecture.\nThe Renaissance period changed the face of Rome dramatically, with works like the Piet\u00e0 by Michelangelo and the frescoes of the Borgia Apartments. Rome reached the highest point of splendour under Pope Julius II (1503\u20131513) and his successors Leo X and Clement VII, both members of the Medici family.\nIn this twenty-year period, Rome became one of the greatest centres of art in the world. The old St. Peter's Basilica built by Emperor Constantine the Great (which by then was in a dilapidated state) was demolished and a new one begun. The city hosted artists like Ghirlandaio, Perugino, Botticelli and Bramante, who built the temple of San Pietro in Montorio and planned a great project to renovate the Vatican. Raphael, who in Rome became one of the most famous painters of Italy, created frescoes in the Villa Farnesina, the Raphael's Rooms, plus many other famous paintings. Michelangelo started the decoration of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel and executed the famous statue of the Moses for the tomb of Julius II.\nIts economy was rich, with the presence of several Tuscan bankers, including Agostino Chigi, who was a friend of Raphael and a patron of arts. Before his early death, Raphael also promoted for the first time the preservation of the ancient ruins. The War of the League of Cognac caused the first plunder of the city in more than five hundred years since the previous sack; in 1527, the Landsknechts of Emperor Charles V sacked the city, bringing an abrupt end to the golden age of the Renaissance in Rome.\nBeginning with the Council of Trent in 1545, the Church began the Counter-Reformation in response to the Reformation, a large-scale questioning of the Church's authority on spiritual matters and governmental affairs. This loss of confidence led to major shifts of power away from the Church. Under the popes from Pius IV to Sixtus V, Rome became the centre of a reformed Catholicism and saw the building of new monuments which celebrated the papacy. The popes and cardinals of the 17th and early 18th centuries continued the movement by having the city's landscape enriched with baroque buildings.\nThis was another nepotistic age; the new aristocratic families (Barberini, Pamphili, Chigi, Rospigliosi, Altieri, Odescalchi) were protected by their respective popes, who built huge baroque buildings for their relatives. During the Age of Enlightenment, new ideas reached the Eternal City, where the papacy supported archaeological studies and improved the people's welfare. But not everything went well for the Church during the Counter-Reformation. There were setbacks in the attempts to assert the Church's power, a notable example being in 1773 when Pope Clement XIV was forced by secular powers to have the Jesuit order suppressed.\nLate modern and contemporary.\nThe rule of the Popes was interrupted by the short-lived Roman Republic (1798\u20131800), which was established under the influence of the French Revolution. The Papal States were restored in June 1800, but during Napoleon's reign Rome was annexed as a \"D\u00e9partement\" of the French Empire: first as \"D\u00e9partement du Tibre\" (1809\u20131810) and then as \"D\u00e9partement Rome\" (1810\u20131814). After the fall of Napoleon, the Papal States were reconstituted by a decision of the Congress of Vienna of 1814.\nIn 1849, a second Roman Republic was proclaimed during a year of revolutions in 1848. Two of the most influential figures of the Italian unification, Giuseppe Mazzini and Giuseppe Garibaldi, fought for the short-lived republic.\nRome then became the focus of hopes of Italian reunification after the rest of Italy was united as the Kingdom of Italy in 1861 with the temporary capital in Florence. That year Rome was declared the capital of Italy even though it was still under the Pope's control. During the 1860s, the last vestiges of the Papal States were under French protection thanks to the foreign policy of Napoleon III. French troops were stationed in the region under Papal control. In 1870 the French troops were withdrawn due to the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War. Italian troops were able to capture Rome entering the city through a breach near Porta Pia. Pope Pius IX declared himself a prisoner in the Vatican. In 1871 the capital of Italy was moved from Florence to Rome. In 1870 the population of the city was 212,000, all of whom lived with the area circumscribed by the ancient city, and in 1920, the population was 660,000. A significant portion lived outside the walls in the north and across the Tiber in the Vatican area.\nSoon after World War I in late 1922 Rome witnessed the rise of Italian Fascism led by Benito Mussolini, who led a march on the city. He did away with democracy by 1926, eventually declaring a new Italian Empire and allying Italy with Nazi Germany in 1938. Mussolini demolished fairly large parts of the city centre in order to build wide avenues and squares which were supposed to celebrate the fascist regime and the resurgence and glorification of classical Rome. The interwar period saw a rapid growth in the city's population which surpassed one million inhabitants soon after 1930. During World War II, due to the art treasuries and the presence of the Vatican, Rome largely escaped the tragic destiny of other European cities. However, on 19 July 1943, the San Lorenzo district was subject to Allied bombing raids, resulting in about 3,000 fatalities and 11,000 injuries, of whom another 1,500 died. Mussolini was arrested on 25 July 1943. On the date of the Italian Armistice 8 September 1943 the city was occupied by the Germans. Allied bombing raids continued throughout 1943 and extended into 1944. Rome was liberated on 4 June 1944.\nRome developed greatly after the war as part of the \"Italian economic miracle\" of post-war reconstruction and modernisation in the 1950s and early 1960s. During this period, the years of \"la dolce vita\" (\"the sweet life\"), Rome became a fashionable city, with popular classic films such as \"Ben Hur\", \"Quo Vadis\", \"Roman Holiday\" and \"La Dolce Vita\" filmed in the city's iconic Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios. The rising trend in population growth continued until the mid-1980s when the \"comune\" had more than 2.8 million residents. After this, the population declined slowly as people began to move to nearby suburbs.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nRome is in the Lazio region of central Italy on the Tiber () river. The original settlement developed on hills that faced onto a ford beside the Tiber Island, the only natural ford of the river in this area. The Rome of the Kings was built on seven hills: the Aventine Hill, the Caelian Hill, the Capitoline Hill, the Esquiline Hill, the Palatine Hill, the Quirinal Hill, and the Viminal Hill. Modern Rome is also crossed by another river, the Aniene, which flows into the Tiber north of the historic centre.\nAlthough the city centre is about inland from the Tyrrhenian Sea, the city territory extends to the shore, where the south-western district of Ostia is located. The altitude of the central part of Rome ranges from above sea level (at the base of the Pantheon) to above sea level (the peak of Monte Mario). The \"Comune\" of Rome covers an overall area of about , including many green areas.\nParks and gardens.\nPublic parks and nature reserves cover a large area in Rome, and the city has one of the largest areas of green space among European capitals. The most notable part of this green space is represented by the large number of villas and landscaped gardens created by the Italian aristocracy. While most of the parks surrounding the villas were destroyed during the building boom of the late 19th century, some of them remain. The most notable of these are the Villa Borghese, Villa Ada, and Villa Doria Pamphili. Villa Doria Pamphili is west of the Gianicolo hill, comprising some . The Villa Sciarra is on the hill, with playgrounds for children and shaded walking areas. In the nearby area of Trastevere, the Orto Botanico (Botanical Garden) is a cool and shady green space. The old Roman hippodrome (Circus Maximus) is another large green space: it has few trees but is overlooked by the Palatine and the Rose Garden ('roseto comunale'). Nearby is the lush Villa Celimontana, close to the gardens surrounding the Baths of Caracalla. The Villa Borghese garden is the best known large green space in Rome, with famous art galleries among its shaded walks. Overlooking Piazza del Popolo and the Spanish Steps are the gardens of Pincio and Villa Medici. There is also a notable pine wood at Castelfusano, near Ostia. Rome also has a number of regional parks of much more recent origin, including the Pineto Regional Park and the Appian Way Regional Park. There are also nature reserves at Marcigliana and at Tenuta di Castelporziano.\nClimate.\nRome has a Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Csa\"), with hot, dry summers and mild, humid winters.\nIts average annual temperature is above during the day and at night. In the coldest month, January, the average temperature is during the day and at night. In the warmest month, August, the average temperature is during the day and at night.\nDecember, January and February are the coldest months, with a daily mean temperature of approximately . Temperatures during these months generally vary between during the day and between at night, with colder or warmer spells occurring frequently. Snowfall is rare but not unheard of, with light snow or flurries occurring on some winters, generally without accumulation, and major snowfalls on a very rare occurrence (the most recent ones were in 2018, 2012 and 1986).\nThe average relative humidity is 75%, varying from 72% in July to 77% in November. Sea temperatures vary from a low of in February to a high of in August.\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in Rome was on 18 July 2023.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBy 550 BC, Rome was the second largest city in Italy after only Taras (modern Taranto) on the Salento Peninsula. It had an area of about and an estimated population of 35,000. Other sources suggest the population was just under 100,000 from 600 to 500 BC. When the Republic was founded in 509 BC the census recorded a population of 130,000. The republic included the city itself and the immediate surroundings. Other sources suggest a population of 150,000 in 500 BC. It surpassed 300,000 by 150 BC.\nThe size of the city at the time of the Emperor Augustus is a matter of speculation, with estimates based on grain distribution, grain imports, aqueduct capacity, city limits, population density, census reports, and assumptions about the number of unreported women, children and slaves providing a very wide range. Glenn Storey estimates 450,000 people, Whitney Oates estimates 1.2 million, Neville Morely provides a rough estimate of 800,000 and excludes earlier suggestions of 2 million. Estimates of the city's population towards and after the end of the Roman empire also vary. A.H.M. Jones estimated the population at 650,000 in the mid-fifth century. The damage caused by the sackings may have been overestimated. The population had already started to decline from the late fourth century onward, although around the middle of the fifth century it seems that Rome continued to be the most populous city of the two parts of the Empire. According to Krautheimer it was still close to 800,000 in 400 AD; had declined to 500,000 by 452, and dwindled to perhaps 100,000 in 500 AD. After the Gothic Wars, 535\u2013552, the population may have dwindled temporarily to 30,000. During the pontificate of Pope Gregory I (590\u2013604), it may have reached 90,000, augmented by refugees. Lancon estimates 500,000 based on the number of 'incisi' enrolled as eligible to receive bread, oil and wine rations; the number fell to 120,000 in the reform of 419. Neil Christie, citing free rations for the poorest, estimated 500,000 in the mid-fifth century and still a quarter of a million at the end of the century. Novel 36 of Emperor Valentinian III records 3.629 million pounds of pork to be distributed to the needy at 5 lbs. per month for the five winter months, sufficient for 145,000 recipients. This has been used to suggest a population of just under 500,000. Supplies of grain remained steady until the seizure of the remaining provinces of North Africa in 439 by the Vandals, and may have continued to some degree afterwards for a while. The city's population declined to less than 50,000 people in the Early Middle Ages from 700 onward. It continued to stagnate or shrink until the Renaissance.\nWhen the Kingdom of Italy annexed Rome in 1870, the city had a population of about 225,000. Less than half the city within the walls was built up in 1881 when the population recorded was 275,000. This increased to 600,000 by the eve of World War I. The Fascist regime of Mussolini tried to block an excessive demographic rise of the city but failed to prevent it from reaching one million people by the early 1930s. Population growth continued after the Second World War, helped by a post-war economic boom. A construction boom also created many suburbs during the 1950s and 1960s.\nIn mid-2010, there were 2,754,440 residents in the city proper, while some 4.2\u00a0million people lived in the greater Rome area (which can be approximately identified with its administrative metropolitan city, with a population density of about 800 inhabitants/km2 stretching over more than ). Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 17.00% of the population compared to pensioners who number 20.76%. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners). The average age of a Roman resident is 43 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Rome grew by 6.54%, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.56%. The current birth rate of Rome is 9.10 births per 1,000 inhabitants compared to the Italian average of 9.45 births.\nThe urban area of Rome extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 3.9 million. Between 3.2 and 4.2 million people live in the Rome metropolitan area.\nOrigin groups.\nAccording to the 2011 statistics conducted by ISTAT, approximately 9.5% of the population consists of non-Italians. About half of the immigrant population consists of those of various other European origins (chiefly Romanian, Polish, Ukrainian, and Albanian) numbering a combined total of 131,118 or 4.7% of the population. The remaining 4.8% are those with non-European origins, chiefly Filipinos (26,933), Bangladeshis (12,154), and Chinese (10,283).\nThe Esquilino \"rione\", off Termini Railway Station, has evolved into a largely immigrant neighbourhood. It is perceived as Rome's Chinatown. Immigrants from more than a hundred different countries reside there. A commercial district, Esquilino contains restaurants featuring many kinds of international cuisine. There are wholesale clothes shops. Of the 1,300 or so commercial premises operating in the district 800 are Chinese-owned; around 300 are run by immigrants from other countries around the world; 200 are owned by Italians.\nSummary table\nLanguage.\nRome's historic contribution to language in a worldwide sense is extensive. Through the process of Romanization, the peoples of Italy, Gallia, the Iberian Peninsula and Dacia developed languages which derive directly from Latin and were adopted in large areas of the world, all through cultural influence, colonisation and migration. Moreover, also modern English, because of the Norman Conquest, borrowed a large percentage of its vocabulary from the Latin language. The Roman or Latin alphabet is the most widely used writing system in the world used by the greatest number of languages.\nThe medieval Roman dialect belonged to the southern family of Italian dialects, and was thus much closer to the Neapolitan language than to the Florentine. A typical example of Romanesco of that period is \"Vita di Cola di Rienzo\" (\"Life of Cola di Rienzo\"), written by an anonymous Roman during the 14th century. Starting with the 16th century, the Roman dialect underwent a stronger and stronger influence from the Tuscan dialect (from which modern Italian derives) starting with the reigns of the two Medici popes (Leo X and Clement VII) and with the Sack of Rome in 1527, two events which provoked a large immigration from Tuscany. Therefore, current Romanesco has grammar and roots that are rather different from other dialects in Central Italy.\nReligion.\nMuch like the rest of Italy, Rome is predominantly Christian, and the city has been an important centre of religion and pilgrimage for centuries, the base of the ancient Roman religion with the pontifex maximus and later the seat of the Vatican and the pope. Before the arrival of the Christians in Rome, the Religio Romana (literally, the \"Roman Religion\") was the major religion of the city in classical antiquity. The first gods held sacred by the Romans were Jupiter, the Most High, and Mars, the god of war, and father of Rome's twin founders, Romulus and Remus, according to tradition. Other deities such as Vesta and Minerva were honoured. Rome was also the base of several mystery cults, such as Mithraism. Later, after St Peter and St Paul were martyred in the city, and the first Christians began to arrive, Rome became Christian, and the Old St. Peter's Basilica was constructed in 313 AD. Despite some interruptions (such as the Avignon papacy), Rome has for centuries been the home of the Roman Catholic Church and the Bishop of Rome, otherwise known as the Pope.\nDespite the fact that Rome is home to the Vatican City and St. Peter's Basilica, Rome's cathedral is the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran, in the south-east of the city centre. There are around 900 churches in Rome in total. Aside from the cathedral itself, some others of note include the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore, the Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls, the Basilica di San Clemente, San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane and the Church of the Ges\u00f9. There are also the ancient Catacombs of Rome underneath the city. Numerous highly important religious educational institutions are also in Rome, such as the Pontifical Lateran University, Pontifical Biblical Institute, Pontifical Gregorian University, and Pontifical Oriental Institute.\nSince the end of the Roman Republic, Rome is also the centre of an important Jewish community, which was once based in Trastevere, and later in the Roman Ghetto. There lies also the major synagogue in Rome, the \"Tempio Maggiore\".\nThe territory of Vatican City is part of the \"Mons Vaticanus\" (Vatican Hill), and of the adjacent former Vatican Fields, where St. Peter's Basilica, the Apostolic Palace, the Sistine Chapel, and museums were built, along with various other buildings. The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929. Being separated from the city on the west bank of the Tiber, the area was a suburb that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV, later expanded by the current fortification walls of Paul III, Pius IV, and Urban VIII. When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that created the Vatican state was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory were influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop.\nRome has been a major Christian pilgrimage site since the Middle Ages. People from all over the Christian world visit Vatican City, within the city of Rome, the seat of the papacy. The city became a major pilgrimage site during the Middle Ages. Apart from brief periods as an independent city during the Middle Ages, Rome kept its status as Papal capital and holy city for centuries, even when the Papacy briefly relocated to Avignon (1309\u20131377). Catholics believe that the Vatican is the last resting place of St. Peter. Pilgrimages to Rome can involve visits to many sites, both within Vatican City and in Italian territory. A popular stopping point is the Pilate's stairs: these are, according to the Christian tradition, the steps that led up to the praetorium of Pontius Pilate in Jerusalem, which Jesus Christ stood on during his Passion on his way to trial.\nIn addition, Rome hosts multiple Buddhist temples, and a variety of Roman modern pagan temples held by the Associazione Tradizionale Pietas which every year takes part in the religious festivities of the Natale di Roma, historically known as \"Dies Romana\" and also referred to as Romaia, the festival linked to the foundation of Rome, celebrated on 21 April. According to legend, Romulus is said to have founded the city of Rome on 21 April, 753 BC. From this date, the Roman chronology derived its system, known by the Latin phrase \"Ab Urbe condita\", meaning \"from the founding of the City\", which counted the years from this presumed foundation.\nGovernment.\nRome constitutes a \"comune speciale\", named \"Roma Capitale\", and is the largest both in terms of land area and population among the 8,101 \"comuni\" of Italy. It is governed by a mayor and a city council. The seat of the \"comune\" is the \"Palazzo Senatorio\" on the Capitoline Hill, the historic seat of the city government. The local administration in Rome is commonly referred to as \"Campidoglio\", the Italian name of the hill. \"Palazzo Senatorio\", seat of the municipality of Rome, has been a town hall since AD 1144, making it the oldest town hall in the world.\nSince 1972, the city has been divided into administrative areas, called \"municipi\" (sing. \"municipio\") (until 2001 named \"circoscrizioni\"). They were created for administrative reasons to increase decentralisation in the city. Each \"municipio\" is governed by a president and a council of twenty-five members who are elected by its residents every five years. The \"municipi\" frequently cross the boundaries of the traditional, non-administrative divisions of the city. The municipi were originally 20, then 19, and in 2013, their number was reduced to 15.\nRome is also divided into differing types of non-administrative units. The historic centre is divided into 22 \"rioni\", all of which are located within the Aurelian Walls except Prati and Borgo. These originate from the 14 regions of Augustan Rome, which evolved in the Middle Ages into the medieval rioni. In the Renaissance, under Pope Sixtus V, they again reached fourteen, and their boundaries were finally defined under Pope Benedict XIV in 1743.\nRome is the principal town of the Metropolitan City of Rome, operative since 1 January 2015. The Metropolitan City replaced the old provincia di Roma, which included the city's metropolitan area and extends further north until Civitavecchia. The Metropolitan City of Rome is the largest by area in Italy. At , its dimensions are comparable to the region of Liguria. Moreover, the city is also the capital of the Lazio region.\nRome is the national capital of Italy and is the seat of the Italian Government. The official residences of the President of the Italian Republic and the Italian Prime Minister, the seats of both houses of the Italian Parliament and that of the Italian Constitutional Court are located in the historic centre. The state ministries are spread out around the city; these include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which is located in Palazzo della Farnesina near the Olympic stadium.\nInternational relations.\nAmong the global cities, Rome is unique in having two sovereign entities located entirely within its city limits, the Holy See, represented by the Vatican City State, and the territorially smaller Sovereign Military Order of Malta. The Vatican is an enclave of the Italian capital city and a sovereign possession of the Holy See, which is the Diocese of Rome and the supreme government of the Roman Catholic Church. For this reason, Rome has sometimes been described as the capital of two states. Rome is the seat of the so-called \"Polo Romano\" made up by three main international agencies of the United Nations: the Food and Agriculture Organization, the World Food Programme and the International Fund for Agricultural Development.\nRome has traditionally been involved in the process of European political integration. The Treaties of the EU are located in Palazzo della Farnesina. In 1957 the city hosted the signing of the Treaty of Rome, which established the European Economic Community (predecessor to the European Union), and also played host to the official signing of the proposed European Constitution in July 2004. Rome is the seat of the European Olympic Committee and of the NATO Defense College. The city is the place where the Statute of the International Criminal Court and the European Convention on Human Rights were formulated. The city hosts also other important international entities such as the International Development Law Organization, the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property and the UNIDROIT (International Institute for the Unification of Private Law).\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nSince April 1956, Rome is exclusively and reciprocally twinned with:\n \"Solo Parigi \u00e8 degna di Roma; solo Roma \u00e8 degna di Parigi.\" \n \"Seule Paris est digne de Rome; seule Rome est digne de Paris.\" \n \"Only Paris is worthy of Rome; only Rome is worthy of Paris.\"\nRome's other partner cities are:\nEconomy.\nAs the capital of Italy, Rome hosts all the principal institutions of the nation, including the Presidency of the Republic, the government (and its single ), the Parliament, the main judicial Courts, and the diplomatic representatives of all the countries for the states of Italy and Vatican City. Many international institutions are located in Rome, notably cultural and scientific ones, such as the American Institute, the British School, the French Academy, the Scandinavian Institutes, and the German Archaeological Institute. There are also specialised agencies of the United Nations, such as the Food and Agriculture Organization. Rome also hosts major international and worldwide political and cultural organisations, such as the International Fund for Agricultural Development, World Food Programme, the NATO Defence College, and the International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration of Cultural Property.\nAccording to the GaWC study of world cities, Rome is a \"Beta +\" city. The city was ranked in 2024 as 31st in the Global Cities Index, second highest in Italy after Milan. With a 2005 GDP of \u20ac94.376\u00a0billion (US$121.5\u00a0billion), the city produces 6.7% of the national GDP (more than any other single city in Italy), and its unemployment rate, lowered from 11.1% to 6.5% between 2001 and 2005, is now one of the lowest rates of all the European Union capital cities. Rome's economy grows at around 4.4% annually and continues to grow at a higher rate in comparison to any other city in the rest of the country. This means that were Rome a country, it would be the world's 52nd richest country by GDP, near to the size to that of Egypt. Rome also had a 2003 GDP per capita of \u20ac29,153 (US$37,412), which was second in Italy (after Milan), and is more than 134.1% of the EU average GDP per capita. Rome, on the whole, has the highest total earnings in Italy, reaching \u20ac47,076,890,463 in 2008, yet, in terms of average workers' incomes, the city places itself 9th in Italy, with \u20ac24,509. On a global level, Rome's workers receive the 30th highest wages in 2009, coming three places higher than in 2008, in which the city ranked 33rd. The Rome area had a GDP amounting to $193.33 billion, and $38,765 per capita.\nAlthough the economy of Rome is characterised by the absence of heavy industry, and it is largely dominated by services, high-technology companies (IT, aerospace, defence, telecommunications), research, construction and commercial activities (especially banking), and the huge development of tourism are very dynamic and extremely important to its economy. Rome's international airport, Fiumicino, is the largest in Italy, and the city hosts the head offices of the vast majority of the major Italian companies, as well as the headquarters of three of the world's 100 largest companies: Enel, Eni, and Telecom Italia.\nUniversities, national radio and television and the movie industry in Rome are also important parts of the economy: Rome is also the hub of the Italian film industry, thanks to the Cinecitt\u00e0 studios, working since the 1930s. The city is also a centre for banking and insurance as well as electronics, energy, transport, and aerospace industries. Numerous international companies and agencies headquarters, government ministries, conference centres, sports venues, and museums are located in Rome's principal business districts: the Esposizione Universale Roma (EUR); the \"Torrino\" (further south from the EUR); the \"Magliana\"; the \"Parco de' Medici-Laurentina\" and the so-called \"Tiburtina-valley\" along the ancient Via Tiburtina.\nTourism.\nRome today is one of the most important tourist destinations of the world, due to the incalculable immensity of its archaeological and artistic treasures, as well as for the charm of its unique traditions, the beauty of its panoramic views, and the majesty of its magnificent \"villas\" (parks). Among the most significant resources are the many museums \u2013 Capitoline Museums, the Vatican Museums and the and others dedicated to modern and contemporary art \u2013 aqueducts, fountains, churches, palaces, historical buildings, the monuments and ruins of the Roman Forum, and the Catacombs. Rome is the third most visited city in the EU, after London and Paris, and receives an average of 7\u201310\u00a0million tourists a year, which sometimes doubles on holy years. The Colosseum (4\u00a0million tourists) and the Vatican Museums (4.2\u00a0million tourists) are the 39th and 37th (respectively) most visited places in the world, according to a recent study.\nRome is a major archaeological hub, and one of the world's main centres of archaeological research. There are numerous cultural and research institutes located in the city, such as the American Academy in Rome, and The Swedish Institute at Rome. Rome contains numerous ancient sites, including the Forum Romanum, Trajan's Market, Trajan's Forum, the Colosseum, and the Pantheon, to name but a few. The Colosseum, arguably one of Rome's most iconic archaeological sites, is regarded as a wonder of the world.\nRome contains a vast collection of art, sculpture, fountains, mosaics, frescos, and paintings, from all different periods. Rome first became a major artistic centre during ancient Rome, with forms of important Roman art such as architecture, painting, sculpture and mosaic work. Metal-work, coin die and gem engraving, ivory carvings, figurine glass, pottery, and book illustrations are considered to be 'minor' forms of Roman artwork. Rome later became a major centre of Renaissance art, since the popes spent vast sums of money for the constructions of grandiose basilicas, palaces, piazzas and public buildings in general. Rome became one of Europe's major centres of Renaissance artwork, second only to Florence, and able to compare to other major cities and cultural centres, such as Paris and Venice. The city was affected greatly by the baroque, and Rome became the home of numerous artists and architects, such as Bernini, Caravaggio, Carracci, Borromini and Cortona. In the late 18th century and early 19th century, the city was one of the centres of the Grand Tour, when wealthy, young English and other European aristocrats visited the city to learn about ancient Roman culture, art, philosophy, and architecture. Rome hosted a great number of neoclassical and rococo artists, such as Pannini and Bernardo Bellotto. Today, the city is a major artistic centre, with numerous art institutes and museums.\nRome has a growing stock of contemporary and modern art and architecture. The National Gallery of Modern Art has works by Balla, Morandi, Pirandello, Carr\u00e0, De Chirico, De Pisis, Guttuso, Fontana, Burri, Mastroianni, Turcato, Kandisky, and C\u00e9zanne on permanent exhibition. 2010 saw the opening of Rome's newest arts foundation, a contemporary art and architecture gallery designed by acclaimed Iraqi architect Zaha Hadid. Known as MAXXI \u2013 National Museum of the 21st Century Arts it restores a dilapidated area with striking modern architecture. Maxxi features a campus dedicated to culture, experimental research laboratories, international exchange and study and research. It is one of Rome's most ambitious modern architecture projects alongside Renzo Piano's Auditorium Parco della Musica and Massimiliano Fuksas' Rome Convention Center, Centro Congressi Italia EUR, in the EUR district, due to open in 2016. The convention centre features a huge translucent container inside which is suspended a steel and teflon structure resembling a cloud and which contains meeting rooms and an auditorium with two piazzas open to the neighbourhood on either side.\nEducation.\nRome is a nationwide and major international centre for higher education, containing numerous academies, colleges and universities. It boasts a large variety of academies and colleges, and has always been a major worldwide intellectual and educational centre, especially during Ancient Rome and the Renaissance, along with Florence. According to the City Brands Index, Rome is considered the world's second most historically, educationally and culturally interesting and beautiful city.\nRome has many universities and colleges. Its first university, La Sapienza (founded in 1303), is one of the largest in the world, with more than 140,000 students attending; in 2005 it ranked as Europe's 33rd best university and in 2013 the Sapienza University of Rome ranked as the 62nd in the world and the top in Italy in its \"World University Rankings\". and has been ranked among Europe's 50 and the world's 150 best colleges. In order to decrease the overcrowding of La Sapienza, two new public universities were founded during the last decades: Tor Vergata in 1982, and Roma Tre in 1992. Rome hosts also the LUISS School of Government, Italy's most important graduate university in the areas of international affairs and European studies as well as LUISS Business School, Italy's most important business school. Rome ISIA was founded in 1973 by Giulio Carlo Argan and is Italy's oldest institution in the field of industrial design.\nRome contains many pontifical universities and other institutes, including the British School at Rome, the French School in Rome, the Pontifical Gregorian University (the oldest Jesuit university in the world, founded in 1551), Istituto Europeo di Design, the Scuola Lorenzo de' Medici, the Link Campus of Malta, and the Universit\u00e0 Campus Bio-Medico. Rome is also the location of two American Universities; The American University of Rome and John Cabot University as well as St. John's University branch campus, John Felice Rome Center, a campus of Loyola University Chicago and Temple University Rome, a campus of Temple University. The Roman Colleges are several seminaries for students from foreign countries studying for the priesthood at the Pontifical Universities. Examples include the Venerable English College, the Pontifical North American College, the Scots College, and the Pontifical Croatian College of St. Jerome. Rome's major libraries include: the , opened in 1604, making it Italy's first public library; the Biblioteca Vallicelliana, established in 1565; the Biblioteca Casanatense, opened in 1701; the National Central Library, one of the two national libraries in Italy, which contains 4,126,002 volumes; The Biblioteca del Ministero degli Affari Esteri, specialised in diplomacy, foreign affairs and modern history; the Biblioteca dell'Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana; the Biblioteca Don Bosco, one of the largest and most modern of all Salesian libraries; the Biblioteca e Museo teatrale del Burcardo, a museum-library specialised in history of drama and theatre; the Biblioteca della Societ\u00e0 Geografica Italiana, which is based in the Villa Celimontana and is the most important geographical library in Italy, and one of Europe's most important; and the Vatican Library, one of the oldest and most important libraries in the world, which was formally established in 1475, though in fact much older and has 75,000 codices, as well as 1.1 million printed books, which include some 8,500 incunabula. There are also many specialist libraries attached to various foreign cultural institutes in Rome, among them that of the American Academy in Rome, the French Academy in Rome and the Bibliotheca Hertziana \u2013 Max Planck Institute of Art History, a German library, often noted for excellence in the arts and sciences.\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nFountains and aqueducts.\nRome is a city known for its numerous fountains, built-in all different styles, from Classical and Medieval, to Baroque and Neoclassical. The city has had fountains for more than two thousand years, and they have provided drinking water and decorated the piazzas of Rome. During the Roman Empire, in 98 AD, according to Sextus Julius Frontinus, the Roman consul who was named \"curator aquarum\" or guardian of the water of the city, Rome had nine aqueducts which fed 39 monumental fountains and 591 public basins, not counting the water supplied to the Imperial household, baths, and owners of private villas. Each of the major fountains was connected to two different aqueducts, in case one was shut down for service.\nDuring the 17th and 18th century, the Roman popes reconstructed other degraded Roman aqueducts and built new display fountains to mark their termini, launching the golden age of the Roman fountain. The fountains of Rome, like the paintings of Rubens, were expressions of the new style of Baroque art. In these fountains, sculpture became the principal element, and the water was used simply to animate and decorate the sculptures. They, like baroque gardens, were \"a visual representation of confidence and power\".\nStatues.\nRome is well known for its statues but, in particular, the talking statues of Rome. These are usually ancient statues which have become popular soapboxes for political and social discussion, and places for people to (often satirically) voice their opinions. There are two main talking statues: the Pasquino and the Marforio, yet there are four other noted ones: \"il Babuino\", Madama Lucrezia, \"il Facchino\" and Abbot Luigi. Most of these statues are ancient Roman or classical, and most of them also depict mythical gods, ancient people or legendary figures; il Pasquino represents Menelaus, Abbot Luigi is an unknown Roman magistrate, \"il Babuino\" is supposed to be Silenus, Marforio represents Oceanus, Madama Lucrezia is a bust of Isis, and \"il Facchino\" is the only non-Roman statue, created in 1580, and not representing anyone in particular. They are often, due to their status, covered with placards or graffiti expressing political ideas and points of view. Other statues in the city, which are not related to the talking statues, include those of the Ponte Sant'Angelo, or several monuments scattered across the city, such as that to Giordano Bruno in the Campo de'Fiori.\nObelisks and columns.\nThe city hosts eight ancient Egyptian and five ancient Roman obelisks, together with a number of more modern obelisks; there was also formerly (until 2005) an ancient Ethiopian obelisk in Rome. The city contains some of obelisks in piazzas, such as in Piazza Navona, St Peter's Square, Piazza Montecitorio, and Piazza del Popolo, and others in villas, thermae parks and gardens, such as in Villa Celimontana, the Baths of Diocletian, and the Pincian Hill. Moreover, the centre of Rome hosts also Trajan's and Antonine Column, two ancient Roman columns with spiral relief. The Column of Marcus Aurelius is located in Piazza Colonna and it was built around AD 180 by Commodus in memory of his parents. The Column of Marcus Aurelius was inspired by Trajan's Column at Trajan's Forum, which is part of the Imperial Fora.\nBridges.\nThe city of Rome contains numerous famous bridges which cross the Tiber. The only bridge to remain unaltered until today from the classical age is Ponte dei Quattro Capi, which connects the Isola Tiberina with the left bank. The other surviving \u2013 albeit modified \u2013 ancient Roman bridges crossing the Tiber are Ponte Cestio, Ponte Sant'Angelo and Ponte Milvio. Considering Ponte Nomentano, also built during ancient Rome, which crosses the Aniene, currently there are five ancient Roman bridges still remaining in the city. Other noteworthy bridges are Ponte Sisto, the first bridge built in the Renaissance above Roman foundations; Ponte Rotto, actually the only remaining arch of the ancient \"Pons Aemilius\", collapsed during the flood of 1598 and demolished at the end of the 19th century; and Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II, a modern bridge connecting Corso Vittorio Emanuele and Borgo. Most of the city's public bridges were built in Classical or Renaissance style, but also in Baroque, Neoclassical and Modern styles. According to the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", the finest ancient bridge remaining in Rome is the Ponte Sant'Angelo, which was completed in 135 AD, and was decorated with ten statues of the angels, designed by Bernini in 1688.\nCatacombs.\nRome has an extensive amount of ancient catacombs, or underground burial places under or near the city, of which there are at least forty, some discovered only in recent decades. Though most famous for Christian burials, they include pagan and Jewish burials, either in separate catacombs or mixed together. The first large-scale catacombs were excavated from the 2nd century onwards. Originally they were carved through tuff, a soft volcanic rock, outside the boundaries of the city, because Roman law forbade burial places within city limits. Currently, maintenance of the catacombs is in the hands of the Papacy which has invested in the Salesians of Don Bosco the supervision of the Catacombs of St. Callixtus on the outskirts of Rome.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nRome is an important centre for music, and it has an intense musical scene, including several prestigious music conservatories and theatres. It hosts the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia (founded in 1585), for which new concert halls have been built in the new Parco della Musica, one of the largest musical venues in the world. Rome also has an opera house, the Teatro dell'Opera di Roma, as well as several minor musical institutions. The city also played host to the Eurovision Song Contest in 1991 and the MTV Europe Music Awards in 2004.\nRome has also had a major impact on music history. The Roman School was a group of composers of predominantly church music, which were active in the city during the 16th and 17th centuries, therefore spanning the late Renaissance and early Baroque eras. The term also refers to the music they produced. Many of the composers had a direct connection to the Vatican and the papal chapel, though they worked at several churches; stylistically they are often contrasted with the Venetian School of composers, a concurrent movement which was much more progressive. By far the most famous composer of the Roman School is Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina, whose name has been associated for four hundred years with smooth, clear, polyphonic perfection. However, there were other composers working in Rome, and in a variety of styles and forms.\nBetween 1960 and 1970 Rome was considered to be as a \"new Hollywood\" because of the many actors and directors who worked there; Via Vittorio Veneto had transformed into a glamour place where you could meet famous people.\nFashion.\nRome is also widely recognised as a world fashion capital. Although not as important as Milan, Rome is the fourth most important centre for fashion in the world, according to the 2009 Global Language Monitor after Milan, New York, and Paris, and beating London.\nMajor luxury fashion houses and jewellery chains, such as Valentino, Bulgari, Fendi, Laura Biagiotti, Brioni, and Renato Balestra, are headquartered or were founded in the city. Also, other major labels, such as Gucci, Chanel, Prada, Dolce &amp; Gabbana, Armani, and Versace have luxury boutiques in Rome, primarily along its prestigious and upscale Via dei Condotti.\nCuisine.\nRome's cuisine has evolved through centuries and periods of social, cultural, and political changes. Rome became a major gastronomical centre during the ancient age. Ancient Roman cuisine was highly influenced by Ancient Greek culture, and after, the empire's enormous expansion exposed Romans to many new, provincial culinary habits and cooking techniques.\nLater, during the Renaissance, Rome became well known as a centre of high-cuisine, since some of the best chefs of the time worked for the popes. An example of this was Bartolomeo Scappi, who was a chef working for Pius IV; he acquired fame in 1570 when his cookbook \"Opera dell'arte del cucinare\" was published. In the book he lists approximately 1,000 recipes of the Renaissance cuisine and describes cooking techniques and tools, giving the first known picture of a fork.\nThe Testaccio, Rome's trade and slaughterhouse area, was often known as the \"belly\" or \"slaughterhouse\" of Rome, and was inhabited by butchers, or \"vaccinari\". The most common or ancient Roman cuisine included the \"fifth quarter\". The old-fashioned \"coda alla vaccinara\" (oxtail cooked in the way of butchers) is still one of the city's most popular meals and is part of most of Rome's restaurants' menus. Lamb is also a very popular part of Roman cuisine, and is often roasted with spices and herbs.\nIn the modern age, the city developed its own peculiar cuisine, based on products of the nearby Campagna, globe artichokes are common. In parallel, Roman Jews \u2013 present in the city since the 1st century BC \u2013 developed their own cuisine, the \"cucina giudaico-romanesca\". The Roman cuisine widely use offal, resulting in dishes such as the entrail-based rigatoni with sauce. is a meat dish based on lamb from the Roman cuisine.\nExamples of Roman dishes include \"saltimbocca alla romana\" \u2013 a veal cutlet, Roman-style, topped with raw ham and sage and simmered with white wine and butter; \"carciofi alla romana\" \u2013 artichokes Roman-style, outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; \"carciofi alla giudia\" \u2013 artichokes fried in olive oil, typical of Roman Jewish cooking, outer leaves removed, stuffed with mint, garlic, breadcrumbs and braised; \"spaghetti alla carbonara\" \u2013 spaghetti with bacon, eggs and ; \"spaghetti cacio e pepe\" \u2013 spaghetti with and black pepper; and \"gnocchi di semolino alla romana\" \u2013 semolina dumpling, Roman-style.\nCinema.\nRome hosts the Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios, the largest film and television production facility in continental Europe and the centre of the Italian cinema, where many of today's biggest box office hits are filmed. The studio complex is from the centre of Rome and is part of one of the biggest production communities in the world, second only to Hollywood, with well over 5,000 professionals \u2013 from period costume makers to visual effects specialists. More than 3,000 productions have been made on its lot.\nFounded in 1937 by Benito Mussolini, the studios were bombed by the Western Allies during the Second World War. In the 1950s, Cinecitt\u00e0 was the filming location for several large American film productions, and subsequently became the studio most closely associated with Federico Fellini. Today, Cinecitt\u00e0 is the only studio in the world with pre-production, production, and full post-production facilities on one lot, allowing directors and producers to walk in with their script and \"walkout\" with a completed film.\nSports.\nAssociation football is the most popular sport in Rome, as in the rest of the country. The city hosted the final games of the 1934 and 1990 FIFA World Cup. The latter took place in the Stadio Olimpico, which is also the shared home stadium for local Serie A clubs SS Lazio, founded in 1900, and AS Roma, founded in 1927, whose rivalry in the Derby della Capitale has become a staple of Roman sports culture. Footballers who play for these teams and are also born in the city tend to become especially popular, as has been the case with players such as Francesco Totti and Daniele De Rossi (both for AS Roma), and Alessandro Nesta (for SS Lazio).\nRome hosted the 1960 Summer Olympics, with great success, using many ancient sites such as the Villa Borghese and the Thermae of Caracalla as venues. For the Olympic Games many new facilities were built, notably the new large Olympic Stadium (which was then enlarged and renewed to host several matches and the final of the 1990 FIFA World Cup), the Stadio Flaminio, the Villaggio Olimpico (Olympic Village, created to host the athletes and redeveloped after the games as a residential district), ecc. Rome made a bid to host the 2020 Summer Olympics but it was withdrawn.\nFurther, Rome hosted the EuroBasket 1991 and is home to the internationally recognised basketball team Virtus Roma. Rugby union is gaining wider acceptance. Until 2011 the Stadio Flaminio was the home stadium for the Italy national rugby union team, which has been playing in the Six Nations Championship since 2000. The team now plays home games at the Stadio Olimpico because the Stadio Flaminio needs works of renovation in order to improve both its capacity and safety. Rome is home to local rugby union teams such as Rugby Roma (winner of five Italian championships), Unione Rugby Capitolina and S.S. Lazio Rugby 1927 (rugby union branch of the multisport club S.S. Lazio).\nEvery May, Rome hosts the Italian Open, an ATP Masters 1000 tennis tournament, on the clay courts of the Foro Italico. Cycling was popular in the post-World War II period, although its popularity has faded. Rome has hosted the final portion of the Giro d'Italia three times, in 1911, 1950, and 2009. Other local sports teams include volleyball (M. Roma Volley), handball or waterpolo.\nTransport.\nRome is at the centre of the radial network of roads that roughly follow the lines of the ancient Roman roads which began at the Capitoline Hill and connected Rome with its empire. Today central Rome is circled, at a distance of about from the Capitol, by the ring-road (the Grande Raccordo Anulare or GRA).\nDue to its location in the centre of the Italian peninsula, Rome is the principal railway node for central Italy. Rome's main railway station, Termini, is one of the largest railway stations in Europe and the most heavily used in Italy, with around 400 thousand travellers passing through every day. The second-largest station in the city, Roma Tiburtina, has been redeveloped as a high-speed rail terminus. As well as frequent high-speed day trains to all major Italian cities, Rome is linked nightly by 'boat train' sleeper services to Sicily, and internationally by overnight sleeper services to Munich and Vienna.\nRome is served by three airports. The intercontinental Leonardo da Vinci International Airport, Italy's chief airport is located in the nearby Fiumicino, south-west of Rome. The older Rome Ciampino Airport is a joint civilian and military airport. It is commonly referred to as \"Ciampino Airport\", as it is located beside Ciampino, south-east of Rome. A third airport, the Rome Urbe Airport, is a small, low-traffic airport located about north of the city centre, which handles most helicopter and private flights. The main city airport of Fiumicino, with over 49 million passengers transported in 2024, is the largest and busiest airport in Italy.\nAlthough the city has its own quarter on the Mediterranean Sea (Lido di Ostia), this has only a marina and a small channel-harbour for fishing boats. The main harbour which serves Rome is Port of Civitavecchia, located about northwest of the city.\nThe city suffers from traffic problems largely due to this radial street pattern, making it difficult for Romans to move easily from the vicinity of one of the radial roads to another without going into the historic centre or using the ring-road. These problems are not helped by the limited size of Rome's metro system when compared to other cities of similar size. Rome has only 21 taxis for every 10,000 inhabitants, far below other major European cities. Chronic congestion caused by cars during the 1970s and 1980s led to restrictions being placed on vehicle access to the inner city-centre during daylight hours. Areas, where these restrictions apply, are known as Limited Traffic Zones (\"Zona a Traffico Limitato\" (ZTL)). More recently, heavy night-time traffic in Trastevere, Testaccio and San Lorenzo has led to the creation of night-time ZTLs in those districts.\nA three-line metro system called the \"Metropolitana\" operates in Rome. Construction on the first branch started in the 1930s. The line had been planned to quickly connect the main railway station with the newly planned E42 area in the southern suburbs, where 1942 the World Fair was supposed to be held. The event never took place because of war, but the area was later partly redesigned and renamed Esposizione Universale Roma in the 1950s to serve as a modern business district. The line was finally opened in 1955, and it is now the south part of the B Line.\nThe A line opened in 1980 from Ottaviano to Anagnina stations, later extended in stages (1999\u20132000) to Battistini. In the 1990s, an extension of the B line was opened from Termini to Rebibbia. The A and B lines intersect at Roma Termini station. A new branch of the B line (B1) opened on 13 June 2012 after an estimated building cost of \u20ac500\u00a0million. B1 connects to line B at Piazza Bologna and has four stations over a distance of .\nA third line, the C line, is under construction with an estimated cost of \u20ac3\u00a0billion and will have 30 stations over a distance of . It will partly replace the existing Termini-Pantano rail line. It will feature full automated, driverless trains. The first section with 15 stations connecting Pantano with the quarter of Centocelle in the eastern part of the city, opened on 9 November 2014. The end of the work was scheduled in 2015, but archaeological findings often delay underground construction work.\nA fourth line, D line, is also planned. It will have 22 stations over a distance of . The first section was projected to open in 2015 and the final sections before 2035, but due to the city's financial crisis, the project has been put on hold.\nAbove-ground public transport in Rome is made up of a bus, tram and urban train network (FR lines). The bus network has in excess of 350 bus lines and over eight thousand bus stops, whereas the more-limited tram system has of track and 192 stops. There are also trolleybuses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25459", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25459", "title": "Rocky Mountains", "text": "Major mountain range in western North America\nThe Rocky Mountains, also known as the Rockies, are a major mountain range and the largest mountain system in North America. The Rocky Mountains stretch in a straight-line distance from the northernmost part of Western Canada, to New Mexico in the Southwestern United States. Depending on differing definitions between Canada and the U.S., its northern terminus is located either in northern British Columbia's Terminal Range south of the Liard River and east of the Trench, or in the northeastern foothills of the Brooks Range/British Mountains that face the Beaufort Sea coasts between the Canning River and the Firth River across the Alaska\u2013Yukon border. Its southernmost point is near the Albuquerque metropolitan area, adjacent to the Rio Grande rift, and north of the Sandia\u2013Manzano Mountain Range, also near Santa Fe, New Mexico. Being the easternmost portion of the North American Cordillera, the Rockies are distinct from the tectonically younger Cascade Range and Sierra Nevada, which both lie farther to its west.\nThe Rockies formed 55 million to 80\u00a0million years ago during the Laramide orogeny, in which a number of plates began sliding underneath the North American plate. The angle of subduction was shallow, resulting in a broad belt of mountains running down western North America. Since then, further tectonic activity and erosion by glaciers have sculpted the Rockies into dramatic peaks and valleys. At the end of the last ice age, humans began inhabiting the mountain range. After explorations of the range by Europeans, such as Sir Alexander Mackenzie, and Anglo-Americans, such as the Lewis and Clark Expedition, natural resources such as minerals and fur drove the initial economic exploitation of the mountains, although the range itself has never experienced a dense population.\nMost of the highest summits of the Rocky Mountains are in Colorado, with the state having an average elevation of . Public parks and forest lands protect much of the mountain range, and they are popular tourist destinations, especially for hiking, camping, mountaineering, fishing, hunting, mountain biking, snowmobiling, skiing, and snowboarding.\nEtymology.\nThe name of the mountains is a calque of an Algonquian name, specifically Plains Cree (originally transcribed ), literally \"rocky mountain / alp\". The first mention of their present name by a European was in the journal of Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre in 1752, where they were called \"\". Another name given to the place by the Cree is .\nGeography.\nThe Rocky Mountains are the easternmost portion of the expansive North American Cordillera. They are often defined as stretching from the Liard River in British Columbia south to the headwaters of the Pecos River, a tributary of the Rio Grande, in New Mexico. The Rockies vary in width from . The Rocky Mountains contain the highest peaks in central North America. The range's highest peak is Mount Elbert in Colorado at above sea level. Mount Robson in British Columbia, at , is the highest peak in the Canadian Rockies.\nThe eastern edge of the Rockies rises dramatically above the Interior Plains of central North America, including the Sangre de Cristo Mountains of New Mexico and Colorado, the Front Range of Colorado, the Wind River Range and Big Horn Mountains of Wyoming, the Absaroka-Beartooth ranges and Rocky Mountain Front of Montana and the Clark Range of Alberta.\nCentral ranges of the Rockies include the La Sal Range along the Utah-Colorado border, the Abajo Mountains and Henry Mountains of Southeastern Utah, the Uinta Range of Utah and Wyoming, and the Teton Range of Wyoming and Idaho.\nThe western edge of the Rockies includes ranges such as the Wasatch near Salt Lake City, the San Juan Mountains of New Mexico and Colorado, the Bitterroots along the Idaho-Montana border, and the Sawtooths in central Idaho. The Great Basin and Columbia River Plateau separate these subranges from distinct ranges further to the west. In Canada, the western edge of the Rockies is formed by the huge Rocky Mountain Trench, which runs the length of British Columbia from its beginning as the Kechika Valley on the south bank of the Liard River, to the middle Lake Koocanusa valley in northwestern Montana.\nThe Canadian Rockies are defined by Canadian geographers as everything south of the Liard River and east of the Rocky Mountain Trench, and do not extend into Yukon, Northwest Territories or central British Columbia. They are divided into three main groups: the Muskwa Ranges, Hart Ranges (collectively called the Northern Rockies) and Continental Ranges. Other more northerly mountain ranges of the eastern Canadian Cordillera continue beyond the Liard River valley, including the Selwyn, Mackenzie and Richardson Mountains in Yukon as well as the British Mountains/Brooks Range in Alaska, but those are not officially recognized as part of the Rockies by the Geological Survey of Canada, although the Geological Society of America definition does consider them parts of the Rocky Mountains system as the \"Arctic Rockies\".\nThe Continental Divide of the Americas is in the Rocky Mountains and designates the line at which waters flow either to the Atlantic or Pacific Oceans. Triple Divide Peak () in Glacier National Park is so named because water falling on the mountain reaches not only the Atlantic and Pacific but Hudson Bay as well. Farther north in Alberta, the Athabasca and other rivers feed the basin of the Mackenzie River, which has its outlet on the Beaufort Sea of the Arctic Ocean.\nHuman population is not very dense in the Rockies, with an average of four people per square kilometer and few cities with over 50,000 people. However, the human population grew rapidly in the Rocky Mountain states between 1950 and 1990. The forty-year statewide increases in population range from 35% in Montana to about 150% in Utah and Colorado. The populations of several mountain towns and communities have doubled in the forty years 1972\u20132012. Jackson, Wyoming, increased 260%, from 1,244 to 4,472 residents, in those forty years.\nGeology.\nThe rocks in the Rocky Mountains were formed before the mountains were raised by tectonic forces. The oldest rock is Precambrian metamorphic rock that forms the core of the North American continent. There is also Precambrian sedimentary argillite, dating back to 1.7\u00a0billion years ago. During the Paleozoic, western North America lay underneath a shallow sea, which deposited many kilometers of limestone and dolomite.\nIn the southern Rockies, near present-day Colorado, these ancestral rocks were disturbed by mountain building approximately 300\u00a0million years ago, during the Pennsylvanian. This mountain-building produced the Ancestral Rocky Mountains. They consisted largely of Precambrian metamorphic rock forced upward through layers of the limestone laid down in the shallow sea. The mountains eroded throughout the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic, leaving extensive deposits of sedimentary rock.\nTerranes began colliding with the western edge of North America in the Mississippian (approximately 350\u00a0million years ago), causing the Antler orogeny. For 270\u00a0million years, the focus of the effects of plate collisions were near the edge of the North American Plate boundary, far to the west of the Rocky Mountain region. It was not until 80\u00a0million years ago that these effects began reaching the Rockies.\nThe current Rocky Mountains arose in the Laramide orogeny from between 80\u00a0million and 55\u00a0million years ago. For the Canadian Rockies, the mountain building is analogous to pushing a rug on a hardwood floor: the rug bunches up and forms wrinkles (mountains). In Canada, the terranes and subduction are the foot pushing the rug, the ancestral rocks are the rug, and the Canadian Shield in the middle of the continent is the hardwood floor.\nFurther south, an unusual subduction may have caused the growth of the Rocky Mountains in the United States, where the Farallon Plate dove at a shallow angle below the North American Plate. This low angle moved the focus of melting and mountain building much farther inland than the normal . Scientists hypothesize that the shallow angle of the subducting plate increased the friction and other interactions with the thick continental mass above it. Tremendous thrusts piled sheets of crust on top of each other, building the broad, high Rocky Mountain range.\nThe current southern Rockies were forced upwards through the layers of Pennsylvanian and Permian sedimentary remnants of the Ancestral Rocky Mountains. Such sedimentary remnants were often tilted at steep angles along the flanks of the modern range; they are now visible in many places throughout the Rockies, and are shown along the Dakota Hogback, an early Cretaceous sandstone formation running along the eastern flank of the modern Rockies.\nJust after the Laramide orogeny, the Rockies were like Tibet: a high plateau, probably above sea level. In the last 60\u00a0million years, erosion stripped away the high rocks, revealing the ancestral rocks beneath, and forming the current landscape of the Rockies.\nPeriods of glaciation occurred from the Pleistocene Epoch (1.8\u00a0million \u2013 70,000 years ago) to the Holocene Epoch (fewer than 11,000 years ago). These ice ages left their mark on the Rockies, forming extensive glacial landforms, such as U-shaped valleys and cirques. Recent glacial episodes included the Bull Lake Glaciation, which began about 150,000 years ago, and the Pinedale Glaciation, which perhaps remained at full glaciation until 15,000\u201320,000 years ago.\nAll of these geological processes exposed a complex set of rocks at the surface. For example, volcanic rock from the Paleogene and Neogene periods (66\u00a0million \u2013 2.6\u00a0million years ago) occurs in the San Juan Mountains and in other areas. Millennia of severe erosion in the Wyoming Basin transformed intermountain basins into a relatively flat terrain. The Tetons and other north-central ranges contain folded and faulted rocks of Paleozoic and Mesozoic age draped above cores of Proterozoic and Archean igneous and metamorphic rocks ranging in age from 1.2\u00a0billion (e.g., Tetons) to more than 3.3\u00a0billion years (Beartooth Mountains).\nEcology and climate.\nThere are a wide range of environmental factors in the Rocky Mountains. The Rockies range in latitude between the Liard River in British Columbia (at 59\u00b0 N) and the Rio Grande in New Mexico (at 35\u00b0 N). Prairie occurs at or below , while the highest peak in the range is Mount Elbert at . Precipitation ranges from per year in the southern valleys to per year locally in the northern peaks. Average January temperatures can range from in Prince George, British Columbia, to in Trinidad, Colorado. Therefore, there is no single monolithic ecosystem for the entire Rocky Mountain Range.\nInstead, ecologists divide the Rockies into a number of biotic zones. Each zone is defined by whether it can support trees and the presence of one or more indicator species. Two zones that do not support trees are the Plains and the Alpine tundra. The Great Plains lie to the east of the Rockies and is characterized by prairie grasses (below roughly ). Alpine tundra occurs in regions above the tree-line for the Rocky Mountains, which varies from in New Mexico to at the northern end of the Rockies (near the Yukon).\nThe U.S. Geological Survey defines ten forested zones in the Rockies. Zones in more southern, warmer, or drier areas are defined by the presence of pinyon pines/junipers, ponderosa pines, or oaks mixed with pines. In more northern, colder, or wetter areas, zones are defined by Douglas firs, Cascadian species (such as western hemlock), lodgepole pines/quaking aspens, or firs mixed with spruce. Near tree-line, zones can consist of white pines (such as whitebark pine or bristlecone pine); or a mixture of white pine, fir, and spruce that appear as shrub-like krummholz. Finally, rivers and canyons can create a unique forest zone in more arid parts of the mountain range.\nThe Rocky Mountains are an important habitat for a great deal of well-known wildlife, such as wolves, elk, moose, mule and white-tailed deer, pronghorn, mountain goats, bighorn sheep, badgers, black bears, grizzly bears, coyotes, lynxes, cougars, and wolverines. North America's largest herds of elk are in the Alberta\u2013British Columbia foothills forests.\nThe status of most species in the Rocky Mountains is unknown, due to incomplete information. European-American settlement of the mountains has adversely impacted native species. Examples of some species that have declined include western toads, greenback cutthroat trout, white sturgeon, white-tailed ptarmigan, trumpeter swan, and bighorn sheep.\nIn the U.S. portion of the mountain range, apex predators such as grizzly bears and wolf packs had been extirpated from their original ranges, but have partially recovered due to conservation measures and reintroduction. Other recovering species include the bald eagle and the peregrine falcon.\nHistory.\nIndigenous people.\nSince the last great ice age, the Rocky Mountains were home first to indigenous peoples including the Apache, Arapaho, Bannock, Blackfoot, Cheyenne, Coeur d'Alene, Kalispel, Crow Nation, Flathead, Shoshone, Sioux, Ute, Kutenai (Ktunaxa in Canada), Sekani, Dunne-za, and others. Paleo-Indians hunted the now-extinct mammoth and ancient bison (an animal 20% larger than modern bison) in the foothills and valleys of the mountains. Like the modern tribes that followed them, Paleo-Indians probably migrated to the plains in fall and winter for bison and to the mountains in spring and summer for fish, deer, elk, roots, and berries. In Colorado, along with the crest of the Continental Divide, rock walls that Native Americans built for driving game date back 5,400\u20135,800 years. A growing body of scientific evidence indicates that indigenous people had significant effects on mammal populations by hunting and on vegetation patterns through deliberate burning.\nEuropean exploration.\nRecent human history of the Rocky Mountains is one of more rapid change. The Spanish explorer Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado\u2014with a group of soldiers and missionaries marched into the Rocky Mountain region from the south in 1540. In 1610, the Spanish founded the city of Santa Fe, the oldest continuous seat of government in the United States, at the foot of the Rockies in present-day New Mexico. The introduction of the horse, metal tools, rifles, new diseases, and different cultures profoundly changed the Native American cultures. Native American populations were extirpated from most of their historical ranges by disease, warfare, habitat loss (eradication of the bison), and continued assaults on their culture.\nIn 1739, French fur traders Pierre and Paul Mallet, while journeying through the Great Plains, discovered a range of mountains at the headwaters of the Platte River, which local American Indian tribes called the \"Rockies\", becoming the first Europeans to report on this uncharted mountain range.\nSir Alexander Mackenzie (1764 \u2013 March 11, 1820) became the first European to cross the Rocky Mountains in 1793. He found the upper reaches of the Fraser River and reached the Pacific coast of what is now Canada on July 20 of that year, completing the first recorded transcontinental crossing of North America north of Mexico. He arrived at Bella Coola, British Columbia, where he first reached saltwater at South Bentinck Arm, an inlet of the Pacific Ocean.\nThe Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804\u20131806) was the first scientific reconnaissance of the Rocky Mountains. Specimens were collected for contemporary botanists, zoologists, and geologists. The expedition was said to have paved the way to (and through) the Rocky Mountains for European-Americans from the East, although Lewis and Clark met at least 11 European-American mountain men during their travels.\nMountain men, primarily French, Spanish, and British, roamed the Rocky Mountains from 1720 to 1800 seeking mineral deposits and furs. The fur-trading North West Company established Rocky Mountain House as a trading post in what is now the Rocky Mountain Foothills of present-day Alberta in 1799, and their business rivals the Hudson's Bay Company established Acton House nearby. These posts served as bases for most European activity in the Canadian Rockies in the early 19th century. Among the most notable are the expeditions of David Thompson, who followed the Columbia River to the Pacific Ocean. On his 1811 expedition, he camped at the junction of the Columbia River and the Snake River and erected a pole and notice claiming the area for the United Kingdom and stating the intention of the North West Company to build a fort at the site.\nBy the Anglo-American Convention of 1818, which established the 49th parallel north as the international boundary west from Lake of the Woods to the \"Stony Mountains\", the UK and the US agreed to what has since been described as \"joint occupancy\" of lands further west to the Pacific Ocean. Resolution of the territorial and treaty issues, the Oregon dispute, was deferred until a later time.\nIn 1819, Spain ceded their rights north of the 42nd Parallel to the United States, though these rights did not include possession and also included obligations to Britain and Russia concerning their claims in the same region.\nSettlement.\nAfter 1802, fur traders and explorers ushered in the first widespread American presence in the Rockies south of the 49th parallel. The more famous of these include William Henry Ashley, Jim Bridger, Kit Carson, John Colter, Thomas Fitzpatrick, Andrew Henry, and Jedediah Smith. On July 24, 1832, Benjamin Bonneville led the first wagon train across the Rocky Mountains by using South Pass in the present State of Wyoming. Similarly, in the wake of Mackenzie's 1793 expedition, fur trading posts were established west of the Northern Rockies in a region of the northern Interior Plateau of British Columbia which came to be known as New Caledonia, beginning with Fort McLeod (today's community of McLeod Lake) and Fort Fraser, but ultimately focused on Stuart Lake Post (today's Fort St. James).\nNegotiations between the United Kingdom and the United States over the next few decades failed to settle upon a compromise boundary and the Oregon Dispute became important in geopolitical diplomacy between the British Empire and the new American Republic. In 1841, James Sinclair, Chief Factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, guided some 200 settlers from the Red River Colony west to bolster settlement around Fort Vancouver in an attempt to retain the Columbia District for Britain. The party crossed the Rockies into the Columbia Valley, a region of the Rocky Mountain Trench near present-day Radium Hot Springs, British Columbia, then traveled south. Despite such efforts, in 1846, Britain ceded all claim to Columbia District lands south of the 49th parallel to the United States; as resolution to the Oregon boundary dispute by the Oregon Treaty.\nThousands passed through the Rocky Mountains on the Oregon Trail beginning in the 1840s. The Mormons began settling near the Great Salt Lake in 1847 and proceeded to extend settlements along the Wasatch range and into eastern Idaho throughout the subsequent decades. From 1859 to 1864, gold was discovered in Colorado, Idaho, Montana, and British Columbia, sparking several gold rushes bringing thousands of prospectors and miners to explore every mountain and canyon and to create the Rocky Mountains' first major industry. The Idaho gold rush alone produced more gold than the California and Alaska gold rushes combined and was important in the financing of the Union Army during the American Civil War. The transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, and Yellowstone National Park was established as the world's first national park in 1872. Meanwhile, a transcontinental railroad in Canada was originally promised in 1871. Though political complications pushed its completion to 1885, the Canadian Pacific Railway eventually followed the Kicking Horse and Rogers Passes to the Pacific Ocean. Canadian railway officials also convinced Parliament to set aside vast areas of the Canadian Rockies as Jasper, Banff, Yoho, and Waterton Lakes National Parks, laying the foundation for a tourism industry which thrives to this day. Glacier National Park (MT) was established with a similar relationship to tourism promotions by the Great Northern Railway. While settlers filled the valleys and mining towns, conservation and preservation ethics began to take hold. U.S. President Benjamin Harrison established several forest reserves in the Rocky Mountains in 1891\u20131892. In 1905, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt extended the Medicine Bow Forest Reserve to include the area now managed as Rocky Mountain National Park. Economic development began to center on mining, forestry, agriculture, and recreation, as well as on the service industries that support them. Tents and camps became ranches and farms, forts and train stations became towns, and some towns became cities.\nEconomy.\nIndustry and development.\nEconomic resources of the Rocky Mountains are varied and abundant. Minerals found in the Rocky Mountains include significant deposits of copper, gold, lead, molybdenum, silver, tungsten, and zinc. The Wyoming Basin and several smaller areas contain significant reserves of coal, natural gas, oil shale, and petroleum. For example, the Climax mine, near Leadville, Colorado, was the largest producer of molybdenum in the world. Molybdenum is used in heat-resistant steel in such things as cars and planes. The Climax mine employed over 3,000 workers. The Coeur d'Alene mine of northern Idaho produces silver, lead, and zinc. Canada's largest coal mines are near Fernie, British Columbia and Sparwood, British Columbia; additional coal mines exist near Hinton, Alberta, and in the Northern Rockies surrounding Tumbler Ridge, British Columbia.\nAbandoned mines with their wakes of mine tailings and toxic wastes dot the Rocky Mountain landscape. In one major example, eighty years of zinc mining profoundly polluted the river and bank near Eagle River in north-central Colorado. High concentrations of the metal carried by spring runoff harmed algae, moss, and trout populations. An economic analysis of mining effects at this site revealed declining property values, degraded water quality, and the loss of recreational opportunities. The analysis also revealed that cleanup of the river could yield $2.3\u00a0million in additional revenue from recreation. In 1983, the former owner of the zinc mine was sued by the Colorado Attorney General for the $4.8\u00a0million cleanup costs; five years later, ecological recovery was considerable.\nThe Rocky Mountains contain several sedimentary basins that are rich in coalbed methane. Coalbed methane is natural gas that arises from coal, either through bacterial action or through exposure to high temperature. Coalbed methane supplies 7 percent of the natural gas used in the U.S. The largest coalbed methane sources in the Rocky Mountains are in the San Juan Basin in New Mexico and Colorado and the Powder River Basin in Wyoming. These two basins are estimated to contain 38\u00a0trillion cubic feet of gas. Coalbed methane can be recovered by dewatering the coal bed, and separating the gas from the water; or injecting water to fracture the coal to release the gas (so-called hydraulic fracturing).\nAgriculture and forestry are major industries. Agriculture includes dryland and irrigated farming and livestock grazing. Livestock are frequently moved between high-elevation summer pastures and low-elevation winter pastures, a practice known as transhumance.\nTourism.\nEvery year the scenic areas of the Rocky Mountains draw millions of tourists. The main language of the Rocky Mountains is English. But there are also linguistic pockets of Spanish and indigenous languages.\nPeople from all over the world visit the sites to hike, camp, or engage in mountain sports. In the summer season, examples of tourist attractions are:\nIn the United States:\nIn Canada, the mountain range contains these national parks:\nGlacier National Park in Montana and Waterton Lakes National Park in Alberta border each other and are collectively known as Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park.\nIn the winter, skiing and snowboarding are the main attractions, with dozens of Rocky Mountain ski areas and resorts.\nThe adjacent Columbia Mountains in British Columbia contain major resorts such as Panorama and Kicking Horse, as well as Mount Revelstoke National Park and Glacier National Park.\nThere are numerous provincial parks in the British Columbia Rockies, the largest and most notable being Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park, Mount Robson Provincial Park, Northern Rocky Mountains Provincial Park, Kwadacha Wilderness Provincial Park, Stone Mountain Provincial Park and Muncho Lake Provincial Park.\nJohn Denver wrote the song \"Rocky Mountain High\" in 1972. The song is one of the two official state songs of Colorado.\nHazards.\nEncountering bears or mountain lions (cougars) is a concern in the Rocky Mountains. There are other concerns as well, including bugs, wildfires, adverse snow conditions and nighttime cold temperatures.\nImportantly, there have been notable incidents in the Rocky Mountains, including accidental deaths, due to falls from steep cliffs (a misstep could be fatal in this class 4/5 terrain) and due to falling rocks, over the years, including 1993, 2007 (involving an experienced NOLS leader), 2015 and 2018. Other incidents include a seriously injured backpacker being airlifted near SquareTop Mountain in 2005, and a fatal hiker incident (from an apparent accidental fall) in 2006 that involved state search and rescue. The U.S. Forest Service does not offer updated aggregated records on the official number of fatalities in the Rocky Mountains.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25468", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25468", "title": "Dittohead", "text": ""}
{"id": "25470", "revid": "22831189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25470", "title": "Feminazi", "text": "Pejorative term for feminists\nFeminazi (also Femi-Nazi) is a pejorative term for feminists that was popularized by politically conservative American radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh.\nOrigins and usage.\n\"Feminazi\" is a portmanteau of the nouns \"feminist\" and \"Nazi\". According to \"The Oxford Dictionary of American Political Slang\", it refers (pejoratively) to \"a committed feminist or a strong-willed woman\". The earliest attested use, according to the \"Oxford English Dictionary,\" is a 1989 article in the \"Los Angeles Times\" about an anti-abortion protest that used the slogan \"Feminazis Go Home\". The term was later popularized by American conservative radio talk show host Rush Limbaugh in the early 1990s. Limbaugh credited the coining of the term to university professor Thomas Hazlett.\nLimbaugh, who was vocally critical of the feminist movement, stated that the term \"feminazi\" refers to \"radical feminists\" whose goal is \"to see that there are as many abortions as possible\", a small group of \"militants\" whom he characterized as having a \"quest for power\" and a \"belief that men aren't necessary\". Limbaugh distinguished these women from \"well-intentioned but misguided people who call themselves 'feminists'\". However, the term came to be widely used for feminism as a whole. According to \"The New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English\", Limbaugh used the term \"to marginalize any feminist as a hardline, uncompromising manhater\". \"The New York Times\" has described it as \"one of [Limbaugh's] favorite epithets for supporters of women's rights\".\nThe term \"feminazi\" is used to characterize feminist perspectives as extreme in order to discredit feminist arguments and to stigmatize women's views or behavior as \"radical\", \"extreme\", and \"tyrannical\". It has been used in mainstream American discourse to erroneously portray women as hyper-vigilant to perceived sexism. Literary critic Toril Moi writes that the term reflects commonplace ideas that feminists \"hate men\", are \"dogmatic, inflexible, and intolerant\", and constitute \"an extremist, power-hungry minority\". In his book \"Angry White Men\", the sociologist Michael Kimmel says the term is used to attack feminist campaigns for equal pay and safety from rape and domestic violence by associating them with Nazi genocide.\nThe term is used as an insult across mass media and social media. \"Feminazis\" are often described as dangerous, strident, man-hating, prudish, humorless, and overly sensitive. Linguist Geraldine Horan writes that there is a marked increase in the use of the term in mainstream media whenever a female public figure makes headlines. Usage in the United Kingdom peaked in 2015 along with reporting on barrister Charlotte Proudman, who had criticized a male colleague for commenting on her appearance online. In Australia, the term gained wider use following the 1995 publication of the book \"The First Stone\", and has been used in popular media to characterize feminists as threatening, \"vindictive\", and \"puritanical\".\nReactions.\nThe meaning and appropriateness of the term \"feminazi\" have frequently been discussed in the media. Horan attributes use of \"feminazi\" as an insult to \"a wider phenomenon of gendered criticism, bullying and trolling aimed [at] women in the public eye\". According to Helen Lewis, deputy editor of the \"New Statesman\", \"the idea of conflating a liberation movement with Nazism is just deeply ignorant. It\u2019s self-undermining, because it\u2019s so over the top.\" Laura Bates, the founder of the Everyday Sexism Project, has said that \"It\u2019s a desperate attempt to demonise us, and it\u2019s frustrating, because if it wasn\u2019t such an offensive word, you could actually start to embrace it and own it\".\nActivist Gloria Steinem writes, \"I've never met anyone who fits that description [of wanting as many abortions as possible], though [Limbaugh] lavishes it on me among many others\".\nSteinem has suggested a boycott of Limbaugh for his use of the term, stating, \"Hitler came to power against the strong feminist movement in Germany, padlocked the family planning clinics, and declared abortion a crime against the state\u2014all views that more closely resemble Rush Limbaugh's\".\nMoi writes that Limbaugh's words prompted a shift in the public perception of feminism across the American political spectrum starting in the mid-1990s; Americans came to see feminists as dogmatic and power-hungry women who hate men and who are incapable of challenging their own assumptions; though the term \"feminazi\" may have been created to describe a small group of particular feminists, it calcified into a stereotype of all feminists or all women. Moi writes that feminism became \"the F-word,\" a label that women hesitated to claim for themselves lest they be seen as \"feminazis\", even among those who agreed with the goals of feminism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25471", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25471", "title": "Excellence In Broadcasting", "text": ""}
{"id": "25473", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25473", "title": "Richard Nixon", "text": "President of the United States from 1969 to 1974\nRichard Milhous Nixon (January 9, 1913\u00a0\u2013 April 22, 1994) was the 37th president of the United States, serving from 1969 until his resignation in 1974. A member of the Republican Party, he represented California in both houses of the United States Congress before serving as the 36th vice president under President Dwight D. Eisenhower from 1953 to 1961. His presidency saw the reduction of U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, \"d\u00e9tente\" with the Soviet Union and China, the Apollo 11 Moon landing, and the establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency and Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Nixon's second term ended early when he became the only U.S. president to resign from office, as a result of the Watergate scandal.\nNixon was born into a poor family of Quakers in Yorba Linda, Southern California. He graduated from Whittier College with a Bachelor of Arts in 1934 and from Duke University School of Law with a Juris Doctor in 1937, practiced law in California, and then moved with his wife Pat to Washington, D.C., in 1942 to work for the federal government. After serving in the Naval Reserve during World War II, he was elected to the House of Representatives in 1946. His work on the Alger Hiss case established his reputation as a leading anti-communist. In 1950, he was elected to the Senate. Nixon was the running mate of Eisenhower, the Republican Party's presidential nominee in the 1952 and 1956 elections. Nixon served for eight years as vice president, and his two terms saw an increase in the notability of the office. He narrowly lost the 1960 presidential election to John F. Kennedy. After his loss in the 1962 race for governor of California, Nixon announced his retirement from politics. However, he ran again for the presidency in 1968 and defeated the Democratic candidate, Vice President Hubert Humphrey.\nSeeking to bring the North Vietnamese to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered military operations and carpet bombing campaigns in Cambodia. He covertly aided Pakistan during the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971 and ended American combat involvement in Vietnam in 1973, and the military draft the same year. His visit to China in 1972 led to diplomatic relations between the two nations, and he finalized the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty with the Soviet Union. During the course of his first term, he enacted many progressive environmental policy shifts, such as creating the Environmental Protection Agency and passing laws, including the Endangered Species and Clean Air Acts. In addition to implementing the Twenty-sixth Amendment that lowered the voting age from 21 to 18, he ended the direct international convertibility of the U.S. dollar to gold in 1971, effectively taking the United States off the gold standard. He also imposed wage and price controls for 90 days, launched the Wars on Cancer and Drugs, passed the Controlled Substances Act, and presided over the end of the Space Race by overseeing the Apollo 11 Moon landing. He was re-elected in 1972, when he defeated George McGovern in one of the largest landslide victories in American history.\nIn his second term, Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli materiel losses in the Yom Kippur War, a conflict which led to the oil crisis at home. From 1973, ongoing revelations from the Nixon administration's involvement in Watergate eroded his support in Congress and the country. The scandal began with a break-in at the Democratic National Committee office, ordered by administration officials, and escalated despite cover-up efforts by the Nixon administration, of which he was aware. On August 9, 1974, facing almost certain impeachment and removal from office, Nixon resigned. Afterward, he was issued a controversial pardon by his successor, Gerald Ford. During nearly 20 years of retirement, Nixon wrote nine books and undertook many foreign trips, rehabilitating his image into that of an elder statesman and leading expert on foreign affairs. On April 18, 1994, he suffered a debilitating stroke, and died four days later. Nixon is generally ranked as a below-average president, mainly due to his role in the Watergate scandal. Evaluations of his time in office have proven complex, with the successes of his presidency contrasted against the circumstances surrounding his departure from office.\nEarly life and education.\nRichard Milhous Nixon was born on January 9, 1913, in what was then the township precinct of Yorba Linda, California, in a house built by his father, on his family's lemon ranch. His parents were Francis A. Nixon and Hannah (Milhous) Nixon. His mother was a Quaker, and his father converted from Methodism to the Quaker faith. Through his mother, Nixon was a descendant of the early English settler Thomas Cornell.\nNixon's upbringing was influenced by Quaker observances of the time, such as abstinence from alcohol, dancing, and swearing. He had four brothers: Harold, Donald, Arthur, and Edward. Four of the five Nixon boys were named after British kings; Richard was named after Richard the Lionheart.\nNixon's early life was marked by hardship, and he later quoted Dwight Eisenhower in describing his boyhood: \"We were poor, but the glory of it was we didn't know it\". The Nixon family ranch failed in 1922, and the family moved to Whittier, California. In an area of East Whittier with many Quakers, Frank Nixon opened a grocery store and gas station at what is now the corner of Whittier Boulevard and Santa Gertrudes Avenue. During this period, the Nixon family attended East Whittier Friends Church. Richard's younger brother Arthur died in 1925 at the age of seven after a short illness. Richard was 12 years old when a spot was found on his lung; with a family history of tuberculosis, he was forbidden to play sports. The spot turned out to be scar tissue from pneumonia.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nNixon attended East Whittier Elementary School, where he was president of his eighth-grade class. His older brother Harold had attended Whittier High School, which his parents thought resulted in a dissolute lifestyle. They decided to send Nixon to the larger Fullerton Union High School. Though he had to ride a school bus an hour each way during his freshman year, he attained excellent grades. Later, he lived with an aunt in Fullerton during the week. He played junior varsity football and seldom missed practice, though he rarely was used in games. He had greater success as a debater, winning several championships and taking his only formal tutelage in public speaking from Fullerton's Head of English, H. Lynn Sheller. Nixon later mused on Sheller's words, \"Remember, speaking is conversation...don't shout at people. Talk to them. Converse with them.\" Nixon said he tried to use a conversational tone as much as possible.\nAt the start of his junior year in September 1928, Nixon's parents permitted him to transfer to Whittier High School. At Whittier, Nixon lost a bid for student body president\u2014his first electoral defeat. He often rose at 4\u00a0a.m. to drive the family truck to Los Angeles to purchase vegetables and then drove to the store to wash and display them before going to school. Harold was diagnosed with tuberculosis the previous year; when their mother took him to Arizona, hoping to improve his health, the demands on Nixon increased, causing him to give up football. Nevertheless, Nixon graduated from Whittier High third in his class of 207.\nCollege and law school.\nNixon was offered a tuition grant to attend Harvard University, but with Harold's continued illness requiring his mother's care until he died in 1933, Richard was needed at the store. He remained in his hometown and enrolled at Whittier College in September 1930. His expenses were met by his maternal grandfather. Nixon played for the basketball team; he also tried out for football, and though he lacked the size to play, he remained on the team as a substitute and was noted for his enthusiasm. Instead of fraternities and sororities, Whittier had literary societies. Nixon was snubbed by the only one for men, the Franklins, many of whom were from prominent families, unlike Nixon. He responded by helping to found a new society, the Orthogonian Society. In addition to the society, his studies, and work at the store, Nixon engaged in several extracurricular activities; he was a champion debater and hard worker. In 1933, he was engaged to Ola Florence Welch, daughter of the Whittier police chief, but they broke up in 1935.\nAfter graduating \"summa cum laude\" with a Bachelor of Arts in history from Whittier in 1934, Nixon was accepted at the new Duke University School of Law, which offered scholarships to top students, including Nixon. It paid high salaries to its professors, many of whom had national or international reputations. The number of scholarships was greatly reduced for second- and third-year students, creating intense competition. Nixon kept his scholarship, was elected president of the Duke Bar Association, inducted into the Order of the Coif, and graduated third in his class in June 1937.\nEarly career and marriage.\nAfter graduating from Duke, Nixon initially hoped to join the FBI. He received no response to his application and learned years later that he had been hired, but his appointment had been canceled at the last minute due to budget cuts. He was admitted to the California bar in 1937, and began practicing in Whittier with the law firm Wingert and Bewley in the National Bank of Whittier Building. His work concentrated on commercial litigation for local petroleum companies and other corporate matters, as well as on wills. Nixon was reluctant to work on divorce cases, disliking frank sexual talk from women. In 1938, he opened up his own branch of Wingert and Bewley in La Habra, California, and became a full partner in the firm the following year. In later years, Nixon proudly said he was the only modern president to have previously worked as a practicing attorney. During this period, Nixon was also the president of the Citra-Frost Company, which attempted to produce and sell frozen orange juice, but the company went bankrupt after 18 months.\nIn January 1938, Nixon was cast in the Whittier Community Players production of \"The Dark Tower\" in which he played opposite his future wife, a high school teacher named Thelma \"Pat\" Ryan. In his memoirs, Nixon described it as \"a case of love at first sight\", but apparently for Nixon only, since Pat Ryan turned him down several times before agreeing to date him. Once they began their courtship, Ryan was reluctant to marry Nixon; they dated for two years before she assented to his proposal. They wed in a small ceremony on June 21, 1940. After a honeymoon in Mexico, the Nixons began their married life in Whittier. They had two daughters: Tricia, born in 1946, and Julie, born in 1948.\nMilitary service.\nIn January 1942, the couple moved to the Northern Virginia suburbs, where Nixon took a job at the Office of Price Administration in Washington, D.C. In his political campaigns, Nixon suggested that this was his response to Pearl Harbor, but he had sought the position throughout the latter part of 1941. Both Nixon and his wife believed he was limiting his prospects by remaining in Whittier. He was assigned to the tire rationing division, where he was tasked with replying to correspondence. He did not enjoy the role, and four months later applied to join the United States Navy. Though he could have claimed an exemption from the draft as a birthright Quaker, or a deferral due to his government service, Nixon nevertheless sought a commission in the Navy. His application was approved, and he was appointed a lieutenant junior grade in the United States Naval Reserve on June 15, 1942.\nIn October 1942, he was given his first assignment as aide to the commander of the Naval Air Station Ottumwa in Wapello County, Iowa, until May 1943. Seeking more excitement, he requested sea duty; on July 2, 1943, he was assigned to Marine Aircraft Group 25 and the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command (SCAT), where he supported the logistics of operations in the South Pacific theater during World War II.\nOn October 1, 1943, Nixon was promoted to lieutenant. Nixon commanded the SCAT forward detachments at Vella Lavella, Bougainville, and finally at Nissan Island. His unit prepared manifests and flight plans for R4D/C-47 operations and supervised the loading and unloading of the transport aircraft. For this service, he received a Navy Letter of Commendation and a Navy Commendation Ribbon, which was later updated to the Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medal, from his commanding officer for \"meritorious and efficient performance of duty as Officer in Charge of the South Pacific Combat Air Transport Command\". Upon his return to the U.S., Nixon was appointed the administrative officer of the Alameda Naval Air Station in Alameda, California. In January 1945, he was transferred to the Bureau of Aeronautics office in Philadelphia, where he helped negotiate the termination of World War II contracts, and received his second letter of commendation, from the Secretary of the Navy for \"meritorious service, tireless effort, and devotion to duty\". Later, Nixon was transferred to other offices to work on contracts, and he moved to Philadelphia, New York, and finally to Baltimore. On October 3, 1945, he was promoted to lieutenant commander. On March 10, 1946, he was relieved of active duty. On June 1, 1953, he was promoted to commander in the U.S. Naval Reserve, and he retired from the U.S. Naval Reserve on June 6, 1966.\nWhile in the Navy, Nixon became a very good five-card stud poker player, helping finance his first congressional campaign with the winnings. In a 1983 interview, he described turning down an invitation to dine with Charles Lindbergh because he was hosting a game.\nU.S. House of Representatives (1947\u20131950).\nRepublicans in California's 12th congressional district were frustrated by their inability to defeat Democratic representative Jerry Voorhis, and they sought a consensus candidate who would run a strong campaign against him. In 1945, they formed a \"Committee of 100\" to decide on a candidate, hoping to avoid internal dissensions which had led to previous Voorhis victories. After the committee failed to attract higher-profile candidates, Herman Perry, manager of Whittier's Bank of America branch, suggested Nixon, a family friend with whom he had served on Whittier College's board of trustees before the war. Perry wrote to Nixon in Baltimore, and after a night of excited conversation with his wife, Nixon gave Perry an enthusiastic response, confirming that he was registered to vote in California at his parents' Whittier residence. Nixon flew to California and was selected by the committee. When he left the Navy at the start of 1946, Nixon and his wife returned to Whittier, where he began a year of intensive campaigning. He contended that Voorhis had been ineffective as a representative and suggested that Voorhis's endorsement by a group linked to Communists meant that Voorhis must have radical views. Nixon won the election, receiving 65,586 votes to Voorhis's 49,994.\nIn June 1947, Nixon supported the Taft\u2013Hartley Act, a federal law that monitors the activities and power of labor unions, and he served on the Education and Labor Committee. In August 1947, he became one of 19 House members to serve on the Herter Committee, which went to Europe to report on the need for U.S. foreign aid. Nixon was the youngest member of the committee and the only Westerner. Advocacy by Herter Committee members, including Nixon, led to congressional passage of the Marshall Plan.\nIn his memoirs, Nixon wrote that he joined the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) \"at the end of 1947\". However, he was already a HUAC member in early February 1947, when he heard \"Enemy Number One\" Gerhard Eisler and his sister Ruth Fischer testify. On February 18, 1947, Nixon referred to Eisler's belligerence toward HUAC in his maiden speech to the House. Also by early February 1947, fellow U.S. Representative Charles J. Kersten had introduced him to Father John Francis Cronin in Baltimore. Cronin shared with Nixon his 1945 privately circulated paper \"The Problem of American Communism in 1945\", with much information from the FBI's William C. Sullivan who by 1961 headed domestic intelligence under J. Edgar Hoover.\nBy May 1948, Nixon had co-sponsored the Mundt\u2013Nixon Bill to implement \"a new approach to the complicated problem of internal communist subversion... It provided for registration of all Communist Party members and required a statement of the source of all printed and broadcast material issued by organizations that were found to be Communist fronts.\" He served as floor manager for the Republican Party. On May 19, 1948, the bill passed the House by 319 to 58, but later it failed to pass the Senate. The Nixon Library cites this bill's passage as Nixon's first significant victory in Congress.\nNixon first gained national attention in August 1948, when his persistence as a House Un-American Activities Committee member helped break the Alger Hiss spy case. While many doubted Whittaker Chambers's allegations that Hiss, a former State Department official, had been a Soviet spy, Nixon believed them to be true and pressed for the committee to continue its investigation. After Hiss filed suit, alleging defamation, Chambers produced documents corroborating his allegations, including paper and microfilm copies that Chambers turned over to House investigators after hiding them overnight in a field; they became known as the \"Pumpkin Papers\". Hiss was convicted of perjury in 1950 for denying under oath he had passed documents to Chambers. In 1948, Nixon successfully cross-filed as a candidate in his district, winning both major party primaries, and was comfortably reelected.\nU.S. Senate (1950\u20131953).\nIn 1949, Nixon began to consider running for the United States Senate against the conservative Democratic incumbent, Sheridan Downey, and entered the race in November. Downey, faced with a bitter primary battle with Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas, announced his retirement in March 1950. Nixon and Douglas won the primary elections and engaged in a contentious campaign in which the ongoing Korean War was a major issue. Nixon tried to focus attention on Douglas's liberal voting record. As part of that effort, a \"Pink Sheet\" was distributed by the Nixon campaign suggesting that Douglas's voting record was similar to that of New York Congressman Vito Marcantonio, reputed to be a communist, and their political views must be nearly identical. Nixon won the election by almost twenty percentage points. During the campaign, Nixon was first called \"Tricky Dick\" by his opponents for his campaign tactics. After Nixon won, Downey resigned effective November 30, 1950; this enabled the governor to appoint Nixon on December 1, giving him a seniority advantage over other senators elected in 1950, whose terms started in January 1951.\nIn the Senate, Nixon took a prominent position in opposing global communism, traveling frequently and speaking out against it. He maintained friendly relations with Joseph McCarthy, a controversial U.S. Senate colleague from Wisconsin and fellow anti-communist, but was careful to keep some distance between himself and McCarthy's allegations. Nixon criticized President Harry S. Truman's handling of the Korean War. He supported statehood for Alaska and Hawaii, voted in favor of civil rights for minorities, and supported federal disaster relief for India and Yugoslavia. He voted against price controls and other monetary restrictions, benefits for illegal immigrants, and public power.\nVice presidency (1953\u20131961).\nNixon's speech at a state Republican Party fundraiser in New York City on May 8, 1952, impressed Governor Thomas E. Dewey, who was an Eisenhower supporter and had organized a pro-Eisenhower delegation from New York to attend the national convention. In a private meeting following the speech, Dewey suggested to Nixon that he would make a suitable vice presidential candidate to run alongside Eisenhower. Eisenhower later indicated to Paul H. Davis of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, an intermediary between candidates Eisenhower and Earl Warren, that if he won the nomination, Nixon would be his first choice for the vice presidency, because Eisenhower believed the party needed to promote leaders who were aggressive, capable, and young. Eisenhower later developed a list of seven potential candidates, with Nixon's name at the top.\nAfter Eisenhower was nominated, his key supporters met to discuss vice presidential possibilities. Eisenhower informed the group's chairman, Herbert Brownell Jr. that he did not wish to appear to dictate to the convention by formally sponsoring a single candidate, so the group reviewed several, including Robert A. Taft, Everett Dirksen, and Alfred E. Driscoll, all of whom they quickly rejected. Dewey then raised Nixon's name; the group quickly concurred. Brownell checked with Eisenhower, who indicated his approval. Brownell then called Nixon to inform him that he was Eisenhower's choice. Nixon accepted, then departed for Eisenhower's hotel room to discuss the details of the campaign and Eisenhower's plans for his vice president if the ticket was successful in the general election.\nThe delegates soon assembled to formalize the selection. Nixon asked Senator William Knowland to nominate him, and Knowland agreed. After Senator John W. Bricker, who had supported Taft for president, declined Nixon's request to second the nomination, Driscoll agreed to do so. There were no other candidates, and Nixon was nominated by acclamation.\nOn the campaign trail, Eisenhower spoke of his plans for the country, and left the negative campaigning to his running mate. In mid-September, the Republican ticket faced a major crisis when the media reported that Nixon had a political fund, maintained by his backers, which reimbursed him for political expenses. Such a fund was not illegal, but it exposed Nixon to allegations of a potential conflict of interest. With pressure building for Eisenhower to demand Nixon's resignation from the ticket, Nixon went on television to address the nation on September 23, 1952. The address, later named the Checkers speech, was heard by about 60\u00a0million Americans, which represented the largest audience ever for a television broadcast at that point. In the speech, Nixon emotionally defended himself, stating that the fund was not secret and that his donors had not received special favors. He painted himself as a patriot and man of modest means, mentioning that his wife had no mink coat; instead, he said, she wore a \"respectable Republican cloth coat\". The speech was remembered for the gift which Nixon had received, but which he would not give back, which he described as \"a little cocker spaniel dog...sent all the way from Texas. And our little girl\u2014Tricia, the 6-year-old\u2014named it Checkers.\" The speech prompted a huge public outpouring of support for Nixon. Eisenhower decided to retain him on the ticket, and the ticket was victorious in the November election.\nEisenhower granted Nixon more responsibilities during his term than any previous vice president. Nixon attended Cabinet and National Security Council meetings and chaired them in Eisenhower's absence. A 1953 tour of the Far East succeeded in increasing local goodwill toward the United States and gave Nixon an appreciation of the region as a potential industrial center. He visited Saigon and Hanoi in French Indochina. On his return to the United States at the end of 1953, Nixon increased the time he devoted to foreign relations.\nBiographer Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional years, said of his vice presidency:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Eisenhower radically altered the role of his running mate by presenting him with critical assignments in both foreign and domestic affairs once he assumed his office. The vice president welcomed the president's initiatives and worked energetically to accomplish White House objectives. Because of the collaboration between these two leaders, Nixon deserves the title, \"the first modern vice president\".\nDespite intense campaigning by Nixon, who reprised his strong attacks on the Democrats, the Republicans lost control of both houses of Congress in the 1954 elections. These losses caused Nixon to contemplate leaving politics once he had served out his term. On September 24, 1955, President Eisenhower suffered a heart attack, and his condition was initially believed to be life-threatening. Eisenhower was unable to perform his duties for six weeks. The Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution had not yet been proposed, and the vice president had no formal power to act. Nonetheless, Nixon acted in Eisenhower's stead during this period, presiding over Cabinet meetings and ensuring that aides and Cabinet officers did not seek power. According to Nixon biographer Stephen Ambrose, Nixon had \"earned the high praise he received for his conduct during the crisis\u00a0... he made no attempt to seize power\".\nHis spirits buoyed, Nixon sought a second term, but some of Eisenhower's aides aimed to displace him. In a December 1955 meeting, Eisenhower proposed that Nixon not run for reelection and instead become a Cabinet officer in a second Eisenhower administration, to give him administrative experience before a 1960 presidential run. Nixon believed this would destroy his political career. When Eisenhower announced his reelection bid in February 1956, he hedged on the choice of his running mate, saying it was improper to address that question until he had been renominated. Although no Republican was opposing Eisenhower, Nixon received a substantial number of write-in votes against the president in the 1956 New Hampshire primary election. In late April, the President announced that Nixon would again be his running mate. Eisenhower and Nixon were reelected by a comfortable margin in the November 1956 election.\nIn early 1957, Nixon undertook another foreign trip, this time to Africa. On his return, he helped shepherd the Civil Rights Act of 1957 through Congress. The bill was weakened in the Senate, and civil rights leaders were divided over whether Eisenhower should sign it. Nixon advised the President to sign the bill, which he did. Eisenhower suffered a mild stroke in November 1957, and Nixon gave a press conference, assuring the nation that the Cabinet was functioning well as a team during Eisenhower's brief illness.\nOn April 27, 1958, Richard and Pat Nixon reluctantly embarked on a goodwill tour of South America. In Montevideo, Uruguay, Nixon made an impromptu visit to a college campus, where he fielded questions from students on U.S. foreign policy. The trip was uneventful until the Nixon party reached Lima, Peru, where he was met with student demonstrations. Nixon went to the historical campus of National University of San Marcos, the oldest university in the Americas, got out of his car to confront the students, and stayed until forced back into the car by a volley of thrown objects. At his hotel, Nixon faced another mob, and one demonstrator spat on him. In Caracas, Venezuela, Nixon and his wife were spat on by anti-American demonstrators and their limousine was attacked by a pipe-wielding mob. According to Ambrose, Nixon's courageous conduct \"caused even some of his bitterest enemies to give him some grudging respect\". Reporting to the cabinet after the trip, Nixon claimed there was \"absolute proof that [the protestors] were directed and controlled by a central Communist conspiracy.\" Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and his brother, Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles, both concurred with Nixon.\nIn July 1959, Eisenhower sent Nixon to the Soviet Union for the opening of the American National Exhibition in Moscow. On July 24, Nixon was touring the exhibits with Nikita Khrushchev when the two stopped at a model of an American kitchen and engaged in an impromptu exchange about the merits of capitalism versus communism that became known as the \"Kitchen Debate\".\n1960 presidential campaign.\nIn 1960, Nixon launched his first campaign for President of the United States, officially announcing on January 9, 1960. He faced little opposition in the Republican primaries and chose former Massachusetts senator Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. as his running mate. His Democratic opponent was John F. Kennedy and the race remained close for the duration. Nixon campaigned on his experience, but Kennedy called for new blood and claimed the Eisenhower\u2013Nixon administration had allowed the Soviet Union to overtake the U.S. in quantity and quality of ballistic missiles. While Kennedy faced issues about his Catholicism, Nixon remained a divisive figure to some.\nTelevised presidential debates made their debut as a political medium during the campaign. In the first of four such debates, Nixon appeared pale, with a five o'clock shadow, in contrast to the photogenic Kennedy. Nixon's performance in the debate was perceived to be mediocre in the visual medium of television, though many people listening on the radio thought Nixon had won. Nixon narrowly lost the election, with Kennedy winning the popular vote by only 112,827 votes (0.2\u00a0percent).\nThere were charges of voter fraud in Texas and Illinois, both states won by Kennedy. Nixon refused to consider contesting the election, feeling a lengthy controversy would diminish the United States in the eyes of the world and that the uncertainty would hurt U.S. interests. At the end of his term of office as vice president in January 1961, Nixon and his family returned to California, where he practiced law and wrote a bestselling book, \"Six Crises\", which included coverage of the Hiss case, Eisenhower's heart attack, and the Fund Crisis, which had been resolved by the Checkers speech.\n1962 California gubernatorial campaign.\nLocal and national Republican leaders encouraged Nixon to challenge incumbent Pat Brown for governor of California in the 1962 gubernatorial election. Despite initial reluctance, Nixon entered the race. The campaign was clouded by public suspicion that Nixon viewed the office as a stepping stone for another presidential run, some opposition from the far-right of the party, and his own lack of interest in being California's governor. Nixon hoped a successful run would confirm his status as the nation's leading active Republican politician and ensure he remained a major player in national politics. Instead, he lost to Brown by more than five percentage points, and the defeat was widely believed to be the end of his political career.\nIn an impromptu concession speech, the morning after the election, Nixon blamed the media for favoring his opponent, saying, \"You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore because, gentlemen, this is my last press conference.\" The California defeat was highlighted in the November 11, 1962, episode of Howard K. Smith's ABC News show, \"Howard K. Smith: News and Comment\", titled \"The Political Obituary of Richard M. Nixon\". Alger Hiss appeared on the program, and many members of the public complained that it was unseemly to give a convicted felon air time to attack a former vice president. The furor drove Smith and his program from the air, and public sympathy for Nixon grew.\nWilderness years.\nIn 1963, the Nixon family traveled to Europe, where Nixon gave press conferences and met with leaders of the countries he visited. The family moved to New York City, where Nixon became a senior partner in the leading law firm Nixon, Mudge, Rose, Guthrie &amp; Alexander. On the morning of November 22, 1963, Nixon was in Dallas, staying at the Baker Hotel. He left the city via Love Field an hour before the arrival of Air Force One. When announcing his California campaign, Nixon had pledged not to run for president in 1964; even if he had not, he believed it would be difficult to defeat Kennedy, or after his assassination, Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson.\nIn 1964, Nixon won write-in votes in the primaries, and was considered a serious contender by both Gallup polls and members of the press. He was even placed on a primary ballot as an active candidate by Oregon's secretary of state. As late as two months before the 1964 Republican National Convention, however, Nixon fulfilled his promise to remain out of the presidential nomination process and instead endorsed Arizona senator Barry Goldwater, the eventual Republican nominee. When Goldwater won the nomination, Nixon was selected to introduce him at the convention. Nixon felt that Goldwater was unlikely to win, but campaigned for him loyally. In the 1964 general election, Goldwater lost in a landslide to Johnson and Republicans experienced heavy losses in Congress and among state governors.\nNixon was one of the few leading Republicans not blamed for the disastrous results, and he sought to build on that in the 1966 congressional elections in which he campaigned for many Republicans and sought to regain seats lost in the Johnson landslide. Nixon was credited with helping Republicans win major electoral gains that year.\nIn 1967, Nixon was approached by an associate at his firm in Leonard Garment about a case involving the press and perceived invasion of privacy. Garment suggested Nixon argue on behalf of the Hill family in \"Time, Inc. v. Hill\" at the Supreme Court of the United States. Nixon studied strenuously in the months before the oral argument before the Court. While the final decision was in favor of Time Inc., Nixon was encouraged by the praise he received for his argument. It was the first and only case he argued in front of the Supreme Court.\n1968 presidential campaign.\nAt the end of 1967, Nixon told his family he planned to run for president a second time. Pat Nixon did not always enjoy public life, being embarrassed, for example, by the need to reveal how little the family owned in the Checkers speech. She still managed to be supportive of her husband's ambitions. Nixon believed that with the Democrats torn over the issue of the Vietnam War, a Republican had a good chance of winning, although he expected the election to be as close as in 1960.\nAn exceptionally tumultuous primary election season began as the Tet Offensive was launched in January 1968. President Johnson withdrew as a candidate in March, after an unexpectedly poor showing in the New Hampshire primary. In June, Senator Robert F. Kennedy, a Democratic candidate, was assassinated just moments after his victory in the California primary. On the Republican side, Nixon's main opposition was Michigan governor George Romney, though New York governor Nelson Rockefeller and California governor Ronald Reagan each hoped to be nominated in a brokered convention. Nixon secured the nomination on the first ballot. He was able to secure the nomination to the support of many Southern delegates, after he and his subordinates made concessions to Strom Thurmond and Harry Dent. He selected Maryland governor Spiro Agnew as his running mate, a choice which Nixon believed would unite the party, appealing both to Northern moderates and to Southerners disaffected with the Democrats.\nNixon's Democratic opponent in the general election was Vice President Hubert Humphrey, who was nominated at a convention marked by violent protests. Throughout the campaign, Nixon portrayed himself as a figure of stability during this period of national unrest and upheaval. He appealed to what he later called the \"silent majority\" of socially conservative Americans who disliked the hippie counterculture and the anti-war demonstrators. Agnew became an increasingly vocal critic of these groups, solidifying Nixon's position with the right.\nNixon waged a prominent television advertising campaign, meeting with supporters in front of cameras. He stressed that the crime rate was too high, and attacked what he perceived as a surrender of the United States' nuclear superiority by the Democrats. Nixon promised \"peace with honor\" in the Vietnam War and proclaimed that \"new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific\". He did not give specifics of how he hoped to end the war, resulting in media intimations that he must have a \"secret plan\". His slogan of \"Nixon's the One\" proved to be effective.\nJohnson's negotiators hoped to reach a truce in Vietnam, or at least a cessation of bombings. On October 22, 1968, candidate Nixon received information that Johnson was preparing a so-called \"October surprise\", abandoning three non-negotiable conditions for a bombing halt, to help elect Humphrey in the last days of the campaign. Whether the Nixon campaign interfered with negotiations between the Johnson administration and the South Vietnamese by engaging Anna Chennault, a fundraiser for the Republican party, remains a controversy. It is not clear whether the government of South Vietnam needed encouragement to opt out of a peace process they considered disadvantageous.\nIn a three-way race between Nixon, Humphrey, and American Independent Party candidate George Wallace, Nixon defeated Humphrey by only 500,000 votes, a margin almost as close as in 1960, with both elections seeing a gap of less than one percentage point of the popular vote. However, Nixon earned 301 electoral votes to 191 for Humphrey and 46 for Wallace, a majority. He became the first non-incumbent vice president to be elected president. In his victory speech, Nixon pledged that his administration would try to bring the divided nation together. Nixon said: \"I have received a very gracious message from the Vice President, congratulating me for winning the election. I congratulated him for his gallant and courageous fight against great odds. I also told him that I know exactly how he felt. I know how it feels to lose a close one.\"\nPresidency (1969\u20131974).\nNixon was inaugurated as president on January 20, 1969, sworn in by his onetime political rival, Chief Justice Earl Warren. Pat Nixon held the family Bibles open at Isaiah 2:4, which reads, \"They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.\" In his inaugural address, which received almost uniformly positive reviews, Nixon remarked that \"the greatest honor history can bestow is the title of peacemaker\"\u2014a phrase that found a place on his gravestone. He spoke about turning partisan politics into a new age of unity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In these difficult years, America has suffered from a fever of words; from inflated rhetoric that promises more than it can deliver; from angry rhetoric that fans discontents into hatreds; from bombastic rhetoric that postures instead of persuading. We cannot learn from one another until we stop shouting at one another, until we speak quietly enough so that our words can be heard as well as our voices.\nForeign policy.\nChina.\nNixon laid the groundwork for his overture to China before he became president, writing in \"Foreign Affairs\" a year before his election: \"There is no place on this small planet for a billion of its potentially most able people to live in angry isolation.\" Among the reasons that Nixon sought to improve relations with China was in the hope of weakening the Soviet Union and decreasing China's support to the North in the Vietnam War. Nixon ultimately used the idea of gaining leverage against the Soviet Union through relations with China to obtain the support of key conservative figures including Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan.\nAssisting him in pursuing relations with China was Henry Kissinger, Nixon's national security advisor and future secretary of state. They collaborated closely, bypassing Cabinet officials. With relations between the Soviet Union and China at a nadir\u2014border clashes between the two took place during Nixon's first year in office\u2014Nixon sent private word to the Chinese that he desired closer relations. A breakthrough came in early 1971, when Chinese Communist Party (CCP) chairman Mao Zedong invited a team of American table tennis players to visit China and play against top Chinese players. Nixon followed up by sending Kissinger to China for clandestine meetings with Chinese officials. On July 15, 1971, with announcements from Washington and Beijing, it was learned that the President would visit China the following February. The secrecy had allowed both sets of leaders time to prepare the political climate in their countries for the visit.\nIn February 1972, Nixon and his wife traveled to China after Kissinger briefed Nixon for over 40 hours in preparation. Upon touching down, the President and First Lady emerged from Air Force One and were greeted by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai. Nixon made a point of shaking Zhou's hand, something which then-secretary of state John Foster Dulles had refused to do in 1954 when the two met in Geneva. More than a hundred television journalists accompanied the president. On Nixon's orders, television was strongly favored over printed publications, as Nixon felt that the medium would capture the visit much better than print. It also allowed him to snub the print journalists he despised.\nNixon and Kissinger immediately met for an hour with CCP Chairman Mao Zedong and Premier Zhou at Mao's official private residence, where they discussed a range of issues. Mao later told his doctor that he had been impressed by Nixon's forthrightness, unlike the leftists and the Soviets. He said he was suspicious of Kissinger, though the National Security Advisor referred to their meeting as his \"encounter with history\". A formal banquet welcoming the presidential party was given that evening in the Great Hall of the People. The following day, Nixon met with Zhou; the joint communique following this meeting recognized Taiwan as a part of China and looked forward to a peaceful solution to the problem of reunification. When not in meetings, Nixon toured architectural wonders, including the Forbidden City, the Ming tombs, and the Great Wall. Americans took their first glance into everyday Chinese life through the cameras that accompanied Pat Nixon, who toured the city of Beijing and visited communes, schools, factories, and hospitals.\nThe visit ushered in a new era of US\u2013China relations. Fearing the possibility of a US\u2013China alliance, the Soviet Union yielded to pressure for d\u00e9tente with the United States. This was one component of triangular diplomacy.\nVietnam War.\nWhen Nixon took office, about 300 American soldiers were dying each week in Vietnam, and the war was widely unpopular in the United States, the subject of ongoing violent protests. The Johnson administration had offered to suspend bombing unconditionally in exchange for negotiations, but to no avail. According to Walter Isaacson, Nixon concluded soon after taking office that the Vietnam War could not be won, and he was determined to end it quickly. He sought an arrangement that would permit American forces to withdraw while leaving South Vietnam secure against attack.\nNixon approved a secret B-52 carpet bombing campaign of North Vietnamese and Khmer Rouge positions in Cambodia beginning in March 1969 and code-named Operation Menu, without the consent of Cambodian leader Norodom Sihanouk. In mid-1969, Nixon began efforts to negotiate peace with the North Vietnamese, sending a personal letter to their leaders, and peace talks began in Paris. Initial talks did not result in an agreement, and in May 1969, he publicly proposed to withdraw all American troops from South Vietnam, provided North Vietnam did so, and suggested South Vietnam hold internationally supervised elections with Viet Cong participation.\nIn July 1969, Nixon visited South Vietnam, where he met with his U.S. military commanders and President Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n Thi\u1ec7u. Amid protests at home demanding an immediate pullout, he implemented a strategy of replacing American troops with Vietnamese troops, known as \"Vietnamization\". He soon instituted phased U.S. troop withdrawals, but also authorized incursions into Laos, in part to interrupt the Ho Chi Minh trail passing through Laos and Cambodia and used to supply North Vietnamese forces. In March 1970, at the explicit request of the Khmer Rouge and negotiated by Pol Pot's then-second-in-command, Nuon Chea, North Vietnamese troops launched an offensive and overran much of Cambodia. Nixon announced the ground invasion of Cambodia on April 30, 1970, against North Vietnamese bases in the east of the country, and further protests erupted against perceived expansion of the conflict, which resulted in Ohio National Guardsmen killing four unarmed students at Kent State University. Nixon's responses to protesters included an impromptu, early morning meeting with them at the Lincoln Memorial on May 9, 1970. Nixon's campaign promise to curb the war, contrasted with the escalated bombing, led to claims that Nixon had a \"credibility gap\" on the issue. It is estimated that between 50,000 and 150,000 people were killed during the bombing of Cambodia between 1970 and 1973.\nIn 1971, excerpts from the \"Pentagon Papers\", which had been leaked by Daniel Ellsberg, were published by \"The New York Times\" and \"The Washington Post\". When news of the leak first appeared, Nixon was inclined to do nothing; the Papers, a history of the United States' involvement in Vietnam, mostly concerned the lies of prior administrations and contained few real revelations. He was persuaded by Kissinger that the Papers were more harmful than they appeared, and the President tried to prevent publication, but the Supreme Court ruled in favor of the newspapers.\nAs U.S. troop withdrawals continued, conscription was phased out by 1973, and the armed forces became all-volunteer. After years of fighting, the Paris Peace Accords were signed at the beginning of 1973. The agreement implemented a ceasefire and allowed for the withdrawal of remaining American troops without requiring the withdrawal of the 160,000 North Vietnam Army regulars located in the South. Once American combat support ended, there was a brief truce, before fighting resumed, and North Vietnam conquered South Vietnam in 1975.\nLatin American policy.\nNixon had been a firm supporter of Kennedy during the 1961 Bay of Pigs Invasion and 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis. On taking office in 1969, he stepped up covert operations against Cuba and its president, Fidel Castro. He maintained close relations with the Cuban-American exile community through his friend, Bebe Rebozo, who often suggested ways of irritating Castro. The Soviets and Cubans became concerned, fearing Nixon might attack Cuba and break the understanding between Kennedy and Khrushchev that ended the missile crisis. In August 1970, the Soviets asked Nixon to reaffirm the understanding, which he did, despite his hard line against Castro. The process was not completed before the Soviets began expanding their base at the Cuban port of Cienfuegos in October 1970. A minor confrontation ensued, the Soviets stipulated they would not use Cienfuegos for submarines bearing ballistic missiles, and the final round of diplomatic notes was exchanged in November.\nThe election of Marxist candidate Salvador Allende as President of Chile in September 1970 spurred a vigorous campaign of covert opposition to him by Nixon and Kissinger. This began by trying to convince the Chilean congress to confirm Jorge Alessandri as the winner of the election, and then messages to military officers in support of a coup. Other support included strikes organized against Allende and funding for Allende opponents. It was even alleged that \"Nixon personally authorized\" $700,000 in covert funds to print anti-Allende messages in a prominent Chilean newspaper. Following an extended period of social, political, and economic unrest, General Augusto Pinochet assumed power in a violent coup d'\u00e9tat on September 11, 1973; among the dead was Allende.\nSoviet Union.\nNixon used the improving international environment to address the topic of nuclear peace. Following the announcement of his visit to China, the Nixon administration concluded negotiations for him to visit the Soviet Union. The President and First Lady arrived in Moscow on May 22, 1972, and met with Leonid Brezhnev, the general secretary of the Communist Party; Alexei Kosygin, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; and Nikolai Podgorny, the Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, among other leading Soviet officials.\nNixon engaged in intense negotiations with Brezhnev. Out of the summit came agreements for increased trade and two landmark arms control treaties: SALT I, the first comprehensive limitation pact signed by the two superpowers, and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which banned the development of systems designed to intercept incoming missiles. Nixon and Brezhnev proclaimed a new era of \"peaceful coexistence\". A banquet was held that evening at the Kremlin.\nNixon and Kissinger planned to link arms control to d\u00e9tente and to the resolution of other urgent problems through what Nixon called \"linkage\". David Tal argues:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The linkage between strategic arms limitations and outstanding issues such as the Middle East, Berlin, and, foremost, Vietnam thus became central to Nixon's and Kissinger's policy of d\u00e9tente. Through the employment of linkage, they hoped to change the nature and course of U.S. foreign policy, including U.S. nuclear disarmament and arms control policy, and to separate them from those practiced by Nixon's predecessors. They also intended, through linkage, to make U.S. arms control policy part of d\u00e9tente... His policy of linkage had, in fact, failed. It failed mainly because it was based on flawed assumptions and false premises, the foremost of which was that the Soviet Union wanted the Strategic Arms Limitation Agreement much more than the United States did.\nSeeking to foster better relations with the United States, China and the Soviet Union both cut back on their diplomatic support for North Vietnam and advised Hanoi to come to terms militarily. Nixon later described his strategy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I had long believed that an indispensable element of any successful peace initiative in Vietnam was to enlist, if possible, the help of the Soviets and the Chinese. Though rapprochement with China and d\u00e9tente with the Soviet Union were ends in themselves, I also considered them possible means to hasten the end of the war. At worst, Hanoi was bound to feel less confident if Washington was dealing with Moscow and Beijing. At best, if the two major Communist powers decided that they had bigger fish to fry, Hanoi would be pressured into negotiating a settlement we could accept.\nIn 1973, Nixon encouraged the Export-Import Bank to finance in part a trade deal with the Soviet Union in which Armand Hammer's Occidental Petroleum would export phosphate from Florida to the Soviet Union, and import Soviet ammonia. The deal, valued at $20 billion over 20 years, involved the construction of two major Soviet port facilities at Odessa and Ventspils, and a pipeline connecting four ammonia plants in the greater Volga region to the port at Odessa. In 1973, Nixon announced his administration was committed to seeking most favored nation trade status with the USSR, which was challenged by Congress in the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.\nDuring the previous two years, Nixon had made considerable progress in U.S.\u2013Soviet relations, and he embarked on a second trip to the Soviet Union in 1974. He arrived in Moscow on June 27 to a welcome ceremony, cheering crowds, and a state dinner at the Grand Kremlin Palace that evening. Nixon and Brezhnev met in Yalta, where they discussed a proposed mutual defense pact, d\u00e9tente, and MIRVs. Nixon considered proposing a comprehensive test-ban treaty, but he felt he would not have time to complete it during his presidency. There were no significant breakthroughs in these negotiations.\nMiddle Eastern policy.\nAs part of the Nixon Doctrine, the U.S. avoided giving direct combat assistance to its allies and instead assisted them to defend themselves. During the Nixon administration, the U.S. greatly increased arms sales to the Middle East, particularly Israel, Iran, and Saudi Arabia. The Nixon administration strongly supported Israel, an American ally in the Middle East, but the support was not unconditional. Nixon believed Israel should make peace with its Arab neighbors and that the U.S. should encourage it. The president believed that\u2014except during the Suez Crisis\u2014the U.S. had failed to intervene with Israel, and should use the leverage of the large U.S. military aid to Israel to urge the parties to the negotiating table. The Arab-Israeli conflict was not a major focus of Nixon's attention during his first term\u2014for one thing, he felt that no matter what he did, American Jews would oppose his reelection.\nOn October 6, 1973, an Arab coalition led by Egypt and Syria, supported with arms and materiel by the Soviet Union, attacked Israel in the Yom Kippur War. Israel suffered heavy losses, and Nixon ordered an airlift to resupply Israeli losses, cutting through inter-departmental squabbles and bureaucracy and taking personal responsibility for any response by Arab nations. More than a week later, by the time the U.S. and Soviet Union began negotiating a truce, Israel had penetrated deep into enemy territory. The truce negotiations rapidly escalated into a superpower crisis; when Israel gained the upper hand, Egyptian president Sadat requested a joint U.S.\u2013USSR peacekeeping mission, which the U.S. refused. When Soviet Premier Brezhnev threatened to unilaterally enforce any peacekeeping mission militarily, Nixon ordered the U.S. military to DEFCON3, placing all U.S. military personnel and bases on alert for nuclear war. This was the closest the world had come to nuclear war since the Cuban Missile Crisis. Brezhnev backed down as a result of Nixon's actions.\nBecause Israel's victory was largely due to U.S. support, the Arab OPEC nations retaliated by refusing to sell crude oil to the U.S., resulting in the 1973 oil crisis. The embargo caused gasoline shortages and rationing in the United States in late 1973, but was eventually ended by the oil-producing nations as peace in the Middle East took hold.\nAfter the war, and under Nixon's presidency, the U.S. reestablished relations with Egypt for the first time since 1967. Nixon used the Middle East crisis to restart the stalled Middle East Peace Negotiations; he wrote in a confidential memo to Kissinger on October 20:\nI believe that, beyond a doubt, we are now facing the best opportunity we have had in 15 years to build a lasting peace in the Middle East. I am convinced history will hold us responsible if we let this opportunity slip by\u00a0... I now consider a permanent Middle East settlement to be the most important final goal to which we must devote ourselves.\nNixon made one of his final international visits as president to the Middle East in June 1974, and became the first president to visit Israel.\nSouth Asia policy.\nSince the 1960s, the United States has perceived Pakistan as an integral bulwark against global communism in the Cold War. Nixon was fond of Pakistani president Yahya Khan and, according to American journalist Gary Bass, \"Nixon liked very few people, but he did like General Agha Muhammad Yahya Khan.\"\nDuring the Bangladesh Liberation War, the United States stood by Pakistan against Bengali nationalists in terms of diplomacy and military threats. Nixon urged President Khan multiple times to exercise restraint, fearing an Indian invasion of Pakistan that would lead to Indian domination of the subcontinent and strengthen the position of the Soviet Union. In the wake of the Third India\u2013Pakistan War, Nixon issued a statement blaming Pakistan for starting the conflict and blaming India for escalating it while personally favoring a ceasefire. The United States used the threat of an aid cut-off to force Pakistan to back down, while its continued military aid to Islamabad prevented India from launching incursions deeper into the country. Nixon denied getting involved in the situation, saying that it was an internal matter of Pakistan, but when Pakistan's defeat seemed certain, he sent the aircraft carrier USS \"Enterprise\" to the Bay of Bengal.\nDomestic policy.\nEconomy.\nAt the time Nixon took office in 1969, inflation was at 4.7\u00a0percent\u2014its highest rate since the Korean War. The Great Society had been enacted under Johnson, which, together with the Vietnam War costs, was causing large budget deficits. Unemployment was low, but interest rates were at their highest in a century. Nixon's major economic goal was to reduce inflation; the most obvious means of doing so was to end the war. This was not done in Nixon's first term, and the U.S. economy continued to struggle through 1970, contributing to a lackluster Republican performance in the midterm congressional elections (Democrats controlled both Houses of Congress throughout Nixon's presidency). According to political economist Nigel Bowles in his 2011 study of Nixon's economic record, the new president did little to alter Johnson's policies through the first year of his presidency.\nNixon was far more interested in foreign affairs than domestic policies, but he believed that voters tend to focus on their own financial condition and that economic conditions were a threat to his reelection. As part of his \"New Federalism\" philosophy, he proposed greater local autonomy in the allocation of domestic spending through grants to the states. These proposals were, for the most part, lost in the congressional budget process. However, Nixon gained political credit for advocating them. In 1970, Congress had granted the president the power to impose wage and price freezes, though the Democratic majorities, knowing Nixon had opposed such controls throughout his career, did not expect Nixon to actually use the authority. With inflation unresolved by August 1971, and an election year looming, Nixon convened a summit of his economic advisers at Camp David. Nixon's options were to limit fiscal and monetary expansionist policies that reduced unemployment or end the dollar's fixed exchange rate; Nixon's dilemma has been cited as an example of the Impossible trinity in international economics. He then announced temporary wage and price controls, allowed the dollar to float against other currencies, and ended the convertibility of the dollar into gold. Bowles points out,\nby identifying himself with a policy whose purpose was inflation's defeat, Nixon made it difficult for Democratic opponents\u00a0... to criticize him. His opponents could offer no alternative policy that was either plausible or believable, since the one they favored was one they had designed but which the president had appropriated for himself.\nNixon's policies dampened inflation through 1972, although their aftereffects contributed to inflation during his second term and into the Ford administration. Nixon's decision to end the gold standard in the United States led to the collapse of the Bretton Woods system. According to Thomas Oatley, \"the Bretton Woods system collapsed so that Nixon might win the 1972 presidential election.\"\nAfter Nixon won re-election, inflation was returning. He reimposed price controls in June 1973. The price controls became unpopular with the public and businesspeople, who saw powerful labor unions as preferable to the price board bureaucracy. The controls produced food shortages, as meat disappeared from grocery stores and farmers drowned chickens rather than sell them at a loss. Despite the failure to control inflation, controls were slowly ended, and on April 30, 1974, their statutory authorization lapsed.\nGovernmental initiatives and organization.\nNixon advocated a \"New Federalism\", which would devolve power to state and local elected officials, though Congress was hostile to these ideas and enacted few of them. He eliminated the Cabinet-level United States Post Office Department, which in 1971 became the government-run United States Postal Service.\nNixon was a late supporter of the conservation movement. Environmental policy had not been a significant issue in the 1968 election, and the candidates were rarely asked for their views on the subject. Nixon broke new ground by discussing environmental policy in his State of the Union speech in 1970. He saw that the first Earth Day in April 1970 presaged a wave of voter interest on the subject, and sought to use that to his benefit; in June he announced the formation of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). He relied on his domestic advisor John Ehrlichman, who favored protection of natural resources, to keep him \"out of trouble on environmental issues.\" Other initiatives supported by Nixon included the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and the National Environmental Policy Act required environmental impact statements for many Federal projects. Nixon vetoed the Clean Water Act of 1972\u2014objecting not to the policy goals of the legislation but to the amount of money to be spent on them, which he deemed excessive. After Congress overrode his veto, Nixon impounded the funds he deemed unjustifiable.\nIn 1971, Nixon proposed health insurance reform\u2014a private health insurance employer mandate, federalization of Medicaid for poor families with dependent minor children, and support for health maintenance organizations (HMOs). A limited HMO bill was enacted in 1973. In 1974, Nixon proposed more comprehensive health insurance reform\u2014a private health insurance employer mandate and replacement of Medicaid by state-run health insurance plans available to all, with income-based premiums and cost sharing.\nNixon was concerned about the prevalence of domestic drug use in addition to drug use among American soldiers in Vietnam. He called for a war on drugs and pledged to cut off sources of supply abroad. He also increased funds for education and for rehabilitation facilities.\nAs one policy initiative, Nixon called for more money for sickle-cell research, treatment, and education in February 1971 and signed the National Sickle Cell Anemia Control Act on May 16, 1972. While Nixon called for increased spending on such high-profile items as sickle-cell disease and for a war on cancer, at the same time he sought to reduce overall spending at the National Institutes of Health.\nCivil rights.\nThe Nixon presidency witnessed the first large-scale integration of public schools in the South. Nixon sought a middle way between the segregationist Wallace and liberal Democrats, whose support of integration was alienating some Southern whites. Hopeful of doing well in the South in 1972, he sought to dispose of desegregation as a political issue before then. Soon after his inauguration, he appointed Vice President Agnew to lead a task force, which worked with local leaders\u2014both white and black\u2014to determine how to integrate local schools. Agnew had little interest in the work, and most of it was done by Labor Secretary George Shultz. Federal aid was available, and a meeting with President Nixon was a possible reward for compliant committees. By September 1970, less than ten percent of black children were attending segregated schools. By 1971, however, tensions over desegregation surfaced in Northern cities, with angry protests over the busing of children to schools outside their neighborhood to achieve racial balance. Nixon opposed busing personally but enforced court orders requiring its use.\nSome scholars, such as James Morton Turner and John Isenberg, believe that Nixon, who had advocated for civil rights in his 1960 campaign, slowed down desegregation as president, appealing to the racial conservatism of Southern whites, who were angered by the civil rights movement. This, he hoped, would boost his election chances in 1972.\nIn addition to desegregating public schools, Nixon implemented the Philadelphia Plan in 1970\u2014the first significant federal affirmative action program. He also endorsed the Equal Rights Amendment after it passed both houses of Congress in 1972 and went to the states for ratification. He also pushed for African American civil rights and economic equity through a concept known as black capitalism. Nixon had campaigned as an ERA supporter in 1968, though feminists criticized him for doing little to help the ERA or their cause after his election. Nevertheless, he appointed more women to administration positions than Lyndon Johnson had.\nSpace policy.\nAfter a nearly decade-long national effort, the United States won the race to land astronauts on the Moon on July 20, 1969, with the flight of Apollo 11. Nixon spoke with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin during their moonwalk. He called the conversation \"the most historic phone call ever made from the White House\".\nNixon was unwilling to keep funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at the high level seen during the 1960s as NASA prepared to send men to the Moon. NASA Administrator Thomas O. Paine drew up ambitious plans for the establishment of a permanent base on the Moon by the end of the 1970s and the launch of a crewed expedition to Mars as early as 1981. Nixon rejected both proposals due to the expense. Nixon also canceled the Air Force Manned Orbital Laboratory program in 1969, because uncrewed spy satellites were a more cost-effective way to achieve the same reconnaissance objective. NASA cancelled the last three planned Apollo lunar missions to place Skylab in orbit more efficiently and free money up for the design and construction of the Space Shuttle.\nOn May 24, 1972, Nixon approved a five-year cooperative program between NASA and the Soviet space program, culminating in the 1975 joint mission of an American Apollo and Soviet Soyuz spacecraft linking in space.\nReelection, Watergate scandal, and resignation.\n1972 presidential campaign.\nNixon believed his rise to power had peaked at a moment of political realignment. The Democratic \"Solid South\" had long been a source of frustration to Republican ambitions. Goldwater had won several Southern states by opposing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 but had alienated more moderate Southerners. Nixon's efforts to gain Southern support in 1968 were diluted by Wallace's candidacy. Through his first term, he pursued a Southern Strategy with policies, such as his desegregation plans, that would be broadly acceptable among Southern whites, encouraging them to realign with the Republicans in the aftermath of the civil rights movement. He nominated two Southern conservatives, Clement Haynsworth and G. Harrold Carswell, to the Supreme Court, but neither was confirmed by the Senate.\nNixon entered his name on the New Hampshire primary ballot on January 5, 1972, effectively announcing his candidacy for reelection. Virtually assured the Republican nomination, the President had initially expected his Democratic opponent to be Massachusetts senator Ted Kennedy (brother of the late president), who was largely removed from contention after the July 1969 Chappaquiddick incident. Instead, Maine senator Edmund Muskie became the front runner, with South Dakota senator George McGovern in a close second place.\nOn June 10, McGovern won the California primary and secured the Democratic nomination. The following month, Nixon was renominated at the 1972 Republican National Convention. He dismissed the Democratic platform as cowardly and divisive. McGovern intended to sharply reduce defense spending and supported amnesty for draft evaders as well as abortion rights. With some of his supporters believed to be in favor of drug legalization, McGovern was perceived as standing for \"amnesty, abortion and acid\". McGovern was also damaged by his vacillating support for his original running mate, Missouri senator Thomas Eagleton, dumped from the ticket following revelations that he had received electroshock treatment for depression. Nixon was ahead in most polls for the entire election cycle, and was reelected on November 7, 1972, in one of the largest landslide election victories in American history. He defeated McGovern with over 60\u00a0percent of the popular vote, losing only in Massachusetts and D.C.\nWatergate.\nThe term \"Watergate\" has come to encompass an array of clandestine and often illegal activities undertaken by members of the Nixon administration. Those activities included \"dirty tricks\", such as bugging the offices of political opponents, and the harassment of activist groups and political figures. The activities were brought to light after five men were caught breaking into the Democratic Party headquarters at the Watergate complex in Washington, D.C., on June 17, 1972. \"The Washington Post\" picked up on the story; reporters Carl Bernstein and Bob Woodward relied on an informant known as \"Deep Throat\"\u2014later revealed to be Mark Felt, associate director at the FBI\u2014to link the men to the Nixon administration. Nixon downplayed the scandal as mere politics, calling news articles biased and misleading. A series of revelations made it clear that the Committee to Re-elect President Nixon, and later the White House, were involved in attempts to sabotage the Democrats. Senior aides such as White House Counsel John Dean faced prosecution; in total 48 officials were convicted of wrongdoing.\nIn July 1973, White House aide Alexander Butterfield testified under oath to Congress that Nixon had a secret taping system and recorded his conversations and phone calls in the Oval Office. These tapes were subpoenaed by Watergate Special Counsel Archibald Cox; Nixon provided transcripts of the conversations but not the actual tapes, citing executive privilege. With the White House and Cox at loggerheads, Nixon had Cox fired in October in the \"Saturday Night Massacre\"; he was replaced by Leon Jaworski. In November, Nixon's lawyers revealed that a tape of conversations held in the White House on June 20, 1972, had an &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;18+1\u20442minute gap. Rose Mary Woods, the President's personal secretary, claimed responsibility for the gap, saying that she had accidentally wiped the section while transcribing the tape, but her story was widely mocked. The gap, while not conclusive proof of wrongdoing by the President, cast doubt on Nixon's statement that he had been unaware of the cover-up.\nThough Nixon lost much popular support, even from his own party, he rejected accusations of wrongdoing and vowed to stay in office. He admitted he had made mistakes but insisted he had no prior knowledge of the burglary, did not break any laws, and did not learn of the cover-up until early 1973. On October 10, 1973, Vice President Agnew resigned for reasons unrelated to Watergate: he was convicted on charges of bribery, tax evasion, and money laundering during his tenure as governor of Maryland. Believing his first choice, John Connally, would not be confirmed by Congress, Nixon chose Gerald Ford, Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, to replace Agnew. One researcher suggests Nixon effectively disengaged from his own administration after Ford was sworn in as vice president on December 6, 1973.\nOn November 17, 1973, during a televised question-and-answer session with 400 Associated Press managing editors, Nixon said, \"People have got to know whether or not their president is a crook. Well, I'm not a crook. I've earned everything I've got.\"\nThe legal battle over the tapes continued through early 1974, and in April Nixon announced the release of 1,200 pages of transcripts of White House conversations between himself and his aides. The House Judiciary Committee opened impeachment hearings against the President on May 9, 1974, which were televised on the major TV networks. These hearings culminated in votes for impeachment. On July 24, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the full tapes, not just selected transcripts, must be released.\nThe scandal grew to involve a slew of additional allegations against the President, ranging from the improper use of government agencies to accepting gifts in office and his personal finances and taxes; Nixon repeatedly stated his willingness to pay any outstanding taxes due, and later paid $465,000 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) in back taxes in 1974.\nEven with support diminished by the continuing series of revelations, Nixon hoped to fight the charges. But one of the new tapes, recorded soon after the break-in, demonstrated that Nixon had been told of the White House connection to the Watergate burglaries soon after they took place, and had approved plans to thwart the investigation. In a statement accompanying the release of what became known as the \"Smoking Gun Tape\" on August 5, 1974, Nixon accepted blame for misleading the country about when he had been told of White House involvement, stating that he had had a lapse of memory. Senate Minority Leader Hugh Scott, Senator Barry Goldwater, and House Minority Leader John Jacob Rhodes met with Nixon soon after. Rhodes told Nixon he faced certain impeachment in the House. Scott and Goldwater told the president that he had, at most, only 15 votes in his favor in the Senate, far fewer than the 34 needed to avoid removal from office.\nResignation.\nOn August 8, 1974, facing a loss of political support and it being increasingly certain that he would be impeached and removed from office, Nixon addressed the nation on television, announcing that he would resign the presidency the following day, on August 9. His resignation speech was delivered from the Oval Office and was carried live on radio and television. Nixon said he was resigning for the good of the country and asked the nation to support the new president, Gerald Ford. Nixon went on to review the accomplishments of his presidency, especially in foreign policy. In defending his presidency, Nixon quoted \"Citizenship in a Republic\", a 1910 speech by Theodore Roosevelt:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sometimes I have succeeded and sometimes I have failed, but always I have taken heart from what Theodore Roosevelt once said about the man in the arena, \"whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood, who strives valiantly, who errs and comes up short again and again because there is not effort without error and shortcoming, but who does actually strive to do the deed, who knows the great enthusiasms, the great devotions, who spends himself in a worthy cause, who at the best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievements and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly\".\nNixon's speech received generally favorable initial responses from network commentators, with only Roger Mudd of CBS News criticizing it for failing to admit wrongdoing. Conrad Black, a Nixon biographer, labeled the resignation speech \"a masterpiece\", saying, \"What was intended to be an unprecedented humiliation for any American president, Nixon converted into a virtual parliamentary acknowledgement of almost blameless insufficiency of legislative support to continue. He left while devoting half his address to a recitation of his accomplishments in office.\"\nPost-presidency (1974\u20131994).\nPardon and illness.\nFollowing his resignation, the Nixons flew to their home La Casa Pacifica in San Clemente, California. According to his biographer, Jonathan Aitken, \"Nixon was a soul in torment\" after his resignation. Congress had funded Nixon's transition costs, including some salary expenses, though reducing the appropriation from $850,000 to $200,000. With some of his staff still with him, Nixon was at his desk by 7:00\u00a0a.m. with little to do. His former press secretary, Ron Ziegler, sat with him alone for hours each day.\nNixon's resignation had not put an end to the desire among many to see him punished. The Ford White House considered a pardon of Nixon, even though it would be unpopular in the country. Nixon, contacted by Ford emissaries, was initially reluctant to accept the pardon, but then agreed to do so. Ford insisted on a statement of contrition, but Nixon felt he had not committed any crimes and should not have to issue such a document. Ford eventually agreed and, on September 8, 1974, he granted Nixon a \"full, free, and absolute pardon\", which ended any possibility of an indictment. Nixon then released a statement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was wrong in not acting more decisively and more forthrightly in dealing with Watergate, particularly when it reached the stage of judicial proceedings and grew from a political scandal into a national tragedy. No words can describe the depth of my regret and pain at the anguish my mistakes over Watergate have caused the nation and the presidency, a nation I so deeply love, and an institution I so greatly respect.\nIn October 1974, Nixon fell ill with phlebitis. Told by his doctors that he could either be operated on or die, a reluctant Nixon chose surgery, and President Ford visited him in the hospital. Nixon was under subpoena for the trial of three of his former aides\u2014Dean, Haldeman, and John Ehrlichman\u2014and \"The Washington Post\", disbelieving his illness, printed a cartoon showing Nixon with a cast on the \"wrong foot\". Judge John Sirica excused Nixon's presence despite the defendants' objections. Congress instructed Ford to retain Nixon's presidential papers\u2014beginning a three-decade legal battle over the documents that was eventually won by the former president and his estate. Nixon was in the hospital when the 1974 midterm elections were held, and Watergate and the pardon were contributing factors to the Republican loss of 49\u00a0seats in the House and four in the Senate.\nReturn to public life.\nIn December 1974, Nixon began planning his comeback despite the considerable ill will against him in the country. He wrote in his diary, referring to himself and Pat,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So be it. We will see it through. We've had tough times before, and we can take the tougher ones that we will have to go through now. That is perhaps what we were made for\u2014to be able to take punishment beyond what anyone in this office has had before, particularly after leaving office. This is a test of character, and we must not fail the test.\nBy early 1975, Nixon's health was improving. He maintained an office in a Coast Guard station from his home, at first taking a golf cart and later walking the route each day; he mainly worked on his memoirs. He had hoped to wait before writing his memoirs; the fact that his assets were being eaten away by expenses and lawyer fees compelled him to begin work quickly. He was handicapped in this work by the end of his transition allowance in February, which compelled him to part with many of his staff, including Ziegler. In August of that year, he met with British talk-show host and producer David Frost, who paid him $600,000 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) for a series of sit-down interviews, filmed and aired in 1977. They began on the topic of foreign policy, recounting the leaders he had known, but the most remembered section of the interviews was that on Watergate. Nixon admitted he had \"let down the country\" and that \"I brought myself down. I gave them a sword, and they stuck it in. And they twisted it with relish. And, I guess, if I'd been in their position, I'd have done the same thing.\" The interviews garnered 45\u201350 million viewers, becoming the most-watched program of its kind in television history.\nThe interviews helped improve Nixon's financial position\u2014at one point in early 1975, he had had only $500 in the bank\u2014as did the sale of his Key Biscayne property to a trust set up by wealthy friends of Nixon, such as Bebe Rebozo. In February 1976, Nixon visited China at the personal invitation of Mao. Nixon had wanted to return to China but chose to wait until after Ford's own visit in 1975. Nixon remained neutral in the close 1976 primary battle between Ford and Reagan. Ford won, but was defeated by Georgia governor Jimmy Carter in the general election. The Carter administration had little use for Nixon and blocked his planned trip to Australia, causing the government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser to withhold its official invitation.\nIn 1976, Nixon was disbarred by a New York State court for obstruction of justice in the Watergate affair. He chose not to present any defense. In early 1978, he visited the United Kingdom; there, he was shunned by American diplomats, most ministers of the James Callaghan government, and two former prime ministers, Harold Macmillan and Edward Heath. He was welcomed, however, by the Leader of the Opposition, Margaret Thatcher, and former prime ministers Lord Home and Sir Harold Wilson. Nixon addressed the Oxford Union regarding Watergate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Some people] felt that, on this matter that I had not handled it properly, and they were right. I screwed it up, and I paid the price.\nAuthor and elder statesman.\nIn 1978, Nixon published his memoirs, \"RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon\", the first of nine books he was to author in his retirement. John A. Farrell deemed it one of the better presidential memoirs, candid and capturing its author's voice; he deemed its rise up the bestseller lists justified. Nixon visited the White House in 1979, invited by Carter for the state dinner for Chinese Vice Premier Deng Xiaoping. Carter had not wanted to invite Nixon, but Deng had said he would visit Nixon in California if the former president was not invited. Nixon had a private meeting with Deng and visited Beijing again in mid-1979.\nOn August 10, 1979, the Nixons purchased a 12\u2010room condominium occupying the seventh floor of 817 Fifth Avenue New York City after being rejected by two Manhattan co-ops. When the deposed Shah of Iran died in Egypt in July 1980, Nixon defied the State Department, which intended to send no U.S. representative, by attending the funeral. Though Nixon had no official credentials, as a former president, he was seen as the American presence at its former ally's funeral. Nixon supported Ronald Reagan for president in 1980, making television appearances portraying himself as, in biographer Stephen Ambrose's words, \"the senior statesman above the fray\". He wrote guest articles for many publications both during the campaign and after Reagan's victory. After 18 months in the New York City townhouse, Nixon and his wife moved in 1981 to Saddle River, New Jersey.\nThroughout the 1980s, Nixon maintained an ambitious schedule of speaking engagements and writing, traveled, and met with many foreign leaders, especially those of Third World countries. He joined former presidents Ford and Carter as representatives of the United States at the funeral of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat. On a trip to the Middle East, Nixon made his views known regarding Saudi Arabia and Libya, which attracted significant U.S. media attention; \"The Washington Post\" ran stories on Nixon's \"rehabilitation\". Nixon visited the Soviet Union in 1986 and on his return sent President Reagan a lengthy memorandum containing foreign policy suggestions and his personal impressions of Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. Following this trip, Nixon was ranked in a Gallup poll as one of the ten most admired men in the world.\nIn 1986, Nixon addressed a convention of newspaper publishers, impressing his audience with his \"tour d'horizon\" of the world. At the time, political pundit Elizabeth Drew wrote, \"Even when he was wrong, Nixon still showed that he knew a great deal and had a capacious memory, as well as the capacity to speak with apparent authority, enough to impress people who had little regard for him in earlier times.\" \"Newsweek\" ran a story on \"Nixon's comeback\" with the headline \"He's back\".\nOn July 19, 1990, the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, California opened as a private institution with the Nixons in attendance. They were joined by a large crowd of people, including Presidents Ford, Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, as well as their wives, Betty, Nancy, and Barbara. In January 1994, the former president founded the Nixon Center (today the Center for the National Interest), a Washington policy think tank and conference center.\nPat Nixon died on June 22, 1993, of emphysema and lung cancer. Her funeral services were held on the grounds of the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. Former president Nixon was distraught throughout the interment and delivered a tribute to her inside the library building.\nDeath and funeral.\nNixon suffered a severe stroke on April 18, 1994, while preparing to eat dinner in his home at Park Ridge, New Jersey. A blood clot resulting from the atrial fibrillation he had suffered for many years had formed in his upper heart, broken off, and traveled to his brain. He was taken to NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan, initially alert but unable to speak or to move his right arm or leg. Damage to the brain caused swelling (cerebral edema) and Nixon slipped into a deep coma. He died at 9:08\u00a0p.m. on April 22, 1994, with his daughters at his bedside. He was 81 years old.\nNixon's funeral took place on April 27, 1994, in Yorba Linda, California. Eulogists at the Nixon Library ceremony included President Bill Clinton, former secretary of state Henry Kissinger, Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, California governor Pete Wilson, and the Reverend Billy Graham. Also in attendance were former presidents Ford, Carter, Reagan, George H. W. Bush, and their wives.\nRichard Nixon was buried beside his wife Pat on the grounds of the Nixon Library. In keeping with his wishes, his funeral was not a full state funeral, though his body did lie in repose in the Nixon Library lobby from April 26 to the morning of the funeral service. Mourners waited in line for up to eight hours in chilly, wet weather to pay their respects. At its peak, the line to pass by Nixon's casket was three miles long with an estimated 42,000 people waiting.\nJohn F. Stacks of \"Time\" magazine said of Nixon shortly after his death,\nAn outsized energy and determination drove him on to recover and rebuild after every self-created disaster that he faced. To reclaim a respected place in American public life after his resignation, he kept traveling and thinking and talking to the world's leaders\u00a0... and by the time Bill Clinton came to the White House [in 1993], Nixon had virtually cemented his role as an elder statesman. Clinton, whose wife served on the staff of the committee that voted to impeach Nixon, met openly with him and regularly sought his advice.\nTom Wicker of \"The New York Times\" noted that Nixon had been equalled only by Franklin Roosevelt in being five times nominated on a major party ticket and, quoting Nixon's 1962 farewell speech, wrote,\nRichard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation really would not \"have Nixon to kick around anymore\".\nAmbrose said of the reaction to Nixon's death, \"To everyone's amazement, except his, he's our beloved elder statesman.\"\nUpon Nixon's death, the news coverage mentioned Watergate and the resignation, but much of the coverage was favorable to the former president. \"The Dallas Morning News\" stated, \"History ultimately should show that despite his flaws, he was one of our most farsighted chief executives.\" This offended some; columnist Russell Baker complained of \"a group conspiracy to grant him absolution\". Cartoonist Jeff Koterba of the \"Omaha World-Herald\" depicted History before a blank canvas, his subject Nixon, as America looks on eagerly. The artist urges his audience to sit down; the work will take some time to complete, as \"this portrait is a little more complicated than most\". Hunter S. Thompson wrote a scathing piece denouncing Nixon for \"Rolling Stone\", entitled \"He Was a Crook\" (which also appeared a month later in \"The Atlantic\"). In his article, Thompson described Nixon as \"a political monster straight out of Grendel and a very dangerous enemy\".\nLegacy.\nHistorian and political scientist James MacGregor Burns asked of Nixon, \"How can one evaluate such an idiosyncratic president, so brilliant and so morally lacking?\" Evaluations of his presidency have proven complex, contrasting his presidency's domestic and foreign policy successes with the acrimonious circumstances of his departure. According to Ambrose, \"Nixon wanted to be judged by what he accomplished. What he will be remembered for is the nightmare he put the country through in his second term and for his resignation.\" Irwin Gellman, who chronicled Nixon's congressional career, suggests, \"He was remarkable among his congressional peers, a success story in a troubled era, one who steered a sensible anti-Communist course against the excess of McCarthy.\" Aitken feels that \"Nixon, both as a man and as a statesman, has been excessively maligned for his faults and inadequately recognised for his virtues. Yet even in a spirit of historical revisionism, no simple verdict is possible.\"\nNixon saw his policies on Vietnam, China, and the Soviet Union as central to his place in history. Nixon's onetime opponent George McGovern commented in 1983, \"President Nixon probably had a more practical approach to the two superpowers, China and the Soviet Union, than any other president since World WarII ... With the exception of his inexcusable continuation of the war in Vietnam, Nixon really will get high marks in history.\" Political scientist Jussi Hanhim\u00e4ki disagrees, saying that Nixon's diplomacy was merely a continuation of the Cold War policy of containment by diplomatic, rather than military, means. Historian Christopher Andrew concludes that \"Nixon was a great statesman on the world stage as well as a shabby practitioner of electoral politics in the domestic arena. While the criminal farce of Watergate was in the making, Nixon's inspirational statesmanship was establishing new working relationships both with Communist China and with the Soviet Union.\"\nNixon's stance on domestic affairs has been credited with the passage and enforcement of environmental and regulatory legislation. In a 2011 paper on Nixon and the environment, historian Paul Charles Milazzo points to Nixon's creation of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and to his enforcement of legislation such as the 1973 Endangered Species Act, stating that \"though unsought and unacknowledged, Richard Nixon's environmental legacy is secure\". Nixon himself did not consider the environmental advances he made in office an important part of his legacy; some historians contend that his choices were driven more by political expediency than any strong environmentalism. Some historians say Nixon's Southern Strategy turned the Southern United States into a Republican stronghold, while others deem economic factors more important in the change. Throughout his career, Nixon moved his party away from the control of isolationists, and as a Congressman, he was a persuasive advocate of containing Soviet communism.\nHistorian Keith W. Olson has written that Nixon left a legacy of fundamental mistrust of government, rooted in Vietnam and Watergate. During the impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, both sides tried to use Nixon and Watergate to their advantage: Republicans suggested that Clinton's misconduct was comparable to Nixon's, while Democrats contended that Nixon's actions had been far more serious than Clinton's. For a time, there was a decrease in the power of the presidency as Congress passed restrictive legislation in the wake of Watergate. Olson suggests that legislation in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks restored the president's power.\nAccording to his biographer Herbert Parmet, \"Nixon's role was to steer the Republican party along a middle course, somewhere between the competitive impulses of the Rockefellers, the Goldwaters, and the Reagans.\"\nA self-described \"progressive conservative,\" Nixon presided over a number of activist governmental initiatives during the course of his presidency. As one speechwriter said of Nixon, \"His heart was on the right, and his head was, with FDR, 'slightly left of center.'\"\nCommenting on Nixon's progressive conservative approach to government, one historian has argued that \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nixon's progressive conservatism gave his administration's policies a distinctive cast that defied easy categorization. Nixon worked hard to find a middle ground between the hyperactivism of the growth liberals JFK and LBJ and the sort of minimalist government championed by Barry Goldwater and the Republican right. Driven by his own predilections and by the object lesson of growth liberalism's implosion, Nixon moved as president to scale back government undertakings abroad and at home while still honoring basic international and domestic commitments.\nPersonality and public image.\nNixon's career was frequently dogged by his persona and the public's perception of it. Editorial cartoonists and comedians often exaggerated his appearance and mannerisms to the point where the line between the human and the caricature became increasingly blurred. He was often portrayed with unshaven jowls, slumped shoulders, and a furrowed, sweaty brow.\nNixon had a complex personality, both very secretive and awkward, yet strikingly reflective about himself. He was inclined to distance himself from people and was formal in all aspects, wearing a coat and tie even when home alone. Nixon biographer Conrad Black described him as being \"driven\" though also \"uneasy with himself in some ways\". According to Black, Nixon\nthought that he was doomed to be traduced, double-crossed, unjustly harassed, misunderstood, underappreciated, and subjected to the trials of Job, but that by the application of his mighty will, tenacity, and diligence, he would ultimately prevail.\nNixon sometimes drank alcohol to excess, especially in 1970. He was also prescribed sleeping pills. According to Ray Price, Nixon sometimes took them in together. Nixon also took dilantin, recommended by Jack Dreyfus. That medicine is usually prescribed to treat and prevent seizures, but in Nixon's case, it was for depression. His periodic overindulgences, especially during stressful times such as during Apollo 13, concerned Price and others, including then-advisor Ehrlichman and long-time valet Manolo Sanchez. Author David Owen deemed Nixon an alcoholic.\nBiographer Elizabeth Drew summarized Nixon as a \"smart, talented man, but most peculiar and haunted of presidents\". In his account of the Nixon presidency, author Richard Reeves described Nixon as \"a strange man of uncomfortable shyness, who functioned best alone with his thoughts\". Nixon's presidency was doomed by his personality, Reeves argues:\nHe assumed the worst in people, and he brought out the worst in them\u00a0... He clung to the idea of being \"tough\". He thought that was what had brought him to the edge of greatness. But that was what betrayed him. He could not open himself to other men, and he could not open himself to greatness.\nIn October 1999, a volume of 1971 White House audio tapes was released, which contained multiple statements by Nixon deemed derogatory toward Jews. In one conversation with H. R. Haldeman, Nixon said that Washington was \"full of Jews\" and that \"most Jews are disloyal\", making exceptions for some of his top aides. He then added, \"But, Bob, generally speaking, you can't trust the bastards. They turn on you. Am I wrong or right?\" Elsewhere on the 1971 recordings, Nixon denies being antisemitic, saying, \"If anybody who's been in this chair ever had reason to be antisemitic, I did\u00a0... And I'm not, you know what I mean?\"\nNixon believed that putting distance between himself and other people was necessary for him as he advanced in his political career and became president. Even Bebe Rebozo, by some accounts his closest friend, did not call him by his first name. Nixon said of this,\nEven with close friends, I don't believe in letting your hair down, confiding this and that and the other thing\u2014saying, \"Gee, I couldn't sleep\u00a0...\" I believe you should keep your troubles to yourself. That's just the way I am. Some people are different. Some people think it's good therapy to sit with a close friend and, you know, just spill your guts\u00a0... [and] reveal their inner psyche\u2014whether they were breast-fed or bottle-fed. Not me. No way.\nWhen Nixon was told that most Americans felt they did not know him even at the end of his career, he replied, \"Yeah, it's true. And it's not necessary for them to know.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrint sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNixon Library.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\nOther.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\"\nstyle=\"width:100%\""}
{"id": "25475", "revid": "935793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25475", "title": "Role-playing game", "text": "Game in which players assume the roles of characters in a fictional setting\nA role-playing game (sometimes spelled roleplaying game, or abbreviated as RPG) is a game in which players assume and play out the roles of characters in a fictional setting. Players take responsibility for acting out these roles within a narrative, either through literal acting or through a process of structured decision-making regarding character development. Actions taken within many games succeed or fail according to a formal system of rules and guidelines.\nThere are several forms of role-playing games. The original form, sometimes called the tabletop role-playing game (TRPG or TTRPG), is conducted through discussion, whereas in live action role-playing (LARP), players physically perform their characters' actions. Both forms can have features of a storytelling game. In both TTRPGs and LARPs, often an arranger called a game master (GM) decides on the game system and setting to be used, while acting as a facilitator or referee. Each of the other players then takes on the role of a single character in the experience.\nSeveral varieties of RPG also exist in electronic media, such as multiplayer text-based Multi-User Dungeons (MUDs) and their graphics-based successors, massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs).\nRole-playing games also include single-player role-playing video games in which the player controls one or more characters who are on a quest. Role-playing video games may include player capabilities that advance over time using statistical attributes. These electronic games sometimes share settings and rules with tabletop RPGs, but emphasize character advancement more than collaborative storytelling.\nSome RPG-related game forms, such as trading/collectible card games (CCGs) and wargames, may or may not be included under the definition of role-playing games. Although some amount of role-playing activity may be present in such games, it is not the primary focus.\nThe term \"role-playing game\" is also sometimes used to describe other games involving roleplay simulation, such as exercises used in teaching, training, academic research, or therapeutic settings.\nPurpose.\nBoth authors and major publishers of tabletop role-playing games consider them to be a form of interactive and collaborative storytelling. Events, roles, and narrative structure give a sense of a narrative experience, and the game need not have a strongly defined storyline. Interactivity is the crucial difference between role-playing games and traditional fiction/ entertainment. Whereas a viewer of a television show is a passive observer, a player in a role-playing game makes choices that affect the story. Such role-playing games extend an older tradition of storytelling games where a small party of friends collaborate to create a story.\nWhile simple forms of role-playing exist in traditional children's games of make believe, role-playing games add a level of sophistication and persistence to this basic idea with additions such as game facilitators and rules of interaction. Participants in a role-playing game will generate specific characters and an ongoing plot. A consistent system of rules and a campaign setting in games aids suspension of disbelief. The level of realism in games ranges from just enough internal consistency to set up a believable story or credible challenge up to full-blown simulations of real-world processes.\nTabletop role-playing games may also be used in therapy settings to help individuals develop behavioral, social, and even language skills. Beneficiaries commonly include young people with neurodevelopmental conditions, such as Autism spectrum disorders, attention-deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD), and dyslexia.\nVarieties.\nRole-playing games are played in a wide variety of formats, ranging from discussing character interaction in tabletop form, physically acting out roles in LARP to playing characters virtually in digital media. There is also a great variety of systems of rules and game settings. Games that emphasize plot creation and player interaction over game mechanics and combat sometimes prefer the name storytelling game. These types of games tend to reduce or eliminate the use of dice and other randomizing elements. Some games are played with characters created before the game by the GM, rather than those created by the players. This type of game is typically played at gaming conventions, or in standalone games that do not form part of a campaign.\nTabletop.\nTabletop (TTRPG) and \"pen-and-paper\" (PnP) RPGs are conducted through discussion in a small social gathering. In traditional TTRPGs, a GM describes the game world and its inhabitants. The other players describe the intended actions of their characters, and the GM describes the outcomes. Some outcomes are determined by the game system, and some are chosen by the GM. This is the format in which role-playing games were first popularized. In contrast, many indie role-playing games experiment with different structures of play, such as sharing the responsibility for creating setting details and NPCs among all players.\nThe first commercially available RPG, \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"D&amp;D\"), was inspired by fantasy literature and the wargaming hobby and was published in 1974. The popularity of \"D&amp;D\" led to the birth of the tabletop role-playing game industry, which publishes games with many different themes, rules, and styles of play.\nThe popularity of tabletop games decreased in the late 1990s due to competition from online MMO RPGs, role-playing video games, and collectible card games. However, TTRPGs experienced a resurgence in popularity between the mid-2010s and early 2020s due to actual play web series and online play through videoconferencing during the COVID-19 lockdowns.\nThe tabletop format is often referred to simply as a \"role-playing game\". To distinguish this form of RPG from other formats, the retronyms \"tabletop role-playing game\" or \"pen and paper role-playing game\" are sometimes used, though neither a table nor pen and paper are strictly necessary.\nLive action.\nA LARP is played more like improvisational theatre. Participants act out their characters' actions instead of describing them, and the real environment is used to represent the imaginary setting of the game world. Players are often costumed as their characters and use appropriate props, and the venue may be decorated to resemble the fictional setting. Some live-action role-playing games use rock paper scissors or comparison of attributes to resolve conflicts symbolically, while other LARPs use physical combat with simulated arms such as airsoft guns or foam weapons.\nLARPs vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand, and in duration from a couple of hours to several days. Because the number of players in a LARP is usually larger than in a tabletop role-playing game, and the players may be interacting in separate physical spaces, there is typically less of an emphasis on tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and game sessions are often managed in a more distributed manner.\nElectronic media.\nTabletop role-playing games have been translated into a variety of electronic formats. As early as 1974, the same year as the release of Dungeons &amp; Dragons, unlicensed versions of it were developed on mainframe university systems under titles such as \"dnd\" and \"Dungeon\". These early computer RPGs influenced all of electronic gaming, as well as spawning the role-playing video game genre. Some authors divide digital role-playing games into two intertwined groups: single-player games using RPG-style mechanics, and multiplayer games incorporating social interaction.\nSingle-player.\nSingle-player role-playing video games form a loosely defined genre of computer and console games with origins in role-playing games such as \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", on which they base much of their terminology, settings, and game mechanics. This translation changes the experience of the game, providing a visual representation of the world but emphasizing statistical character development over collaborative, interactive storytelling.\nMultiplayer.\nOnline text-based role-playing games involve many players using some type of text-based interface and an Internet connection to play an RPG. Games played in a real-time way include MUDs, MUSHes, and other varieties of MU*. Games played in a turn-based fashion include play-by-mail games and play-by-post games.\nMassively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) combine the large-scale social interaction and persistent world of MUDs with graphic interfaces. Most MMORPGs do not actively promote in-character role-playing, however, players can use the games' communication functions to role-play so long as other players cooperate. The majority of players in MMORPGs do not engage in role-playing in this sense.\nComputer-assisted gaming can be used to add elements of computer gaming to in-person tabletop role-playing, where computers are used for record-keeping and sometimes to resolve combat, while the participants generally make decisions concerning character interaction.\nPeople.\nGamemaster.\nOne common feature of many RPGs is the role of a gamemaster (GM), a participant who has special duties to present the fictional setting, arbitrate the results of character actions, and maintain the narrative flow. In tabletop and live-action RPGs the GM performs these duties in person. In video RPGs, many of the functions of a GM are fulfilled by the game engine. However, some multi-player video RPGs also allow for a participant to take on a GM role through a visual interface called a \"GM toolkit\", albeit with abilities limited by the available technology.\nPlayer character.\nAnother standard concept in RPGs is the player character, a character in the fictional world of the game whose actions the player controls. Typically each player controls a separate player character, sometimes more, each of whom acts as a protagonist in the story.\nNon-player character.\nIn contrast to player characters, non-player characters (NPCs) are controlled by the gamemaster or game engine, or by people assisting the gamemaster. Non-player characters fill out the population of the fictional setting and can act as antagonists, bystanders, or allies of the player characters.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "25476", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25476", "title": "Raised-bed gardening", "text": "Form of gardening\nRaised-bed gardening is a form of gardening in which the soil is raised above ground level and usually enclosed in some way. Raised bed structures can be made of wood, rock, concrete or other materials, and can be of any size or shape. The soil is usually enriched with compost.\nVegetables are grown in geometric patterns, much closer together than in conventional row gardening. The spacing is such that when the vegetables are fully grown, their leaves just barely touch each other, creating a microclimate in which weed growth is suppressed and moisture is conserved.\nOverview.\nRaised beds lend themselves to the development of complex agriculture systems that utilize many of the principles and methods of permaculture. They can be used effectively to control erosion and recycle and conserve water and nutrients by building them along contour lines on slopes. This also makes more space available for intensive crop production. They can be created over large areas with the use of several commonly available tractor-drawn implements and efficiently maintained, planted and harvested using hand tools.\nThis form of gardening is compatible with square foot gardening and companion planting.\nCircular raised beds with a path to the center (a slice of the circle cut out) are called keyhole gardens. Often the center has a chimney of sorts built with sticks and then lined with feedbags or grasses that allows water placed at the center to flow out into the soil and reach the plants' roots.\nA self watering raised bed known as a wicking bed is particularly beneficial in dry climates and are often made by converting Intermediate bulk container (IBC's).\nMaterials and construction.\nLumber is the most common construction material for making raised beds. If using lumber treated with chromated copper arsenate or CCA (though uncommon since 2004 in the US and Europe), it is recommended to use a plastic liner between the wood and soil if the raised bed is intended for growing edibles.\nAnother material commonly used are railroad ties, also known as sleepers, joined with steel rods to hold them together. Another approach is to use concrete blocks, although less aesthetically pleasing, they are inexpensive to obtain and easy to use.\nOn the market are also prefab raised garden bed solutions which are made from long lasting polyethylene that is UV stabilized and food grade so it will not leach undesirable chemicals into the soil or deteriorate in the elements. A double skinned wall provides an air pocket of insulation that minimizes the temperature fluctuations and drying out of the soil in the garden bed. Sometimes raised bed gardens are covered with clear plastic to protect the crops from wind and strong rains. Pre-manufactured raised bed gardening boxes also exist. There are variants of wood, metal, stone and plastic.\nBenefits.\nRaised beds produce a variety of benefits: they extend the planting season, they can reduce weeds if designed and planted properly, and they reduce the need to use poor native soil. Since the gardener does not walk on the raised beds, the soil is not compacted and the roots have an easier time growing. Waist-high raised beds enable the elderly and physically disabled to grow vegetables without having to bend over to tend them.\nSunken gardens.\nA \"waffle garden\" is the inverse of raised beds and is a gardening method by the Zuni people. In an arid climate, clay walls are built up around the planting area and plants are watered by filling the bed \"cells\".\nThe term \"sunken garden\" usually refers to a formal traditional English garden where the garden is lower than the surrounding land, and may have multiple terraces around it and steps leading down to the garden.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25477", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25477", "title": "Ring", "text": "(The) Ring(s) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25479", "revid": "41641680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25479", "title": "Miniature", "text": "A miniature is a small-scale reproduction, or a small version. It may refer to:\nEntertainment.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25480", "revid": "34057362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25480", "title": "Richard Petty", "text": "American racing driver (born 1937)\nRichard Lee Petty (born July 2, 1937), nicknamed \"the King\", is an American former stock car racing driver who competed from 1958 to 1992 in the former NASCAR Grand National and Winston Cup Series (now called the NASCAR Cup Series), most notably driving the No. 43 Plymouth/Pontiac for Petty Enterprises. He is one of the members of the Petty racing family. He was the first driver to win the Cup Series championship seven times (a record now tied with Dale Earnhardt and Jimmie Johnson), while also winning a record 200 races during his career. This included winning the Daytona 500 a record seven times and winning a record 27 races in one season (1967). Petty is widely regarded as one of the greatest drivers in NASCAR history.\nPetty was inducted into the inaugural class of the NASCAR Hall of Fame in 2010. He is also statistically the most accomplished driver in the history of NASCAR, having racked up most wins (two-hundred), most poles (123), tied for most championships (seven), most wins in a season (27), most Daytona 500 wins (seven), most consecutive wins (ten) and most starts (1,185).\nHe earns broad respect in motorsport where beyond driving, he remains very active as both a team ambassador (Legacy Motor Club) in the Cup Series and owner of Petty's Garage (a car restoration and modification shop) in Level Cross, North Carolina. During his 35-year career, Petty collected a record number of poles (123) and over seven-hundred top-ten finishes in a record 1,184 starts, including 513 consecutive starts from 1971 to 1989. Petty was the first driver to win in his 500th race start, being joined by Matt Kenseth in 2013.\nThe Richard Petty Museum was formerly in nearby Randleman, North Carolina, but moved back to its original location in Level Cross in March 2014. Petty has also voiced a role in Disney/Pixar's animated films \"Cars\" and \"Cars 3\", playing Strip \"The King\" Weathers, a character partially based on himself.\nPersonal life.\nPetty is a second-generation driver. His father, Lee Petty, won the first Daytona 500 in 1959 and was also a three-time NASCAR champion. He was born July 2, 1937. In 1958, Petty married Lynda Owens, who would die of cancer on March 25, 2014, at her home in Level Cross, North Carolina at the age of 72. Lynda's brother Randy Owens was a member of Petty's pit crew and killed at age 19 during a pit road accident when a water tank exploded during the 1975 Winston 500. Richard and Lynda had four children, including Kyle Petty. The family resides in Petty's home town of Level Cross, North Carolina.\nPetty's son Kyle is also a former NASCAR driver. His grandson, Adam (Kyle's son), was killed in a practice crash at New Hampshire Motor Speedway on May 12, 2000, five weeks after the death of Lee Petty. Adam's brother Austin is Emeritus Chairman and Founder of Victory Junction, a SeriousFun Children's Network camp established by the Pettys after Adam's death.\nRacing career.\nPetty was born in Level Cross, North Carolina, the son of Elizabeth Petty (n\u00e9e Toomes) and Lee Arnold Petty, also a NASCAR driver, and the older brother of NASCAR personality Maurice Petty. He was educated in Randleman, North Carolina and attended Randleman High School, where he was an All-Conference guard on the football team. After his 1955 graduation, he took a business course at Greensboro Junior College, then began work for his father's racing company, Petty Enterprises. He began his NASCAR career on July 18, 1958, sixteen days after his 21st birthday. His first race was held at CNE Stadium in Toronto, Ontario, Canada (the site of BMO Field and the Honda Indy Toronto currently). In 1959, he was named NASCAR Rookie of the Year, after he produced nine top-tenfinishes, including six top-five finishes. That year, he had participated in the inaugural Daytona 500 at the new Daytona International Speedway, but after his day ended due to engine trouble, he joined his father Lee's pit crew, who won the race. In Lakewood, Georgia in 1959, Petty won his first race, but his father Lee protested, complaining of a scoring error on the officials' part. Hours later, Lee was awarded the win.\nFirst championship rides (1960-1970).\nIn 1960, he finished second in the NASCAR Grand National Points Race, and got his first career win at the Charlotte Fairgrounds Speedway. 1963 was his breakout year, winning at tracks like Martinsville and Bridgehampton. In 1964, driving a potent Plymouth with a new Hemi engine, Petty led 184 of the 200 laps to capture his first Daytona 500, en route to nine victories, earning over $114,000 and his first Grand National championship.\nJoining in the Chrysler boycott of NASCAR due to the organizing body's ban of the Hemi engine, Petty spent much of 1965 competing as a drag racer. Petty Enterprises installed the Hemi in the new compact Barracuda and lettered \"OUTLAWED\" on the door. He crashed this car at Southeastern Dragway, in Dallas, Georgia, on February 28, 1965, killing an eight-year-old boy and injuring seven others. Petty, his father Lee, and Chrysler Corporation faced lawsuits totaling more than $1 million, though Petty and his team came to settlements with the lawsuits within one month of the suits being filed. Afterwards, a second Hemi Barracuda was built, this time with an altered wheelbase and eventually with Hilborn fuel injection. This car was lettered with a large \"43 JR\" on the door. The car was very successful, winning its class at the Bristol Spring Nationals and competing in many match races against well-known racers such as Ronnie Sox, Don Nicholson, Phil Bonner, Huston Platt, Hubert Platt and Dave Strickler. Even after returning to NASCAR once the Hemi was reinstated, Richard continued drag racing the 43 JR until early 1966.\nOn February 27, 1966, Petty overcame a two-lap deficit to win his second Daytona 500 when the race was stopped on lap 198 of 200 because of a thunderstorm. This made him the first driver to win the event twice. In 1966, he won the first ever race at Middle Georgia Raceway (Morelock 200). Petty broke the half-mile NASCAR record for half-mile tracks with an average speed of 82.023 miles per hour during the 100-mile (160\u00a0km) event. He would end up recording 4 wins there in his career, including one in 1970 in which he was very ill before the race. 1967 was a milestone year. In that year, Petty won 27 of the 48 races he entered, including a record ten wins in a row (between August 12 and October 1, 1967). He won his second Grand National Championship. One of the 27 victories was the Southern 500 at Darlington, which would be his only Southern 500 victory. His dominance in this season earned him the nickname \"King Richard\". He had previously been known as \"the Randleman Rocket\".\nIn 1968, Petty won sixteen races including the last ever race at Occoneechee Speedway.\nIn 1969, Ford significantly ratcheted up their factory involvement in NASCAR when they introduced the Ford Torino Talladega. The Talladega was specifically designed to give Ford a competitive race advantage by being more aerodynamic and thus faster, especially on super-speedway tracks more than a mile long. Petty switched brands to Ford, due to his belief the Plymouth was not competitive on super-speedways; he wanted a slippery Dodge Daytona but Chrysler executives insisted he stay with Plymouth. He would win ten races and finish second in points. He won in 1970 in the sleek new Plymouth Superbird with a shark nose and towel rack wing, Petty returned to Plymouth for the 1970 season. This is the car in which Petty is cast in the Pixar film \"Cars\" (2006), in which Richard and Lynda had voice roles.\nThe 1970s.\nOn February 14, 1971, Petty won his third Daytona 500, driving a brand-new (for 1971) Plymouth Road Runner and beating Buddy Baker, by little more than a car length en route to another historic year, making him the first driver to win the race three times. He won twenty more races (which would make him become the first driver to earn more than $1 million in career earnings) and claimed his third Grand National Championship. At the end of the 1971 season, Chrysler told the Pettys they no longer would receive direct factory funding support; this caused the Petty team great concern. In 1972, STP began what would turn into a successful 28-year sponsorship arrangement with Petty, however, it marked the end of his famous all \"Petty Blue\" paint job. STP previously insisted on an all STP orangish-red color for the cars, but Petty balked and after an all-night negotiation session, the familiar STP orange/\"Petty blue\" paint scheme was agreed to as a compromise that would later become part of STP's motorsport paint schemes, most notably Gordon Johncock's win in the 1982 Indianapolis 500 (where the car had a primarily \"Petty Blue\" scheme). Thanks to his 28 top-ten finishes (25 top-five finishes and eight victories), Petty went on to win his 4th NASCAR Cup Series championship. 1972 was a year of change in other ways, as it was the last year where Petty would campaign a Plymouth-based race car; as in the middle of the year, he debuted to drive a newly built 1972 Dodge Charger in a few races (winning one of them), as he believed that the car would have a slight aero advantage over the Plymouth body style. In a driver's duel on February 18, 1973, Petty, in a newly built 1973 Dodge Charger (a body style he would use exclusively until the end of 1977), outlasted Baker (now with the K&amp;K Insurance Dodge race team) to win his fourth Daytona 500 after Baker's engine gave out with six laps to go. A year later, Petty won the Daytona \"450\" (shortened twenty laps {50\u00a0mi/80\u00a0km} due to the energy crisis) for the fifth time en route to his fifth Winston Cup Championship.\n1975 was another historic year for Petty, as he won the World 600 for the first time in his career, one of thirteen victories en route to his sixth Winston Cup. The thirteen victories is a modern (1972\u2013present) NASCAR record for victories in a season and was tied in 1998 by Jeff Gordon, although Gordon won thirteen out of 33 races, compared to Petty's thirteen out of 30 races. In 1976, Petty was involved in one of the most famous finishes in NASCAR history. Petty and David Pearson were racing on the last lap out of turn 4 in the Daytona 500. As Petty tried to pass Pearson, at the exit of turn 4, Petty's right rear bumper hit Pearson's left front bumper. Pearson and Petty both spun and hit the front stretch wall. Petty's car came to rest just yards from the finish line, but his engine stalled. Pearson's car had hit the front stretch wall and clipped another car, but his engine was running. Members of Petty's pit crew came out onto the track and tried to push the car to the finish line, but ultimately failed. Pearson was able to drive his car toward the finish line, while Petty's car would not restart. Pearson passed Petty on the infield grass and won the Daytona 500. Petty was given credit for second place.\nOddly, 1978 will stand out as the one year during his prime that Petty did not visit the winner's circle. The Petty Enterprises Team could not get the new 1978 Dodge Magnum to handle properly, even though much time, effort, and faith were spent massaging the cars. Unhappy with the seven top-five and eleven top-ten finishes (including three-second places), Petty decided that his longtime relationship with Chrysler could not continue and he instead began racing a secondhand 1974 Chevrolet Monte Carlo at the fall race at Michigan. Returning to the General Motors fold proved successful as Petty recorded six top-ten finishes in the final ten races of the 1978 season and finished sixth in the final standings. He would go on to even better results in 1979. Petty won the Daytona 500 in an Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme in the \"Famous Finish\" and ran most of the remaining races in a Chevrolet, winning four additional races and taking the NASCAR championship for the seventh, and last, time by eleven points which was the closest points margin in NASCAR history until 1992.\nTwilight years (1980\u20131991).\nPetty won two more Daytona 500s in 1979 and 1981. In 1979, he snapped a 45-race drought, winning his sixth Daytona 500, the first to be televised live flag-to-flag; it would become notorious for a fistfight between competitors following the controversial finish. Petty won the race as the first and second place cars of Donnie Allison and Cale Yarborough crashed on the last lap. Petty held off Darrell Waltrip and A. J. Foyt. The race is also regarded as being the genesis of the current surge in NASCAR's popularity. The East Coast was snowed in by a blizzard, giving CBS a captive audience. The win was part of Petty's seventh and last NASCAR Winston Cup Championship. He was able to hold off Waltrip to win the title in 1979.\nIn 1980, Petty won two races early in the year at North Wilkesboro and Nashville but a violent crash at Pocono in July ended his championship hopes. He finished 4th in points. For 1981, NASCAR dictated that all teams had to show up with the new downsized cars of 110\" wheel-base, that Detroit had been building since 1979. Though Petty had been successful with the Chevrolet and Oldsmobile cars he had been running, he wanted to get back to his Mopar roots. After taking a phone call from Lee Iacocca (who personally asked Petty to campaign a Dodge for 1981), the Petty team built a stunning 1981 Dodge Mirada and took it to Daytona in January 1981 for high speed tests. Petty's fans were also in a large part fans of his Dodges, so when word got out about the Mirada testing, 15,000 or so showed up on January 17, 1981, at Daytona Speedway to watch Petty put the Dodge through its paces. Sadly for the fans, the car could do no better than 186\u00a0miles per hour, about eight miles per hour slower than the GM and Ford cars. Petty gave up on returning to Dodge knowing that for the superspeedways the Mirada would not be competitive, and bought a Buick Regal for the Daytona race. In the 1981 Daytona 500, Petty used a \"fuel only\" for his last pit stop, with 25 laps to go, to outfox Bobby Allison and grab his seventh and final Daytona 500 win. This win marked a large change in Petty's racing team. Dale Inman, Petty's longtime crew chief, left the team after the Daytona victory (Inman would win an eighth championship as crew chief in 1984 with Terry Labonte).\nWhile the 1981 season gave Petty three wins, he felt the season was a failure, and the Regals being ill-handling and poor in reliability. For 1982, he made the move to the Pontiac Grand Prix, with the promise of substantial factory support from Pontiac. 1982 was a repeat of 1978, and no victories were to be had. At first, the Grand Prix behaved much like the Dodge Magnum of 1978, with handling and speed problems. Toward the end of 1982 things improved with several top-ten finishes, which opened the door to a successful 1983 season with three victories, and several top-five and top-ten finishes. In 1983, he broke his 43-race winless streak from 1982 with a win in the 1983 Carolina 500, barely edging out a young Bill Elliott. After a controversial win at Charlotte in October 1983 (recognised by NASCAR as win No. 198), Petty left the race team his father founded for the 1984 season. He spent '84 and '85 driving for Mike Curb before returning to Petty Enterprises in 1986.\nBecause of the 1971 Myers Brothers 250 combination race in 1971 that Petty finished second in a Grand National Car while winner Bobby Allison drove a Grand American car, there is a technical dispute regarding which race is credited as his 200th win. NASCAR did not credit Petty with a class win, which was a dispute that affected two other drivers, Elmo Langley and Charlie Glotzbach, both of whom drove in combination races that season, finishing second to Grand American cars. Under modern NASCAR combination race rules for various series, Petty would be credited with that would be recognized as his 135th win. On May 20, 1984, Petty won what under modern regulations would be recognized as his two-hundredth Cup class win, the Budweiser 500 at Dover International Speedway, when the Winston-Salem class win is recognized.\nOn July 4, 1984, Petty won his officially-recognized two-hundredth (and what would turn out to be his final victory) race at the Firecracker 400 at Daytona International Speedway. The race was memorable: On lap 158, Doug Heveron crashed, bringing out the yellow caution flag, essentially turning lap 158 into the last lap as the two drivers battled back to the start-finish line. Petty and Cale Yarborough diced it out on that lap, with Yarborough drafting and taking an early lead before Petty managed to cross the start/finish line only a fender-length ahead. President Ronald Reagan was in attendance, the first sitting president to attend a NASCAR race. Reagan celebrated the milestone with Petty and his family in victory lane.\nIn early 1988, Petty traveled to Australia to help promote a NASCAR exhibition race at the then new Calder Park Thunderdome, the first NASCAR race outside of North America. While he did not compete in the track's inaugural race, the Goodyear NASCAR 500 (though his son Kyle did), Richard Petty, in testing at the 1.119\u00a0mi (1.801\u00a0km) track which owner Bob Jane had modeled on the Charlotte Motor Speedway, set an unofficial lap record of 28.2 seconds (142.85 mp/h). This would have in fact landed him on pole position for the race, as the fastest time in official qualifying was by Alabama Gang member Neil Bonnett, who recorded a 28.829-second lap (139.734 mp/h) in his Pontiac Grand Prix.\nPetty's final ride (1992).\nOn October 1, 1991, Petty announced he would retire after the 1992 season. Petty's final top-ten finish came at the 1991 Budweiser at the Glen which was the same race J. D. McDuffie was killed in a fifth lap accident. Petty chose to run the entire 1992 season, not just selected events as other drivers have done before retirement. His year-long Fan Appreciation Tour took him around the country, participating in special events, awards ceremonies, and fan-related meetings. Racing Champions ran a promotional line of diecast cars for every race in Petty's Farewell Tour.\nAt the 1992 Pepsi 400 on July 4, Petty qualified on the front row for the first time since 1986. Before the start of the race, he was honored with a gift ceremony which included a visit from President George H. W. Bush. When the green flag dropped, Petty led the opening five laps as the holiday crowd cheered wildly. Unfortunately, the oppressive heat forced him to drop out after completing just 84 laps.\nDespite the busy appearance schedule and mediocre race results, Petty managed to qualify for all 29 races in 1992. On his final visit to each track, Petty would lead the field on the pace lap to salute the fans. Petty's final race, the season-ending Hooters 500 at Atlanta Motor Speedway, which also marked the start of Jeff Gordon's NASCAR career and the second-closest points championship in NASCAR history, with six drivers mathematically eligible to win the championship, is hailed to this day as the greatest race in NASCAR history. A record 160,000 spectators attended the race and celebrated Petty's farewell. In the intense title race, the championship contender, Davey Allison, got mixed up in a crash with Ernie Irvan, dashing his title hopes. Long-shot contenders Mark Martin, Kyle Petty and Harry Gant fell behind in the long run, which left Bill Elliott and Alan Kulwicki to compete for the title. The race went down to the final lap with Elliott winning and Kulwicki taking the championship by ten points because he had led the most laps, one more than Elliott, which gave him a five-point bonus.\nFacing intense pressure, Petty barely managed to qualify at Atlanta, posting the 39th fastest speed out of 41 cars. He would not have been eligible for the provisional starting position, and had to qualify on speed. On the 94th lap, Petty became tangled up in an accident, and his car caught fire. Petty pulled the car off the track, and climbed out of the burning machine uninjured. His pit crew worked diligently with less than twenty laps to go to get the car running again, and with two laps to go, Petty pulled out of the pits and was credited as running at the finish in his final race. He took his final checkered flag, finishing in 35th position. After the race, Petty circled the track to salute the fans one final time in his trademark STP Pontiac.\nThereafter he made a few public show appearances at racetracks. On August 18, 1993, NASCAR participated in a tire test at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, in preparations for the 1994 Brickyard 400. Petty drove several laps around the track, and then donated his car to the Speedway's museum. He would again step into a racecar in 2003 on the week of the final race under the Winston banner at Homestead\u2013Miami Speedway, where he took a solo lap honoring his seven Winston Cup Championships for Winston's salute to the champions. In 2009 at the Coke Zero 400 in Daytona, for the 25th anniversary of his final, two-hundredth victory in 1984, Petty drove one of his 1980s Pontiac racecars during the pace laps, leading the field for the first one. The field split him and he followed it for one more pace lap before he pulled his car in. Finally, at the 2017 Southern 500 at Darlington, Petty led the field through several pace laps in his Plymouth Belvedere. He apparently stayed out a lap longer than expected and was humorously black flagged by the starter. Petty followed the pace car down pit road at the start of the race.\nPetty as an owner.\nIn later years of his career, Petty developed the career of crew leader Robbie Loomis, who was at the helm of Petty Enterprises as crew chief in the 1990s and won three races\u2014the 1996 Checker Auto Parts 500 at Phoenix, the 1997 ACDelco 400 at North Carolina Speedway, both with Bobby Hamilton driving, and the 1999 Goody's Body Pain 500 at Martinsville Speedway, with John Andretti driving. Petty remained as operating owner until his son Kyle Petty took over day-to-day operations a decade later.\nHowever, in 2008, Kyle Petty was released by Petty Enterprises, and, because of lack of sponsorship, Petty Enterprises was bought out by Gillett-Evernham Motorsports. The name was originally going to stay the same, but when Evernham left the team, it was renamed Richard Petty Motorsports, despite George Gillett continuing to own the majority.\nIn November 2010, an investment group including Medallion Financial Corp., Douglas G. Bergeron and Petty, signed and closed sale on racing assets of Richard Petty Motorsports. Andrew M. Murstein, president of Medallion, had been seeking a sports investment since 2008 when he formed a special-purpose acquisition company together with Hank Aaron, a Medallion board member, and others.\nPetty as a broadcaster.\nIn 1995, Petty moved to the television broadcast booth, joining CBS as a color commentator. Petty worked three races for CBS including the Daytona 500, and one race for TBS, the Coca-Cola 600.\nSponsorship.\nPetty promised his mother not to accept alcohol sponsorship. Therefore, he never collected purses for the Bud Pole Award, and he competed at the Busch Clash only once, in 1980.\nClose calls.\nAs well as his numerous victories, Petty is remembered for three of the many disastrous crashes that he survived:\nPolitics.\nIn 1978, Petty was elected to the Randolph County Commission as a Republican. In 1980 he endorsed John Connally for the Republican nomination for president. According to Petty, it was a \"tossup\" between Connally and Ronald Reagan, but he chose Connally \"basically on personality. And Connally's been there in Washington a lot of times doing a lot of things. He knows the system better.\" He was reelected to the county commission in 1982, 1986, and 1990. During his 1992 retirement tour, Petty took a parade lap before every race with the exception of the Southern 500, where Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton served as grand marshal. In 1993, Petty formed a political action committee to support Republican candidates. He was the Republican nominee in the 1996 North Carolina Secretary of State election, but was defeated by Democratic state senator Elaine Marshall. Petty was mistakenly seen as a shoo-in, and his campaigning was sporadic. Following his loss, Petty stated, \"If I had known I wasn't going to win, I wouldn't have run.\" In June 2016, he made an appearance on stage with Donald Trump. Petty is a Kentucky Colonel.\nLife after racing.\nPetty is currently a spokesman for Liberty Medical, Cheerios and the GlaxoSmithKline products Nicorette and Goody's Headache Powder. His portrait was featured on Brawny paper towels during a limited time when the company replaced their image with several \"real Brawny men\". General Mills created a Petty-themed packaged cereal, \"43's,\" its boxes featuring his image and story. Petty also played himself in the 2008 film \"Swing Vote\", where he commends the film's protagonist by allowing him to briefly drive his famous \"43\" Plymouth.\nFor public benefit, Petty and his son Kyle have lent their talent to host \"Lifting It Right\", an automotive lift safety training DVD produced and distributed by the Automotive Lift Institute (ALI); it is used in high school vocational programs and community colleges. He has recorded public service announcements for Civitan International, a nonprofit organization of which he is a former member. He has also established a summer camp known as \"Victory Junction\", which is intended to give seriously ill children an outdoors, summer-camp experience and has medical staff on hand around the clock in case of emergencies.\nIn May 2011, Petty was chosen to be the Grand Marshal for the 2011 STP 400 of the Sprint Cup Series. In public, he is usually seen wearing his trademark sunglasses and a Charlie 1 Horse cowboy hat, with a large snakeskin hat band and a plume of rooster feathers at the front.\nAfter retirement, Petty purchased a 90-acre (36 ha) ranch south of Jackson, Wyoming.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25481", "revid": "40812388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25481", "title": "Reduction", "text": "Reduction, reduced, or reduce may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "25483", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25483", "title": "Roy Champman Andrews", "text": ""}
{"id": "25484", "revid": "50892966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25484", "title": "Rosemary", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSalvia rosmarinus (), commonly known as rosemary, is a shrub with fragrant, evergreen, needle-like leaves and purple or sometimes white, pink, or blue flowers. It is a member of the sage family, Lamiaceae.\nThe species is native to the Mediterranean region, as well as Portugal and Spain. It has a number of cultivars, and its leaves are commonly used as a flavoring.\nDescription.\nRosemary has a fibrous root system. It forms an aromatic evergreen shrub with leaves similar to \"Tsuga\" needles. Forms range from upright to trailing; the upright forms can reach between tall. The leaves are evergreen, long and broad, green above, and white below, with dense, short, woolly hair.\nThis plant flowers in spring and summer in temperate climates, but the plants can be in constant bloom in warm climates; flowers are white, pink, purple, or deep blue. The branches are dotted with groups of 2 to 3 flowers down their length. Rosemary also tends to flower outside its normal flowering season; it has been known to flower as late as early December, and as early as mid-February (in the Northern Hemisphere). The plant can live as long as 35 years.\nSimilar species.\n\"Salvia jordanii\" (formerly \"Rosmarinus eriocalyx\") is a closely related species native to Iberia and the Maghreb of Africa.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Salvia rosmarinus\" is now considered one of many hundreds of species in the genus \"Salvia\". Formerly it was placed in a much smaller genus, \"Rosmarinus\", which contained only two to four species including \"Rosmarinus\" \"officinalis (),\"\"\" which is now considered a synonym. Both the original and current genus names of the species were applied by the 18th-century naturalist and founding taxonomist Carl Linnaeus.\nEtymology.\nElizabeth Kent noted in her \"Flora Domestica\" (1823), \"The botanical name of this plant is compounded of two Latin words [], signifying Sea-dew; and indeed Rosemary thrives best by the sea.\"\nDistribution and habitat.\nIt is native to the Mediterranean region, as well as Portugal and northwestern Spain. The herb was naturalized in China as early as 220 CE, during the late Han dynasty.\nRosemary came to England at an unknown date, though it is likely that the Romans brought it when they invaded Britain in 43 CE. Even so, there are no viable records containing rosemary in Britain until the 8th century CE. This mention was in a document which was later credited to Charlemagne, who promoted the general usage of herbs and ordered rosemary specifically to be grown in monastic gardens and farms.\nThere are no records of rosemary being properly naturalized in Britain until 1338, when cuttings were sent to Queen Philippa by her mother, Countess Joan of Hainault. It was then planted in the garden of the old palace of Westminster. Since then, rosemary can be found in most English herbal texts. \nRosemary finally arrived in the Americas with early European settlers in the beginning of the 17th century, and was soon spread to South America and distributed globally.\nIt is reasonably hardy in cool climates. Special cultivars like 'Arp' can withstand winter temperatures down to about . It can withstand droughts, surviving a severe lack of water for lengthy periods. It is considered a potentially invasive species and its seeds are often difficult to start, with a low germination rate.\nCultivation.\nSince it is attractive and drought-tolerant, rosemary is used as an ornamental plant in gardens and for xeriscape landscaping, especially in regions of Mediterranean climate. It is considered easy to grow and pest-resistant. Rosemary can grow quite large and retain attractiveness for many years, can be pruned into formal shapes and low hedges, and has been used for topiary. It is easily grown in pots. The groundcover cultivars spread widely, with a dense and durable texture.\nIn order to harvest from the plant, the bush should be matured 2\u20133 years to ensure it is large enough to withstand it. . The amount harvested should not exceed 20% of the growth in order to preserve the plant.\nCultivars.\nNumerous cultivars have been selected for garden use.\nThe following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:\nUses.\nCulinary.\nRosemary leaves are used as a flavoring in foods, such as stews, stuffing, roasted meats, and marinades. \nFresh or dried leaves are used in traditional Mediterranean cuisine, having an aroma of pine which complements many cooked foods. Herbal tea can be made from the leaves. In some cooking, the woody stem, stripped of its leaves, is used as a skewer. \nFragrance.\nHungary water, dating to the 14th century, was one of the first alcohol-based perfumes in Europe, and was primarily made from distilled rosemary. Rosemary oil is used in perfumes, shampoos, cleaning products, and aromatherapy.\nPhytochemicals.\nRosemary essential oil contains about 150 phytochemicals, including rosmarinic acid, camphor, A-pinene, caffeic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, carnosic acid, and carnosol. Rosemary essential oil contains 10\u201320% camphor.\nRosemary extract, specifically the type mainly consisting of carnosic acid and carnosol, is approved as a food preservative in several countries, having E number E392.\nIn culture.\nRosemary was considered sacred to ancient Egyptians, Romans, and Greeks. It was written about by Pliny the Elder (23\u201379 CE) and Pedanius Dioscorides (c. 40 CE to c. 90 CE), a Greek botanist (amongst other things). The latter talked about rosemary in his most famous writing, \"De Materia Medica\", one of the most influential herbal books in history.\nSeveral Shakespeare plays refer to the use of rosemary in burial or memorial rites. In Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\", Ophelia says, \"There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love, remember.\" It likewise appears in Shakespeare's \"Winter's Tale\" in Act 4 Scene 4, where Perdita talks about \"Rosemary and Rue\". In Act 4 Scene 5 of \"Romeo and Juliet\", Friar Lawrence admonishes the Capulet household to \"stick your rosemary on this fair corse, and as the custom is, and in her best array, bear her to church.\" It is also said that \"In the language of flowers it means 'fidelity in love.'\"\nIn \"Don Quixote\" (Part One, Chapter XVII), the fictional hero uses rosemary in his recipe for balm of fierabras.\nRosemary is one of the four herbs mentioned in the refrain of the folk song \"Scarborough Fair.\"\nIn the Spanish fairy tale The Sprig of Rosemary, the heroine touches the hero with the titular sprig of rosemary in order to restore his magically lost memory.\nThe plant has been used as a symbol for remembrance during war commemorations and funerals in Europe and Australia. Mourners would throw it into graves as a symbol of remembrance for the dead. In Australia, sprigs of rosemary are worn on ANZAC Day and sometimes Remembrance Day to signify remembrance; the herb grows wild on the Gallipoli Peninsula, where many Australians died during World War I.\nRosemary is used in Danube Swabian culture for christenings, weddings, burials and festivals; for example, an apple with a sprig of rosemary in it is used for Kirchweih celebrations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25486", "revid": "50076165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25486", "title": "Rosales", "text": "Order of flowering plants\nRosales (, ) are an order of flowering plants. Well-known members of Rosales include: roses, strawberries, blackberries and raspberries, apples, cherries, pears, plums, peaches and apricots, almonds, rowan and hawthorn, jujube, elms, banyans, figs, mulberries, breadfruit, nettles, hops, and cannabis.\nRosales contain about 7,700 species, distributed into nine families and about 260 genera. Their type family is the rose family, Rosaceae. The largest families are Rosaceae (91/4828) and Urticaceae (53/2625). \nTaxonomy.\nThe order Rosales is strongly supported as monophyletic in phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences, such as those carried out by members of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group. In their APG III system of plant classification, they defined Rosales as consisting of the nine families:\nIn the older classification system of Dahlgren the Rosales were in the superorder Rosiflorae (also called Rosanae). In the obsolete Cronquist system, the order Rosales was many times polyphyletic. It consisted of the family Rosaceae and 23 other families that are now placed in various other orders. These families and their placement in the APG III system are:\nPhylogeny.\nThe relationships of Rosales families were resolved in a molecular phylogenetic study based on two nuclear genes and ten chloroplast genes:\nThe order Rosales is divided into three clades that have never been assigned a taxonomic rank. The basal clade consists of the family Rosaceae; another clade consists of four families, including Rhamnaceae; and the third clade consists of the four urticalean families.\nThe order is a sister to a clade consisting of Fagales and Cucurbitales. \nDistribution.\nDifferent plants that fall under the order Rosales grow in many different parts of the world. They can be found in the mountains, the tropics and the arctic. Even though you can find a member of the order Rosales nearly anywhere, the specific families grow in different specific geographical locations. Wind-pollination is the way that the majority of the families that fall under the order Rosales (including Moraceae, Ulmaceae, and Urticaceae etc.) pollinate.\nImportance.\nWithin the order Rosales is the family Rosaceae, which includes numerous species that are cultivated for their fruit, making this one of the most economically important families of plants. Fruit produced by members of this family include apples, pears, plums, peaches, cherries, almonds, strawberries, blackberries and raspberries. Many ornamental species of plant are also in the family Rosaceae, including the rose after which the family and order were named. The rose, considered a symbol of love in many cultures, is featured prominently in poetry and literature. Modern garden varieties of roses such as hybrid teas, floribunda, and grandifora, originated from complex hybrids of several separate wild species native to different regions of Eurasia.\nThe Moraceae also produce important fruits, such as mulberries, figs, jackfruits, and breadfruits, and the leaves of the mulberry provide food for the silkworms used in commercial silk production.\nThe wood from the black cherry (\"Prunus serotina\") and sweet cherry (\"P. avium\") is used to make high quality furniture due to its color and ability to be bent. The \"Cannabis\" plant has been highly prized for millennia for its hemp, which has numerous uses. Other varieties of \"Cannabis\" are grown as a drug.\nPlants in the order Rosales were used in the traditional medicines of many cultures. Medical cannabis has been recognized for its pharmaceutical use. The latex of some species of fig trees contains the enzyme ficin, which is effective in killing roundworms that infect the intestinal tracts of animals.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25488", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25488", "title": "Rebuttal", "text": "Legal term\nIn law, rebuttal is a form of evidence that is presented to contradict or nullify other evidence that has been presented by an adverse party. By analogy the same term is used in politics and public affairs to refer to the informal process by which statements, designed to refute or negate specific arguments (see Counterclaim) put forward by opponents, are deployed in the media.\nIn law, special rules apply to rebuttal; rebuttal evidence or rebuttal witnesses must be confined solely to the subject matter of the evidence rebutted. New evidence on other subjects may not be brought in rebuttal. However, rebuttal is one of the few vehicles whereby a party may introduce surprise evidence or witnesses. The basic process is as follows: both sides of a controversy are obliged to declare in advance of trial what witnesses they plan to call, and what each witness is expected to testify to. When either a plaintiff (or prosecutor) or defendant brings direct evidence or testimony which was not anticipated, the other side may be granted a specific opportunity to rebut it. In rebuttal, the rebutting party may generally bring witnesses and evidence which were never before declared, so long as they serve to rebut the prior evidence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25489", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25489", "title": "Res ipsa loquitur", "text": "Legal term - Latin for \"the thing speaks for itself\"\nRes ipsa loquitur (Latin: \"the thing speaks for itself\") is a doctrine in common law and Roman-Dutch law jurisdictions under which a court can infer negligence from the very nature of an accident or injury in the absence of direct evidence on how any defendant behaved in the context of tort litigation.\nThe crux of \"res ipsa loquitur\" is circumstantial inference. Although specific criteria differ by jurisdiction, an action typically must satisfy the following elements of negligence: the existence of a duty of care, breach of appropriate standard of care, causation, and injury. In \"res ipsa loquitur\", the existence of the first three elements is inferred from the existence of injury that does not ordinarily occur without negligence.\nHistory.\nThe term comes from Latin and is literally translated \"the thing itself speaks\", but the sense is well conveyed in the more common translation, \"the thing speaks for itself\". The earliest known use of the phrase was by Cicero in his defense speech \"Pro Milone\". The circumstances of the genesis of the phrase and application by Cicero in Roman legal trials has led to questions whether it reflects on the quality of \"res ipsa loquitur\" as a legal doctrine subsequent to 52 BC, some 1915 years before the English case \"Byrne v Boadle\" and the question whether Charles Edward Pollock might have taken direct inspiration from Cicero's application of the maxim in writing his judgment in that case.\nElements.\nThe first element may be satisfied in one of three ways:\nThe second element is discussed further in the section below. The third element requires the absence of contributory negligence from the plaintiff. The fourth element emphasizes that defendant may defeat a \"res ipsa loquitur\" claim by producing evidence of a non-negligent scenario that would completely explain plaintiff's injury and negate all possible inferences that negligence could have occurred.\nExclusive control requirement.\nThe common law traditionally required that \"the instrumentality or agent which caused the accident was under the exclusive control of the defendant\". See e.g., \"Eaton v. Eaton\", 575 A2d 858 (NJ 1990). However, in the United States the second and the third versions of the Restatement of Torts eliminated the strict requirement because it can be difficult to prove \"exclusive control\". Accordingly, the element has largely given way in modern American cases to a less rigid formulation: the evidence must eliminate, to a sufficient degree, other responsible causes (including the conduct of the plaintiff and third parties). For example, in New York State, the defendant's exclusivity of control must be such that the likelihood of injury was more likely than not, the result of the defendant's negligence. The likelihood of other possibilities does not need to be eliminated altogether but must be so reduced that the greater probability lies with the defendant.\nHere is a fictitious example:\nIn some cases, a closed group of people may be held in breach of a duty of care under the rule of \"res ipsa loquitur\". In \"Ybarra v. Spangard\", a patient undergoing surgery experienced back complications as a result of the surgery, but it could not be determined the specific member of the surgical team who had breached the duty so it was held that they had all breached, as it was certain that at least one of them was the only person who was in exclusive control of the instrumentality of harm.\nIn jurisdictions that employ this less rigid formulation of exclusive control, the element subsumes the element that the plaintiff did not contribute to his injury. In modern case law, contributory negligence is compared to the injury caused by the other. For example, if the negligence of the other is 95% of the cause of the plaintiff's injury, and the plaintiff is 5% responsible, the plaintiff's slight fault cannot negate the negligence of the other. The new type of split liability is commonly called \"comparative negligence\".\nTypical in medical malpractice.\n\"Res ipsa loquitur\" often arises in the \"scalpel left behind\" variety of case. For example, a person goes to a doctor with abdominal pains after having his appendix removed. X-rays show the patient has a metal object the size and shape of a scalpel in his abdomen. It requires no further explanation to show the surgeon who removed the appendix was negligent, as there is no legitimate reason for a doctor to leave a scalpel in a body at the end of an appendectomy.\nExamples by jurisdictions.\nCanada.\nIn Canada the doctrine of \"res ipsa loquitur\" has been largely overturned by the Supreme Court. In case of \"Fontaine v. British Columbia (Official Administrator)\" the Court rejected the use of \"res ipsa loquitur\" and instead proposed the rule that once the plaintiff has proven that the harm was under exclusive control of the defendant and that they were not contributorily negligent a tactical burden is placed on the defendant in which the judge has the discretion to infer negligence unless the defendant can produce evidence to the contrary.\nHong Kong.\nHong Kong is one of the common law jurisdictions that use the doctrine of \"res ipsa loquitur\".\nSome lawyers prefer to avoid the expression \"res ipsa loquitur\" (for example, Hobhouse LJ in \"Radcliff v. Plymouth\"). But other lawyers (and judges too) still find the expression a convenient one (for example, see the judgement of Mr Justice Bokhary, a Permanent Judge of the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong, in \"Sanfield Building Contractors Ltd v. Li Kai Cheong\").\nThe expression \"res ipsa loquitur\" is not a doctrine but a \"mode of inferential reasoning\" and applies only to accidents of \"unknown cause\". \"Res ipsa loquitur\" comes into play where an accident of unknown cause is one that would not normally happen without negligence on the part of the defendant in control of the object or activity which injured the plaintiff or damaged his property. In such a situation the court is able to infer negligence on the defendant's part unless he offers an acceptable explanation consistent with his having taken reasonable care.\nIreland.\nThe Irish courts have applied the doctrine. In \"Hanrahan v. Merck, Sharp &amp; Dohme (Ireland) Ltd.\" [1988] ILRM 629 the supreme court held that in cases of nuisance the burden of proof could be shifted to the defendant where it would be palpably unfair for the plaintiff to have to prove something beyond their reach. The facts concerned poisoning of farm animals downwind of a chemical plant.\nIn \"Rothwell v. The Motor Insurers Bureau of Ireland\" [2003] 1 IR 268 the supreme court held the burden of proof would shift when the knowledge is exclusive to the defendant, but also where it is \"especially within the range\" of the defendant's capacity to probe the facts.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South African law (which is modelled on Roman Dutch law), there is no doctrine of \"res ipsa loquitur\", although the phrase is used regularly to mean the \"facts speak for themselves\". \"Res ipsa loquitur\" does not shift any burden of proof or onus from one party to the other. The phrase is merely a handy phrase used by lawyers.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe doctrine exists in both English law and Scots law.\nEngland and Wales.\nIn English tort law, the effect of \"res ipsa loquitur\" is a strong inference in favour of the claimant that negligence has taken place. It does not however fully reverse the burden of proof (\"Ng Chun Pui v. Li Chuen Tat\", 1988).\nThe requirement of control is important in English law. This requirement was not satisfied in \"Easson v. LNE Ry\" [1944] 2 KB 421, where a small child fell off a train several miles after it had left the station. It was considered that the door of the train was not sufficiently under control of the railway company after the train started moving and could have been opened by somebody for whom the company was not responsible. This case was distinguished from the earlier \"Gee v. Metropolitan Ry\" where the plaintiff fell from the train immediately after it left the station, when the door through which he fell could still be considered to be fully controlled by the railway company.\nThe requirement that the exact cause of the accident must be unknown is illustrated by the case of \"Barkway v. South Wales Transport\". In this case a bus veered across the road and it was known that the accident was caused by a flat tyre. In this case, the plaintiff could not be assisted by \"res ipsa loquitur\" and had to go on to prove that the flat tyre was caused by the transport company's negligence.\nScotland.\nThe doctrine exists in the Scots law of \"delict\". The leading case is that of \"Scott v London &amp; Catherine Dock Co\". This case laid down 3 requirements for the doctrine to apply:\nIn \"Scott\", the court held that sacks of sugar do not fall out of warehouses and crush passers-by without somebody having been negligent along the way, so the plaintiff did not need to show how it happened.\nRecent examples in Scotland are \"McDyer v Celtic Football Club\" and \"McQueen v The Glasgow Garden Festival 1988 Ltd\".\nUnited States.\nUnder United States common law, \"res ipsa loquitur\" has the following requirements:\nMost American courts recognize \"res ipsa loquitur\". The Restatement (Second) of Torts, \u00a7 328D describes a two-step process for establishing \"res ipsa loquitur\". The first step is whether the accident is the kind usually caused by negligence, and the second is whether or not the defendant had exclusive control over the instrumentality that caused the accident. If found, \"res ipsa loquitur\" creates an inference of negligence, although in most cases it does not necessarily result in a directed verdict. The Restatement (Third) of Torts, \u00a7 17, adopts a similar test, although it eschews the exclusive control element.\nThe doctrine was not initially welcome in medical malpractice cases. In \"Gray v. Wright\", a seven-inch hemostat was left in Mrs. Gray during gallbladder surgery in June 1947, and despite her chronic complaints about stomach pain over the years, the device was not found until an X-ray in March 1953, when it was removed. Her $12,000 award was reversed by the Supreme Court of West Virginia because she was outside the statute of limitations when she filed and could not prove that the doctor concealed knowledge of his error. This \"guilty knowledge\" requirement disappeared over the years, and the \"discovery rule\" by which statutes of limitation run from the date of discovery of the wrongdoing rather than the date of the occurrence has become the rule in most states.\nForty years later, leaving a medical device in a patient was medical malpractice, provable without expert testimony, in almost every jurisdiction. Virginia has limited the rule. The Virginia Supreme Court stated in 1996: \"Almost 60 years ago, this Court, discussing res ipsa loquitur, said: 'In Virginia the doctrine, if not entirely abolished, has been limited and restricted to a very material extent.' \"City of Richmond v. Hood Rubber Products Co.\", 168 Va. 11, 17, 190 S.E. 95, 98 (1937). ... It may be utilized only when the circumstances of the incident, without further proof, are such that, in the ordinary course of events, the incident could not have happened except on the theory of negligence.\"\nA contention of \"res ipsa loquitur\" commonly is made in cases of commercial airplane accidents. It was part of the commentary in a train collision in California in 2008: \"If two trains are in the same place at the same time, somebody's made a terrible mistake.\"\nIn some states, the doctrine of \"res ipsa loquitur\" is also used as a method of proving the intent or \"mens rea\" element of the inchoate crime of attempt. Under the Model Penal Code, \"the behavior in question is thought to corroborate the defendant's criminal purpose\", for example:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Possession of materials to be employed in the commission of the crime, which are specifically designed for such unlawful use or which serve no lawful purpose of the actor under the circumstances\nCriticism.\nSome US tort scholars have criticized the doctrine as an unnecessarily cumbersome way to state the simple proposition that negligence may be proved by circumstantial evidence. In their view, the doctrine does not promote clarity in courts' reasoning.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "25491", "revid": "50909935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25491", "title": "The Rocky Horror Picture Show", "text": "1975 musical comedy horror film by Jim Sharman\nThe Rocky Horror Picture Show is a 1975 independent musical comedy horror film produced by Lou Adler and Michael White, directed by Jim Sharman, and distributed by 20th Century Fox. The screenplay was written by Sharman and Richard O'Brien, who also played the supporting role Riff Raff. The film is based on the 1973 musical stage production \"The Rocky Horror Show\", with music, book, and lyrics by O'Brien. The production is a tribute to the science fiction and horror B movies of the 1930s through to the early 1960s. The film stars Tim Curry (in his debut), Susan Sarandon, and Barry Bostwick. It is narrated by Charles Gray, with cast members from the original Royal Court Theatre, Roxy Theatre, and Belasco Theatre productions, including Nell Campbell and Patricia Quinn.\nThe story centres on a young engaged couple whose car breaks down in the rain near a castle, where they search for help. The castle is occupied by strangers in elaborate costumes holding a party. They then meet the head of the house, Dr. Frank-N-Furter, an apparently mad scientist and alien transvestite from the planet Transsexual in the galaxy of Transylvania, who creates a living muscle man named Rocky.\nThe film was shot in the United Kingdom at Bray Studios and on location at Oakley Court, a country house best known for its earlier use by Hammer Film Productions. A number of props and set pieces were reused from the Hammer horror films. Although the film is both a parody of and tribute to many kitsch science fiction and horror films, costume designer Sue Blane conducted no research for her designs. Blane has claimed that her creations for the film directly affected the development of punk rock fashion trends, such as torn fishnet stockings and colourfully dyed hair.\nInitially the film was largely ignored by critics, but it soon became a hit as a midnight movie, when audiences began participating with the film at the Waverly Theater in New York City in 1976. Audience members returned to the cinemas frequently and talked back to the screen and began dressing as the characters, spawning similar performance groups across the United States. At almost the same time, fans in costume began performing alongside the film. This \"shadow cast\" mimed the actions on screen, above and behind them, while lip-synching their characters' lines.\nStill in limited release in 2025, years after its premiere, it is the longest-running theatrical release in film history. In many cities, live amateur shadow-casts act out the film as it is being shown and heavily draw upon a tradition of audience participation. The film is most often shown close to Halloween. Today, the film has a large international cult following and has been considered by many as one of the greatest musical films of all time. In 2005, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.\"\nPlot.\nThe film begins with a pair of floating disembodied lips welcoming the audience to a science fiction double feature (\"Science Fiction/Double Feature\"). Throughout the film, a criminologist from an unspecified point in the future narrates and provides commentary on the events.\nFollowing the wedding of their friends, a na\u00efve young couple, Brad Majors and Janet Weiss, get engaged and decide to celebrate with their high school science teacher Dr. Scott, who taught the class where they first met (\"Dammit Janet\"). En route to Scott's house on a dark and rainy night, they get lost and suffer a flat tyre. Seeking a telephone to call for help, the couple walks to a nearby castle (\"Over at the Frankenstein Place\") where a party is being held. They are accepted in by the strangely dressed inhabitants, led by the butler Riff Raff, the maid Magenta, and a groupie named Columbia, who dance to \"The Time Warp\". Dr. Frank-N-Furter, a transvestite mad scientist, introduces himself and invites them to stay for the night (\"Sweet Transvestite\").\nWith the help of Riff Raff, Frank brings to life a tall, muscular, handsome blond man named Rocky (\"The Sword of Damocles\"). As Frank vows he can improve Rocky into an ideal man in a week (\"I Can Make You a Man\"), Eddie, a motorcyclist with a bandaged head, breaks out of a deep freeze (\"Hot Patootie \u2013 Bless My Soul\"). Frank kills Eddie with an ice axe, justifying it as a \"mercy killing\". Rocky and Frank depart for the bridal suite (\"I Can Make You a Man (Reprise)\").\nBrad and Janet are shown to separate bedrooms, where Frank visits and seduces each one disguised as the other. Meanwhile, Riff Raff and Magenta torment Rocky, who flees the suite. Janet, having learned of Brad's dalliance with Frank, discovers Rocky cowering in his birth tank. While tending to his wounds, Janet seduces Rocky as Magenta and Columbia watch from their bedroom monitor (\"Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch-a, Touch Me\").\nDr. Scott, now a government investigator of UFOs, comes to the castle in search of his nephew Eddie, who sent him a letter implying part of his brain was removed by aliens. Everyone discovers Janet and Rocky together, enraging Frank. Magenta summons everyone to an uncomfortable dinner, which they soon realise has been prepared from Eddie's mutilated remains (\"Eddie\"). In the chaos, Janet runs screaming into Rocky's arms, provoking a jealous Frank to chase her through the halls to the lab, where he uses his Medusa Transducer to turn Dr. Scott, Brad, Janet, Rocky, and Columbia into nude statues (\"Planet Schmanet Janet/Wise Up Janet Weiss\"/\"Planet Hotdog\").\nAfter dressing the statues in cabaret costumes, Frank \"unfreezes\" them and leads them in a live cabaret floor show, complete with an RKO tower and a swimming pool (\"Rose Tint My World\"/\"Don't Dream It, Be It\"/\"Wild and Untamed Thing\"). Riff Raff and Magenta interrupt and announce that due to Frank's extravagance, they are declaring mutiny and returning to their home planet of Transsexual, Transylvania. Frank makes a desperate final plea (\"I'm Going Home\"), but is ignored as Riff Raff kills both him and Columbia with a laser. An enraged Rocky climbs the tower with Frank's body, and, after several shots from the laser, plunges to his death. The castle lifts off into space, and Brad, Janet, and Dr. Scott are left crawling in the smog and dirt, confused and disorientated, as the criminologist concludes that the human race is equivalent to insects crawling on the planet's surface: \"lost in time, and lost in space\u00a0... and meaning\" (\"Super Heroes\").\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Tim Curry as Dr. Frank-N-Furter, a transvestite alien scientist\nJeremy Newson and Hilary Labow play Brad and Janet's newlywed friends Ralph and Betty Hapschatt. The guests at both the Hapschatt wedding and Frank's convention consist of Perry Bedden, Christopher Biggins, Gaye Brown, Ishaq Bux, Stephen Calcutt, Hugh Cecil, Imogen Claire, Tony Cowan, Sadie Corr\u00e9, Fran Fullenwider, Lindsay Ingram, Peggy Ledger, Annabel Leventon, Anthony Milner, Pamela Obermeyer, Tony Then, Kimi Wong, and Henry Woolf, as well as an uncredited Rufus Collins.\nProduction.\nConcept and development.\nRichard O'Brien was living as an unemployed actor in London during the early 1970s. He wrote most of \"The Rocky Horror Show\" during one winter just to occupy himself. Since his youth, O'Brien had loved science fiction and B horror movies. He wanted to combine elements of the unintentional humour of B horror movies, portentous dialogue of schlock-horror, Steve Reeves muscle flicks, and fifties rock and roll into his musical. O'Brien conceived and wrote the play set against the backdrop of the glam era that had manifested itself in British popular culture in the 1970s. Allowing his concept to come into being, O'Brien states \"glam rock allowed me to be myself more\".\nO'Brien showed a portion of the unfinished script to Australian director Jim Sharman, who decided to direct it at the small experimental space Upstairs at the Royal Court Theatre in Sloane Square, Chelsea, London, which was used as a project space for new work. O'Brien had appeared briefly in a stage production of Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Jesus Christ Superstar\", directed by Sharman, and the two also worked together in Sam Shepard's \"The Unseen Hand\". Sharman would bring in production designer Brian Thomson. The original creative team was then rounded out by costume designer Sue Blane, musical director Richard Hartley, and stage producer Michael White, who was brought in to produce. As the musical went into rehearsal, the working title, \"They Came from Denton High\", was changed just before previews at the suggestion of Sharman to \"The Rocky Horror Show\".\nHaving premiered in the small 60-seat Royal Court Theatre, it quickly moved to larger venues in London, transferring to the 230-seat Chelsea Classic Cinema on King's Road on 14 August 1973, before finding a quasi-permanent home at the 500-seat King's Road Theatre from 3 November that year, running for six years. The musical made its US debut in Los Angeles in 1974 before playing in New York City as well as other cities. Producer and Ode Records owner Lou Adler attended the London production in the winter of 1973, escorted by friend Britt Ekland. He immediately decided to purchase the US theatrical rights. His production would be staged at his Roxy Theatre in L.A. In 1975, \"The Rocky Horror Show\" premiered on Broadway at the 1,000-seat Belasco Theatre.\nFilming and locations.\nSet in the fictional town of Denton, the film was shot at Bray Studios and Oakley Court, a country house near Maidenhead, Berkshire, England, and at Elstree Studios for post-production, from 21 October to 19 December 1974. Oakley Court, built in 1857 in the Victorian Gothic style, is known for a number of Hammer films. Much of the location shooting took place there, although at the time the manor was not in good condition. Most of the cast were from the original London stage production, including Tim Curry, who had decided that Dr Frank N. Furter should speak like the Queen of the United Kingdom, extravagantly posh. Fox insisted on casting the two characters of Brad and Janet with American actors, Barry Bostwick and Susan Sarandon. Filming took place during autumn, which made conditions worse. During filming, Sarandon fell ill with pneumonia. Filming of the laboratory scene and the title character's creation occurred on 30 October 1974.\nThe film is both a parody and tribute to many of the science fiction and horror movies from the 1930s up to the 1970s. The film production retains many aspects from the stage version, such as production design and music, but adds new scenes not featured in the original stage play. The film's plot, setting, and style echo those of the Hammer horror films, which had their own instantly recognisable style (just as Universal Studios' horror films did). The originally proposed opening sequence was to contain clips of various films mentioned in the lyrics, as well as the first few sequences shot in black and white, but this was deemed too expensive and scrapped.\nCostumes, make-up, and props.\nIn the stage productions, actors generally did their own make-up; however, for the film, the producers chose Pierre La Roche, who had previously been a make-up artist for Mick Jagger and David Bowie, to redesign the make-up for each character. Production stills were taken by rock photographer Mick Rock, who has published a number of books from his work. In \"Rocky Horror: From Concept to Cult\", designer Sue Blane discusses the \"Rocky Horror\" costumes' influence on punk music style, opining \"[It was a] big part of the build-up [to punk].\" She states that ripped fishnet stockings, glitter, and coloured hair were directly attributable to \"Rocky Horror\".\nSome of the costumes from the film had been originally used in the stage production. Props and set pieces were reused from old Hammer Horror productions and others. The tank and dummy used for Rocky's birth originally appeared in \"The Revenge of Frankenstein\" (1958). These references to earlier productions, in addition to cutting costs, enhanced the cult status of the film.\nCostume designer Sue Blane was not keen on working for the film, until she became aware that Curry, an old friend, was committed to the project. Curry and Blane had worked together in Glasgow's Citizens Theatre in a production of \"The Maids\", for which Curry had worn a woman's corset. Blane arranged for the theatre to loan her the corset from the other production for \"Rocky Horror\". Blane admits that she did not conduct research for her designing, had never seen a science fiction film, and is acutely aware that her costumes for Brad and Janet may have been generalisations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When I designed \"Rocky\", I never looked at any science fiction movies or comic books. One just automatically knows what spacesuits look like, the same way one intuitively knows how Americans dress. I had never been to the United States, but I had this fixed idea of how people looked there. Americans wore polyester so their clothes wouldn't crease, and their trousers were a bit too short. Since they're very keen on sports, white socks and white T-shirts played an integral part in their wardrobe. Of course, since doing \"Rocky\" I have been to the United States and admit it was a bit of a generalization, but my ideas worked perfectly for Brad and Janet.\nThe budget for the film was US$1,600,000, far more than the stage production budget, but having to double up on costumes for the film production was expensive. For filming, corsets for the finale had to be doubled for the pool scene, with one version drying while the other was worn on set. While many of the costumes are exact replicas from the stage productions, other costumes were new to filming, such as Columbia's gold sequined swallow-tail coat and top hat and Magenta's maid's uniform.\nBlane was amazed by the recreation and understanding of her designs by fans. When she first heard that people were dressing up, she thought it would be tacky, but was surprised to see the depth to which the fans went to recreate her designs. \"Rocky Horror\" fan Mina Credeur, who designs costumes and performed as Columbia for Houston's performance group, states that \"the best part is when everyone leaves with a big smile on their face,\" noting that there's \"such a kitschiness and campiness that it seems to be winking at you.\" The film still plays at many theatre locations.\nTitle sequence.\nThe film starts with the screen fading to black and oversized, disembodied female lips appear overdubbed with a male voice, establishing the theme of androgyny to be repeated as the film unfolds. The opening scene and song, \"Science Fiction/Double Feature\", consists of the lips of Patricia Quinn (who appears in the film later as the character Magenta and as 'Trixie the Usherette' in the original London production, where she also sings the song) but has the vocals of actor and \"Rocky Horror\" creator, Richard O'Brien (who appears as Magenta's brother Riff Raff). The lyrics refer to science fiction and horror films of the past and list several film titles from the 1930s to the 1960s, including \"The Day the Earth Stood Still\" (1951), \"Flash Gordon\" (1936), \"The Invisible Man\" (1933), \"King Kong\" (1933), \"It Came from Outer Space\" (1953), \"Doctor X\" (1932), \"Forbidden Planet\" (1956), \"Tarantula\" (1955), \"The Day of the Triffids\" (1962), \"Curse of the Demon\" (1957), and \"When Worlds Collide\" (1951).\nMusic.\nThe soundtrack was released in 1975 by Ode Records and produced by English composer Richard Hartley. The album peaked at No. 49 on the US \"Billboard\" 200 in 1978. It reached No. 12 on the Australian albums chart and No.\u00a011 on the New Zealand albums chart. The album is described as the \"definitive version of the [\"Rocky Horror\"] score\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelease.\nTheatrical.\nThe film opened in the United Kingdom at the Rialto Theatre in London on 14 August 1975 and in the United States on 26 September at the UA Westwood in Los Angeles. It did well at that location, but not elsewhere. Before the midnight screenings' success, the film was withdrawn from its eight opening cities due to very small audiences, and its planned New York City opening on Halloween night was cancelled. Fox re-released the film around college campuses on a double-bill with another rock music film parody, Brian De Palma's \"Phantom of the Paradise\" (1974), but again it drew small audiences.\nA second film poster was created using a set of red lipstick-painted lips with the tagline \"A Different Set of Jaws\", a spoof of the poster for the film \"Jaws\" (which was also released in 1975). The lips of former \"Playboy\" model Lorelei Shark are featured on the poster.\nWith \"Pink Flamingos\" (1972) and \"Reefer Madness\" (1936) making money in midnight showings nationwide, a Fox executive, Tim Deegan, was able to talk distributors into midnight screenings, starting in New York City on April Fools' Day of 1976. It was the \"Secret\" film, on 20 May, in the first Seattle International Film Festival. The cult following started shortly after the film began its midnight run at the Waverly Theater in New York City, then spread to other counties in New York, and to Uniondale, Long Island. \"Rocky Horror\" was not only found in the larger cities but throughout the United States, where many attendees would get in free if they arrived in costume. The western division of the film's release included the U.A. Cinemas in Fresno and Merced, the Cinema J. in Sacramento, the UC Theatre in Berkeley and the Covell in Modesto. In New Orleans, an early organised performance group was active with the release there, as well as in such cities as Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Chicago (at the Biograph Theater).\nIn St. Louis, the Varsity Theatre began showing \"Rocky Horror\" in March 1976 as its main feature for three weeks, making it one of the first 30 theatres in the United States to screen the film. Owner Pete Piccione subsequently brought it back as a midnight movie on weekends through 1976 and 1977. By mid-1978, the Varsity was running \"Rocky Horror\" every weekend at midnight, and by May 1979 it had logged at least 60 consecutive weekends; the run continued until the theatre closed in January 1988. Before long, nearly every screening of the film was accompanied by a live fan cast.\n\"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" is considered to be the longest-running release in film history. It benefited from a 20th Century Fox policy that made archival films available to theatres at any time. Having never been pulled by 20th Century Fox from its original 1975 release, it continues to play in cinemas. After The Walt Disney Company acquired 20th Century Fox in 2019 and began withdrawing archival Fox movies from theatres to be placed into the Disney Vault, the company made an exception in the case of \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" to allow the traditional midnight screenings to continue.\nTo commemorate the film's 50th anniversary, a new 4K remaster of the film, resulting from a 10-month restoration effort by the Walt Disney Studios Restoration Team, is set to be released in theatres in 2025 by 20th Century Studios, with screenings taking place both at midnight and during the day. Disney's Restoration &amp; Library Management director Kevin Schaeffer described the new version of the film as a way \"to honor its bold, genre-defying spirit and ensure that audiences \u2013 both longtime fans and first-time viewers \u2013 can experience it as it was originally intended, with stunning picture and sound.\" Adler added \"What began as a small, rebellious project has become a global celebration of individuality, community, and creative freedom. This anniversary is a tribute to the fans who kept it alive and kicking all these years.\"\nHome media.\nA Super 8 version of selected scenes of the film was made available. In 1983, Ode Records released \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show, Audience Par-Tic-I-Pation Album\", recorded at the 8th Street Playhouse. The recording consisted of the film's audio and the standardised call-backs from the audience. A home video release was made available in 1987 in the UK. In the US, the film (including documentary footage and extras) was released on VHS on 8 November 1990, retailing for $89.95. The film received two separate US LaserDisc releases in 1992 and 1997, with the film also being released on LaserDisc in France, Germany and Japan during the 1990s.\n20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released a DVD in the US on 23 October 2000, for the film's 25th anniversary. This one is a THX certified two-disc set that features the original theatrical version and an extended version. In Australia (Region 4) it was released on DVD in 2002, by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment South Pacific, while in the UK (Region 2) it was released on DVD on 14 February 2001. A 35th anniversary edition Blu-ray was released by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment in the US on 19 October 2010. The disc includes a newly created 7.1 surround sound mix, the original theatrical mono sound mix, and a 4K/2K image transfer from the original camera negative. In addition, new content featuring karaoke and a fan performance were included.\nA 45th anniversary edition Blu-ray was released in September 2020 by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment under the 20th Century Home Entertainment label. In October 2021, the film was added to Disney+ on the Star hub for users in locations such as the UK, Ireland and Canada. For the film's 50th anniversary, film was released on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on 7 October 2025 by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment under licence from Disney.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\n\"Chicago Sun-Times\" critic Roger Ebert noted that when first released, \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" was \"ignored by pretty much everyone, including the future fanatics who would eventually count the hundreds of times they'd seen it\". He considered it more a \"long-running social phenomenon\" than a movie, rating it 2.5 out of 4 stars and describing Curry as \"the best thing in the movie, maybe because he seems to be having the most fun\" but thinking the story would work better performed on stage for a live audience. Bill Henkin noted that \"Variety\" thought that the \"campy hijinks\" of the film seemed \"labored\", and also mentioned that the \"San Francisco Chronicle\"'s John Wasserman, who had liked the stage play in London, found the film \"lacking both charm and dramatic impact\". \"Newsweek\", in 1978, called the film \"tasteless, plotless and pointless\".\nReview aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a rating of 81% based on 51 reviews, and an average grade of 6.9/10, with the critical consensus reading \"\"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" brings its quirky characters in tight, but it's the narrative thrust that really drives audiences insane and keeps 'em doing the time warp again\". A number of contemporary critics find it compelling and enjoyable because of its offbeat and bizarre qualities; the BBC summarised: \"for those willing to experiment with something a little bit different, a little bit outr\u00e9, \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" has a lot to offer.\" \"The New York Times\" called it a \"low-budget freak show/cult classic/cultural institution\" with \"catchy\" songs. Geoff Andrew, of \"Time Out\", noted that the \"string of hummable songs gives it momentum, Gray's admirably straight-faced narrator holds it together, and a run on black lingerie takes care of almost everything else\", rating it 4 out of 5 stars. On the other hand, Dave Kehr of the \"Chicago Reader\" considered the wit to be \"too weak to sustain a film\" and thought that the \"songs all sound the same\".\nIn 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nBox office.\nIn its first year of release, the film grossed $1,032,000 in the United States and Canada and $200,650 internationally.\nIt fared better in 1976, grossing over $11 million in the United States and Canada and $2 million internationally for a worldwide total of $14.7 million. It grossed similar amounts for the next four years and had reached a gross of $57.9 million in the United States and Canada and $68.6 million worldwide by 1980. By 1984 it had reached $100 million worldwide and by 1986 it had reached that milestone in the United States and Canada and $124 million worldwide. By 1990, the film had grossed $125.6 million in the United States and Canada and $150 million worldwide. At that date, it had an estimated profit just from theatrical release grosses of $55 million. By 1999 it had grossed almost $140 million in the United States and Canada for a worldwide gross in excess of $164 million. Since 2007, it has grossed $2.6 million worldwide giving it a worldwide gross in excess of $166 million.\nCult following.\nOrigins.\n\"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" helped shape conditions of cult film's transition from art-house to exploitation style. The film developed a cult following in 1976 at the Waverly Theatre in New York, which developed into a standardised ritual. According to J. Hoberman, author of \"Midnight Movies\", it was after five months into the film's midnight run when lines began to be shouted by the audience. Louis Farese Jr., a normally quiet teacher, upon seeing the character Janet place a newspaper over her head to protect herself from rain, yelled, \"Buy an umbrella, you cheap bitch.\" Originally, Louis and other \"Rocky Horror\" pioneers, including Amy Lazarus, Theresa Krakauskas, and Bill O'Brian, did this to entertain each other, each week trying to come up with something new to make each other laugh. This quickly caught on with other theatre-goers and thus began this self-proclaimed \"counter point dialogue\", which became standard practice and was repeated nearly verbatim at each screening. Performance groups became a staple at \"Rocky Horror\" screenings due in part to the prominent New York City fan cast. The New York City cast was originally run by former schoolteacher and stand-up comic Sal Piro and his friend Dori Hartley, the latter of whom portrayed Dr. Frank N. Furter and was one of several performers, including Will Kohler as Brad Majors, Nora Poses as Janet, and Lilias Piro as Magenta, in a flexible rotating cast. The performances of the audience were scripted and actively discouraged improvising, being conformist in a similar way to the repressed characters.\nOn Halloween in 1976, people attended in costume and talked back to the screen, and by mid-1978, \"Rocky Horror\" was playing in over 50 locations on Fridays and Saturdays at midnight. Newsletters were published by local performance groups, and fans gathered for \"Rocky Horror\" conventions. By the end of 1979, there were twice-weekly showings at over 230 theatres. The National Fan Club was established in 1977 and later merged with the International Fan Club. The fan publication \"The Transylvanian\" printed a number of issues, and a semi-regular poster magazine was published as well as an official magazine.\nPerformance groups in the Los Angeles area originated at the Fox Theatre in 1977, where Michael Wolfson won a look-alike contest as Frank N. Furter, and won another at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard. Wolfson's group eventually performed in all of the L.A. area theatres screening \"Rocky Horror\", including the Balboa Theater in Balboa, The Cove at Hermosa Beach, and The Sands in Glendale. He was invited to perform at the Sombrero Playhouse in Phoenix, Arizona. At the Tiffany Theatre, the audience performance cast had the theatre's full cooperation; the local performers entered early and without charge. The fan playing Frank for this theatre was a transgender performer, D. Garret Gafford, who was out of work in 1978 and trying to raise the funds for a gender reassignment while spending the weekends performing at the Tiffany.\nBy 1978, \"Rocky Horror\" had moved from an earlier San Francisco location to the Strand Theatre located near the Tenderloin on Market Street. The performance group there, Double Feature/Celluloid Jam, was the first to act out and perform almost the entire film, unlike the New York cast at that time. The Strand cast was put together from former members of an early Berkeley group, disbanded due to less than enthusiastic management. Frank N. Furter was portrayed by Marni Scofidio, who, in 1979, attracted many of the older performers from Berkeley. Other members included Mishell Erickson as Columbia, her twin sister Denise Erickson as Magenta, Kathy Dolan as Janet, and Linda \"Lou\" Woods as Riff Raff. The Strand group performed at two large science fiction conventions in Los Angeles and San Francisco, were offered a spot at The Mabuhay, a local punk club, and performed for children's television of Argentina.\nLegacy.\nAnnual \"Rocky Horror\" conventions are held in varying locations, lasting days. Tucson, Arizona has been host a number of times, including 1999 with \"El Fishnet Fiesta\", and \"Queens of the Desert\" held in 2006. Vera Dika wrote that, to the fans, \"Rocky Horror\" is ritualistic and comparable to a religious event, with a compulsive, repeated cycle of going home and coming back to see the film each weekend. The audience call-backs are similar to responses in church during a mass. Many theatre troupes exist across the United States that produce shadow-cast performances where the actors play each part in the film in full costume, with props, as the movie plays on the big screen in a movie theatre. O'Brien's Orchestra, formerly known as the Queerios (based in Austin, Texas), is the longest running shadow-cast in Texas.\nThe film has a global following and remains popular. Subcultures such as \"Rocky Horror\" have also found a place on the Internet. Audience participation scripts for many cities are available for download from the internet. The internet has a number of \"Rocky Horror\" fan-run websites with various quizzes and information, specialising in different content, allowing fans to participate at a unique level.\nLGBT influence.\nMembers of the LGBT community comprised a large part of the \"Rocky Horror\" cult following; they identified with the embrace of sexual liberation and androgyny, and attended show after show, slowly forming a community. Judith A. Peraino compares Brad and Janet's initiation into Frank N. Furter's world to the self-discovery of \"queer identity\", and to the traditional initiation of \"virgins\" in the shadow screenings. June Thomas describes the midnight screenings in Newark, Delaware as a \"very queer scene\", which increased visibility for the LGBTQ community: \"The folks standing in line outside the State in fishnets and makeup every Saturday night undoubtedly widened the sphere of possibilities for gender expression on Main Street.\"\n\"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" remains a cultural phenomenon in both the US and UK Cult film participants are often people on the fringe of society who find connection and community at the screenings, although the film attracts fans of differing backgrounds all over the world.\n\"Bisexuality, The Rocky Horror Picture Show, and Me\", by Elizabeth Reba Weise, is part of the publication, \"\" (1991), an anthology edited by Loraine Hutchins and Lani Ka\u02bbahumanu about the history of the modern bisexual rights movement that is one of the first publications of bisexual literature.\nCultural influence.\n\"The Rocky Horror Picture Show\" has been featured in a number of other feature films and television series over the years. Episodes of \"The Simpsons\", \"The Venture Bros.\", \"Cold Case\", \"Tuca &amp; Bertie\", \"The Boondocks\", \"Glee\", \"The Drew Carey Show\", \"That '70s Show\", \"Deutschland 86\", \"Mickey Mouse Clubhouse\", and \"American Dad!\" spotlight \"Rocky Horror\", as do films such as \"Vice Squad\" (1982), \"Halloween II\" (2009), and \"The Perks of Being a Wallflower\" (2012). The 1980 film \"Fame\" featured the audience reciting their callback lines to the screen and dancing the Time Warp, the dance from the stage show and film, which has become a novelty dance at parties. Dr. Frank-N-Furter influenced the appearance of Emporio Ivankov, a transvestite character from the manga/anime series \"One Piece\". Director Rob Zombie cited \"Rocky Horror\" as a major influence on his film \"House of 1000 Corpses\" (2003), while the film's fan culture of cosplaying and audience participation during screenings laid the groundwork for the similarly influential cult following surrounding Tommy Wiseau's \"The Room\" (2003). \"Rocky Horror\" also inspired John McPhail's zombie musical \"Anna and the Apocalypse\" (2018). Sabrina Carpenter's \"Tears\" music video takes inspiration from the film, with her portraying a character similar to Janet Weiss and actor Colman Domingo featured playing a drag tribute to Dr. Frank-N-Furter.\n50 year anniversary.\nIn 2025, the film celebrated its 50-year anniversary. Celebratory events in Los Angeles included a talk at the Academy Museum which included the attendance of Tim Curry and a screening and fan-centered event at the Roxy.\nSequel.\nO'Brien drafted a sequel titled \"Rocky Horror Shows His Heels\" in 1979. This script featured the return of all of the characters from the original film, and O'Brien wished to reunite the original production team. But Sharman did not wish to revisit the original concept so directly, nor did Tim Curry wish to reprise his role.\nInstead, Sharman reunited with O'Brien to film \"Shock Treatment\" in 1981, a stand-alone feature with little continuity from the original film. Initially conceived and scripted in 1980 as \"The Brad and Janet Show\", the film repurposed several songs from the earlier \"Rocky Horror Shows His Heels\" project with lyrical adjustments, and depicting the characters' continuing adventures in the town of Denton. Production was forced to adjust amidst the Screen Actors Guild strike; eventually the entire film was shot on a single sound stage. \"Shock Treatment\" was poorly received by critics and audiences upon release (largely due to the absence of Curry, Sarandon, and Bostwick) but over time has built its own niche following.\nO'Brien revisited the notion for a direct \"RHPS\" sequel in 1991, writing \"Revenge of the Old Queen\". Producer Michael White had hoped to begin work on the production and described the script as being \"in the same style as the other one. It has reflections of the past in it.\" \"Revenge of the Old Queen\" commenced pre-production; however, after studio head Joe Roth was ousted from Fox in 1993, the project was shelved indefinitely. Although the script went unpublished, bootleg copies have leaked online, and a song from the original demo tape circulates among fans. The script remains the property of Fox, producer of the two prior films, and remains unlikely to be revived.\nBetween 1999 and 2001, O'Brien was working on a third attempted sequel project with the working title \"Rocky Horror: The Second Coming\", intended as a stage production, with an option to adapt to film if met with success. This script integrated plot elements from \"Rocky Horror Shows His Heels\" paired with all-new songs. O'Brien completed a first draft of this script (which was read by Terry Jones). In the story, Brad's brother Steve seeks revenge on the aliens in the first film after Brad becomes a Las Vegas go-go dancer and falls to his death from a trapeze wearing only six-inch heels and a rhinestone choker. Also revealed is Sonny, the illegitimate son of Janet and Frank and heir to the throne of Transexual. The script never made it past early draft stages but has been shared on many fan sites.\nO'Brien produced \"Shock Treatment\" for the theatrical stage with a premiere at the King's Head Theatre in Islington, London in spring 2015.\nRemake.\n\"The Rocky Horror Glee Show\" aired on 26 October 2010, as part of the second season of the television series \"Glee\"\u2014and recreated several scenes from the film, including the opening credits. It featured Barry Bostwick and Meat Loaf in cameo roles. An covering seven songs from the movie was released on 19 October 2010.\nOn 10 April 2015, the Fox Network announced it would air a modern-day reimagining of the film, titled \"The Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let's Do the Time Warp Again\". On 22 October 2015, Fox announced that the role of Dr. Frank N. Furter would be played by transgender actress Laverne Cox. Ryan McCartan played Brad, alongside Victoria Justice as Janet, with Reeve Carney as Riff Raff and singer/model Staz Nair as Rocky. Adam Lambert portrays Eddie. Tim Curry, who portrayed Dr. Frank N. Furter in the original film, portrays the Criminologist. On 1 February 2016, the network announced that Broadway veteran Annaleigh Ashford would portray Columbia. On 5 February 2016, Ben Vereen joined the cast as Dr. Everett von Scott.\nKenny Ortega, best known for the \"High School Musical\" franchise and \"Michael Jackson's This Is It\" (2009) directed, choreographed and executive-produced the remake; Lou Adler, who was an executive producer of the original film, has the same role for the new film, which premiered on Fox on 20 October 2016.\nVideo game.\nAn early video game adaptation was released in 1985 on Commodore 64 and 128.\nAnother adaptation, by Freakzone Games, was released on 27 October 2024, on Microsoft Windows, Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 5, Xbox Series X and Series S.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
