{"id": "20486", "revid": "43209119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20486", "title": "Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet", "text": "German rocket-powered interceptor\nThe Messerschmitt Me\u00a0163 Komet is a rocket-powered interceptor aircraft primarily designed and produced by the German aircraft manufacturer Messerschmitt. It is the only operational rocket-powered fighter aircraft in history as well as the first piloted aircraft of any type to exceed in level flight.\nDevelopment of what would become the Me 163 can be traced back to 1937 and the work of the German aeronautical engineer Alexander Lippisch and the \"Deutsche Forschungsanstalt f\u00fcr Segelflug\" (DFS). Initially an experimental programme that drew upon traditional glider designs while integrating various new innovations such as the rocket engine, the development ran into organisational issues until Lippisch and his team were transferred to Messerschmitt in January 1939. Plans for a propeller-powered intermediary aircraft were quickly dropped in favour of proceeding directly to rocket propulsion. On 1 September 1941, the prototype performed its maiden flight, quickly demonstrating its unprecedented performance and the qualities of its design. Having been suitably impressed, German officials quickly enacted plans that aimed for the widespread introduction of Me 163 point-defence interceptors across Germany. During December 1941, work began on the upgraded \"Me 163B\", which was optimized for large-scale production.\nDuring early July 1944, German test pilot Heini Dittmar reached , an unofficial flight airspeed record that remained unmatched by turbojet-powered aircraft until 1953. That same year, the Me 163 began flying operational missions, being typically used to defend against incoming enemy bombing raids. As part of their alliance with the Empire of Japan, Germany provided design schematics and a single Me 163 to the country; this led to the development of the Mitsubishi J8M. By the end of the conflict, roughly 370 Komets had been completed, most of which were being used operationally. Some of the aircraft's shortcomings were never addressed, and it was less effective in combat than predicted. Capable of a maximum of 7.5 minutes of powered flight, its range fell short of projections and greatly limited its potential. Efforts to improve the aircraft were made (most notably the development of the Messerschmitt Me 263), but many of these did not see actual combat due to the sustained advance of the Allied powers into Germany in 1945.\nAfter being introduced into service the Me 163 was credited with the destruction of between 9 and 18 Allied aircraft against 10 losses. Aside from combat losses, numerous Me 163 pilots were killed upon takeoff or during testing and training flights. This high loss rate was, at least partially, a result of the later models' use of rocket propellant which was not only highly volatile but also corrosive and hazardous to humans. One noteworthy fatality was that of Josef P\u00f6hs, a German fighter ace and \"Oberleutnant\" in the \"Luftwaffe\", who was killed in 1943 through exposure to \"T-Stoff\" in combination with injuries sustained during a failed takeoff that ruptured a fuel line. Besides Nazi Germany, no nation ever made operational use of the Me 163; the only other operational rocket-powered aircraft was the Japanese Yokosuka MXY-7 Ohka which was a manned flying bomb.\nDevelopment.\nEarly work by Alexander Lippisch.\nThe world's first piloted rocket flights were carried out by the German vehicle manufacturer Opel RAK. The first flight of such an aircraft, a rocket-modified glider designed by Alexander Lippisch, took place at Wasserkuppe Mountain on 11 June 1928. Two black powder rockets, designed by Friedrich Wilhelm Sander, were fitted to the aircraft\u2019s rear. Due to the use of a forward canard arrangement, Lippisch named the glider \"Ente\", German for duck. After a failed first attempt, one rocket finally ignited as intended and the Ente lifted off, test pilot Fritz Stamer flying it for before making a controlled landing. Another flight using both rockets did not go as planned, as one of the two rockets exploded; the damaged aircraft took off due to the active intact rocket, but the control surfaces did not work, and with much of it aflame Stamer barely survived while fire destroyed the Ente.\nAfter the Ente's loss, Fritz von Opel commissioned a dedicated rocket plane, the Opel RAK.1. It was designed by Julius Hatry, another early Wasserkuppe pioneer, and also equipped with Friedrich Sander's Opel RAK rockets. The first public flight of a rocket plane took place in Frankfurt on 30 September 1929. Lippisch also continued his independent design work over the following decades, and in particular using rocketry, leading eventually to the Me 163.\nBackground.\nDuring 1937, work on what would become the Me 163 commenced, the initial work was conducted under the aegis of the \"Deutsche Forschungsanstalt f\u00fcr Segelflug\" (DFS)\u2014the German Institute for the study of sailplane flight. Their first design was a conversion of the earlier Lippisch Delta IV known as the DFS\u00a039 and used purely as a glider testbed of the airframe. A larger follow-on version with a small propeller engine started as the DFS 194. This version used wingtip-mounted rudders that Lippisch felt would cause problems at high speed. Lippisch changed the system of vertical stabilization for the DFS 194's airframe from the earlier DFS 39's wingtip rudders, to a conventional vertical stabilizer at the rear of the aircraft. The design included a number of features from its origins as a glider, notably a skid used for landings, which could be retracted into the aircraft's keel in flight. For takeoff, a pair of wheels, each mounted onto the ends of a specially designed cross-axle, were needed due to the weight of the fuel, but the wheels, forming a takeoff dolly under the landing skid, were released shortly after takeoff.\nThe designers planned to use the forthcoming Walter R-1-203 \"cold engine\" of thrust, which like the self-contained Walter HWK 109-500 \"Starthilfe\" RATO booster rocket unit, used a monopropellant consisting of stabilized HTP known by the name T-Stoff. Heinkel had also been working with Hellmuth Walter on his rocket engines, mounting them in the He 112R's tail for testing \u2013 this was done in competition with Wernher von Braun's bi-propellant, alcohol/LOX-fed rocket motors, also with the He 112 as a test airframe \u2013 and with the Walter catalyzed HTP propulsion format for the first purpose-designed, liquid-fueled rocket aircraft, the He 176. Heinkel had also been selected to produce the fuselage for the DFS 194 when it entered production, as it was felt that the monopropellant fuel's high reactivity with organic matter would be too dangerous in a wooden fuselage structure. Work continued under the code name \"Projekt X\".\nThe division of work between DFS and Heinkel led to problems, notably that DFS seemed incapable of building even a prototype fuselage. Lippisch eventually asked to leave DFS and join Messerschmitt instead. On 2 January 1939, Lippisch moved with his team and the partly completed DFS 194 to the Messerschmitt works at Augsburg. The delays caused by this move allowed the engine development to catch up. Once at Messerschmitt, the team decided to abandon the propeller-powered version and move directly to rocket-power. The airframe was completed in Augsburg and in early 1940 was shipped to receive its engine at Peenem\u00fcnde-West, one of the quartet of \"Erprobungsstelle\"-designated military aviation test facilities of the Reich. Although the engine proved to be extremely unreliable, the aircraft had excellent performance, reaching a speed of in one test.\nIt is important to note that the wing sweep incorporated in the design stemmed from its tailless nature and the need to balance centre of gravity and centre of lift positions for stability purposes. The sweep in both the Me 163 and Me 262 stemmed from these CG and CL issues (heavier than planned engines in the case of the Me 262), not from high speed aerodynamic requirements.\nIn the Me\u00a0163B and -C subtypes, a ram-air turbine was installed on the extreme nose of the fuselage that, along with a backup lead\u2013acid battery inside the fuselage that it charged, provided electrical power for various pieces of onboard equipment. Such apparatus included the radio, reflector gunsight (either Revi16B, -C, or -D), direction finder, compass, firing circuits for the twin cannons, as well as some of the lighting for the cockpit instrumentation. Limited battery capacity made the electrical generator necessary.\nThe airspeed indicator averaged readings from two sources: the pitot tube on the leading edge of the port wing, and a small pitot inlet in the nose, just above the top edge of the underskid channel. There was a further tapping-off of pressure-ducted air from the pitot tube which also provided the rate of climb indicator with its source.\nThe resistance group around the Austrian priest Heinrich Maier (later executed) had contacts with the Heinkelwerke in Jenbach in Tyrol, where important components for the Me 163 were also produced. The group supplied location sketches of the production facilities to the Allies, thus greatly aiding Allied bombers in carrying out targeted air strikes against them.\nMe 163A.\nIn early 1941, production of a prototype series, known as the \"Me\u00a0163\", began. Secrecy was such that the RLM's \"GL/C\" airframe number, \"8-163\", was actually that of the earlier Messerschmitt Bf 163. Three Bf 163-prototypes (V1 to V3) had been built, and it was thought that foreign intelligence services would conclude any reference to the number \"163\" was for that earlier design. During May 1941, the first prototype Me 163A, V4, was shipped to Peenem\u00fcnde to receive the HWK RII-203 engine. By 2 October 1941, Me 163A V4, bearing the radio call sign letters, or \"Stammkennzeichen\", \"KE+SW\", set a new world speed record of , piloted by Heini Dittmar, with no apparent damage to the aircraft during the attempt. Some postwar aviation history publications stated that the Me 163A V3 was thought to have set the record. The record figure would not be officially surpassed until after the war, specifically by the American Douglas D-558-1 on 20 August 1947. Ten Me\u00a0163As (V4-V13) were built for pilot training and further tests; these were unarmed.\nDuring testing of the prototype (A-series) aircraft, the jettisonable undercarriage presented a serious problem. The original dollies possessed well-sprung independent suspension for each wheel, and as the aircraft took off, the large springs rebounded and threw the dolly upward, striking the aircraft. In comparison, the production (B-series) aircraft used much simpler, crossbeam-axled dollies, and relied on the landing skid's oleo-pneumatic strut to absorb ground-running impacts during the takeoff run, as well as to absorb the shock of landing. If the hydraulic cylinder was malfunctioning, or the skid mistakenly left during a landing procedure in the \"locked and lowered\" position (as it had to be for takeoff), the impact of a hard touchdown on the skid could cause back injuries to the pilot.\nOnce on the ground, the aircraft had to be retrieved by a \"Scheuch-Schlepper\", a converted small agricultural vehicle, originally based on the concept of the two-wheel tractor, carrying a detachable third swiveling wheel at the extreme rear of its design for stability in normal use\u2014this swiveling third wheel was replaced with a pivoting, special retrieval trailer that rolled on a pair of short, triple-wheeled continuous track setups (one per side) for military service wherever the \"Komet\" was based. This retrieval trailer usually possessed twin trailing lifting arms, that lifted the stationary aircraft off the ground from under each wing whenever it was not already on its twin-wheel dolly main gear, as when the aircraft had landed on its ventral skid and tailwheel after a mission. Another form of trailer, known also to have been trialled with the later B-series examples, was tried during the \"Komet\"'s test phase, which used a pair of sausage-shaped air bags in place of the lifting arms and could also be towed by the \"Scheuch-Schlepper\" tractor, inflating the air bags to lift the aircraft. The three-wheeled \"Scheuch-Schlepper\" tractor used for the task was originally meant for farm use, but such a vehicle with a specialized trailer\u2014which could also lift the Me 163's airframe completely clear of the ground to effect the recovery as a normal part of the Me 163's intended use\u2014was required as the \"Komet\" was unpowered after exhausting its rocket propellants, and lacked main wheels after landing, from the jettisoning of its \"dolly\" main gear at takeoff.\nDuring flight testing, the superior gliding capability of the \"Komet\" proved detrimental to safe landing. As the now un-powered aircraft completed its final descent, it could rise back into the air with the slightest updraft. Since the approach was unpowered, there was no opportunity to make another landing pass. For production models, a set of landing flaps allowed somewhat more controlled landings. This issue remained a problem throughout the program. Nevertheless, the overall performance was tremendous, and plans were made to put Me 163 squadrons all over Germany in around any potential target. However, while the development of an operational version was encouraged, the Me 163 programme was not assigned the highest priority due to competition from other projects; this lack of focus protracted its development.\nMe 163B.\nIn December 1941, work on an upgraded design began. A simplified construction format for the airframe was deemed necessary, as the Me 163A version was not truly optimized for large-scale production. The result was the Me 163B subtype that had the desired, more mass-producible fuselage, wing panel, retractable landing skid and tailwheel designs with the previously mentioned unsprung dolly takeoff gear, and a generally one-piece conical nose for the forward fuselage which could incorporate a turbine for supplementary electrical power while in flight, as well as a one-piece, perimeter frame-only hinged canopy for ease of production.\nMeanwhile, Walter had started work on the newer HWK 109-509 bipropellant \"hot engine\", which added a fuel of hydrazine hydrate and methanol, designated \"C-Stoff\", that burned with the oxygen-rich exhaust from the T-Stoff, used as the oxidizer, for added thrust. The new powerplant and numerous detail design changes meant to simplify production over the general A-series airframe design resulted in the significantly modified Me 163B of late 1941. Due to the \"Reichsluftfahrtministerium\" requirement that it should be possible to throttle the engine, the original power plant grew complicated and lost reliability. The \"Komet\" carried no more than of fuel, which was exhausted in 4 to 7 minutes, limiting its flight radius to .\nThe fuel system was particularly troublesome, as leaks incurred during hard landings easily caused fires and explosions. Metal fuel lines and fittings, which failed in unpredictable ways, were used as this was the best technology available. Both fuel and oxidizer were toxic and required extreme care when loading in the aircraft, yet there were occasions when \"Komets\" exploded on the tarmac from the propellants' hypergolic nature. Both propellants were clear fluids, and different tanker trucks were used for delivering each propellant to a particular \"Komet\" aircraft, usually the \"C-Stoff\" hydrazine/methanol-base fuel first. For safety purposes, the truck left the immediate area of the aircraft following its delivery and capping off of the \"Komet\"'s fuel tanks from a rear located dorsal fuselage filling point just ahead of the \"Komet\"'s vertical stabilizer. Then, the other tanker truck carrying the very reactive T-Stoff hydrogen peroxide oxidizer would deliver its load through a different filling point on the \"Komet\"'s dorsal fuselage surface, located not far behind the rear edge of the canopy.\nThe corrosive nature of the liquids, especially for the T-Stoff oxidizer, required special protective gear for the pilots. To help prevent explosions, the engine and the propellant storage and delivery systems were frequently and thoroughly hosed down and flushed with water run through the propellant tanks and the rocket engine's propellant systems before and after flights, to clean out any remnants. The relative \"closeness\" to the pilot of some 120 litres (31.7 US gal) of the chemically active T-Stoff oxidizer, split between two auxiliary oxidizer tanks of equal volume to either side within the lower flanks of the cockpit area\u2014besides the main oxidizer tank of some 1,040-litre (275 US gal) volume just behind the cockpit's rear wall, could present a serious or even fatal hazard to a pilot in a fuel-caused mishap.\nTwo prototypes were followed by 30 Me\u00a0163\u00a0B-0 pre-production aircraft armed with two 20\u00a0mm MG 151/20 cannon and some 400 Me\u00a0163\u00a0B-1 production aircraft armed with two 30\u00a0mm (1.18-inch) MK 108 cannons, but which were otherwise similar to the B-0. Early in the war, when German aircraft firms created versions of their aircraft for export purposes, the a was added to export (\"ausland\") variants (B-1a) or to foreign-built variants (Ba-1) but for the Me 163, there were neither export nor a foreign-built version. Later in the war, the \"a\" and successive letters were used for aircraft using different engine types: as Me\u00a0262\u00a0A-1a with Jumo engines, Me\u00a0262\u00a0A-1b with BMW engines. As the Me 163 was planned with an alternative BMW P3330A rocket engine, it is likely the \"a\" was used for this purpose on early examples. Only one Me 163, the V10, was tested with the BMW engine, so this designation suffix was soon dropped. The Me\u00a0163\u00a0B-1a did not have any wingtip \"washout\" built into it, and as a result, it had a much higher critical Mach number than the Me\u00a0163\u00a0B-1.\nThe Me\u00a0163B had very docile landing characteristics, mostly due to its integrated leading edge slots, located directly forward of the elevon control surfaces, and just behind and at the same angle as the wing's leading edge. It would neither stall nor spin. One could fly the \"Komet\" with the stick full back, and have it in a turn and then use the rudder to take it out of the turn, and not fear it snapping into a spin. It would also slip well. Because the Me 163B's airframe design was derived from glider design concepts, it had excellent gliding qualities, and the tendency to continue flying above the ground due to ground effect. On the other hand, making a too close turn from base onto final, the sink rate would increase, and one could quickly lose altitude and come in short. Another main difference from a propeller-driven aircraft is that there was no slipstream over the rudder. On takeoff, one had to attain the speed at which the aerodynamic controls become effective\u2014about \u2014and that was always a critical factor. Pilots accustomed to flying propeller-driven aircraft had to be careful that the control stick was not somewhere in the corner when the control surfaces began working. These, like many other specific Me 163 problems, would be resolved by specific training.\nThe performance of the Me 163 far exceeded that of contemporary piston engine fighters. At a speed of over the aircraft would take off, in a so-called \"\"scharfer Start\"\" (\"hot start\") from the ground, from its two-wheeled dolly. The aircraft would be kept at level flight at low altitude until the best climbing speed of around was reached, at which point it would jettison the dolly, retract its extendable skid using a knob-topped release lever just forward of the throttle (as both levers were located atop the cockpit's portside 120-litre T-Stoff oxidizer tank) that engaged the aforementioned pneumatic cylinder, and then pull up into a 70\u00b0 angle of climb, to a bomber's altitude. It could go higher if required, reaching in an unheard-of three minutes. Once there, it would level off and quickly accelerate to around or faster, which no Allied fighter could match. The usable Mach number was similar to that of the Me 262, but because of the high thrust-to-drag ratio, it was much easier for the pilot to lose track of the onset of severe compressibility and risk loss of control. A Mach warning system was installed as a result. The aircraft was remarkably agile and docile to fly at high speed. According to Rudolf Opitz, chief test pilot of the Me 163, it could \"fly circles around any other fighter of its time\".\nBy this point, Messerschmitt was completely overloaded with production of the Messerschmitt Bf 109 and attempts to bring the Me 210 into service. Production in a dispersed network was handed over to Klemm, but quality control problems were such that the work was later given to Junkers, who were, at that time, underworked. As with many German designs of World War II's later years, parts of the airframe (especially the wings) were made of wood by furniture manufacturers. The older Me 163A and first Me 163B prototypes were used for training. It was planned to introduce the Me 163S, which removed the rocket engine and tank capacity and placed a second seat for the instructor above and behind the pilot, with his own canopy. The Me 163S would be used for glider landing training, which as explained above, was essential to operate the Me 163. It appears that the Me 163S was produced via the conversion of the earlier Me 163B series prototypes.\nIn service, the Me 163 turned out to be difficult to use against enemy aircraft. Its tremendous speed and climb rate meant a target was reached and passed in a matter of seconds. Although the Me 163 was a stable gun platform, it required excellent marksmanship to bring down an enemy bomber. The \"Komet\" was equipped with two 30\u00a0mm (1.18\u00a0inch) MK 108 cannons that had a relatively low muzzle velocity of 540 meters per second (1,772\u00a0feet/sec), and were accurate only at short range, making it almost impossible to hit a slow moving bomber. Four or five hits were typically needed to take down a B-17.\nInnovative methods were employed to help pilots achieve kills. The most promising was a weapon called the \"Sonderger\u00e4t 500 J\u00e4gerfaust\". This included 10 single-shot, short-barreled 50\u00a0mm (2-inch) guns pointing upwards, similar to \"Schr\u00e4ge Musik\". Five were mounted in the wing roots on each side of the aircraft. A photocell in the upper surface of the \"Komet\" triggered the weapons by detecting the change in brightness when the aircraft flew under a bomber. As each shell shot upwards, the disposable gun barrel that fired it was ejected downwards, thus making the weapon recoilless. It appears that this weapon was used in combat only once, resulting in the destruction of a Lancaster bomber on 10 April 1945.\nLater versions.\nThe biggest concern about the design was the short flight time, which never met the projections made by Walter. Being capable of a maximum of 7.5 minutes of powered flight (which was only roughly 25% of the 30-minute combat time that the \"light-class\" Heinkel He 162A \"Spatz\" single-BMW 003 jet fighter possessed), when the Komet entered combat in April 1945; the solely rocket-powered Me 163B fighter truly was a dedicated point defense interceptor. To improve this, the Walter firm began developing two more advanced versions of the 509A rocket engine, the 509B and C, each with two separate combustion chambers of differing sizes, one above the other, for greater efficiency. The B-version possessed a main combustion chamber\u2014usually termed in German as a \"Hauptofen\" on these dual-chamber subtypes\u2014with an exterior shape much like that on the single chamber 509A version, with the C-version having a forward chamber shape of a more cylindrical nature, designed for a higher top thrust level of some 2,000\u00a0kg (4,410\u00a0lb) of thrust, while simultaneously dropping the use of the cubic-shape frame for the forward engine propellant flow/turbopump mechanisms as used by the earlier -A and -B versions. The 509B and 509C rocket motors' main combustion chambers were supported by the thrust tube exactly as the 509A motor's single chamber had been. They were tuned for high power for takeoff and climb. The added, smaller volume lower chamber on the two later models, nicknamed the \"Marschofen\" with approximately of thrust at its top performance level, was intended for more efficient, lower power cruise flight. These HWK 109\u2013509B and C motors would improve endurance by as much as 50%. Two 163 Bs, models V6 and V18, were experimentally fitted with the lower-thrust B-version of the new twin-chamber engine (mandating twin combustion chamber pressure gauges on the instrument panel of any \"Komet\" equipped with them), a retractable tailwheel, and tested in spring 1944.\nThe main \"Hauptofen\" combustion chamber of the 509B engine used for the B V6 and V18 occupied the same location as the A-series' engine did, with the lower \"Marschofen\" cruise chamber housed within the retractable tailwheel's appropriately widened ventral tail fairing. On 6 July 1944, the Me 163B V18 (VA+SP), like the B V6 basically a standard production Me 163B airframe outfitted with the new, twin-chamber \"cruiser\" rocket motor with the aforementioned airframe modifications beneath the original rocket motor orifice to accept the extra combustion chamber, set a new unofficial world speed record of , piloted by Heini Dittmar, and landed with almost all of the vertical rudder surface broken away from flutter. This record was not broken in terms of absolute speed until 6 November 1947 by Chuck Yeager in flight number 58 that was part of the Bell X-1 test program, with a , or Mach 1.35 supersonic speed, recorded at an altitude of nearly . However, it is unclear if Dittmar's flight achieved sufficient altitude for its speed to be considered supersonic, as the X-1 did.\nThe X-1 never exceeded Dittmar's speed from a normal runway \"\"scharfer Start\"\" liftoff. Heini Dittmar had reached the performance, after a normal \"hot start\" ground takeoff, without an air drop from a mother ship. Neville Duke exceeded Heini Dittmar's record mark roughly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442 years after Yeager's achievement (and some 263\u00a0km/h short of it) on 31 August 1953 with the Hawker Hunter F Mk3 at a speed of , after a normal ground start. Postwar experimental aircraft of the aerodynamic configuration that the Me 163 used, were found to have serious stability problems when entering transonic flight, like the similarly configured, and turbojet powered, Northrop X-4 Bantam and de Havilland DH 108, which made the V18's record with the Walter 509B \"cruiser\" rocket motor more remarkable.\nWaldemar Voigt of Messerschmitt's \"Oberammergau\" project and development offices started a redesign of the 163 to incorporate the new twin-chamber Walter rocket engine, as well as fix other problems. The resulting Me 163C design featured a larger wing through the addition of an insert at the wing root, an extended fuselage with extra tank capacity through the addition of a plug insert behind the wing, a ventral fairing whose aft section possessed a retractable tailwheel design closely resembling that pioneered on the Me 163B V6, and a new pressurized cockpit topped with a bubble canopy for improved visibility, on a fuselage that had dispensed with the earlier B-version's dorsal fairing. The additional tank capacity and cockpit pressurization allowed the maximum altitude to increase to , as well as improving powered time to about 12 minutes, almost doubling combat time (from about five minutes to nine). Three Me\u00a0163\u00a0C-1a prototypes were planned, but it appears only one was flown, but without its intended engine.\nBy this time the project was moved to Junkers. There, a new design effort under the direction of Heinrich Hertel at Dessau attempted to improve the \"Komet\". The Hertel team had to compete with the Lippisch team and their Me 163C. Hertel investigated the Me 163 and found it was not well suited for mass production and not optimized as a fighter aircraft, with the most glaring deficiency being the lack of retractable landing gear. To accommodate this, what would eventually become the Me 263 V1 prototype would be fitted with the desired tricycle gear, also accommodating the twin-chamber Walter rocket from the start\u2014later it was assigned to the Ju 248 program.\nThe resulting \"Junkers Ju 248\" used a three-section fuselage to ease construction. The V1 prototype was completed for testing in August 1944, and was glider-tested behind a Junkers Ju 188. Some sources state that the Walter 109\u2013509C engine was fitted in September, but it was probably never tested under power. At this point the RLM reassigned the project to Messerschmitt, where it became the Messerschmitt Me 263. This appears to have been a formality only, with Junkers continuing the work and planning production. By the time the design was ready to go into production, the plant where it was to be built was overrun by Soviet forces. While it did not reach operational status, the work was briefly continued by the Soviet Mikoyan-Gurevich (MiG) design bureau as the Mikoyan-Gurevich I-270.\nOperational history.\nThe initial test deployment of the Me 163A, to acquaint prospective pilots with the world's first rocket-powered fighter, occurred with \"Erprobungskommando 16\" (Service Test Unit 16, EK 16), led by \"Major\" Wolfgang Sp\u00e4te and first established in late 1942, receiving their eight A-model service test aircraft by July 1943. Their initial base was as the \"Erprobungsstelle\" (test facility) at the Peenem\u00fcnde-West field. They departed permanently the day after an RAF bombing raid on the area on 17 August 1943, moving southwards, to the base at Anklam, near the Baltic coast. Their stay was brief, as a few weeks later they were placed in northwest Germany, based at the military airfield at Bad Zwischenahn from August 1943 to August 1944. EK 16 received their first B-series armed Komets in January 1944, and was ready for action by May while at Bad Zwischenahn. \"Major\" Sp\u00e4te flew the first-ever Me 163B combat sortie on 13 May 1944 from the Bad Zwischenahn base, with the Me 163B armed prototype (V41), bearing the \"Stammkennzeichen\" PK+QL.\nDuring early 1944, routine aerial reconnaissance flights over German aerodromes had made the Allies aware of the existence of the Me 163, but as EK 16 commenced small-scale combat operations in May 1944, the Me 163B's unsurpassed velocity was something Allied fighter pilots were at a loss to counter. The \"Komets\" attacked singly or in pairs, often even faster than the intercepting fighters could dive. A typical Me 163 tactic was to fly vertically upward through the bombers at , climb to , then dive through the formation again, firing as they went. This approach afforded the pilot two brief chances to fire a few rounds from his cannons before gliding back to his airfield. The pilots reported it was possible to make four passes on a bomber, but only if it was flying alone. According to the historian Mano Ziegler, German officials were allegedly considering using the Me 163 to directly ram into enemy aircraft in suicide attacks; this desperate tactic was never actually used. \nProspective Me163 pilots received training in \"Stummelhabicht\" gliders which, like the Komet, had a short wingspan and high landing speed. Training included gunnery practice with a machine pistol mounted in the glider nose. As the cockpit was unpressurized, the operational ceiling was limited by what the pilot could endure for several minutes while breathing oxygen from a mask, without losing consciousness. Pilots underwent altitude chamber training to harden them against the rigors of operating in the thin air of the stratosphere without a pressure suit. Special low fiber diets were prepared for pilots, as gas in the gastrointestinal tract would expand rapidly during ascent.\nFollowing the initial combat trial missions of the Me 163B with EK 16, during the winter and spring of 1944 \"Major\" Sp\u00e4te formed the Luftwaffe's first dedicated Me 163 fighter wing, \"Jagdgeschwader\" 400 (JG 400), in Brandis, near Leipzig. JG 400's purpose was to provide additional protection for the Leuna synthetic gasoline works which were raided frequently during almost all of 1944. A further group was stationed at Stargard near Stettin to protect the large synthetic fuel plant at P\u00f6litz (today Police, Poland). Further defensive units of rocket fighters were planned for Berlin, the Ruhr, and the German Bight.\nThe first actions involving the Me 163B in regular Luftwaffe active service occurred on 28 July 1944, from I./JG 400's base at Brandis, when two USAAF B-17 Flying Fortress were attacked without confirmed kills. Combat operations continued from May 1944 to spring 1945. During this time, there were nine confirmed kills with ten Me 163s lost. \"Feldwebel\" Siegfried Schubert was the most successful pilot, with three bombers to his credit. Each engagement would see as many as a dozen Me 163s at a time launched to challenge the B-17s.\nAllied fighter pilots quickly observed the short duration of the Me 163's powered flight, and adapted their tactics to take advantage of this. The fighters would delay engaging until after the engine had exhausted its propellant before pouncing on the unpowered \"Komet\". Even with this handicap, the aircraft was extremely manoeuvrable in gliding flight and thus was not a straightforward target to down. Another Allied method of engagement was to attack the airfields from which the Komets operated, performing strafing runs upon them after the Me 163s had landed. Due to the skid-based landing gear system, the Komet was immobile until the \"Scheuch-Schlepper\" tractor could back the trailer up to the nose of the aircraft, place its two rear arms under the wing panels, and jack up the trailer's arms to hoist the aircraft off the ground or place it back on its take-off dolly to tow it back to its maintenance area.\nAt the end of 1944, 91 aircraft had been delivered to JG 400, but a persistent lack of fuel had kept most of them grounded. It was clear that the original plan for a huge network of Me 163 bases would never be realized. Up to that point, JG 400 had lost only six aircraft due to enemy action. Nine Me 163s had been lost to other causes, remarkably few for such a revolutionary and technologically advanced aircraft. Into early 1945, the type continued to be flown to defend high priority targets, such as the Daimler Benz tank factory in Berlin. In the final days of Nazi Germany, the Me 163 was given up in favor of the more successful Me\u00a0262. At the beginning of May 1945, Me 163 operations were stopped, the JG 400 disbanded, and many of its pilots sent to fly Me 262s.\nIn any operational sense, the \"Komet\" was a failure. Although it shot down sixteen aircraft, mainly four-engined bombers, it did not warrant the effort put into the project. Due to fuel shortages late in the war, few went into combat, and it took an experienced pilot with excellent shooting skills to achieve kills. The \"Komet\" also inspired later rocket planes such as the vertical-launch Bachem Ba 349 Natter. Ultimately, the point defense role that the Me 163 played would be taken over by the surface-to-air missile, Messerschmitt's own example being the Enzian.\nPostwar flight.\nCaptain Eric Brown RN, Chief Naval Test Pilot and commanding officer of the Captured Enemy Aircraft Flight, who tested the Me 163 at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough, said, \"The Me 163 was an aeroplane that you could not afford to just step into the aircraft and say 'You know, I'm going to fly it to the limit.' You had very much to familiarise yourself with it because it was state-of-the-art and the technology used.\" Acting unofficially, after a spate of accidents involving Allied personnel flying captured German aircraft resulted in official disapproval of such flights, Brown was determined to fly a powered Komet. On around 17 May 1945, he flew an Me 163B at Husum with the help of a cooperative German ground crew, after initial towed flights in an Me 163A to familiarise himself with the handling.\nThe day before the flight, Brown and his ground crew had performed an engine run on the chosen Me 163B to ensure that everything was running correctly, the German crew being apprehensive should an accident befall Brown, until being given a disclaimer signed by him to the effect that they were acting under his orders. On the rocket-powered \"\"scharfer-start\"\" takeoff the next day, after dropping the takeoff dolly and retracting the skid, Brown later described the resultant climb as \"like being in charge of a runaway train\", the aircraft reaching altitude in 2 minutes, 45 seconds. During the flight, while practicing attacking passes at an American B-17 bomber, he was surprised at how well the Komet accelerated in the dive with the engine shut down. When the flight was over Brown had no problems on the approach to the airfield; apart from the rather restricted view from the cockpit due to the flat angle of glide, the aircraft touching down at . Once down safely, Brown and his much-relieved ground crew celebrated with a drink.\nBeyond Brown's unauthorised flight, the British never tested the Me 163 under power themselves; due to the danger of its hypergolic propellants it was only flown unpowered. Brown himself piloted RAE's Komet \"VF241\" on a number of occasions, the rocket motor being replaced with test instrumentation. When interviewed for a 1990s television programme, Brown said he had flown five tailless aircraft in his career (including the British de Havilland DH 108). Referring to the Komet, he said \"this is the only one that had good flight characteristics\"; he called the other four \"killers\".\nSurviving aircraft.\nIt has been claimed that at least 29 \"Komets\" were shipped out of Germany after the war and that of those at least 10 have been known to survive the war to be put on display in museums around the world. Most of the 10 surviving Me 163s were part of JG 400, and were captured by the British at Husum, the squadron's base at the time of Germany's surrender in 1945. According to the RAF museum, 48 aircraft were captured intact and 24 were shipped to the United Kingdom for evaluation, although only one, \"VF241\", was test flown (unpowered).\n Werknummer 19116 (but more probable 191916) and 191095 (AM211) also seem to have been held at one time in this museum.\nGermany.\nEventually an elderly German woman came forward with Me 163 instruments that her late husband had collected after the war, and the engine was reproduced by a machine shop owned by Me 163 enthusiast Reinhold Opitz. The factory closed in the early 1990s and \"Yellow 25\" was moved to a small museum created on the site. The museum contained aircraft that had once served as gate guards, monuments and other damaged aircraft previously located on the air base. In 1997 \"Yellow 25\" was moved to the official \"Luftwaffe\" Museum located at the former RAF base at Berlin-Gatow, where it is displayed today alongside a restored Walter HWK 109\u2013509 rocket engine. This particular Me 163B is one of the very few World War II\u2013era German military aircraft, restored and preserved in a German aviation museum, to have a swastika marking, in a \"low visibility\" white outline form, currently displayed on the tailfin.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOf the 21 aircraft that were captured by the British, at least three have survived. They were assigned the British serial numbers AM200 to AM220.\nJapanese versions.\nAs part of their alliance, Germany provided the Japanese Empire with plans and an example of the Me 163. One of the two submarines carrying Me 163 parts did not arrive in Japan, so at the time, the Japanese lacked all of the major parts and construction blueprints, including the turbopump, which they could not make on their own, forcing them to reverse-engineer their own design from information obtained in the Me 163 Erection &amp; Maintenance manual obtained from Germany. The prototype J8M crashed on its first powered flight and was completely destroyed, but several variants were built and flown, including: trainers, fighters, and interceptors, with only minor differences between the versions.\nThe Navy version, the Mitsubishi J8M1 \"Sh\u016bsui\", replaced the Ho 155 cannon with the Navy's 30\u00a0mm (1.18\u00a0in) Type 5 cannon. Mitsubishi also planned on producing a version of the 163C for the Navy, known as the J8M2 \"Sh\u016bsui\" Model 21. A version of the 163 D/263 was known as the J8M3 \"Shusui\" for the Navy with the Type 5 cannon, and a Ki-202 with the Ho 155-II for the Army. Trainers were planned, roughly the equivalent of the Me 163 A-0/S; these were known as the Kugisho/Yokosuka MXY8 (Yokoi Ki-13) \u00a0\u2014 an unpowered glider trainer\u00a0\u2014 and Kugisho/Yokosuka MXY9 \u00a0\u2014 a Tsu-11-powered motorjet trainer)\nOne complete example of the Japanese aircraft survives at the Planes of Fame Air Museum in the United States. The fuselage of a second aircraft is displayed at the Mitsubishi company's Komaki Plant Museum, at Komaki, Aichi Prefecture, in Japan.\nReplicas.\nA flying replica Me 163 was constructed between 1994 and 1996 by Joseph Kurtz, a former \"Luftwaffe\" pilot who trained to fly Me 163s, but who never flew in combat. He subsequently sold the aircraft to EADS. The replica is an unpowered glider whose shape matches that of an Me 163, although its construction is completely different: the glider is built of wood with an empty weight of , a fraction of the weight of a wartime aircraft. Reportedly, it has excellent flying characteristics. The glider is painted red to represent the Me 163 flown by Wolfgang Sp\u00e4te. It is not currently flown, but is exhibited at the Messerschmitt Museum of Flight.\nIn the early 2000s, a rocket-powered airworthy replica, the \"Komet II\", was proposed by XCOR Aerospace, a former aerospace company that had previously built the XCOR EZ-Rocket rocket-plane. Although outwardly the same as a wartime aircraft, the \"Komet II\"'s design would have differed considerably for safety reasons. It would have been partially constructed with composite materials, powered by one of XCOR's own simpler and safer, pressure fed, liquid oxygen/alcohol engines, and retractable undercarriage would have been used instead of a takeoff dolly and landing skid.\nSeveral static replica Me 163s are exhibited in museums.\nSpecifications: Me 163B-1a.\n\"Data from\" \"The Warplanes of the Third Reich\", \"Profile No225: Messerschmitt Me 163 Komet\"General characteristics* Crew: 1* Capacity: (Me 163S + 1)* Aspect ratio: * Fuel capacity: \nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: 7.5 mins powered* g limits: * Roll rate: * Maximum glide ratio: * Time to altitude: From standing start\nArmament\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20487", "revid": "3132940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20487", "title": "Mohamed Atta", "text": "Egyptian terrorist and 9/11 hijacker (1968\u20132001)\nMohamed Atta (1 September 1968\u00a0\u2013 11 September 2001) was an Egyptian engineer and terrorist hijacker for al-Qaeda. Ideologically a pan-Islamist, he was the ringleader of the September 11 attacks and served as the hijacker-pilot of American Airlines Flight 11, which he flew into the North Tower of the original World Trade Center as part of coordinated suicide attacks. Aged 33, he was the oldest of the 19 hijackers who took part in the mission. Before the attacks, he worked as a civil engineer.\nBorn and raised in Egypt, Atta studied architecture at Cairo University, graduating in 1990, and pursued postgraduate studies in Germany at the Hamburg University of Technology. In Hamburg, Atta became involved with the al-Quds Mosque where he met Marwan al-Shehhi, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, and Ziad Jarrah, together forming the Hamburg cell. Atta disappeared from Germany for periods of time, embarking on the hajj in 1995 but also meeting Osama bin Laden and other top al-Qaeda leaders in Afghanistan from late 1999 to early 2000. Atta and the other Hamburg cell members were recruited by bin Laden and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed for a \"planes operation\" in the United States.\nAtta returned to Hamburg in February 2000 and began inquiring about flight training in the United States, where he, Jarrah, and al-Shehhi arrived in June to learn how to pilot planes, obtaining instrument ratings in November. Beginning in May 2001, Atta assisted with the arrival of the \"muscle\" hijackers whose role was to subdue passengers and crew to enable the hijacker-pilots to take over. In July, Atta traveled to Spain to meet with bin al-Shibh to finalize the plot, then in August traveled as a passenger on \"surveillance\" flights to establish in detail how the attacks could be carried out.\nOn the morning of 11 September 2001, Atta and his team boarded and hijacked American Airlines Flight 11, which Atta flew into 1 World Trade Center (the North Tower). More than 1,600 people died as a result of the impact, ensuing fire, and subsequent collapse of the tower, making him responsible for the single deadliest air crash of all time, as well as the single deadliest terrorist attack of all time.\nAliases.\nMohamed Atta had varied his name on documents, also using \"Mehan Atta\", \"Mohammad El Amir\", \"Muhammad Atta\", \"Mohamed El Sayed\", \"Mohamed Elsayed\", \"Muhammad al-Amir\", \"Awag Al Sayyid Atta\", and \"Awad Al Sayad\". In Germany, he registered his name as \"Mohamed el-Amir Awad el-Sayed Atta\", and went by the name Mohamed el-Amir at the Hamburg University of Technology. In his will, written in 1996, Atta gives his name as \"Mohamed the son of Mohamed Elamir awad Elsayed\". He was known as Abd al-Rahman al-Misri by al-Qaeda. Atta also claimed different nationalities, sometimes Egyptian and other times telling people he was from the United Arab Emirates.\nEarly life.\nMohamed Atta was born on 1 September 1968, in Kafr el-Sheikh, located in the Nile Delta region of Egypt (then a part of the United Arab Republic). His father, Mohamed el-Amir Awad el-Sayed Atta, was a lawyer, educated in both civil law and \"sharia\". His mother, Buthayna Mohamed Mustafa Shiraqi, came from a wealthy farming and trading family and was also educated. Buthayna and Mohamed married when she was 14, via an arranged marriage. The family had few relatives on the father's side and kept their distance from Buthayna's family. In-laws characterized Atta's father as \"austere, strict, and private\", and neighbors viewed the family as reclusive. Atta was the only son; he had two older sisters who are both well-educated and successful in their careers \u2013 one as a medical doctor and the other as a professor.\nWhen Atta was ten, his family moved to the Cairo neighborhood of Abdeen, situated near the city center. His father, who kept the family ever insulated, forbade young Atta to fraternize with the other children in their neighborhood. Having little else to do, he mostly studied at home and easily excelled in school. In 1985, Atta enrolled at Cairo University and focused his studies on engineering. He was among the highest-scoring students; by his senior year, he was admitted to an exclusive architecture program. After he graduated in 1990 with an architecture degree, he joined the Engineers Syndicate. He then worked for several months at the Urban Development Center in Cairo, where he joined various building projects and dispatched diverse architectural tasks. Also in 1990, Atta's family moved into the eleventh floor of an apartment building in the Egyptian city of Giza.\nAtta also got engaged to a woman lined up by his father and her family in Cairo, in late 1999, after coming back from Germany the same year. Although the marriage never happened, Atta's father said they liked each other.\nGermany.\nAtta graduated from Cairo University with marks insufficient for the graduate program. As his father insisted that he go abroad for graduate studies, Atta, to this end, entered a German-language program at the Goethe-Institut in Cairo. In 1992, his father overheard a German couple who were visiting Egypt's capital. The couple explained at dinner that they ran an exchange program and invited Atta to continue his studies in Germany; they also offered him room and board at their home in the city. Atta accepted and arrived in Germany two weeks later, in July.\nIn Germany, he enrolled in the urban planning graduate program at the Hamburg University of Technology. Atta initially lived with two high school teachers; however, they eventually found his closed-mindedness and introverted personality to be too much for them. Atta began adhering to the strictest Islamic diet, frequenting the most conservative mosques, socializing seldom, and acting disdainfully towards the couple's unmarried daughter who had a young child. After six months, they asked him to leave.\nBy early 1993, Atta had moved into university housing with two roommates, in Centrumshaus. He stayed there until 1998. During that period, his roommates grew annoyed with him. He seldom bathed, and they could not bear his \"complete, almost aggressive insularity\". He kept to himself to such an extent that he would often react to simple greetings with silence.\nAcademic studies.\nAt the Hamburg University of Technology, Atta studied under the guidance of the department chair, Dittmar Machule, who specialized in the Middle East. Atta was averse to modern development. This included the construction of high-rise buildings in Cairo and other ancient cities in the region. He believed that the drab and impersonal apartment blocks, built in the 60s and 70s, ruined the beauty of old neighborhoods and robbed their people of privacy and dignity. Atta's family moved into an apartment block in 1990; it was to him but \"a shabby symbol of Egypt's haphazard attempts to modernize and its shameless embrace of the West.\" For his thesis, Atta concentrated on the ancient Syrian city of Aleppo. He researched the history of the urban landscape in relation to the general theme of conflict between Arab and modern civilization. He criticized how the newfangled skyscrapers and other modernizing projects disrupted the fabric of communities by blocking common streets and altering the skyline.\nAtta's professor, Dittmar Machule, brought him along on an archaeological expedition to Aleppo in 1994. The invitation had been for a three-day visit, but Atta ended up staying several weeks that August, only to visit Aleppo yet again that December. While in Syria, he met Amal, a young Palestinian woman who worked for a planning bureau in the city. Volker Hauth, who was traveling with Atta, described Amal as \"attractive and self-confident. She observed Muslim customs, taking taxis to and from the office so as not to come into close physical contact with men on buses. But she was also said to be 'emancipated' and 'challenging'. Atta and Amal appeared to be attracted to each other, but Atta soon decided that \"she had a quite different orientation and that the emancipation of the young lady did not fit.\" His nascent infatuation with her, begrudgingly realised, was the closest thing Atta knew to romance.\nIn mid-1995, he stayed for three months in Cairo, on a grant from the Carl Duisberg Society, along with fellow students Volker Hauth and Ralph Bodenstein. The academic team inquired into the effects of redevelopment in the Islamic Cairo, the old quarter, which the government undertook to remodel for tourism. Atta stayed in Cairo awhile with his family after Hauth and Bodenstein flew back to Germany.\nWhile in Hamburg, Atta held several positions, including a part-time job at the urban planning firm Plankontor beginning in 1992. He was let go from the firm in 1997, however, because its business had declined and \"his draughtsmanship was not needed\" after it bought a CAD system. Among other odd jobs to supplement his income, Atta sometimes worked at a cleaning company and sometimes bought and sold cars. Atta had harbored a desire to return to his native city ever since he finished his studies in Hamburg, but he was prevented by the dearth of job prospects in Cairo, his family lacking the \"right connections\" to avail the customary nepotism. Further, after the Egyptian government had imprisoned droves of political activists, he knew better than to trust it not to target him too, with his social and political beliefs being such as they were.\nReligious zeal and Hamburg cell.\nAfter coming to Hamburg in 1992, Atta grew more religiously fanatical and frequented the mosque with greater regularity. His friends in Germany described him as an intelligent man in whom religious convictions and political motives held equal sway. He harbored anger and resentment toward the U.S. for its policy in Islamic nations of the Middle East, with nothing inflaming his ire more than the Oslo Accords and the Gulf War in particular. He was also angry and bitter at the elite in his native Egypt, who he believed hoarded power for themselves, as well as at the Egyptian government, that cracked down on the dissident Muslim Brotherhood. Atta was anti-Semitic, believing that Jews controlled the world's media, financial, and political institutions from New York City. These beliefs were even stronger during Operation Infinite Reach, as he believed that Monica Lewinsky was a Jewish agent influencing American president Bill Clinton against aiding Palestine, which would later play a key role in creating the Hamburg cell.\nOn 1 August 1995, Atta returned to Egypt for three months of study. Before this trip he grew out a beard to show himself as a devout Muslim and also to make a political gesture. Atta returned to Hamburg on 31 October 1995, only to join the pilgrimage to Mecca shortly thereafter.\nIn Hamburg, Atta was intensely drawn to al-Quds Mosque which adhered to a \"harsh, uncompromisingly fundamentalist, and resoundingly militant\" version of Sunni Islam. He made acquaintances at al-Quds, some of whom visited him on occasion at Centrumshaus. He also began teaching classes both at al-Quds and at a Turkish mosque near the Harburg district. Atta also started and led a prayer group, which Ahmed Maklat and Mounir el-Motassadeq joined. Ramzi bin al-Shibh was also there, teaching occasional classes, and became Atta's friend.\nOn 11 April 1996, Atta signed his last will and testament at the mosque, officially declaring his Muslim beliefs and giving 18 instructions regarding his burial. This was the same day that Israel, much to Atta's fury, attacked Lebanon in Operation Grapes of Wrath; signing the will \"offering his life\" was his response. The instructions in his last will and testament reflect both Sunni funeral practices along with some more puritanical demands from Salafism, including asking people not \"to weep and cry\" and to generally refrain from showing emotion. The will was signed by el-Motassadeq and a second person at the mosque.\nAfter leaving Plankontor in the summer of 1997, Atta disappeared again and did not return until 1998. He had made no progress on his thesis. Atta phoned his graduate advisor, Machule, and mentioned family problems at home, saying, \"Please understand, I don't want to talk about this.\" At the winter break in 1997, Atta left and did not return to Hamburg for three months. He said that he went on pilgrimage to Mecca again, just 18 months after his first time. This claim has been disputed; American journalist Terry McDermott has argued that it is unusual for someone to go on pilgrimage so soon after the first time and to spend three months there (more than Hajj requires). When Atta returned, he claimed that his passport was lost and applied for a new one, which is a common tactic to erase evidence of travel to places such as Afghanistan. When he returned in spring 1998, after disappearing for several months, he had grown a thick long beard, and \"seemed more serious and aloof\" than before to those who knew him.\nBy mid-1998, Atta was no longer eligible for university housing in Centrumshaus. Atta, Bahaji and Ramzi moved into a Hamburgian apartment, which they supposedly named . By early 1999, Atta had completed his thesis, and formally defended it in August 1999.\nIn mid-1998, Atta worked alongside al-Shehhi, bin al-Shibh, and Belfas, at a warehouse, packing computers in crates for shipping. The Hamburg group did not stay in Wilhelmsburg for long. The next winter, they moved into an apartment at Marienstrasse 54 in the borough of Harburg, near the Hamburg University of Technology, at which they enrolled. It was here that the Hamburg cell developed and acted more as a group. They met three or four times a week to discuss their anti-American feelings and to plot possible attacks. Many al-Qaeda members lived in this apartment at various times, including hijacker Marwan al-Shehhi, Zakariya Essabar, and others.\nIn late 1999, Atta, al-Shehhi, Jarrah, Bahaji, and bin al-Shibh decided to travel to Chechnya to fight against the Russians, but were convinced by Khalid al-Masri and Mohamedou Ould Salahi at the last minute to change their plans. They instead traveled to Afghanistan over a two-week period in late November. On 29 November 1999, Mohamed Atta boarded Turkish Airlines Flight TK1662 from Hamburg to Istanbul, where he changed to flight TK1056 to Karachi, Pakistan. After they arrived, they were selected by al-Qaeda leader Mohammed Atef as suitable candidates for the \"planes operation\" plot. They were all well-educated, had experience of living in western society, along with some English skills, and would be able to obtain visas. Even before bin al-Shibh had arrived, Atta, Shehhi, and Jarrah were sent to the House of Ghamdi near bin Laden's home in Kandahar, where he was waiting to meet them. Bin Laden asked them to pledge loyalty and commit to suicide missions, which Atta and the other three Hamburg men all accepted. Bin Laden sent them to see Atef to get a general overview of the mission, and then they were sent to Karachi to see Khalid Sheikh Mohammed to go over specifics.\nGerman investigators said that they had evidence that Mohamed Atta trained at al-Qaeda camps in Afghanistan from late 1999 to early 2000. The timing of the Afghanistan training was outlined on 23 August 2002, by a senior investigator. The investigator, Klaus Ulrich Kersten, was the director of Germany's federal anticrime agency, the Bundeskriminalamt. He provided the first official confirmation that Atta and two other pilots had been in Afghanistan, and he also provided the first dates of the training. Kersten said in an interview at the agency's headquarters in Wiesbaden that Atta was in Afghanistan from late 1999 until early 2000, and that there was evidence that Atta met with Osama bin Laden there.\nA video surfaced in October 2006. The first chapter of the video showed bin Laden at Tarnak Farms on 8 January 2000. The second chapter showed Atta and Ziad Jarrah reading their wills together ten days later on 18 January. On his return journey, Atta left Karachi on 24 February 2000, by flight TK1057 to Istanbul where he changed to flight TK1661 to Hamburg. Immediately after returning to Germany, Atta, al-Shehhi, and Jarrah reported their passports stolen, possibly to discard travel visas to Afghanistan.\nUnited States.\nOn 22 March 2000, Atta was still in Germany when he sent an e-mail to the Academy of Lakeland in Florida. He inquired about flight training, \"Dear sir, we are a small group of young men from different Arab countries. Now, we are living in Germany since a while for study purposes. We would like to start training for the career of airline professional pilots. In this field, we haven't yet any knowledge but we are ready to undergo an intensive training program (up to ATP and eventually higher).\" Atta sent 50\u201360 similar e-mails to other flight training schools in the United States.\nOn 17 May Atta applied for a United States visa. The next day, he received a five-year B-1/B-2 (tourist/business) visa from the United States embassy in Berlin. Atta had lived in Germany for approximately five years and also had a \"strong record as a student\". He was therefore treated favorably and not scrutinized. After obtaining his visa, Atta took a bus on 2 June from Hamburg to Prague where he stayed overnight before traveling on to the United States the next day. Bin al-Shibh later explained that they believed it would contribute to operational security for Atta to fly out of Prague instead of Hamburg, where he traveled from previously. Likewise, al-Shehhi traveled from a different location, in his case via Brussels.\nOn 6 June 2002, ABC's \"World News Tonight\" broadcast an interview with Johnelle Bryant, former loan officer at the U.S. Department of Agriculture in south Florida, who told about her encounter with Mohamed Atta. This encounter took place \"around the third week of April to the third week of May of 2000\", before Atta's official entry date into the United States (see below). According to Bryant, Atta wanted to finance the purchase of a crop-duster. \"He wanted to finance a twin-engine, six-passenger aircraft and remove the seats,\" Bryant told ABC's \"World News Tonight\". He insisted that she write his name as ATTA, that he originally was from Egypt but had moved to Afghanistan, that he was an engineer and that his dream was to go to a flight school. He asked about the Pentagon and the White House. He said he wanted to visit the World Trade Center and asked Bryant about the security there. He mentioned al-Qaeda and said the organization \"could use memberships from Americans\". He mentioned Osama bin Laden and said \"this man would someday be known as the world's greatest leader.\" Bryant said \"the picture that came out in the newspaper, that's exactly what that man looked like.\" Bryant contacted the authorities after recognising Atta in news reports. Law enforcement officials said Bryant passed a lie-detector exam.\nAccording to official reports, Atta flew from Prague to Newark International Airport, arriving on 3 June 2000. That month, Atta and al-Shehhi stayed in hotels and rented rooms in New York City on a short-term basis. Jarrah had arrived in the United States on 27 June 2000, after his flight landed at Newark, New Jersey, and Jarrah had decided to go with al-Shehhi and Atta to search for different flight schools in the US. They continued to inquire about flight schools and personally visited some, including Airman Flight School in Norman, Oklahoma, which they visited on 3 July 2000. Days later, al-Shehhi, Jarrah and Atta ended up in Venice, Florida. Atta and al-Shehhi established accounts at SunTrust Bank and received wire transfers from Ali Abdul Aziz Ali, Khalid Sheikh Mohammed's nephew in the United Arab Emirates. On 6 July 2000, Atta, Jarrah and Shehhi enrolled at Huffman Aviation in Venice, where they entered the Accelerated Pilot Program. When Atta and al-Shehhi arrived in Florida, they initially stayed with Huffman's bookkeeper and his wife in a spare room of their house. After a week, they were asked to leave because they were rude. Atta and al-Shehhi then moved into a small house nearby in Nokomis where they stayed for six months.\nAtta began flight training on 6 July 2000, and continued training nearly every day. By the end of July, both Atta and al-Shehhi did solo flights. Atta earned his private pilot certificate in September, and then he and al-Shehhi decided to switch flight schools. Both enrolled at Jones Aviation in Sarasota and took training there for a brief time. They had problems following instructions and were both very upset when they failed their Stage 1 exam. They inquired about multi-engine planes and told the instructor that \"they wanted to move quickly, because they had a job waiting in their country upon completion of their training in the U.S.\" In mid-October, Atta and al-Shehhi returned to Huffman Aviation to continue training. In November 2000, Atta earned his instrument rating, and then a commercial pilot's license in December from the Federal Aviation Administration.\nAtta continued with flight training that included solo flights and simulator time. On 22 December, Atta and al-Shehhi applied to Eagle International for large jet and simulator training for McDonnell Douglas DC-9 and Boeing 737-300 models. On 26 December, Atta and al-Shehhi needed a tow for their rented Piper Cherokee on a taxiway of Miami International Airport after the engine shut down. On 29 and 30 December, Atta and al-Shehhi went to the Opa-locka Airport where they practiced on a Boeing 727 simulator, and they obtained Boeing 767 simulator training from Pan Am International on 31 December. Atta purchased cockpit videos for Boeing 747-200, Boeing 757-200, Airbus A320 and Boeing 767-300ER models via mail-order from Sporty's Pilot Shop in Batavia, Ohio, in November and December 2000.\nRecords on Atta's cellphone indicated that he phoned the Moroccan embassy in Washington on 2 January 2001, just before Shehhi flew to the country. Atta flew to Spain two days later, on 4 January, to coordinate with bin al-Shibh, and returned to the United States on 10 January. He then traveled to Lawrenceville, Georgia, where he and al-Shehhi visited an LA Fitness Health Club. During that time Atta flew out of Briscoe Field in Lawrenceville with a pilot, and Atta and either the pilot or al-Shehhi flew around the Atlanta area.\nOn 11 April, Atta and al-Shehhi rented an apartment at 10001 Atlantic Blvd, Apt. 122 in Coral Springs, Florida, for $840 per month, and assisted with the arrival of the muscle hijackers. On 16 April, Atta was given a citation for not having a valid driver's license, and he began steps to acquire one. On 2 May, Atta received his driver's license in Lauderdale Lakes, Florida. While in the United States, Atta owned a red 1989 Pontiac Grand Prix.\nOn 11 May, Atta visited Logan International Airport in Boston with another man, and took a lot of photographs and footage inside. Airport employees became suspicious of two persons and they alarmed security, but this was ignored. One technical worker complained about Atta's behavior and spoke to him, but did not stop him.\nOn 27 June, Atta flew from Fort Lauderdale to Boston, Massachusetts, where he spent a day, and then continued to San Francisco for a short time, and from there to Las Vegas. On 28 June, Atta arrived at McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas to meet with the three other pilots. He rented a Chevrolet Malibu from an Alamo Rent A Car agency. It is not known where he stayed that night, but on the 29th he registered at the Econo Lodge at 1150 South Las Vegas Boulevard. Here he presented an AAA membership for a discount, and paid cash for the $49.50/night room. During his trip to Las Vegas, he is thought to have used a video camera that he had rented from a Select Photo outlet back in Delray Beach, Florida.\nFBI operative Elie Assaad became suspicious of Atta in early 2001 as he was supposedly seen with al-Qaeda fugitive Adnan Shukrijumah.\nJuly 2001 summit in Spain.\nIn July 2001, Atta again left for Spain in order to meet with bin al-Shibh for the last time. On 7 July 2001, Atta flew on Swissair Flight 117 from Miami to Z\u00fcrich, where he had a stopover. On 8 July, Atta was recorded on surveillance video when he withdrew 1700 Swiss francs from an ATM. He used his credit card to purchase two Swiss Army knives and some chocolate in a shop at the Zurich Airport. After the stopover in Z\u00fcrich, he arrived in Madrid at 4:45\u00a0pm on Swissair Flight 656, and spent several hours at the airport. Then at 8:50\u00a0pm, he checked into the Hotel Diana Cazadora in Barajas, a neighborhood near the airport. That night and twice the next morning, he called Bashar Ahmad Ali Musleh, a Jordanian student in Hamburg who served as a liaison for bin al-Shibh.\nOn the morning of 9 July, Mohamed Atta rented a silver Hyundai Accent, which he booked from SIXT Rent-A-Car for 9 to 16 July, and later extended to the 19th. He drove east out of Madrid towards the Mediterranean beach area of Tarragona. On the way, Atta stopped in Reus to pick up Ramzi bin al-Shibh at the airport. They drove to Cambrils, where they spent a night at the Hotel M\u00f2nica. They checked out the next morning, and spent the next few days at an unknown location in Tarragona. The absence of other hotel stays, signed receipts or credit card stubs has led investigators to believe that the men may have met in a safe house provided by other al-Qaeda operatives in Spain. There, Atta and bin al-Shibh held a meeting to complete the planning of the attacks. Several clues have been found to link their stay in Spain to Syrian-born Imad Eddin Barakat Yarkas (Abu Dahdah), and Amer el Azizi, a Moroccan in Spain. They may have helped arrange and host the meeting in Tarragona. Yosri Fouda, who interviewed bin al-Shibh and Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (KSM) before the arrest, believes that Said Bahaji and KSM may have also been present at the meeting. Spanish investigators have said that Marwan al-Shehhi and two others later joined the meeting. Bin al-Shibh would not discuss this meeting with Fouda.\nDuring the meetings in Spain, Atta and bin al-Shibh had coordinated the details of the attacks. The 9/11 Commission obtained details about the meeting, based on interrogations of bin al-Shibh in the weeks after his arrest in September 2002. Bin al-Shibh explained that he passed along instructions from Osama bin Laden, including his desire for the attacks to be carried out as soon as possible. Bin Laden was concerned about having so many operatives in the United States. Atta confirmed that all the muscle hijackers had arrived in the United States, without any problems, but said that he needed five to six more weeks to work out details. Bin Laden also asked that other operatives not be informed of the specific date until the last minute. During the meeting, Atta and bin al-Shibh also decided on the targets to be hit, ruling out a strike on a nuclear plant. Bin al-Shibh passed along bin Laden's list of targets; bin Laden wanted the United States Capitol, the Pentagon, and the World Trade Center to be attacked, as they were deemed \"symbols of America.\" If any of the hijackers could not reach their intended targets, Atta said, they were to crash the plane. They also discussed the personal difficulties Atta was having with fellow hijacker Ziad Jarrah. Bin al-Shibh was worried that Jarrah might even abandon the plan. The \"9/11 Commission Report\" speculated that the now-convicted terrorist conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui was being trained as a possible replacement for Jarrah.\nFrom 13 to 16 July, Atta stayed at the Hotel Sant Jordi in Tarragona. After bin al-Shibh returned to Germany on 16 July 2001, Atta had three more days in Spain. He spent two nights in Salou at the beachside Casablanca Playa Hotel, then spent the last two nights at the Hotel Residencia Montsant. On 19 July, Atta returned to the United States, flying on Delta Air Lines from Madrid to Fort Lauderdale, via Atlanta.\nFinal plans in the U.S..\nOn 22 July 2001, Atta rented a Mitsubishi Galant from Alamo Rent a Car, putting on the vehicle before returning it on 26 July. On 25 July, Atta dropped Ziad Jarrah off at Miami International Airport for a flight back to Germany. On 26 July, Atta traveled via Continental Airlines to Newark, New Jersey, checked into the Kings Inn Hotel in Wayne, New Jersey, and stayed there until 30 July when he took a flight from Newark back to Fort Lauderdale.\nOn 4 August, Atta is believed to have been at Orlando International Airport waiting to pick up suspected \"20th Hijacker\" Mohammed al-Qahtani from Dubai, who ended up being held by immigration as \"suspicious.\" Atta was believed to have used a payphone at the airport to phone a number \"linked to al-Qaeda\" after Qahtani was denied entry.\nOn 6 August, Atta and al-Shehhi rented a white, four-door 1995 Ford Escort from Warrick's Rent-A-Car, which was returned on 13 August. On 6 August, Atta booked a flight on Spirit Airlines from Fort Lauderdale to Newark, leaving on 7 August and returning on 9 August. The reservation was not used and canceled on 9 August with the reason \"Family Medical Emergency\". Instead, he went to Central Office &amp; Travel in Pompano Beach to purchase a ticket for a flight to Newark, leaving on the evening of 7 August and scheduled to return in the evening on 9 August. Atta did not take the return flight. On 7 August, Atta checked into the Wayne Inn in Wayne, New Jersey and checked out on 9 August. The same day, he booked a one-way first-class ticket via the Internet on America West Flight 244 from Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport to Las Vegas. Atta traveled twice to Las Vegas on \"surveillance flights\" rehearsing how the 9/11 attacks would be carried out. Other hijackers traveled to Las Vegas at different times in the summer of 2001.\nThroughout the summer, Atta met with Nawaf al-Hazmi to discuss the status of the operation on a monthly basis.\nOn 23 August, Atta's driver license was revoked \"in absentia\" after he failed to show up in traffic court to answer the earlier citation for driving without a license. The same day, the Mossad gave his name to the CIA as one of 19 belonging to US residents suspected of planning an imminent attack against the United States; only four of the names are publicly known, the others belonging to fellow 9/11 hijackers Marwan al-Shehhi, Nawaf al-Hazmi, and Khalid al-Mihdhar. It is not known if the 19 names were all those of the hijackers who would carry out the 9/11 attacks or if the list length is just a coincidence.\n9/11 attacks and death.\nOn 10 September 2001, Atta picked up al-Omari from the Milner Hotel in Boston, Massachusetts, and the two drove their rented Nissan Altima to a Comfort Inn in South Portland, Maine. On the way, they were seen getting gasoline at an Exxon gas station and visited the Longfellow House in Portland that afternoon; they arrived at the hotel at 5:43\u00a0p.m. and spent the night in Room 233. While in South Portland, they were seen making two ATM withdrawals and stopping at Wal-Mart. The FBI also reported that two Middle-Eastern men were seen in the parking lot of a Pizza Hut, where Atta is known to have eaten that day.\nAtta and al-Omari arrived early the next morning, at 5:40\u00a0a.m., at the Portland International Jetport, where they left their rental car in the parking lot and at 6:00\u00a0a.m. boarded a Colgan Air (US Airways Express) BE-1900C flight to Logan International Airport in Boston. In Portland, Mohamed Atta was selected by the Computer-Assisted Passenger Prescreening System (CAPPS), which required his checked bags to undergo extra screening for explosives but involved no extra screening at the passenger security checkpoint.\nThe connection between the two flights at Logan International Airport was within Terminal B, but the two gates were not connected within security. Passengers must leave the secured area, go outdoors, cross a covered roadway, and enter another building before going through security once again. There are two separate concourses in Terminal B; the south concourse was mainly used by US Airways and the north one was mostly used by American Airlines. It had been overlooked that there would still be a security screen to pass in Boston because of this distinct detail of the terminal's arrangement. A ticket staffer at Portland Airport reported becoming uneasy with Atta's anger upon being told of the additional screening requirements in Boston, but that he did not act on his suspicions after becoming concerned that he was racially profiling Atta. At 6:45\u00a0a.m., while at the Boston airport, Atta took a call from Flight 175 hijacker Marwan al-Shehhi. This call was apparently to confirm that the attacks were ready to begin. Atta checked in for American Airlines Flight 11, passed through security again, and boarded the flight. Atta was seated in business class, in seat 8D. At 7:59\u00a0a.m., the plane departed from Boston to Los Angeles International Airport, carrying 81 passengers.\nThe hijacking began fifteen minutes into the flight at approximately 8:14 a.m., when beverage service would be starting. As this was happening, the pilots stopped responding to air traffic control and the aircraft began deviating from its assigned route; the plane's transponder was switched off several minutes later at 8:21\u00a0a.m. The pilots of United Airlines Flight 175 picked up on a suspicious transmission while leaving the runway around the same time Flight 11 was being hijacked, reportedly hearing the words, \"Everyone, stay in your seats.\" Investigators later determined that this communication was made from the cockpit of Flight 11. This transmission was never heard by ATC, but the context suggests Atta was the one speaking. On the phone with American Airlines after the hijackers had assumed control of the plane, flight attendant Betty Ong reported that the cockpit was unresponsive and inaccessible.\nAt 8:24:38\u00a0a.m., a voice believed to be Atta's was heard by air traffic controllers, saying: \"We have some planes. Just stay quiet and you will be OK. We are returning to the airport.\" Evidently, he tried to deliver a message over the cabin's PA system instructing the passengers and crew to stay put, but pressed the wrong switch and thereby tipped off ATC that the flight had been hijacked. Seconds later he transmitted another message: \"Nobody move, everything will be OK. If you try to make any moves you'll endanger yourself and the airplane. Just stay quiet.\" About a minute later, he turned the plane southbound, on a course pointed in the direction of New York City. Atta was not heard from again for nine minutes until 8:33:59 when he transmitted, \"Nobody move, please. We are going back to the airport. Don't try to make any stupid moves.\" This was the last transmission from Flight 11.\nTwelve minutes later, at 8:46:40\u00a0a.m., Atta crashed the plane into the North Tower of the World Trade Center in New York City between floors 93 and 99, killing himself and everyone else aboard the plane. Hundreds more inside the North Tower were killed instantly. The damage from the impact severed all escape routes from floors 92 and higher, trapping more than 800 people on the upper floors of the building. No one above the 91st floor was able to make it out alive before the tower collapsed 102 minutes later at 10:28\u00a0a.m.\nBecause the flight from Portland to Boston had been delayed, Atta's luggage did not make it onto Flight 11. His bags, later recovered in Logan International Airport, contained airline uniforms, flight manuals, and a copy of Atta's will. A list of instructions, titled \"The Last Night\" was also found. This document is divided into three sections; the first is a fifteen-point list providing detailed instructions for the last night of a martyr's life, the second gives instructions for travelling to the plane and the third from the time between boarding the plane and martyrdom. Almost all of these points discuss spiritual preparation, such as prayer and citing religious scripture.\nFamily reaction and denial.\nAtta's father vehemently rejected allegations his son was involved in the 9/11 attacks, and instead accused the Mossad and the United States government of having a hand in framing his son. Atta Sr. rejected media reports that stated his son was drinking wildly, and instead described his son as a quiet boy uninvolved with politics, shy and devoted to studying architecture. The elder Mr. Atta said he had spoken with Mohamed by phone the day after on 12 September 2001. He held interviews with the German news magazine \"Bild am Sonntag\" in late 2002, saying his son was alive and hiding in fear for his life, and that American Christians were responsible for the attacks. In an interview on 24 September 2001, Atta Sr. stated, \"My son is gone. He is now with God. The Mossad killed him.\"\nIn 2021, on the 20th anniversary of the attacks, Atta's mother was interviewed by a Spanish newspaper \"El Independiente\". His mother, aged 79 at the time, denied her son's involvement in the attacks and said that she feels he is in Afghanistan.\nMistaken identity.\nIn the aftermath of 9/11 attacks, the names of the hijackers were released. There was some confusion regarding who Mohamed Atta was, and cases of mistaken identity. Initially, Mohamed Atta's identity was confused with that of a native Jordanian, Mahmoud Mahmoud Atta, who bombed an Israeli bus in the West Bank in 1986, killing one and severely injuring three. Mahmoud Atta was 14 years older than Mohamed Atta. Mahmoud Atta, a naturalized U.S. citizen, was subsequently deported from Venezuela to the United States, extradited to Israel, tried, convicted, and sentenced to life in prison. The Israeli Supreme Court later overturned his extradition and set him free. After the attacks, there were also reports stating that Mohamed Atta had attended the International Officers School at Maxwell Air Force Base in Montgomery, Alabama. \"The Washington Post\" quoted a United States Air Force official who explained, \"discrepancies in their biographical data, such as birth dates 20 years off, indicate we are probably not talking about the same people.\"\nPrague controversy.\nIn the months following the September 11 attacks, officials at the Czech Interior Ministry asserted that Atta made a trip to Prague on 8 April 2001, to meet with an Iraqi intelligence agent named Ahmed Khalil Ibrahim Samir al-Ani. This piece of information was passed on to the FBI as \"unevaluated raw intelligence\". Intelligence officials have concluded that such a meeting did not occur. A Pakistani businessman named Mohammed Atta had come to Prague from Saudi Arabia on 31 May 2000, with this second Atta possibly contributing to the confusion. The Egyptian Mohamed Atta arrived at the Florenc bus terminal in Prague, from Germany, on 2 June 2000. He left Prague the next day, flying on Czech Airlines to Newark, New Jersey, U.S. In the Czech Republic, some intelligence officials say the source of the purported meeting was an Arab informant who approached the Czech intelligence service with his sighting of Atta only after Atta's photograph had appeared in newspapers all over the world. United States and Czech intelligence officials have since concluded that the person seen with Ani was mistakenly identified as Atta, and the consensus of investigators is that Atta never attended a meeting in Prague.\nAble Danger.\nIn 2005, Army Lt. Col. Anthony Shaffer and Congressman Curt Weldon alleged that the Defense Department data mining project, Able Danger, produced a chart that identified Atta, along with Nawaf al-Hazmi, Khalid al-Mihdhar, and Marwan al-Shehhi, as members of a Brooklyn-based al-Qaeda cell in early 2000. Shaffer largely based his allegations on the recollections of Navy Captain Scott Phillpott, who later recanted his recollection, telling investigators that he was \"convinced that Atta was not on the chart that we had.\" Phillpott said that Shaffer was \"relying on my recollection 100 percent,\" and the Defense Department Inspector General's report indicated that Philpott \"may have exaggerated knowing Atta's identity because he supported using Able Danger's techniques to fight terrorism.\"\nFive witnesses who had worked on Able Danger and had been questioned by the Defense Department's Inspector General later told investigative journalists that their statements to the IG were distorted by investigators in the final IG's report, or the report omitted essential information that they had provided. The alleged distortions of the IG report centered around excluding any evidence that Able Danger had identified and tracked Atta years before 9/11.\nAssessment and motivation.\nThere are multiple, conflicting interpretations of Atta's behavior and motivation. Political psychologist Jerrold Post has suggested that Atta and his fellow hijackers were just following orders from al-Qaeda leadership, \"and whatever their destructive, charismatic leader Osama bin Laden said was the right thing to do for the sake of the cause was what they would do.\" American political scientist Robert Pape asserts that Atta was motivated by his commitment to the political cause, that he was psychologically normal, and that he was \"not readily characterized as depressed, not unable to enjoy life, not detached from friends and society.\" By contrast, criminal justice professor, Adam Lankford, has found evidence that indicated Atta was suicidal, and that his struggles with social isolation, depression, guilt, shame, hopelessness, and rage were extraordinarily similar to the struggles of those who commit conventional suicide and murder-suicide. By this view, Atta's political and religious beliefs affected the method of his suicide and his choice of target, but they were not the underlying causes of his behavior.\nOn 1 October 2006, \"The Sunday Times\" released a video it had obtained \"through a previously tested channel\", purporting to show Mohamed Atta and Ziad Jarrah recording a martyrdom message at a training camp in Afghanistan. The video, bearing the date of 18 January 2000, is of good resolution but contains no sound track. Lip readers have failed to decipher it. Atta and Jarrah appear in high spirits, laughing and smiling in front of the camera. They had never been pictured together before. Unidentified sources from both al-Qaeda and the United States confirmed the video's authenticity. A separate section of the video shows Osama bin Laden addressing his followers at a complex near Kandahar. Ramzi bin al-Shibh is also identified in the video. According to \"The Sunday Times\", \"American and German investigators have struggled to find evidence of Atta's whereabouts in January 2000 after he disappeared from Hamburg. The hour-long tape places him in Afghanistan at a decisive moment in the development of the conspiracy when he was given operational command. Months later both he and Jarrah enrolled at flying schools in America.\"\nIn popular culture.\nCanadian actor Elie Gemael portrayed Atta in the second episode of the BBC/Discovery docudrama \"Zero Hour,\" titled \"The Last Hour of Flight 11\".\nAtta was the primary antagonist of the 2004 British-Canadian biographical docudrama film \"The Hamburg Cell,\" wherein he was portrayed by Egyptian-French actor Maral Kamel.\nMartin Brodie portrayed Atta in \"The Path to 9/11\", a 2006 ABC miniseries.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20488", "revid": "50719561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20488", "title": "Messerschmitt Me 262", "text": "First operational jet-powered fighter aircraft\nThe Messerschmitt Me 262, nicknamed (German for \"Swallow\") in fighter versions, or (\"Storm Bird\") in fighter-bomber versions, is a fighter aircraft and fighter-bomber that was designed and produced by the German aircraft manufacturer Messerschmitt. It was the world's first operational jet-powered fighter aircraft and one of two jet fighter aircraft types to see air-to-air combat in World War II, the other being the Heinkel He 162.\nThe design of what would become the Me 262 started in April 1939, before World War II. It made its maiden flight on 18 April 1941 with a piston engine, and its first jet-powered flight on 18 July 1942. Progress was delayed by problems with engines, metallurgy, and interference from Luftwaffe chief Hermann G\u00f6ring and Adolf Hitler. The German leader demanded that the Me 262, conceived as a defensive interceptor, be redesigned as ground-attack/bomber aircraft. The aircraft became operational with the Luftwaffe in mid-1944. The Me 262 was faster and more heavily armed than any Allied fighter, including the British jet-powered Gloster Meteor. The Allies countered by attacking the aircraft on the ground and during takeoff and landing.\nOne of the most advanced World War II combat aircraft, the Me 262 operated as a light bomber, reconnaissance aircraft, and experimental night fighter. The Me 262 proved an effective dogfighter against Allied fighters; German pilots claimed 542 Allied aircraft were shot down, although higher claims have sometimes been made.\nThe aircraft had reliability problems because of strategic materials shortages and design compromises with its Junkers Jumo 004 axial-flow turbojet engines.\nLate-war Allied attacks on fuel supplies also reduced the aircraft's readiness for combat and training sorties. Armament production within Germany was focused on more easily manufactured aircraft. Ultimately, the Me 262 had little effect on the war because of its late introduction and the small numbers that entered service.\nAlthough German use of the Me 262 ended with World War II, the Czechoslovak Air Force operated a small number until 1951. Also, Israel may have used between two and eight Me 262s. These were supposedly built by Avia and supplied covertly, and there has been no official confirmation of their use.\nThe aircraft heavily influenced several prototype designs, such as the Sukhoi Su-9 (1946) and Nakajima Kikka. Many captured Me 262s were studied and flight-tested by the major powers, and influenced the designs of production aircraft such as the North American F-86 Sabre, MiG-15, and Boeing B-47 Stratojet. Several aircraft have survived on static display in museums. Some privately built flying reproductions have also been produced; these are usually powered by modern General Electric CJ610 engines.\nDesign and development.\nOrigins.\nBefore World War II, the Germans saw the potential for aircraft powered by the jet engine constructed by Hans von Ohain in 1936. After the successful test flights of the world's first jet aircraft\u2014the Heinkel He 178\u2014within a week of the invasion of Poland which started the conflict, they adopted the jet engine for an advanced fighter aircraft. As a result, the Me 262 was already under development as \"Projekt\" 1065 (or P.1065) before the start of the war. The project had originated with a request by the \"Reichsluftfahrtministerium\" (RLM, Ministry of Aviation) for a jet aircraft capable of one hour's endurance and a speed of at least . Woldemar Voigt headed the design team, with Messerschmitt's chief of development, Robert Lusser, overseeing.\nDuring April 1939, initial plans were drawn up and, following their submission in June 1939, the original design was very different from the aircraft that eventually entered service. Specifically, it featured wing-root-mounted engines, rather than podded ones. The progression of the original design was delayed greatly by technical problems with the new jet engine. \nOriginally designed with straight wings, problems arose when the long delayed engines proved heavier than originally promised. While waiting for the engines, Messerschmitt moved the engines from the wing roots to underwing pods, allowing them to be changed more readily if needed. That turned out to be important, both for availability and maintenance.\nWhen it became apparent that the BMW 003 jets would be significantly heavier than anticipated, on 1 March 1940, it was decided that instead of moving the wing backward on its mount, the outer wing would be swept slightly rearwards to 18.5 degrees, to accommodate the change in the centre of gravity and to position the centre of lift properly relative to the centre of mass. (The original 35\u00b0 sweep, proposed by Adolf Busemann, was not adopted.)\nInitially the inboard leading edge retained the straight profile as did the trailing edge of the midsection of the wing.\nBased on data from the AVA G\u00f6ttingen and wind tunnel results, the inboard section's leading edge (between the nacelle and wing root) was later swept to the same angle as the outer panels, from the \"V6\" sixth prototype onward throughout volume production.\nThe shallow leading edge sweep of 18.5\u00b0 may have inadvertently provided an advantage by slightly increasing the critical Mach number however, its Tactical (useable) Mach number remained a relatively modest at Mach 0.82 and both German and British test pilots found that it suffered severe controllability problems as it approached Mach 0.86.\nThe jet engine program was waylaid by a lack of funding, which was primarily due to a prevailing attitude amongst high-ranking officials that the conflict could be won easily with conventional aircraft. Among these was Hermann G\u00f6ring, head of the Luftwaffe, who cut the engine development program to just 35 engineers in February 1940 (the month before the first wooden mock-up was completed). The aeronautical engineer Willy Messerschmitt sought to maintain mass production of the piston-powered, 1935-origin Bf 109 and the projected Me 209. Major General Adolf Galland had supported Messerschmitt through the early development years, flying the Me 262 himself on 22 April 1943. By that time, the problems with engine development had slowed production of the aircraft considerably. One particularly acute problem was the lack of an alloy with a melting point high enough to endure the temperatures involved, a problem that had not been adequately resolved by the end of the war. After a November 1941 flight (with BMW 003s) ended in a double flameout, the aircraft made its first successful flight entirely on jet power on 18 July 1942, propelled by a pair of Jumo 004 engines.\nLudwig B\u00f6lkow was the principal aerodynamicist assigned to work on the design of the Me 262. He initially designed the wing using NACA airfoils modified with an elliptical nose section. Later in the design process, these were changed to AVL derivatives of NACA airfoils, the NACA 00011-0.825-35 being used at the root and the NACA 00009-1.1-40 at the tip. The elliptical nose derivatives of the NACA airfoils were used on the horizontal and vertical tail surfaces. Wings were of single-spar cantilever construction, with stressed skins, varying from skin thickness at the root to at the tip. To expedite construction, save weight, and use fewer strategic materials late in the war, the wing interiors were not painted. The wings were fastened to the fuselage at four points, using a pair of and forty-two bolts.\nDuring mid-1943, Adolf Hitler envisioned the Me 262 as a ground-attack/bomber aircraft rather than a defensive interceptor. The configuration of a high-speed, light-payload \"Schnellbomber\" (\"fast bomber\") was intended to penetrate enemy airspace during the expected Allied invasion of France. His edict resulted in the development of (and concentration on) the \"Sturmvogel\" variant. Hitler's interference helped to extend the delay in bringing the \"Schwalbe\" into operation; (other factors contributed too; in particular, there were engine vibration problems which needed attention). In his memoirs, Albert Speer, then Minister of Armaments and War Production, claimed Hitler originally had blocked mass production of the Me 262, before agreeing in early 1944. Similar criticisms were voiced by Lieutenant General Adolf Galland. Hitler rejected arguments that the aircraft would be more effective as a fighter against the Allied bombers destroying large parts of Germany and wanted it as a bomber for revenge attacks. According to Speer, Hitler felt its superior speed compared to other fighters of the era meant it could not be attacked, and so preferred it for high altitude straight flying.\nTest flights.\nTest flights began on 18 April 1941, with the Me 262 V1 example, bearing its \"Stammkennzeichen\" radio code letters of PC+UA, but since its intended BMW 003 turbojets were not ready for fitting, a conventional Junkers Jumo 210 engine was mounted in the V1 prototype's nose, driving a propeller, to test the Me 262 V1 airframe. When the BMW 003 engines were installed, the Jumo was retained for safety, which proved wise as both 003s failed during the first flight and the pilot had to land using the nose-mounted engine alone. The V1 through V4 prototype airframes all possessed what would become an uncharacteristic feature for most later jet aircraft designs, a fully retracting conventional gear setup with a retracting tailwheel\u2014indeed, the very first prospective German \"jet fighter\" airframe design ever flown, the Heinkel He 280, used a retractable tricycle landing gear from its beginnings and flew on jet power alone as early as the end of March 1941.\nThe V3 third prototype airframe, with the code PC+UC, became a true jet when it flew on 18 July 1942 in Leipheim near G\u00fcnzburg, Germany, piloted by test pilot Fritz Wendel. This was almost nine months ahead of the British Gloster Meteor's first flight on 5 March 1943. Its retracting conventional tail wheel gear (similar to other contemporary piston-powered propeller aircraft), a feature shared with the first four Me 262 V-series airframes, caused its jet exhaust to deflect off the runway, with the wing's turbulence negating the effects of the elevators, and the first takeoff attempt was cut short.\nOn the second attempt, Wendel solved the problem by tapping the aircraft's brakes at takeoff speed, lifting the horizontal tail out of the wing's turbulence. The first four prototypes (V1-V4) were built with the conventional gear configuration. Changing to a tricycle arrangement\u2014a permanently fixed undercarriage on the fifth prototype (V5, code PC+UE), with the definitive fully retractable nosewheel gear on the V6 (with \"Stammkennzeichen\" code VI+AA, from a new code block) and subsequent aircraft corrected this problem.\nTest flights continued over the next year, but engine problems continued to plague the project, the Jumo 004 being only marginally more reliable than the lower-thrust (7.83\u00a0kN/1,760\u00a0lbf) BMW 003. Early engines were so short-lived that they frequently needed replacement after only a single flight. Airframe modifications were complete by 1942 but, hampered by the lack of engines, serial production did not begin until 1944, and deliveries were low, with 28 Me 262s in June, 59 in July, but only 20 in August.\nBy mid-1943, the Jumo 004A engine had passed several 100-hour tests, with a time between overhauls of 50 hours being achieved. However, the Jumo 004A engine proved unsuitable for full-scale production because of its considerable weight and its high utilization of strategic materials (nickel, cobalt, molybdenum), which were in short supply. Consequently, the 004B engine was designed to use a minimum amount of strategic materials. All high heat-resistant metal parts, including the combustion chamber, were changed to mild steel (SAE 1010) and were protected only against oxidation by aluminum coating. The engine represented a design compromise to minimize the use of strategic materials and to simplify manufacture. With the lower-quality steels used in the 004B, the engine required overhaul after just 25 hours for a metallurgical test on the turbine. If it passed the test, the engine was refitted for a further 10 hours of usage, but 35 hours marked the absolute limit for the turbine wheel. Frank Whittle concludes in his final assessment over the two engines: \"it was in the quality of high temperature materials that the difference between German and British engines was most marked\"\nOperationally, carrying of fuel in two tanks, one each fore and aft of the cockpit; and a ventral fuselage tank beneath, the Me 262 would have a total flight endurance of 60 to 90 minutes. Fuel was usually J2 (derived from brown coal), with the option of diesel or a mixture of oil and high octane B4 aviation petrol. Fuel consumption was double the rate of typical twin-engine fighter aircraft of the era, which led to the installation of a low-fuel warning indicator in the cockpit that notified pilots when remaining fuel fell below .\nUnit cost for an Me 262 airframe, less engines, armament, and electronics, was 87,400\u00a0\u211b\ufe01\u2133\ufe01. To build one airframe took around 6,400-man-hours.\nOperational history.\nIntroduction.\nOn 19 April 1944, \"Erprobungskommando\" 262 was formed at Lechfeld just south of Augsburg, as a test unit (\"J\u00e4ger Erprobungskommando Thierfelder\", commanded by \"Hauptmann\" Werner Thierfelder) to introduce the Me 262 into service and train a corps of pilots to fly it. On 26 July 1944, Leutnant Alfred Schreiber, while flying over Munich, with the 262 A-1a W.Nr. 130 017, encountered a Mosquito PR Mark XVI reconnaissance aircraft, of No. 540 Squadron RAF, piloted by Fl. Lt. A.E. Wall. Schreiber attempted to shoot down the unarmed Mosquito, though Wall evaded Schreiber's three attack runs, to land safely at Fermo, Italy, after the first air-to-air use of a jet fighter. Sources state the Mosquito had a hatch fall out, during the evasive manoeuvres, though the aircraft returned to RAF Benson on 27 July 1944, and remained in service until it was lost in a landing in October 1950. On 8 August 1944, Lt. Joachim Weber of EKdo 262 claimed the first kill by a 262, of a reconnaissance Mosquito, PR.IX LR433, of 540 squadron, over Munich, killing the pilot, Fl. Lt. Desmond Laurence Mattewman and navigator Flight Sergeant William Stopford.\nMajor Walter Nowotny was assigned as commander after the death of Thierfelder in July 1944, and the unit redesignated \"Kommando Nowotny\". Essentially a trials and development unit, it mounted the world's first jet fighter operations. Trials progressed at a slow pace; it was not until August 1944 that initial operational missions were flown against the Allies; the unit made claims for 19 Allied aircraft in exchange for six Me\u00a0262s lost. Despite orders to stay grounded, Nowotny chose to fly a mission against an enemy bomber formation flying some above, on 8 November 1944. He claimed two P-51D Mustangs destroyed before suffering engine failure at high altitude. Then, while diving and trying to restart his engines, he was attacked by other Mustangs, forced to bail out, and died. The \"Kommando\" was then withdrawn for further flight training and a revision of combat tactics to optimise the Me\u00a0262's strengths.\nOn 26 November 1944, a Me 262A-2a Sturmvogel of III.\"Gruppe\"/KG 51 'Edelwei\u00df' based at Rheine-Hopsten Air Base near Osnabr\u00fcck was the first confirmed ground-to-air kill of a jet combat aircraft. The Me 262 was shot down by a Bofors gun of B.11 Detachment of 2875 Squadron RAF Regiment at the RAF forward airfield of Helmond, near Eindhoven. Others were lost to ground fire on 17 and 18 December when the same airfield was attacked at intervals by a total of 18 Me 262s and the guns of 2873 and 2875 Squadrons RAF Regiment damaged several, causing at least two to crash within a few miles of the airfield. In February 1945, a B.6 gun detachment of 2809 Squadron RAF Regiment shot down another Me 262 over the airfield of Volkel. The final appearance of Me 262s over Volkel was in 1945 when yet another fell to 2809's guns.\nBy January 1945, \"Jagdgeschwader\" 7 (JG 7) had been formed as a pure jet fighter wing, partly based at Parchim, although it was several weeks before it was operational. In the meantime, a bomber unit\u2014I \"Gruppe\", \"Kampfgeschwader\" 54 (KG(J) 54)\u2014redesignated as such on 1 October 1944 through being re-equipped with, and trained to use the Me\u00a0262A-2a fighter-bomber for use in a ground-attack role. However, the unit lost 12 jets in action in two weeks for minimal returns. \"Jagdverband 44\" (JV 44) was another Me\u00a0262 fighter unit, of squadron (\"Staffel\") size given the low numbers of available personnel, formed in February 1945 by Lieutenant General Adolf Galland, who had recently been dismissed as Inspector of Fighters. Galland was able to draw into the unit many of the most experienced and decorated Luftwaffe fighter pilots from other units grounded by lack of fuel.\nDuring March, Me 262 fighter units were able, for the first time, to mount large-scale attacks on Allied bomber formations. On 18 March 1945, thirty-seven Me 262s of JG 7 intercepted a force of 1,221 bombers and 632 escorting fighters. They shot down 12 bombers and one fighter for the loss of three Me\u00a0262s. Although a 4:1 ratio was exactly what the Luftwaffe would have needed to make an impact on the war, the absolute scale of their success was minor, as it represented only 1% of the attacking force.\nIn the last days of the conflict, Me 262s from JG 7 and other units were committed in ground assault missions, in an attempt to support German troops fighting Red Army forces. Just south of Berlin, halfway between Spremberg and the German capital, the Wehrmacht's 9th Army (with elements from the 12 Army and 4th Panzer Army) was assaulting the Red Army's 1st Ukrainian Front. To support this attack, on 24 April, JG 7 dispatched thirty-one Me 262s on a strafing mission in the Cottbus-Bautzen area. Luftwaffe pilots claimed six lorries and seven Soviet aircraft, but three German jets were lost. On the evening of 27 April, thirty-six Me 262s from JG 7, III.KG(J)6 and KJ(J)54 were sent against Soviet forces that were attacking German troops in the forests north-east of Baruth. They succeeded in strafing 65 Soviet lorries, after which the Me 262s intercepted low flying Il-2 Sturmoviks searching for German tanks. The jet pilots claimed six Sturmoviks for the loss of three Messerschmitts. During operations between 28 April and 1 May Soviet fighters and ground fire downed at least ten more Me 262s from JG 7.\nHowever, JG 7 managed to keep its jets operational until the end of the war. And on 8 May, at around 4:00\u00a0p.m. \"Oblt.\" Fritz Stehle of 2./JG 7, while flying a Me 262 on the Ore Mountains, attacked a formation of Soviet aircraft. He claimed a Yakovlev Yak-9, but the aircraft shot down was probably a P-39 Airacobra. Soviet records show that they lost two Airacobras, one of them probably downed by Stehle, who would thus have scored the last Luftwaffe air victory of the war.\nSeveral two-seat trainer variants of the Me 262, the Me 262 B-1a, had been adapted through the \"Umr\u00fcst-Bausatz 1\" factory refit package as night fighters, complete with on-board FuG 218 \"Neptun\" high-VHF band radar, using \"Hirschgeweih\" (\"stag's antlers\") antennae with a set of dipole elements shorter than the \"Lichtenstein SN-2\" had used, as the B-1a/U1 version. Serving with 10. \"Staffel\" \"Nachtjagdgeschwader\" 11, near Berlin, these few aircraft (alongside several single-seat examples) accounted for most of the 13 Mosquitoes lost over Berlin in the first three months of 1945. Intercepts were generally or entirely made using \"Wilde Sau\" methods, rather than AI radar-controlled interception. As the two-seat trainer was largely unavailable, many pilots made their first jet flight in a single-seater without an instructor.\nDespite its deficiencies, the Me 262 clearly marked the beginning of the end of piston-engined aircraft as effective fighting machines. Once airborne, it could accelerate to speeds over , about faster than any Allied fighter operational in the European Theater of Operations.\nThe Me 262's top ace was probably \"Hauptmann\" Franz Schall with 17 kills, including six four-engine bombers and ten P-51 Mustang fighters, although fighter ace \"Oberleutnant\" Kurt Welter claimed 25 Mosquitos and two four-engine bombers shot down by night and two further Mosquitos by day. Most of Welter's claimed night kills were achieved by eye, even though Welter had tested a prototype Me 262 fitted with FuG 218 \"Neptun\" radar. Another candidate for top ace on the aircraft was \"Oberstleutnant\" Heinrich B\u00e4r, who is credited with 16 enemy aircraft while flying Me 262s out of his total of 240 aircraft shot down.\nAnti-bomber tactics.\nThe Me 262 was so fast that German pilots needed new tactics to attack Allied bombers. In a head-on attack, the combined closing speed of about was too high for accurate shooting with the relatively slow firing 30mm MK 108 cannon \u2013 at about 650 rounds/min this gave around 44 rounds per second from all four guns. Even from astern, the closing speed was too great to use the short-ranged cannon to maximum effect. A roller-coaster attack was devised, the Me 262s approached from astern and about than the bombers. From about behind, they went into a shallow dive that took them through the escort fighters with little risk of interception. When they were about astern and below the bombers, they pulled up sharply to reduce speed. On levelling off, they were astern and overtaking the bombers at about relative speed, well placed to attack them.\nSince the short barrels of the MK 108 cannon and low muzzle velocity \u2013 \u2013 rendered it inaccurate beyond , coupled with the jet's velocity, which required breaking off at to avoid colliding with the target, Me 262 pilots normally commenced firing at . Gunners of Allied bomber aircraft found their electrically powered gun turrets had problems tracking the jets. Aiming was difficult because the jets closed into firing range quickly and remained in firing position only briefly, using their standard attack profile, which proved more effective.\nA prominent Royal Navy test pilot, Captain Eric Brown, chief naval test pilot and commanding officer of the Captured Enemy Aircraft Flight Royal Aircraft Establishment, who tested the Me 262 noted that:\nThis was a Blitzkrieg aircraft. You whack in at your bomber. It was never meant to be a dogfighter, it was meant to be a destroyer of bombers... The great problem with it was it did not have dive brakes. For example, if you want to fight and destroy a B-17, you come in on a dive. The 30mm cannon were not so accurate beyond . So you normally came in at and would open fire on your B-17. And your closing speed was still high and since you had to break away at to avoid a collision, you only had two seconds firing time. Now, in two seconds, you can't sight. You can fire randomly and hope for the best. If you want to sight and fire, you need to double that time to four seconds. And with dive brakes, you could have done that.\nEventually, German pilots developed new tactics to counter Allied bombers. Me 262s, equipped with up to 24 unguided folding-fin R4M rockets\u201412 in each of two underwing racks, outboard of the engine nacelles\u2014approached from the side of a bomber formation, where their silhouettes were widest and while still out of range of the bombers' machine guns, fired a salvo of rockets. One or two hits with these rockets could shoot down even the famously rugged Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, from the \"metal-shattering\" brisant effect of the fast-flying rocket's explosive warhead. The much bigger BR 21 large-calibre rockets, fired from their tubular launchers under the nose of the Me 262A (one either side of the nosewheel well) were only as fast as MK 108 rounds.\nThough this broadside-attack tactic was effective, it came too late to have a real effect on the war and only small numbers of Me 262s were equipped with the rocket packs; most were Me 262A-1a models, of \"Jagdgeschwader\" 7. This method of attacking bombers became the standard and mass deployment of Ruhrstahl X-4 guided missiles was cancelled. Some nicknamed this tactic the Luftwaffe's Wolf Pack, as the fighters often made runs in groups of two or three, fired their rockets, then returned to base. On 1 September 1944, USAAF General Carl Spaatz expressed the fear that if greater numbers of German jets appeared, they could inflict losses heavy enough to force cancellation of the Allied bombing offensive by daylight.\nCounter-jet tactics.\nThe Me 262 was difficult to counter because its high speed and rate of climb made it hard to intercept. However, as with other turbojet engines at the time, the Me 262's engines did not provide sufficient thrust at low airspeeds and throttle response was slow, so that in certain circumstances such as takeoff and landing the aircraft became a vulnerable target. Another disadvantage that pioneering jet aircraft of the World War II era shared, was the high risk of compressor stall and if throttle movements were too rapid, the engine(s) could suffer a flameout. The coarse opening of the throttle would cause fuel surging and lead to excessive jet pipe temperatures. Pilots were instructed to operate the throttle gently and avoid quick changes. German engineers introduced an automatic throttle regulator later in the war but it only partly alleviated the problem.\nThe aircraft had, by contemporary standards, a high wing loading (294.0\u00a0kg/m2, 60.2\u00a0lbs/ft2) that required higher takeoff and landing speeds. Due to poor throttle response, the engines' tendency for airflow disruption that could cause the compressor to stall was ubiquitous. The high speed of the Me 262 also presented problems when engaging enemy aircraft, the high-speed convergence allowing Me 262 pilots little time to line up their targets or acquire the appropriate amount of deflection. This problem faces any aircraft that approaches another from behind at much higher speed, as the slower aircraft in front can always pull a tighter turn, forcing the faster aircraft to overshoot.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I passed one that looked as if it was hanging motionless in the air (I am too fast!). The one above me went into a steep right-hand turn, his pale blue underside standing out against the purple sky. Another banked right in front of the Me's nose. Violent jolt as I flew through his airscrew eddies. Maybe a wing's length away. That one in the gentle left-hand curve! Swing her round. I was coming from underneath, eye glued to the sight (pull her tighter!). A throbbing in the wings as my cannon pounded briefly. Missed him. Way behind his tail. It was exasperating. I would never be able to shoot one down like this. They were like a sack of fleas. A prick of doubt: is this really such a good fighter? Could one in fact, successfully attack a group of erratically banking fighters with the Me 262?\u2014\u200a\nLuftwaffe pilots eventually learned how to handle the Me 262's higher speed and the Me 262 soon proved a formidable air superiority fighter, with pilots such as Franz Schall managing to shoot down seventeen enemy fighters in the Me 262, ten of them American North American P-51 Mustangs. Me 262 aces included Georg-Peter Eder, with twelve enemy fighters (including nine P-51s) to his credit, Erich Rudorffer also with twelve enemy fighters to his credit, Walther Dahl with eleven (including three Lavochkin La-7s and six P-51s) and Heinz-Helmut Baudach with six (including one Spitfire and two P-51s) amongst many others.\nPilots soon learned that the Me 262 was quite maneuverable despite its high wing loading and lack of low-speed thrust, especially if attention was drawn to its effective maneuvering speeds. The controls were light and effective right up to the maximum permissible speed and perfectly harmonised. The inclusion of full span automatic leading-edge slats, something of a \"tradition\" on Messerschmitt fighters dating back to the original Bf 109's outer wing slots of a similar type, helped increase the overall lift produced by the wing by as much as 35% in tight turns or at low speeds, greatly improving the aircraft's turn performance as well as its landing and takeoff characteristics. As many pilots soon found out, the Me 262's clean design also meant that it, like all jets, held its speed in tight turns much better than conventional propeller-driven fighters, which was a great potential advantage in a dogfight as it meant better energy retention in manoeuvres.\nToo fast to catch for the escorting Allied fighters, the Me 262s were almost impossible to head off. As a result, Me 262 pilots were relatively safe from the Allied fighters, as long as they did not allow themselves to get drawn into low-speed turning contests and saved their maneuvering for higher speeds. Combating the Allied fighters could be effectively done the same way as the U.S. fighters fought the more nimble, but slower, Japanese fighters in the Pacific.\nAllied pilots soon found that the only reliable way to destroy the jets, as with the even faster Me 163B \"Komet\" rocket fighters, was to attack them on the ground or during takeoff or landing. As the Me 262A's pioneering Junkers Jumo 004 axial-flow jet engines needed careful nursing by their pilots, these jet aircraft were particularly vulnerable during takeoff and landing. Luftwaffe airfields identified as jet bases were frequently bombed by medium bombers, and Allied fighters patrolled over the fields to attack jets trying to land. The Luftwaffe countered by installing extensive \"\"Flak\" alleys\" of anti-aircraft guns along the approach lines to protect the Me 262s from the ground\u2014and by providing top cover during the jets' takeoff and landing with the most advanced Luftwaffe single-engined fighters, the Focke-Wulf Fw 190D and (just becoming available in 1945) Focke-Wulf Ta 152H. Nevertheless, in March\u2013April 1945, Allied fighter patrol patterns over Me 262 airfields resulted in numerous jet losses.\nOn 5 October 1944, Hpt. Hans-Christoph Buttmann's Me 262 was shot down near Overasselt by a Supermarine Spitfire LF Mk IX from No. 401 Squadron of the Royal Canadian Air Force. This was the first aerial victory over a jet aircraft in history. Lt. Chuck Yeager of the 357th Fighter Group was one of the first American pilots to shoot down an Me 262, which he caught during its landing approach. On 7 October 1944, Lt. Urban Drew of the 365th Fighter Group shot down two Me 262s that were taking off, while on the same day Lt. Col. Hubert Zemke, who had transferred to the Mustang equipped 479th Fighter Group, shot down what he thought was a Bf 109, only to have his gun camera film reveal that it may have been an Me 262. On 25 February 1945, Mustangs of the 55th Fighter Group surprised an entire \"Staffel\" of Me 262As at takeoff and destroyed six jets.\nThe British Hawker Tempest scored several kills against the new German jets, including the Me 262. Hubert Lange, a Me 262 pilot, said: \"the Messerschmitt Me 262's most dangerous opponent was the British Hawker Tempest\u2014extremely fast at low altitudes, highly manoeuvrable and heavily armed.\" Some were destroyed with a tactic known to the Tempest-equipped No. 135 Wing RAF as the \"Rat Scramble\": Tempests on immediate alert took off when an Me 262 was reported airborne. They did not intercept the jet, but instead flew towards the Me 262 and Ar 234 base at Hopsten air base. The aim was to attack jets on their landing approach, when they were at their most vulnerable, travelling slowly, with flaps down and incapable of rapid acceleration. The German response was the construction of a \"flak lane\" of over 150 emplacements of the 20\u00a0mm \"Flakvierling\" quadruple autocannon batteries at Rheine-Hopsten to protect the approaches. After seven Tempests were lost to flak at Hopsten in a week, the \"Rat Scramble\" was discontinued.\nHigh-speed research.\nAdolf Busemann had proposed swept wings as early as 1935; Messerschmitt researched the topic from 1940. In April 1941, Busemann proposed fitting a 35\u00b0 swept wing (\"Pfeilfl\u00fcgel II\", literally \"arrow wing II\") to the Me 262, the same wing-sweep angle later used on both the North American F-86 Sabre and Soviet Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 fighter jets. Though this was not implemented, he continued with the projected HG II and HG III (\"Hochgeschwindigkeit\", \"high-speed\") derivatives in 1944, designed with a 35\u00b0 and 45\u00b0 wing sweep, respectively.\nInterest in high-speed flight, which led him to initiate work on swept wings starting in 1940, is evident from the advanced developments Messerschmitt had on his drawing board in 1944. While the Me 262 V9 \"Hochgeschwindigkeit I\" (HG I) flight-tested in 1944 had only small changes compared to combat aircraft, most notably a low-profile canopy\u2014tried as the \"Rennkabine\" (literally \"racing cabin\") on the ninth Me 262 prototype for a short time\u2014to reduce drag, the HG II and HG III designs were far more radical. The projected HG II combined the low-drag canopy with a 35\u00b0 wing sweep and a V-tail (butterfly tail). The HG III had a conventional tail, but a 45\u00b0 wing sweep and turbines embedded in the wing roots.\nMesserschmitt also conducted a series of flight tests with the series production Me 262. Dive tests determined that the Me\u00a0262 went out of control in a dive at Mach\u00a00.86, and that higher Mach numbers would cause a nose-down trim that the pilot could not counter. The resulting steepening of the dive would lead to even higher speeds and the airframe would disintegrate from excessive negative g loads.\nMesserschmitt believed the HG series of Me 262 derivatives was capable of reaching transonic Mach numbers in level flight, with the top speed of the HG III being projected as Mach 0.96 at altitude. After the war, the Royal Aircraft Establishment, at that time one of the leading institutions in high-speed research, re-tested the Me 262 to help with British attempts at exceeding Mach\u00a01. The RAE achieved speeds of up to Mach\u00a00.84 and confirmed the results from the Messerschmitt dive-tests. The Soviets ran similar tests.\nAfter Willy Messerschmitt's death in 1978, the former Me 262 pilot Hans Guido Mutke claimed to have exceeded Mach\u00a01 on 9 April 1945 in a Me 262 in a \"straight-down\" 90\u00b0 dive. This claim relies solely on Mutke's memory of the incident, which recalls effects other Me 262 pilots observed below the speed of sound at high indicated airspeed, but with no altitude reading required to determine the speed. The pitot tube used to measure airspeed in aircraft can give falsely elevated readings as the pressure builds up inside the tube at high speeds. The Me 262 wing had only a slight sweep, incorporated for trim (center of gravity) reasons and likely would have suffered structural failure due to divergence at high transonic speeds. The Me 262 V9, Werknummer 130 004, with \"Stammkennzeichen\" of VI+AD, was prepared as the HG I test airframe with the low-profile \"Rennkabine\" racing-canopy and may have achieved an unofficial record speed for a turbojet-powered aircraft of , altitude unspecified, even with the recorded wartime airspeed record being set on 6 July 1944, by another Messerschmitt design\u2014the Me 163B V18 rocket fighter setting a record, but landing with a nearly disintegrated rudder surface.\nUS tests conducted at the Royal Aircraft bas in Farnborough in October 1945 showed the ME 262 achieving 540 miles per hour (869 kph), with the engine at maximum RPM. The peak speed was achieved at 20,000\u00a0ft altitude.\nProduction.\nAbout 1,400 aircraft were produced; however, less than a hundred Me 262s were in a combat-ready condition at any one time. According to sources they destroyed from 300 to 450 enemy aircraft, with the Allies destroying about one hundred Me 262s in the air. While Germany was bombed intensively, production of the Me 262 was dispersed into low-profile production facilities, sometimes little more than clearings in the forests of Germany and occupied countries. From the end of February to the end of March 1945, approximately sixty Me 262s were destroyed in attacks on Obertraubling and thirty at Leipheim; the Neuburg jet plant itself was bombed on 19 March 1945.\nLarge, heavily protected underground factories were constructed \u2013 as with the partly-buried Weingut I complex for Jumo 004 jet engine production \u2013 to take up production of the Me 262, safe from bomb attacks. A disused mine complex under the Walpersberg mountain was adapted for the production of complete aircraft. These were hauled to the flat top of the hill where a runway had been cleared and flown out. Between 20 and 30 Me 262s were built here, the underground factory being overrun by Allied troops before it could reach a meaningful output. Wings were produced in Germany's oldest motorway tunnel at Engelberg, to the west of Stuttgart. At \"B8 Bergkristall-Esche II\", a vast network of tunnels was excavated beneath St. Georgen/Gusen, Austria, where slave labourers of concentration camp Gusen II produced fully equipped fuselages for the Me 262 at a monthly rate of 450 units on large assembly lines from early 1945. Gusen II was known as one of the harshest concentration camps; the typical life expectancy was six months. An estimated 35,000 to 50,000 people died on the forced labour details for the Me 262.\nPostwar history.\nAfter the end of the war, the Me 262 and other advanced German technologies were quickly swept up by the Soviets, British and Americans, as part of the USAAF's Operation Lusty. Many Me 262s were found in readily repairable condition and were confiscated. The Soviets, British and Americans wished to evaluate the technology, particularly the engines.\nDuring testing, the Me 262 was found to be faster than the British Gloster Meteor jet fighter, and had better visibility to the sides and rear (mostly due to the canopy frames and the discoloration caused by the plastics used in the Meteor's construction), and was a superior gun platform to the Meteor F.1 which had a tendency to snake at high speed and exhibited \"weak\" aileron response. The Me 262 had a shorter range than the Meteor and had less reliable engines.\nCaptain Eric Brown, a British test pilot who flew 487 types of aircraft during his service, flew a captured Me 262 (as well as other German Second World War jets) after the end of the war. He referred to the Me 262 as \"the most formidable aircraft of WW2.\" He noted that it had a number of innovatory features, but in terms of performance, was a quantum jump ahead of other aircraft at the time. In particular he noted its swept back wings, its axial flow jet engine, and the four powerful 30mm cannons. He stated that it was significantly faster than the fastest Spitfire (at the time) and with that speed \"you could conduct combat totally on your own terms. If you didn't want to engage, you could go off and leave everyone standing.\"\nThe USAAF compared the Lockheed P-80 Shooting Star and Me 262, concluding that the Me 262 was superior in acceleration and speed, with similar climb performance. The Me 262 appeared to have a higher critical Mach number than any American fighter.\nThe Americans also tested a Me 262A-1a/U3 unarmed photo reconnaissance version, which was fitted with a fighter nose and a smooth finish. Between May and August 1946, the aircraft completed eight flights, lasting four hours and forty minutes. Testing was discontinued after four engine changes were required during the course of the tests, culminating in two single-engine landings. These aircraft were extensively studied, aiding development of early American, British and Soviet jet fighters. The F-86, designed by engineer Edgar Schmued, used a slat design based on the Me\u00a0262's.\nThe Czechoslovak aircraft industry continued to produce single-seat (Avia S-92) and two-seat (Avia CS-92) variants of the Me 262 after World War II. From August 1946, a total of nine S-92s and three two-seater CS-92s were completed and test flown. They were introduced in 1947 and in 1950 were supplied to the 5th Fighter Squadron, becoming the first jet fighters to serve in the Czechoslovak Air Force. These were kept flying until 1951, when they were replaced in service by Soviet jet fighters. Both versions are on display at the Prague Aviation museum in Kbely.\nFlyable reproductions.\nIn January 2003, the American Me 262 Project, based in Everett, Washington, completed flight testing to allow the delivery of partially updated spec reproductions of several versions of the Me 262 including at least two B-1c two-seater variants, one A-1c single-seater and two \"convertibles\" that could be switched between the A-1c and B-1c configurations. All are powered by General Electric CJ610 engines and feature additional safety features, such as upgraded brakes and strengthened landing gear. The \"c\" suffix refers to the new CJ610 powerplant and has been informally assigned with the approval of the Messerschmitt Foundation in Germany (the Werknummer of the reproductions picked up where the last wartime produced Me 262 left off \u2013 a continuous airframe serial number run with a near 60-year production break).\nFlight testing of the first newly manufactured Me 262 A-1c (single-seat) variant (Werknummer 501244) was completed in August 2005. The first of these machines (Werknummer 501241) went to a private owner in the southwestern United States, while the second (Werknummer 501244) was delivered to the Messerschmitt Foundation at Manching, Germany. This aircraft conducted a private test flight in late April 2006 and made its public debut in May at the ILA 2006. The new Me 262 flew during the public flight demonstrations. Me 262 Werknummer 501241 was delivered to the Collings Foundation as White 1 of JG 7; this aircraft offered ride-along flights starting in 2008. The third replica, a non-flyable Me 262 A-1c, was delivered to the Evergreen Aviation &amp; Space Museum in May 2010.\nVariants.\n\"Note:-\" U = \"Umr\u00fcst-Bausatz\" \u2013 conversion kit installed at factory level, denoted as a suffix in the form /U\"n\".\n Pre-production aircraft fitted with two Jumo 004B turbojet engines, 23 built.\n Primary production version, usable as both fighter (interceptor) and fighter-bomber.\n Single prototype with a total of six nose mounted guns, two MG 151/20 cannon, two MK 103 cannon, and two MK 108 cannon.\n Single prototype with FuG 220 Lichtenstein SN-2 90\u00a0MHz radar transceiver and \"Hirschgeweih\" (stag's antlers) antenna array, for trials as a night-fighter.\n Reconnaissance version modified in small numbers, with Rb 20/30 cameras mounted in the nose or alternatively one Rb 20/20 and one Rb 75/30 (Rb \u2013 \"Reihenbildner\" \u2013 series-picture, topographic camera). Some retained one MK 108 cannon, but most were unarmed.\n Bomber destroyer version, two prototypes with an adapted MK 214 (intended armament) or BK 5 (test ordnance only) anti-tank gun in the nose.\n Heavy jet fighter with six MK 108 cannon in the nose.\n Trio of A-1a evaluation versions, starting with \"Werknummer\" 170 078, re-engined with two BMW 003A turbojets in place of the Jumo 004s, maximum speed .\n Definitive bomber version retaining only the two lower MK 108 cannon.\n Single prototype with advanced bombsight.\n Two prototypes with glazed nose for accommodating a bombardier.\n Proposed ground-attack version.\n Reconnaissance version.\n Definitive reconnaissance version used in small numbers at end of the war.\n Two-seat trainer.\n Me 262 B-1a trainers converted into provisional night fighters, FuG 218 \"Neptun\" radar, with \"Hirschgeweih\" (eng:antler) eight-dipole antenna array.\n Proposed night fighter version with stretched fuselage.\n Proposed development prototypes in four differing designs, meant to augment or replace the Jumo 004 jets with liquid-fueled rocket propulsion, as the \"Home Protector\" (\"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\") series.\n Single prototype [made from Me 262A \"Werknummer\" 130 186] of rocket-boosted interceptor (\"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\" I) with Walter HWK 109-509 liquid-fuelled rocket in the tail, first flown with combined jet/rocket power on 27 February 1945.\n Single prototype [made from Me 262A \"Werknummer\" 170 074] of rocket-boosted interceptor (\"Heimatsch\u00fctzer\" II) with two BMW 003R \"combined\" powerplants (BMW 003 turbojet, with a single thrust BMW 109-718 liquid-fuelled rocket engine mounted atop the rear of each jet exhaust) for boosted thrust, only flown once with combined jet/rocket power on 26 March 1945.\n \"Heimatsch\u00fctzer III\" \u2013 proposed version with Jumo 004 turbojet engines replaced with Walter HWK RII-211 Liquid-fuelled rocket engines.\n \"Heimatsch\u00fctzer IV\" \u2013 a rocket-boosted interceptor with a Walter HWK 109-509S-2 rocket motor housed in a permanent belly pack. Prototypes and initial production aircraft were captured before completion.\n Proposed variant to carry \"Jagdfaust\" mortars.\n Proposed variant based on A-1a/U4 with a MK 114 cannon.\n Proposed rocket-armed variant carrying up to 48 \u00d7 R4M rockets.\n \"Hohe Geschwindigkeit\" or \"High Speed\" variant, modified A-1a with new \"racing\" style cockpit and additional pieces were added to wing roots at the front.\n Second \"High Speed\" variant, more heavily modified A-1a with \"racing\" style cockpit and wings swept at 35-degree angle and engine nacelles were moved closer to fuselage. A new butterfly V-shaped tail was tested but was too unstable in wind tunnel tests, so normal tail was kept.\n Proposed Third \"High Speed\" variant, only progressed to wind tunnel model stage. This was the last and the pinnacle of the Me 262 aerodynamical possibility, which would have been built from the ground up as a new Me 262 instead of modifying older ones. In the Me 262 HG-III, its wings were swept at 45 degrees, it also had the \"racing\" style cockpit, but the largest change was the moving of the engine nacelles right into the fuselage side and changing the engines to the more powerful Heinkel HeS 011 engines.\n Zero-series model for Me 262 A-1a\n Provisional designation for Me 262 with 2x Argus As 014 pulse jet engines\n Provisional designation for Me 262 with 2x \"square-intake\" Argus As 044 pulse jet engines\n Provisional designation for Me 262 with 2x \"Lorin\" ramjet booster engines in \"over-wing\" mounts, one above each of the Jumo turbojet nacelles.\nR\u00fcsts\u00e4tze (field modification kits).\nR\u00fcsts\u00e4tze may be applied to various sub-types of their respective aircraft type, denoted as a suffix in the form /R\"n\".\nData from: Messerschmitt Me 262A Schwalbe\n/R1: Underfuselage pylon for external fuel tank.\n/R2: Ratog installation for two Rheinmetall 109-502 solid rocket engines.\n/R3: BMW 003R rocket boosted turbojet installation.\n/R4: Installation of the FuG 350 Zc Naxos radar warning receiver / detector.\n/R5: The standard 4x MK 108 cannon installation.\n/R6: Jabo (JagdBomber) equipment, such as bombsights and bomb racks.\n/R7: Underwing installation of 12x R4M rockets carried on wooden racks.\n/R8: R110BS Air to air rocket installation.\n/R9: Ruhrstahl Ru 344 X-4 air-to-air missile installation.\n Czech-built Me 262 A-1a (fighter)\n Czech-built Me 262 B-1a (fighter trainer, two seats)\nReproductions.\nA series of reproductions was constructed by American company Legend Flyers (later Me 262 Project) of Everett, Washington. The Jumo 004 engines of the original are replaced by more reliable General Electric CJ610 engines. The first Me 262 reproduction (a two-seater) took off for the first time in December 2002 and the second one in August 2005. This one was delivered to the Messerschmitt Foundation and was presented at the ILA airshow in 2006.\nA-1c: American privately built, based on A-1a configuration.\nB-1c: American privately built, based on B-1a configuration.\nA/B-1c: American privately built, convertible between A-1c and B-1c configuration.\n Deutsches Museum, Munich, Germany. This aircraft, flown by Hans Guido Mutke while a pilot of 9. Staffel/\"JG\" 7, was confiscated by Swiss authorities on 25 April 1945 after Mutke made an emergency landing in Switzerland due to lack of fuel (80 litres were remaining, 35 litres were usually burnt in one minute).\n Reconstructed from parts of crashed and incomplete Me 262s. Luftwaffenmuseum der Bundeswehr, Germany.\n National Museum of the United States Air Force, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio, US.\n Flying Heritage Collection, Everett, Washington, United States, currently undergoing restoration to flying condition. It is intended to fly using its original Jumo 004 engines. The aircraft was bought from the Planes of Fame Air Museum, Chino, California.\n National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C., United States. Possesses twin original underwing racks for 24 R4M unguided rockets. Flown by \"Oberfeldwebel\" Heinz Arnold\n Royal Air Force Museum Cosford RAF Cosford, Cosford, United Kingdom.\n Australian War Memorial, Canberra, Australia. Built at Regensburg in March 1945, same batch from which the Deutsches Museum \"White 3\" was built. Flown by Fahnenjunker Oberfeldwebel Fr\u00f6hlich and surrendered at Fassberg. It remains the only Me 262 left in existence wearing original (albeit worn, as seen in the picture) colours. Its markings show both the Unit signatures along with the Air Ministry colours applied at Farnborough, where it was allocated reference \"Air Min 81\". Restoration was completed in 1985 and the aircraft was put up on display. The Australian War Memorial's website states that the aircraft \"is the only Me 262 bomber variant to survive, and is the only remaining Me 262 wearing its original paint\".\n South African National Museum of Military History, Johannesburg, South Africa.\n National Museum of Naval Aviation, Pensacola, Florida (previously at NAS/JRB Willow Grove, Willow Grove, Pennsylvania, US)\n Prague Aviation Museum, Kbely, Prague, Czech Republic.\n Prague Aviation Museum, Kbely, Prague, Czech Republic.\nSpecifications (Messerschmitt Me 262 A-1a).\n\"Data from\" \"Quest for Performance\". \"Original Messerschmitt documents\"General characteristics* Crew: 1* Aspect ratio: 7.32* Airfoil: \nPerformance* Maximum speed: Mach * Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Thrust/weight: 0.28\nArmament\nSee also.\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20490", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20490", "title": "Menstrual", "text": ""}
{"id": "20491", "revid": "516514", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20491", "title": "Madeira islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "20493", "revid": "5641591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20493", "title": "Masuria", "text": "Region of northeastern Poland\nMasuria ( ; ; ) is an ethnographic and geographic region in northern and northeastern Poland, known for its 2,000 lakes. Masuria occupies much of the Masurian Lake District. Administratively, it is part of the Warmian\u2013Masurian Voivodeship (administrative area/province). Its biggest city, often regarded as its capital, is E\u0142k. The region covers a territory of some 10,000\u00a0km2 which approximately 500,000 people inhabit.\nMasuria is bordered by Warmia, Powi\u015ble and Che\u0142mno Land in the west, Mazovia in the south, Podlachia and Suwa\u0142ki Region in the east, and Lithuania Minor in the north.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and early history.\nSome of the earliest archeological finds in Masuria were found at Dudka and Szczepanki sites and belonged to the subneolithic Zedmar culture. Indo-European settlers first arrived in the region during the 4th millennium BC, which in the Baltic would diversify into the satem Balto-Slavic branch which would ultimately give rise to the Balts as the speakers of the Baltic languages. The Balts would have become differentiated into Western and Eastern Balts in the late 1st millennium BC. The region was inhabited by ancestors of Western Balts \u2013 Old Prussians, Sudovians/Jotvingians, Scalvians, Nadruvians, and Curonians while the eastern Balts settled in what is now Lithuania, Latvia and Belarus.\nThe Greek explorer Pytheas (4th century BC) may have referred to the territory as \"Mentenomon\" and to the inhabitants as \"Guttones\" (neighbours of the \"Teutones\", probably referring to the Goths). In AD\u00a098 Tacitus described one of the tribes living near the Baltic Sea () as \"Aestiorum gentes\" and amber-gatherers.\nOld Prussians.\nBefore the 13th century, the territory was inhabited by Old (Baltic) Prussians, a Baltic ethnic group that lived in Prussia (the area of the southeastern coastal region of the Baltic Sea neighbouring of the Baltic Sea around the Vistula Lagoon and the Curonian Lagoon). A part of the territory later called Masuria was then known as Galindia and was probably a peripheral, deeply forested and lightly populated area. Inhabitants of the now Masuria spoke a language now known as Old Prussian and had their own mythology. Although a 19th-century German political entity bore their name, they were not Germans. They were converted to Roman Catholicism in the 13th century, after conquest by the Knights of the Teutonic Order.\nEstimates range from approximately 170,000 to 220,000 Old Prussians living in the entire Prussia around 1200. The wilderness was their natural barrier against attack by would-be invaders. During the Northern Crusades of the early 13th century, the Old Prussians used this vast forest as a broad zone of defence. They did so again against the Knights of the Teutonic Order, who had been invited to Poland by Konrad I of Masovia in 1226. The order's goal was to convert the native population to Christianity and baptise it by force if necessary. In the subsequent conquest, which lasted over 50 years, the original population was partly exterminated, particularly during the major Prussian rebellion of 1261\u201383. A lot of Prussians went to Lithuania as war refugees too. But several Prussian noble families also accommodated the Knights to hold their power and possessions.\nTeutonic Order.\nAfter the Order's acquisition of Prussia, Poles (or more specifically, Mazurs, that is inhabitants of the adjacent region of Mazovia) began to settle in the southeastern part of the conquered region. German, Dutch, Flemish, and Danish colonists entered the area afterward, from the northwest. The number of Polish settlers grew significantly again at the beginning of the 15th century, especially after the first and the second treaties of Thorn (Toru\u0144), in 1411 and 1466 respectively, following the Thirteen Years' War and the final defeat of the order. The Battle of Grunwald took place in western Masuria in 1410. It was one of the largest battles of medieval Europe and ended in a Polish-Lithuanian victory over the Teutonic Knights. In 1440 the anti-Teutonic Prussian Confederation was founded, and various towns of Masuria joined it. Western Masuria with Ostr\u00f3da, was, next to the Che\u0142mno Land, the place of the most widespread participation of the nobility in the foundation of the Confederation. In 1454 upon the Confederation's request King Casimir IV of Poland signed the act of incorporation of the entire region including Masuria to Poland and after the subsequent Thirteen Years' War Masuria became a part of Poland as a fief held by the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order.\nDucal Prussia.\nThe secularization of the Teutonic Order in Prussia and the conversion of Albert of Prussia to Lutheranism in 1525 brought Prussia including the area later called Masuria to Protestantism. The Knights untied their bonds to the Catholic Church and became land-owning noblemen and the Duchy of Prussia was established as a vassal state of Poland. The Polish language predominated due to the many immigrants from Mazovia, who additionally settled the southern parts of Ducal Prussia, till then virgin part of (later Masuria) in the 16th century. While the southern countryside was inhabited by these - meanwhile Protestant - Polish-speakers, the very small southern towns constituted a mixed Polish and German-speaking population. The ancient Old Prussian language survived in parts of the countryside in the northern and central parts of Ducal Prussia until the early 18th century. At that time they proved to be assimilated into the mass of German-speaking villagers and farmers. Areas that had many Polish language speakers were known as the Polish Departments.\nMasuria became one of the leading centers of Polish Protestantism. In the mid-16th century Lyck (E\u0142k) and Angerburg (W\u0119gorzewo) became significant Polish printing centers. A renowned Polish high school, which attracted Polish students from different regions, was founded in E\u0142k in eastern Masuria in 1546 by Hieronim Malecki, Polish translator and publisher, who contributed to the creation of the standards and patterns of the Polish literary language. The westernmost part of Masuria, the Osterode (Ostr\u00f3da) county, in 1633 came under the administration of one of the last dukes of the Piast dynasty, John Christian of Brieg.\nAfter the death of Albert Frederick, Duke of Prussia in 1618, his son-in-law John Sigismund, Margrave of Brandenburg, inherited the duchy (including Masuria), combining the two territories under a single dynasty and forming Brandenburg-Prussia. In 1656, during the Battle of Prostki, the forces of Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, including 2,000 Tatar raiders, beat the allied Swedish and Brandenburg army capturing Bogus\u0142aw Radziwi\u0142\u0142. The war resulted in the destruction of most towns, 249 villages and settlements, and 37 churches were destroyed. Over 50% of the population of Masuria died within the years 1656\u20131657, 23,000 were killed, another 80,000 died of diseases and famine, and 3,400 people were enslaved and deported to Russia. The Treaty of Wehlau ended the sovereignty of Poland in 1657.\nFrom 1709 to 1711, in all of Ducal Prussia between 200,000 and 245,000 out of 600,000 inhabitants died from the Black Death. In Masuria the death toll varied regionally; while 6,789 people died in the district of Rhein (Ryn) only 677 died in Seehesten (Szestno). In L\u00f6tzen (Gi\u017cycko) 800 out of 919 people died. Losses in population were compensated by migration of Protestant settlers or refugees from Scotland, Salzburg (expulsion of Protestants 1731), France (Huguenot refugees after the Edict of Fontainebleau in 1685), and especially from the counterreformed Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, including Polish brethren expelled from Poland in 1657. The last group of refugees to emigrate to Masuria were the Russian Philipons (as 'Old Believers' opposed to the State Church) in 1830, when King Frederick William III of Prussia granted them asylum.\nKingdom of Prussia.\nThe region became part of the Kingdom of Prussia with the coronation of King Frederick I of Prussia in 1701 in K\u00f6nigsberg. Masuria became part of a newly created administrative province of East Prussia upon its creation in 1773. The name \"Masuria\" began to be used officially after new administrative reforms in Prussia after 1818. Masurians referred to themselves during that period as \"Polish Prussians\" or as \"Staroprusaki\" (Old Prussians) During the Napoleonic Wars and Polish national liberation struggles, in 1807, several towns of northern and eastern Masuria were taken over by Polish troops under the command of generals Jan Henryk D\u0105browski and J\u00f3zef Zaj\u0105czek. Some Masurians showed considerable support for the Polish uprising in 1831, and maintained many contacts with Russian-held areas of Poland beyond the border of Prussia, the areas being connected by common culture and language; before the uprising people visited each other's country fairs and much trade took place, with smuggling also widespread. Nevertheless, their Lutheran belief and a traditional adherence to the Prussian royal family kept Masurians and Poles separated. Some early writers about Masurians - like Max Toeppen - postulated Masurians in general as mediators between German and Slav cultures.\nGermanisation policies in Masuria included various strategies, first and foremost they included attempts to propagate the German language and to eradicate the Polish language as much as possible; German became the obligatory language in schools from 1834 on. In 1813 the old Polish school in E\u0142k, founded in 1546, was transformed into a German gymnasium. Fryderyk Tymoteusz Krieger, superintendent of the school, actively defended the rights of local Poles to use the Polish language, becoming the first pastor in Masuria to protest against the initiated Germanization of Polish schools in the region. Prussian authorities launched investigations against Krieger three times. Polish people who had acquired knowledge of the German language, including children whose parents did not speak German, were officially classified as ethnic Germans by the authorities, and were denied the right to attend Polish church services. In 1836, a synod was organized in Olecko which protested against Germanization policies. The synod's protest was signed by all the pastors in the Olecko County, and its arguments were later used by the well-known defenders of the Polish language in Masuria, Gustaw Gizewiusz and Krzysztof Celestyn Mrongovius. The protests were successful, however, the campaign of Germanization was resumed in 1865 and later intensified. The Lutheran churches and their vicars principally exerted their spiritual care in Polish as concerned to Polish mother tongue parishioners.\nPolish secret resistance was active and smuggled weapons through the region to the Russian Partition of Poland during the January Uprising of 1863\u20131864. Polish insurgents fled from the Russians to Masuria and found shelter in various towns and villages. Some insurgents reorganized in Masuria to return to the Russian Partition of Poland and continue the fight. Newly formed Polish units from the Prussian Partition of Poland also passed through Masuria, and even clashed with Prussian troops in the region. Several local resistance members, smugglers and insurgents were arrested and imprisoned by the Prussians. Local residents protested against the deportation of insurgents to the Russian Partition.\nEthno-linguistic structure.\nMother tongue of the inhabitants of Masuria, by county, during the first half of the 19th century:\nThe Darkehmen/Darkiejmy (now Ozyorsk) and Go\u0142dap counties, as transitional counties between Masuria and the Lithuania Minor region to the north, were inhabited by notable numbers of both ethnic Poles and Lithuanians.\nGerman Empire.\nAfter the Unification of Germany into the German Empire in 1871, the last lessons that made use of the Polish language were removed from schools in 1872. Masurians who expressed sympathy for Poland were deemed \"national traitors\" by German public opinion, especially after 1918 when the new Polish republic laid claims to, up to then German, areas inhabited by Polish speakers. According to Stefan Berger, after 1871 the Masurians in the German Empire were seen in a view that while acknowledging their \"objective\" Polishness (in terms of culture and language) they felt \"subjectively\" German and thus should be tightly integrated into the German nation-state; Berger concludes that such arguments of German nationalists were aimed at integrating Masurian (and Silesian) territory firmly into the German Reich.\nDuring the period of the German Empire, the Germanisation policies in Masuria became more widespread; children using Polish in playgrounds and classrooms were widely punished by corporal punishment, and authorities tried to appoint Protestant pastors who would use only German instead of bilinguality and this resulted in protests of local parishioners. According to Jerzy Mazurek, the native Polish-speaking population, like in other areas with Polish inhabitants, faced discrimination of Polish language activities from Germanised local administration. In this climate a first resistance defending the rights of rural population was organized, according to Jerzy Mazurek usually by some teachers engaged in publishing Polish language newspapers.\nDespite anti-Polish policies, such Polish language newspapers as the \"Pruski Przyjaciel Ludu\" (Prussian Friend of People) or the \"Kalendarz Kr\u00f3lewsko-Pruski Ewangelicki\" (Royal Prussian Evangelical Calendar) or bilingual journals like the \"Oletzkoer Kreisblatt - Tygodnik Obwodu Oleckiego\" continued to be published in Masuria. In contrast to the Prussian-oriented periodicals, in the late 19th century such newspapers as \"Przyjaciel Ludu \u0141ecki\" and \"Mazur\" were founded by members of the Warsaw-based \"Komitet Centralny dla \u015al\u0105ska, Kaszub i Mazur\" (Central Committee for Silesia, Kashubia and Masuria), influenced by Polish politicians like Antoni Osuchowski or Juliusz Bursche, to strengthen the Polish identity in Masuria. The \"Gazeta Ludowa\" (The Folk's Newspaper) was published in Lyck in 1896\u20131902, with 2,500 copies in 1897 and the \"Mazur\" in Ortelsburg (Szczytno) after 1906 with 500 copies in 1908 and 2,000 prior to World War I.\nPolish activists started to regard Masurians as \"Polish brothers\" after Wojciech K\u0119trzy\u0144ski had published his pamphlet \"O Mazurach\" in 1872 and Polish activists engaged in active self-help against repressions by the German state K\u0119trzy\u0144ski fought against attempts to Germanise Masuria\nHowever, the attempts to create a Masurian Polish national consciousness, largely originating from nationalist circles of Province of Posen (Pozna\u0144) in the Prussian Partition of Poland, faced the resistance of the Masurians, who, despite having similar folk traditions and linguistics to Poles, regarded themselves as Prussians and later Germans. and were loyal to the Hohenzollern dynasty, the Prussian and German state. After World War I the editor of the Polish language \"Mazur\" described the Masurians as \"not nationally conscious, on the contrary, the most loyal subjects of the Prussian king\". However, a minority of Masurians did exist who expressed Polish identity\nAfter 1871 there appeared resistance among the Masurians towards Germanisation efforts, the so-called Gromadki movement was formed which supported use of Polish language and came into conflict with German authorities; while most of its members viewed themselves as loyal to the Prussian state, a part of them joined the Pro-Polish faction of Masurians. The programme of Germanisation started to unite and mobilise Polish people in Polish-inhabited territories held by Germany including Masuria A Polish-oriented party, the \"Mazurska Partia Ludowa\" (\"People's Party of Masuria\"), was founded in 1897. The eastern areas of the German Empire were systematically Germanised with changing of names and public signs, and the German state fostered cultural imperialism, in addition to giving financial and other support to German farmers, officials, and teachers to settle in the east.\nThe German authorities in their efforts of Germanisation tried to claim the Masurian language separate from Polish by classifying it as a non-Slavic language different from Polish one, this was reflected in official census Thus the Masurian population in 1890, 143,397 was reported to the Prussian census as having German as their language (either primary or secondary), 152,186 Polish and 94,961 Masurian. In 1910, the German language was reported by German authorities as used by 197,060, Polish by 30,121 and Masurian by 171,413. Roman Catholics generally opted for the Polish language, Protestants appreciated Masurian. In 1925, German authorities reported 40,869 inhabitants as having declared Masurian as their native tongue and 2,297 as Polish. However, the last result may have been a result of politics at the time, the desire of the population to be German after the trauma evoked by the 1920 plebiscite. So the province could be presented as - so-called - 'purely German'; in reality, the Masurian dialect was still in use among bilinguals.\nThroughout industrialisation in the late 19th century about 10 percent of the Masurian populace emigrated to the Ruhr Area, where about 180,000 Masurians lived in 1914. Wattenscheid, Wanne and Gelsenkirchen were the centers of Masurian emigration and Gelsenkirchen-Schalke was even called Klein (little)-Ortelsburg before 1914. Masurian newspapers like the \"Przyjaciel Ewangeliczny\" and the \"Gazeta Polska dla Ludu staropruskiego w Westfalii i na Mazurach\" but also the German language \"Altpreu\u00dfische Zeitung\" were published.\nDuring World War I, the Battle of Tannenberg and the First and Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes between Imperial Germany and the Russian Empire took place within the borders of Masuria in 1914. After the war, the League of Nations held the East Prussian plebiscite on 11 July 1920 to determine if the people of the southern districts of East Prussia wanted to remain within East Prussia or to join the Second Polish Republic. The German side terrorised the local population before the plebiscite using violence, Polish organisations and activists were harassed by German militias, and those actions included attacks and some supposed murders of Polish activists; Masurs who supported voting for Poland were singled out and subjected to terror and repressions. In April 1920, the German \"Sicherheitswehr\" even battered Italian soldiers stationed in E\u0142k, two fatally.\nNames of those Masurs supporting the Polish side were published in German newspapers, and their photos presented in German shops; afterwards regular hunts were organised after them by German militias terrorizing the Polish minded population. At least 3,000 Warmian and Masurian activists who were engaged for the Polish side decided to flee the region. At the same time also local police officials were engaged in active surveillance of the Polish minority and attacks against Polish activists. Before the plebiscite Poles started to flee the region to escape the German harassment and Germanisation policies.\nThe results determined that 99.32% of the voters in Masuria proper chose to remain with the province of East Prussia. Their traditional religious belief in Lutheranism kept them away from Polish national consciousness, dominated by Roman Catholicism. In fact almost only Catholics voted for Poland in the plebiscite. They were to be found as a majority in the villages around the capital Allenstein (Olsztyn) in Warmia, the same were Polish cultural activism got hold between 1919 and 1932. However, the contemporary Polish ethnographer Adam Ch\u0119tnik accused the German authorities of abuses and falsifications during the plebiscite. Moreover, the plebiscite took place during the time when Polish\u2013Soviet War threatened to erase the Polish state. As a result, even many Poles of the region voted for Germany out of fear that if the area was allocated to Poland it would fall under Soviet rule. After the plebiscite in German areas of Masuria attacks on Polish population commenced by German mobs, and Polish priests and politicians were driven from their homes After the plebiscite at least 10,000 Poles had to flee German held Masuria to Poland.\nInterbellum.\nPolish Masuria \u2014 the Dzia\u0142dowo county.\nThe region of Dzia\u0142dowo (Soldau), where according to the official German census of 1910 ethnic Germans formed a minority of 37.3%, was excluded from the plebiscite and became part of Poland. This was reasoned with placing the railway connection between Warsaw and Danzig (Gda\u0144sk), of vital importance to Poland as it connected central Poland with its recently obtained seacoast, completely under Polish sovereignty. Dzia\u0142dowo itself counted about 24,000 people of which 18,000 were Masurians.\nAccording to the municipal administration of Rybno, after World War I Poles in Dzia\u0142dowo believed that they will be quickly joined with Poland, they organised secret gatherings during which the issue of rejoining Polish state with help of Polish military was discussed. According to the Rybno administration, most active Poles in that subregion included J\u00f3\u017cwiakowscy, Wojnowscy, Grzeszczowscy families working under the guidance of politician Leon Wojnowski who protested German attempts to remain Dzia\u0142dowo a part of Germany after the war; other local pro-Polish activists were Alfred Wellenger, Paczy\u0144ski, Tadeusz Bogda\u0144ski, J\u00f3\u017awiakowski.\nThe historian Andreas Kossert describes that the incorporation happened despite protests of the local populace, the municipal authorities and the German Government, According to Kossert, 6,000 inhabitants of the region soon left the area.\nIn 1920, the candidate of the German Party in Poland, Ernst Barczewski, was elected to the Sejm with 74.6 percent of votes and to the Polish Senate with 34.6% of votes for the Bloc of National Minorities in 1928. During the Polish\u2013Soviet War Dzia\u0142dowo was briefly occupied by the Red Army regarded as liberator from the Polish authority by the local German population, which hoisted the German flag, but it was soon recovered by the Polish Army.\nDuring the interwar period many native inhabitants of Dzia\u0142dowo subregion left and migrated to Germany.\nWeimar Republic and Nazi Germany.\nMasuria was the only region of Germany directly affected by the battles of World War I. Damaged towns and villages were reconstructed with the aid of several twin towns from western Germany like Cologne to Neidenburg (Nidzica), Frankfurt to L\u00f6tzen (Gi\u017cycko) and even Vienna to Ortelsburg (Szczytno). The architecture still is surprisingly distinct, being of modern Central European character. However, Masuria was still largely agrarian-oriented and suffered from the economic decline after World War I, additionally badly affected by the creation of the so-called Polish Corridor, which raised freight costs to the traditional markets in Germany. The later implemented Osthilfe had only a minor influence on Masuria as it privileged larger estates, while Masurian farms were generally small.\nThe interwar period was characterised by ongoing Germanisation policies, intensified especially under the Nazis.\nIn the 1920s Masuria remained a heartland of conservatism with the German National People's Party as strongest party. The Nazi Party, having absorbed the conservative one, became the strongest party already in the Masurian constituencies in the elections of 1930 and received its best results in the poorest areas of Masuria with the highest rate of Polish speakers. Especially in the elections of 1932\u00a0and 1933 they reached up to 81 percent of votes in the district of Neidenburg and 80 percent in the district of Lyck. The Nazis used the economic crisis, which had significant effects in far-off Masuria, as well as traditional anti-Polish sentiments while at the same time Nazi political rallies were organised in the Masurian dialect during the campaigning.\nIn 1938, the Nazi government (1933\u20131945) changed thousands of still existing toponyms (especially names of cities and villages) of Old Prussian, Lithuanian and Polish origin to newly created German names; six thousand, that meant about 50% of the existing names were changed, but the countryside population stuck to their traditional names. Another renaming would take place after Masuria passed to Poland in 1945, with the bulk of the historic Polish names restored. \nAccording to German author Andreas Kossert, Polish parties were financed and aided by the Polish government in Warsaw, and remained splintergroups without any political influence, e.g. in the 1932 elections the Polish Party received 147 votes in Masuria proper. According to Wojciech Wrzesi\u0144ski (1963), the Polish organisations in Masuria had decided to lower their activity in order to escape acts of terror performed against Polish minority activists and organisations by Nazi activists. Jerzy Lanc, a teacher and Polish national who had moved to Masuria in 1931 to establish a Polish school in Piassutten (Piasutno), died in his home of carbon monoxide poisoning, most likely murdered by local German nationalists.\nDue to severe persecution, from 1936 Polish organizations carried out their activities partly in conspiracy. Before the war the Nazi German state sent undercover operatives to spy on Polish organisations and created lists of people that were to be executed or sent to concentration camps. Information was gathered on who sent children to Polish schools, bought Polish press or took part in Polish ceremonies and organised repressions against these people were executed by Nazi militias. Polish schools, printing presses and headquarters of Polish institutions were attacked as well as homes of the most active Poles; shops owned by Poles were vandalised or demolished. Polish masses were dispersed, and Polish teachers were intimidated as members of the SS gathered under their locals performing songs like \"Wenn das Polenblut vom Messer spritzt, dann geht's noch mal so gut\" (\"When Polish blood spurts from the knife, everything will be better\").\nThe Nazi anti-Polish activities further intensified in 1939. Those Poles who were most active in politics were evicted from their own homes, while Polish newspapers and cultural houses were closed down in the region. In an attempt to rig the results of an upcoming census and understate the number of Poles in the region, the Germans terrorized the Polish population and attacked Polish organizations. In summer 1939 the German terror against the Poles even exceeded the terror from the period of the 1920 plebiscite. Polish church masses were banned between June and July in Warmia and Masuria. In August 1939, Germany introduced martial law in the region, which allowed for even more blatant persecution of Poles.\nIn the final moments of August 1939 all remains of political and cultural life of Polish minority was eradicated by the Nazis, with imprisonment of Polish activists and liquidation of Polish institutions. Seweryn Pieni\u0119\u017cny, the chief editor of \"Gazeta Olszty\u0144ska\", who opposed Germanisation of Masuria, was interned, and other Polish activists in Masuria were also arrested.\nDirectors of Polish schools and teachers were imprisoned, as was the staff of Polish pre-schools in the Masuria region. They were often forced to destroy Polish signs, emblems and symbols of Polish institutions.\nWorld War II.\nWith the start of the German invasion of Poland and World War II on 1 September 1939, the German minority in the parts of Masuria attached to Poland after World War I organised themselves in paramilitary formations called \"Selbstschutz\" (selfdefense) and begun to engage in massacres of local Polish population; Poles were imprisoned, tortured and murdered while Masurians were sometimes forcefully placed on Volksliste.\nFrom now on conscripted Masurians had to serve without exception in the German army invading Poland, and Russia two years later on. In addition, the \"Einsatzgruppe V\" Nazi paramilitary death squads entered German-occupied Dzia\u0142dowo to commit crimes against the Polish population. Only some of the Polish activists from Dzia\u0142dowo County were caught by the Germans, as most managed to flee and hide under assumed names in the General Government (German-occupied central Poland). Arrested Polish activists from the pre-war German part of Masuria were mostly deported to concentration camps, incl. Hohenbruch, Soldau, Stutthof, Sachsenhausen, Gusen and Ravensbr\u00fcck.\nIn 1939, the German occupiers established a prisoner-of-war camp for captured Polish soldiers in Dzia\u0142dowo. In December 1939 it was converted into a camp for Polish civilians arrested during the \"Intelligenzaktion\", and afterwards converted into the Soldau concentration camp, where 13,000 people were murdered by the Nazi German state during the war. Notable victims included the Polish bishops Antoni Julian Nowowiejski and Leon Wetma\u0144ski, as well as the nun Mieczys\u0142awa Kowalska. Additionally, almost 1,900 mentally ill patients from East Prussia and annexed areas of Poland were murdered there as well, in what was known as Action T4. Polish resistance in Masuria was organised by Pawe\u0142 Nowakowski \"Le\u015bnik\" commander of the Home Army's Dzia\u0142dowo district. The resistance operated one of the region's main smuggling points for Polish underground press in E\u0142k.\nThe Nazis believed that in future, the Masurians, as a separate non-German entity, would 'naturally' disappear in the end, while those who would cling to their \"foreigness\" as one Nazi report mentioned, would be deported. Local Jews were considered by the Nazis to be subhuman and were to be exterminated. The Nazi authorities also executed Polish activists in Masuria and those who remained alive were sent to concentration camps.\nIn Masuria, Germany also established and operated the Stalag I-B and Oflag 63 prisoner-of-war camps for Polish, Belgian, French, Italian, Serbian and Soviet POWs, and built the Wolf's Lair, Adolf Hitler's first Eastern Front military headquarters where the 20 July assassination attempt occurred in 1944. In August 1943 the Uderzeniowe Bataliony Kadrowe attacked the village of Mittenheide (Turo\u015bl) in southern Masuria.\nIn 1943, \"Zwi\u0105zek Mazurski\" was reactivated secretly by Masurian activists of the Polish Underground State in Warsaw and led by Karol Ma\u0142\u0142ek. Zwi\u0105zek Mazurski opposed Nazi Germany and asked Polish authorities during the war to liquidate German large landowners after the victory over Nazi Germany to help in agricultural reform and settlement of Masurian population, Masurian iconoclasts opposed to Nazi Germany requested to remove German heritage sites \"regardless of their cultural value\". Additionally a Masurian Institute was founded by Masurian activists in Rado\u015b\u0107 near Warsaw in 1943.\nIn the final stages of World War II, Masuria was partially devastated by the retreating German and advancing Soviet armies during the Vistula-Oder Offensive. During the Soviet offensive, wartime rape was especially common in the region, as well as ethnic cleansing of the remaining German population. Already on May 23, 1945, the Soviets granted that a Polish administration be established in the region, which aroused British and American protest.\nHowever, per the decisions made at the earlier Yalta Conference and the Potsdam Conference the region passed to Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, pending a final peace conference with Germany. Most of the population fled to Germany or was killed during or after the war, while those which stayed were subject to a \"nationality verification\", organised by the communist government of Poland. As a result, the number of native Masurians remaining in Masuria was initially relatively high, while most of the population was subsequently expelled. Poles from central Poland and the Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union as well as Ukrainians expelled from southern Poland throughout the Operation Vistula, were resettled in Masuria.\nMasuria after World War II.\nAccording to the Masurian Institute, the Masurian members of resistance against Nazi Germany who survived the war became active in 1945 in the region, working in Olsztyn in cooperation with new state authorities in administration, education and cultural affairs. Historic Polish names for most of towns of Masuria were restored, but for some places new names were determined even if there were historic Polish names.\nOn 16 February 1946, the village of Gajrowskie was the site of the largest battle between Polish anti-communist partisans and communist forces in Masuria.\nGerman author Andreas Kossert describes the post-war process of \"national verification\" as based on an ethnic racism which categorised the local populace according to their alleged ethnic background. A Polish-sounding last name or a Polish-speaking ancestor was sufficient to be regarded as \"autochthonous\" Polish.\nIn October 1946, 37,736 persons were \"verified\" as Polish citizens while 30,804 remained \"unverified\". A center of such \"unverified\" Masurians was the district of Mr\u0105gowo, where in early 1946 out of 28,280 persons, 20,580 were \"unverified\", while in October, 16,385 still refused to adopt Polish citizenship. However, even those who complied with the often used pressure by Polish authorities were in fact treated as Germans because of their Lutheran faith and their often rudimentary knowledge of Polish. Names were \"Polonised\" and the usage of the German language in public was forbidden. In the late 1940s the pressure to sign the \"verification documents\" grew and in February 1949 the former chief of the stalinist secret Police (UB) of \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Mieczys\u0142aw Moczar, started the \"Great verification\" campaign. Many unverified Masurians were imprisoned and accused of pro-Nazi or pro-American propaganda, even former pro-Polish activists and inmates of Nazi concentration camps were jailed and tortured. After the end of this campaign in the district of Mr\u0105gowo only 166 Masurians were still \"unverified\".\nIn 1950, 1,600 Masurians left the country and in 1951, 35,000 people from Masuria and Warmia managed to obtain a declaration of their German nationality by the embassies of the United States and Great Britain in Warsaw. Sixty-three percent of the Masurians in the district of Mr\u0105gowo received such a document. In December 1956, Masurian pro-Polish activists signed a memorandum to the Communist Party leadership:\n\"The history of the people of Warmia and Masuria is full of tragedy and suffering. Injustice, hardship and pain often pressed on the shoulders of Warmians and Masurians... Dislike, injustice and violence surrounds us...They (Warmians and Masurians) demand respect for their differentness, grown in the course of seven centuries and for freedom to maintain their traditions\".\nSoon after the political reforms of 1956, Masurians were given the opportunity to join their families in West Germany. The majority (over 100 thousand) gradually left, and after the improvement of German-Polish relations by the German Ostpolitik of the 1970s, 55,227 persons from Warmia and Masuria moved to West Germany in between 1971 and 1988. Today, between 5,000 and 6,000 Masurians still live in the area, about 50 percent of them members of the German minority in Poland; the remaining half is ethnic Polish. As the Polish journalist Andrzej K. Wr\u00f3blewski stated, the Polish post-war policy succeeded in what the Prussian state never managed: the creation of a German national consciousness among the Masurians.\nMost of the originally Protestant churches in Masuria are now used by the Polish Roman Catholic Church as the number of Lutherans in Masuria declined from 68,500 in 1950 to 21,174 in 1961 and further to 3,536 in 1981. Sometimes, like on 23 September 1979 in the village of Spychowo, the Lutheran Parish was even forcefully driven out of their church while liturgy was held.\nModern Masuria.\nIn most of modern Masuria the native population has virtually disappeared. Masuria was incorporated into the voivodeship system of administration in 1945. In 1999 Masuria was constituted with neighbouring Warmia as a single administrative province through the creation of the Warmian-Masurian Voivodeship.\nToday, numerous summer music festivals take place in Masuria, including the largest reggae festival in Poland in Ostr\u00f3da, the largest country music festival in Poland in Mr\u0105gowo, and one of Poland's largest hip hop music festivals in Gi\u017cycko and E\u0142k.\nThe Masurian Szczytno-Szymany International Airport gained international attention as press reports alleged the airport to be a so-called \"black site\" involved in the CIA's network of extraordinary renditions.\nLandscape.\nMasuria and the Masurian Lake District are known in Polish as \"Kraina Tysi\u0105ca Jezior\", meaning \"land of a thousand lakes.\" These lakes were ground out of the land by glaciers during the Pleistocene ice age around 14,000 - 15,000 years ago, when ice covered northeastern Europe. From that period originates the horn of a reindeer found in the vicinity of Gi\u017cycko. By 10,000 BC this ice started to melt. Great geological changes took place and even in the last 500 years the maps showing the lagoons and peninsulas on the Baltic Sea have greatly altered in appearance. More than in other parts of northern Poland, such as from Pomerania (from the River Oder to the River Vistula), this continuous stretch of lakes is popular among tourists. The terrain is rather hilly, with connecting lakes, rivers and streams. Forests account for about 30% of the area. The northern part of Masuria is covered mostly by the broadleaved forest, while the southern part is dominated by pine and mixed forests.\nThe two largest lakes of Poland, \u015aniardwy and Mamry, are located in Masuria.\nCities and towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "20494", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20494", "title": "Masuren", "text": ""}
{"id": "20497", "revid": "28438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20497", "title": "Magnus", "text": "Male given name and family name\nMagnus, meaning \"Great\" in Latin, was used as cognomen of Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus in the first century BC. The best-known use of the name during the Roman Empire is for the fourth-century Western Roman Emperor Magnus Maximus. The name gained wider popularity in the Middle Ages among various European peoples and their royal houses, being introduced to them upon being converted to the Latin-speaking Catholic Christianity. This was especially the case with Scandinavian royalty and nobility.\nAs a Scandinavian forename, it was extracted from the Frankish ruler Charlemagne's Latin name \"Carolus Magnus\" and re-analyzed as Old Norse \"magn-h\u00fas\" = \"power house\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPeople.\nGiven name.\nKings of Hungary\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Name listThis page or section lists people that share the same given name or the same family name. "}
{"id": "20498", "revid": "42250001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20498", "title": "M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res", "text": "International humanitarian medical non-governmental organisation\n (MSF; pronounced ), French for Doctors Without Borders, is a charity that provides humanitarian medical care. It is a non-governmental organisation (NGO) of French origin known for its projects in conflict zones and in countries affected by endemic diseases. The organisation provides care for diabetes, drug-resistant infections, HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C, tropical and neglected diseases, tuberculosis, vaccines and COVID-19. In 2019, the charity was active in 70 countries with over 35,000 personnel; mostly local doctors, nurses and other medical professionals, logistical experts, water and sanitation engineers, and administrators. Private donors provide about 90% of the organisation's funding, while corporate donations provide the rest, giving MSF an annual budget of approximately US$1.63\u00a0billion.\nMSF was founded in 1971, in the aftermath of the Biafran famine of the Nigerian Civil War, by a small group of French doctors and journalists who sought to expand accessibility to medical care across national boundaries and irrespective of race, religion, creed or political affiliation. MSF's principles and operational guidelines are highlighted in its Charter, the Chantilly Principles, and the later La Mancha Agreement. Governance is addressed in Section 2 of the Rules portion of this final document. MSF has an associative structure where operational decisions are made, independently, by the six operational centres (Amsterdam, Barcelona-Athens, Brussels, Geneva, Paris and West and Central Africa \u2013 with a headquarter office in Abidjan, Ivory Coast). Common policies on core issues are coordinated by the International Council, in which each of the 24 sections (national offices) is represented. The International Council meets in Geneva, Switzerland, where the International Office, which coordinates international activities common to the operational centres, is based.\nMSF has general consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council. It received the 1999 Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of its members' continued efforts to provide medical care in acute crises, as well as raising international awareness of potential humanitarian disasters. James Orbinski, who was the president of the organisation at the time, accepted the prize on behalf of MSF. Prior to this, MSF also received the 1996 Seoul Peace Prize. Christos Christou succeeded Joanne Liu as international president in June 2019.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\n1967 to 1970 \u2013 Biafra.\nDuring the Nigerian Civil War of 1967 to 1970, the Nigerian military formed a blockade around the nation's newly independent south-eastern region, Biafra. At this time, France was one of the few major countries supportive of the Biafrans (the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States sided with the Nigerian government), and the conditions within the blockade were unknown to the world. A number of French doctors volunteered with the French Red Cross to work in hospitals and feeding centers in besieged Biafra. One of the co-founders of the organisation was Bernard Kouchner, who later had a career in French politics, rising to the position of Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, which he held 2007\u20132010.\nAfter entering the country, the volunteers, in addition to Biafran health workers and hospitals, were subjected to attacks by the Nigerian Armed Forces, and witnessed civilians being murdered and starved by the blockading forces. The doctors publicly criticised the Nigerian government and the Red Cross for their seemingly complicit behaviour. These doctors concluded that a new aid organisation was needed that would ignore political/religious boundaries and prioritise the welfare of survivors.\nApart from Nigeria, MSF exists in several African countries including Benin, Zambia, Uganda, Kenya, South Africa, Rwanda, Sudan, Sierra Leone, and others.\n1971 establishment.\nThe (\"Emergency Medical and Surgical Intervention Group\") was formed in 1971 by French doctors who had worked in Biafra, to provide aid and to emphasize the importance of survivors' rights. At the same time, Raymond Borel, the editor of the French medical journal \"TONUS\", had started a group called (\"French Medical Relief\") in response to the 1970 Bhola cyclone, which killed at least 625,000 in East Pakistan (now Bangladesh). Borel had intended to recruit doctors to provide aid to survivors of natural disasters. On 22 December 1971, the two groups of colleagues merged to form (Doctors Without Borders).\nMSF's first mission was to the Nicaraguan capital, Managua, where a 1972 earthquake had destroyed most of the city and killed between 10,000 and 30,000 people. The organisation, today known for its quick response in an emergency, arrived three days after the Red Cross had set up a relief mission. On 18 and 19 September 1974, Hurricane Fifi caused major flooding in Honduras and killed thousands of people (estimates vary), and MSF set up its first long-term medical relief mission.\nBetween 1975 and 1979, after South Vietnam had fallen to North Vietnam, millions of Cambodians immigrated to Thailand to avoid the Khmer Rouge. In response, MSF set up its first refugee camp missions in Thailand. When Vietnam withdrew from Cambodia in 1989, MSF started long-term relief missions to help survivors of the mass killings and reconstruct the country's health care system. Although its missions to Thailand to help victims of war in Southeast Asia could arguably be seen as its first wartime mission, MSF saw its first mission to a true war zone, including exposure to hostile fire, in 1976. MSF spent nine years (1976\u20131984) assisting surgeries in the hospitals of various cities in Lebanon, during the Lebanese Civil War, and established a reputation for its neutrality and willingness to work under fire. Throughout the war, MSF helped both Christian and Muslim soldiers alike, helping whichever group required the most medical aid at the time. In 1984, as the situation in Lebanon deteriorated further and security for aid groups was minimised, MSF withdrew its volunteers.\n1970s.\nClaude Malhuret was elected as the new president of M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res in 1977, and soon after debates began over the future of the organisation. In particular, the concept of (\"witnessing\"), which refers to speaking out about the suffering that one sees as opposed to remaining silent, was being opposed or played down by Malhuret and his supporters. Malhuret thought MSF should avoid criticism of the governments of countries in which they were working, while Kouchner believed that documenting and broadcasting the suffering in a country was the most effective way to solve a problem.\nIn 1979, after four years of refugee movement from South Vietnam and the surrounding countries by foot and by boat, French intellectuals made an appeal in \"Le Monde\" for \"A Boat for Vietnam\", a project intended to provide medical aid to the refugees. Although the project did not receive support from the majority of MSF, some, including later Minister Bernard Kouchner, chartered a ship called (\"The Island of Light\"), and, along with doctors, journalists and photographers, sailed to the South China Sea and provided some medical aid to the boat people. The splinter organisation that undertook this, M\u00e9decins du Monde, later developed the idea of humanitarian intervention as a duty, in particular on the part of Western nations such as France. In 2007 MSF clarified that for nearly 30 years MSF and Kouchner have had public disagreements on such issues as the right to intervene and the use of armed force for humanitarian reasons. Kouchner is in favour of the latter, whereas MSF stands up for an impartial humanitarian action, independent from all political, economic and religious powers.\n1980s.\nIn 1982, Malhuret and Rony Brauman (who became the organisation's president in 1982) brought increased financial independence to MSF by introducing fundraising-by-mail to better collect donations. The 1980s also saw the establishment of the other operational sections from MSF-France (1971): MSF-Belgium (1980), MSF-Switzerland (1981), MSF-Holland (1984), and MSF-Spain (1986). MSF-Luxembourg was the first support section, created in 1986. The early 1990s saw the establishment of the majority of the support sections: MSF-Greece (1990), MSF-USA (1990), MSF-Canada (1991), MSF-Japan (1992), MSF-UK (1993), MSF-Italy (1993), MSF-Australia (1994), as well as Germany, Austria, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Hong Kong (MSF-UAE was formed later). Malhuret and Brauman were instrumental in professionalising MSF. In December 1979, after the Soviet army had invaded Afghanistan, field missions were immediately set up to provide medical aid to the mujahideen, and in February 1980, MSF publicly denounced the Khmer Rouge. During the 1983\u20131985 famine in Ethiopia, MSF set up nutrition programmes in the country in 1984, but was expelled in 1985 after denouncing the abuse of international aid and the forced resettlements. MSF's explicit attacks on the Ethiopian government led to other NGOs criticizing their abandonment of their supposed neutrality and contributed to a series of debates in France around humanitarian ethics. The group also set up equipment to produce clean drinking water for the population of San Salvador, capital of El Salvador, after 10 October 1986 earthquake that struck the city.\n1990s.\nIn 1990, MSF first entered Liberia to help civilians and refugees affected by the Liberian Civil War. Constant fighting throughout the 1990s and the Second Liberian Civil War have kept MSF volunteers actively providing nutrition, basic health care, and mass vaccinations, and speaking out against attacks on hospitals and feeding stations, especially in Monrovia.\nField missions were set up to provide relief to Kurdish refugees who had survived the al-Anfal Campaign, for which evidence of atrocities was being collected in 1991. 1991 also saw the beginning of the civil war in Somalia, during which MSF set up field missions in 1992 alongside a UN peacekeeping mission. Although the UN-aborted operations by 1993, MSF representatives continued with their relief work, running clinics and hospitals for civilians.\nMSF first began work in Srebrenica (in Bosnia and Herzegovina) as part of a UN convoy in 1993, one year after the Bosnian War had begun. The city had become surrounded by the Bosnian Serb Army and, containing about 60,000 Bosniaks, had become an enclave guarded by a United Nations Protection Force. MSF was the only organisation providing medical care to the surrounded civilians, and as such, did not denounce the genocide for fear of being expelled from the country (it did, however, denounce the lack of access for other organisations). MSF was forced to leave the area in 1995 when the Bosnian Serb Army captured the town. 40,000 Bosniak civilian inhabitants were deported, and approximately 7,000 were killed in mass executions.\nRwandan genocide.\nWhen the genocide in Rwanda began in April 1994, some delegates of MSF working in the country were incorporated into the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) medical team for protection. Both groups succeeded in keeping all main hospitals in Rwanda's capital Kigali operational throughout the main period of the genocide. MSF, together with several other aid organisations, had to leave the country in 1995, although many MSF and ICRC volunteers worked together under the ICRC's rules of engagement, which held that neutrality was of the utmost importance. These events led to a debate within the organisation about the concept of balancing neutrality of humanitarian aid workers against their witnessing role. As a result of its Rwanda mission, the position of MSF with respect to neutrality moved closer to that of the ICRC, a remarkable development in the light of the origin of the organisation.\nThe ICRC lost 56 and MSF lost almost one hundred of their respective local staff in Rwanda, and MSF-France, which had chosen to evacuate its team from the country (the local staff were forced to stay), denounced the murders and demanded that a French military intervention stop the genocide. MSF-France introduced the slogan \"One cannot stop a genocide with doctors\" to the media, and the controversial Op\u00e9ration Turquoise followed less than one month later. This intervention directly or indirectly resulted in movements of hundreds of thousands of Rwandan refugees to Zaire and Tanzania in what became known as the Great Lakes refugee crisis, and subsequent cholera epidemics, starvation and more mass killings in the large groups of civilians. MSF-France returned to the area and provided medical aid to refugees in Goma.\nAt the time of the genocide, competition between the medical efforts of MSF, the ICRC, and other aid groups had reached an all-time high, but the conditions in Rwanda prompted a drastic change in the way humanitarian organisations approached aid missions. The \"Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief Programmes\" was created by the ICRC in 1994 to provide a framework for humanitarian missions and MSF is a signatory of this code. The code advocates the provision of humanitarian aid only, and groups are urged not to serve any political or religious interest, or be used as a tool for foreign governments. MSF has since still found it necessary to condemn the actions of governments, such as in Chechnya in 1999, but has not demanded another military intervention since then.\n2020s.\nAccusations of racism.\nMore than a thousand staffers accused the charity of white supremacy when they voiced their concerns in a 2020 petition. One staffer from Cameroon detailed her experiences with racism from the group's leaders. Many concerns involved different treatment of expatriate staff from Europe and North America, who are typically white, compared to national staff. In an interview with NPR, the president of the organisation acknowledged Doctors Without Borders was founded in racism and pledged to do better.\nSnakebite prioritisation in WHO.\nMSF played an important role for including snakebite as a WHO Category A Neglected Tropical Disease (NTD) status in, a WHO resolution and development of global strategy to decrease burden of snakebite. MSF highlighted the scarcity of anti-venom in Africa due to stoppage of manufacturing and brought urgency to the scenario and led media advocacy efforts.\nAccess to medicine campaign.\nOn June 20, 2024, MSF announced closing down its access-to-medicines campaign focused on enabling access to medicines in resource limited settings. MSF plans to replace the campaign with a new effort that will focus on products, like medicines and vaccines, that MSF needs for its own relief efforts. Several advocates have criticized this move including the Treatment Action Group.\nActivities by location.\nIn 1999, the organisation spoke out about the lack of humanitarian support in Kosovo and Chechnya, having set up field missions to help civilians affected by the respective political situations. Although MSF had worked in the Kosovo region since 1993, the onset of the Kosovo War prompted the movement of tens of thousands of refugees, and a decline in suitable living conditions. MSF provided shelter, water and health care to civilians affected by NATO's strategic bombing campaigns.\nA serious crisis within MSF erupted in connection with the organisation's work in Kosovo when the Greek section of MSF was expelled from the organisation. The Greek MSF section had gained access to Serbia at the cost of accepting Serb government imposed limits on where it could go and what it could see\u00a0\u2013 terms that the rest of the MSF movement had refused. A non-MSF source alleged that the exclusion of the Greek section happened because its members extended aid to both Albanian and Serbian civilians in Pristina during NATO's bombing.\nThe rift was healed only in 2005 with the re-admission of the Greek section to MSF.\nA similar situation was found in Chechnya, whose civilian population was largely forced from their homes into unhealthy conditions and subjected to the violence of the Second Chechen War.\nMSF has been working in Haiti since 1991, but since President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was forced from power, the country has seen a large increase in civilian attacks and rape by armed groups. In addition to providing surgical and psychological support in existing hospitals\u00a0\u2013 offering the only free surgery available in Port-au-Prince\u00a0\u2013 field missions have been set up to rebuild water and waste management systems and treat survivors of major flooding caused by Hurricane Jeanne; patients with HIV/AIDS and malaria, both of which are widespread in the country, also receive better treatment and monitoring. As a result of 12 January 2010 Haiti earthquake, reports from Haiti indicated that all three of the organisation's hospitals had been severely damaged; one collapsing completely and the other two having to be abandoned. Following the quake, MSF sent about nine planes loaded with medical equipment and a field hospital to help treat the victims. However, the landings of some of the planes had to be delayed due to the massive number of humanitarian and military flights coming in.\nThe Kashmir conflict in North India resulted in a more recent MSF intervention (the first field mission was set up in 1999) to help civilians displaced by fighting in Jammu and Kashmir, as well as in Manipur. Psychological support is a major target of missions, but teams have also set up programmes to treat tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS and malaria. Mental health support has been of significant importance for MSF in much of southern Asia since the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake.\nMSF went through a long process of self-examination and discussion in 2005\u20132006. Many issues were debated, including the treatment of \"nationals\" as well as \"fair employment\" and self-criticism.\nMSF issued a statement for safe abortion following \"Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization\".\nSub-Saharan Africa.\nMSF has been active in a large number of African countries for decades, sometimes serving as the sole provider of health care, food, and water. Although MSF has consistently attempted to increase media coverage of the situation in Africa to increase international support, long-term field missions are still necessary. Treating and educating the public about HIV/AIDS in sub-Saharan Africa, which sees the most deaths and cases of the disease in the world, is a major task for volunteers. Of the 14.6\u00a0million people in need of anti-retroviral treatment the WHO estimated that only 5.25\u00a0million people were receiving it in developing countries, and MSF continues to urge governments and companies to increase research and development into HIV/AIDS treatments to decrease cost and increase availability.\nSierra Leone.\nIn the late 1990s, MSF missions were set up to treat tuberculosis and anaemia in residents of the Aral Sea area, and look after civilians affected by drug-resistant disease, famine, and epidemics of cholera and AIDS. They vaccinated 3 million Nigerians against meningitis during an epidemic in 1996 and denounced the Taliban's neglect of health care for women in 1997. Arguably, the most significant country in which MSF set up field missions in the late 1990s was Sierra Leone, which was involved in a civil war at the time. In 1998, volunteers began assisting in surgeries in Freetown to help with an increasing number of amputees, and collecting statistics on civilians (men, women and children) being attacked by large groups of men claiming to represent ECOMOG. The groups of men were travelling between villages and systematically chopping off one or both of each resident's arms, raping women, gunning down families, razing houses, and forcing survivors to leave the area. Long-term projects following the end of the civil war included psychological support and phantom limb pain management.\nSudan.\nSince 1979, MSF has been providing medical humanitarian assistance in Sudan, a nation plagued by starvation and the civil war, prevalent malnutrition and one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the world. In March 2009, it is reported that MSF has employed 4,590 field staff in Sudan tackling issues such as armed conflicts, epidemic diseases, health care and social exclusion. MSF's continued presence and work in Sudan is one of the organisation's largest interventions. MSF provides a range of health care services including nutritional support, reproductive healthcare, kala-azar treatment, counselling services and surgery to the people living in Sudan. Common diseases prevalent in Sudan include tuberculosis, kala-azar also known as visceral leishmaniasis, meningitis, measles, cholera, and malaria.\nKala-azar in Sudan.\nKala-azar, also known as visceral leishmaniasis, has been one of the major health problems in Sudan. After the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between North and Southern Sudan on 9 January 2005, the increase in stability within the region helped further efforts in healthcare delivery. M\u00e9dicins Sans Fronti\u00e8res tested a combination of sodium stibogluconate and paromomycin, which would reduce treatment duration (from 30 to 17 days) and cost in 2008. In March 2010, MSF set up its first kala-azar treatment centre in Eastern Sudan, providing free treatment for this otherwise deadly disease. If left untreated, there is a fatality rate of 99% within 1\u20134 months of infection. Since the treatment centre was set up, MSF has cured more than 27,000 kala-azar patients with a success rate of approximately 90\u201395%. There are plans to open an additional kala-azar treatment centre in Malakal, Southern Sudan, to cope with the overwhelming number of patients that are seeking treatment. MSF has been providing necessary medical supplies to hospitals and training Sudanese health professionals to help them deal with kala-azar. MSF, Sudanese Ministry of Health and other national and international institutions are combining efforts to improve on the treatment and diagnosis of kala-azar. Research on its cures and vaccines are currently being conducted. In December 2010, South Sudan was hit with the worst outbreak of kala-azar in eight years. The number of patients seeking treatment increased eight-fold as compared to the year before.\nHealth care infrastructure in Sudan.\nSudan's latest civil war began in 1983 and ended in 2005 when a peace agreement was signed between North Sudan and South Sudan. MSF medical teams were active throughout and prior to the civil war, providing emergency medical humanitarian assistance in multiple locations. The situation of poor infrastructure in the South was aggravated by the civil war and resulted in the worsening of the region's appalling health indicators. An estimated 75 percent of people in the nascent nation has no access to basic medical care and 1 in seven women dies during childbirth. Malnutrition and disease outbreaks are perennial concerns as well. In 2011, MSF clinic in Jonglei State, South Sudan, was looted and attacked by raiders. Hundreds, including women and children were killed. Valuable items including medical equipment and drugs were lost during the raid and parts of the MSF facilities were destroyed in a fire. The incident had serious repercussions as MSF is the only primary health care provider in this part of Jonglei State.\nDemocratic Republic of the Congo.\nAlthough active in the Congo region of Africa since 1985, the First and Second Congo War brought increased violence and instability to the area. MSF has had to evacuate its teams from areas such as around Bunia, in the Ituri district due to extreme violence, but continues to work in other areas to provide food to tens of thousands of displaced civilians, as well as treat survivors of mass rapes and widespread fighting. The treatment and possible vaccination against diseases such as cholera, measles, polio, Marburg fever, sleeping sickness, HIV/AIDS, and bubonic plague is also important to prevent or slow down epidemics.\nUganda.\nMSF has been active in Uganda since 1980, and provided relief to civilians during the country's guerrilla war during the . However, the formation of the Lord's Resistance Army saw the beginning of a long campaign of violence in northern Uganda and southern Sudan. Civilians were subjected to mass killings and rapes, torture, and abductions of children, who would later serve as sex slaves or child soldiers. Faced with more than 1.5\u00a0million people displaced from their homes, MSF set up relief programmes in internally displaced person (IDP) camps to provide clean water, food and sanitation. Diseases such as tuberculosis, measles, polio, cholera, ebola, and HIV/AIDS occur in epidemics in the country, and volunteers provide vaccinations (in the cases of measles and polio) and/or treatment to the residents. Mental health is also an important aspect of medical treatment for MSF teams in Uganda since most people refuse to leave the IDP camps for constant fear of being attacked.\nIvory Coast.\nMSF first camp set up a field mission in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire in 1990, but ongoing violence and the 2002 division of the country by rebel groups and the government led to several massacres, and MSF teams have even begun to suspect that an ethnic cleansing is occurring. Mass measles vaccinations, tuberculosis treatment and the re-opening of hospitals closed by fighting are projects run by MSF, which is the only group providing aid in much of the country.\nMSF has strongly promoted the use of contraception in Africa.\nWest African Ebola outbreak.\nDuring the Ebola outbreak in West Africa in 2014, MSF met serious medical demands largely on its own, after the organisation's early warnings were largely ignored.\nBurundi.\nMSF-Burundi has aided in attending to casualties suffered in the 2019 Burundi landslides.\nAsia.\nSri Lanka.\nMSF is involved in Sri Lanka, where a 26-year civil war ended in 2009 and MSF has adapted its activities there to continue its mission. For example, it helps with physical therapy for patients with spinal cord injuries. It conducts counseling sessions, and has set up an \"operating theatre for reconstructive orthopaedic surgery and supplied specialist surgeons, anaesthetists and nurses to operate on patients with complicated war-related injuries\".\nCambodia.\nMSF first provided medical help to civilians and refugees who have escaped to camps along the Thai-Cambodian border in 1979. Due to long decades of war, a proper health care system in the country was severely lacking.\nIn 1999, Cambodia was hit with a malaria epidemic. The situation of the epidemic was aggravated by a lack of qualified practitioners and poor quality control which led to a market of fake antimalarial drugs. Counterfeit antimalarial drugs were responsible for the deaths of at least 30 people during the epidemic. This has prompted efforts by MSF to set up and fund a malaria outreach project and utilise Village Malaria Workers. MSF also introduced a switching of first-line treatment to a combination therapy (Artesunate and Mefloquine) to combat resistance and fatality of old drugs that were used to treat the disease traditionally.\nCambodia is one of the hardest hit HIV/AIDS countries in Southeast Asia. In 2001, MSF started introducing antiretroviral (ARV) therapy to AIDS patients for free. This therapy prolongs the patients' lives and is a long-term treatment. In 2002, MSF established chronic diseases clinics with the Cambodian Ministry of Health in various provinces to integrate HIV/AIDS treatment, alongside hypertension, diabetes, and arthritis which have high prevalence rate. This aims to reduce facility-related stigma as patients are able to seek treatment in a multi-purpose clinic in contrast to a HIV/AIDS specialised treatment centre.\nMSF also provided humanitarian aid in times of natural disaster such as a major flood in 2002 which affected up to 1.47 million people. MSF introduced a community-based tuberculosis programme in 2004 in remote villages, where village volunteers are delegated to facilitate the medication of patients. In partnership with local health authorities and other NGOs, MSF encouraged decentralized clinics and rendered localized treatments to more rural areas from 2006. Since 2007, MSF has extended general health care, counselling, HIV/AIDS and TB treatment to prisons in Phnom Penh via mobile clinics. However, poor sanitation and lack of health care still prevails in most Cambodian prisons as they remain as some of the world's most crowded prisons.\nIn 2007, MSF worked with the Cambodian Ministry of Health to provide psychosocial and technical support in offering pediatric HIV/AIDS treatment to affected children. MSF also provided medical supplies and staff to help in one of the worst dengue outbreaks in 2007, which had more than 40,000 people hospitalized, killing 407 people, primarily children.\nIn 2010, Southern and Eastern provinces of Cambodia were hit with a cholera epidemic and MSF responded by providing medical support that were adapted for usage in the country.\nCambodia is one of 22 countries listed by WHO as having a high burden of tuberculosis. WHO estimates that 64% of all Cambodians carry the tuberculosis mycobacterium. Hence, MSF has since shifted its focus away from HIV/AIDS to tuberculosis, handing over most HIV-related programs to local health authorities.\nMiddle East and North Africa.\nLibya.\nThe 2011 Libyan civil war prompted efforts by MSF to set up a hospital and mental health services to help locals affected by the conflict. The fighting created a backlog of patients that needed surgery. With parts of the country slowly returning to livable, MSF started working with local health personnel to address the needs. The need for psychological counseling increased and MSF set up mental health services to address the fears and stress of people living in tents without water and electricity. As of late 2016, MSF was the only International Aid organisation with actual presence in the country.\nMSF was ordered in November 2025 to leave Libya without any apparent explanation.\nSearch and Rescue in the Mediterranean Sea.\nMSF is providing Maritime Search And Rescue (SAR) services on the Mediterranean Sea to save the lives of migrants attempting to cross with unseaworthy boats. The Mission started in 2015 after the EU ended its major SAR operation Mare Nostrum, severely diminishing much needed SAR capacities in the Mediterranean. Throughout the mission MSF has operated its own vessels like the \"Bourbon Argos\" (2015\u20132016), \"Dignity 1\" (2015\u20132016) and \"VOS Prudence\" (2016\u20132017). MSF has also provided medical teams to support other NGOs and their ships like the MOAS \"Phoenix\" (2015) or the \"Aquarius\" (2017\u20132018) and \"Ocean Viking\" (2019\u20132020) with SOS M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e and Mediterranea Saving Humans. In August 2017 MSF decided to suspend the activities of the \"VOS Prudence\" protesting restrictions and threats by the Libyan \"Coast Guard\".\nIn December 2018 MSF and SOS M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e were forced to end operations of the \"Aquarius\", at that date the last remaining vessel supported by MSF. This came after attacks by EU states that stripped the vessel of its registration and produced criminal accusations against MSF. Up to then 80,000 people had been rescued or assisted since the beginning of the mission. Operations resumed with \"Ocean Viking\" in July 2019, but the ship was seized in Sicily in July 2020. In May 2021, MSF returned to refugee rescue operations in the Mediterranean with a new vessel, the \"Geo Barents\". Within a month this resulted in the rescue of some 400 people. In December 2024 MSF announced the suspension of further operations of the vessel. During the 2023 and 2024, due to bureaucratic blockages by the Italian government, it had spent some 160 days in port. In November 2025, the 20m-long vessel \"Oyvon\" began in service as a replacement for the larger \"Geo Barents\", with a crew of 10 MSF activists under the German flag.\nYemen.\nMSF is involved in trying to help with the humanitarian crisis caused by the Yemeni Civil War. The organisation operates eleven hospitals and health centres in Yemen and provides support to another 18 hospitals or health centres. According to MSF, since October 2015, four of its hospitals and one ambulance have been destroyed by Saudi-led coalition airstrikes. In August 2016, an airstrike on Abs hospital killed 19 people, including one MSF staff member, and wounded 24.\nEurope.\nThe Netherlands.\nIn August and September 2022, MSF provided medical care to asylum seekers staying outside the overcrowded migration centre in Ter Apel, the Netherlands.\nItaly.\nMSF has been active in Italy since 1999, providing comprehensive assistance \u2013 including humanitarian, medical, psychological, and socio-health support \u2013 to migrants, asylum seekers, and refugees across the country. Over the years, its efforts have spanned various initiatives, from aiding migrant arrivals to operating within reception centers and informal settlements in different regions of Italy.\nAs of Spring 2024, MSF is involved in projects across three key locations in Italy. In Calabria, it delivers medical and psychological aid during migrant arrivals and ensures ongoing care within the region's reception centers. In Ventimiglia, situated on the Italo-French border, MSF operates a mobile clinic specifically catering to migrants passing through the area. Meanwhile, in Palermo, in collaboration with local health authorities, MSF has launched a program to support foreign individuals who have survived torture and other deliberate acts of violence. Moreover, MSF Italy possesses the capability to provide psychological first aid to individuals who have undergone particularly traumatic experiences during their Mediterranean Sea crossings.\nOrganisation of activities.\nBefore a field mission is established in a country, an MSF team visits the area to determine the nature of the humanitarian emergency, the level of safety in the area and what type of aid is needed (this is called an \"exploratory mission\").\nMedical aid is the main objective of most missions, although some missions help in such areas as water purification and nutrition.\nField mission team.\nA field mission team usually consists of a small number of coordinators to head each component of a field mission, and a \"head of mission\". The head of mission usually has the most experience in humanitarian situations of the members of the team, and it is their job to deal with the media, national governments and other humanitarian organisations. The head of mission does not necessarily have a medical background.\nMedical volunteers include physicians, surgeons, nurses, and various other specialists. In addition to operating the medical and nutrition components of the field mission, these volunteers are sometimes in charge of a group of local medical staff and provide training for them.\nMedical component.\nVaccination campaigns are a major part of the medical care provided during MSF missions. Diseases such as diphtheria, measles, meningitis, tetanus, pertussis, yellow fever, polio, and cholera, all of which are uncommon in developed countries, may be prevented with vaccination. Some of these diseases, such as cholera and measles, spread rapidly in large populations living in close proximity, such as in a refugee camp, and people must be immunised by the hundreds or thousands in a short period of time. For example, in Beira, Mozambique, in 2004, an experimental cholera vaccine was received twice by approximately 50,000 residents in about one month.\nAn equally important part of the medical care provided during MSF missions is AIDS treatment (with antiretroviral drugs), AIDS testing, and education. MSF is the only source of treatment for many countries in Africa, whose citizens make up the majority of people with HIV and AIDS worldwide. Because antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) are not readily available, MSF usually provides treatment for opportunistic infections and educates the public on how to slow transmission of the disease.\nIn most countries, MSF increases the capabilities of local hospitals by improving sanitation, providing equipment and drugs, and training local hospital staff. When the local staff is overwhelmed, MSF may open new specialised clinics for treatment of an endemic disease or surgery for victims of war. International staff start these clinics but MSF strives to increase the local staff's ability to run the clinics themselves through training and supervision. In some countries, like Nicaragua, MSF provides public education to increase awareness of reproductive health care and venereal disease.\nSince most of the areas that require field missions have been affected by a natural disaster, civil war, or endemic disease, the residents usually require psychological support as well. Although the presence of an MSF medical team may decrease stress somewhat among survivors, often a team of psychologists or psychiatrists help people who have depression, survivors of domestic violence and those with substance use disorder. The doctors may also train local mental health staff. Such cases include Palestinian refugee camps, where long-term displacement and geopolitical circumstances have left many residents without long-term purpose or clear strategies for action. Humanitarian actors, like M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res, have sometimes responded by proferring coping skills to residents as a humanitarian aim and outcome. In the late 2000s, M\u00e9decins Sans Fronti\u00e8res launched a mental health program in Bourj el-Barajneh camp in Lebanon, providing sexual and reproductive health services, mental health support, and health promotion activities.\nNutrition.\nOften in situations where an MSF mission is set up, there is moderate or severe malnutrition as a result of war, drought, or government economic mismanagement. Intentional starvation is also sometimes used during a war as a weapon, and MSF, in addition to providing food, brings awareness to the situation and insists on foreign government intervention. Infectious diseases and diarrhoea, both of which cause weight loss and weakening of a person's body (especially in children), must be treated with medication and proper nutrition to prevent further infections and weight loss. A combination of the above situations, as when a civil war is fought during times of drought and infectious disease outbreaks, can create famine.\nIn emergency situations where there is a lack of nutritious food, but not to the level of a true famine, protein-energy malnutrition is most common among young children. Marasmus, a form of calorie deficiency, is the most common form of childhood malnutrition and is characterised by severe wasting and often fatal weakening of the immune system. Kwashiorkor, a form of calorie and protein deficiency, is a more serious type of malnutrition in young children, and can negatively affect physical and mental development. Both types of malnutrition can make opportunistic infections fatal. In these situations, MSF sets up \"Therapeutic Feeding Centres\" for monitoring the children and any other malnourished individuals.\nA Therapeutic Feeding Centre (or Therapeutic Feeding Programme) is designed to treat severe malnutrition through the gradual introduction of a special diet intended to promote weight gain after the individual has been treated for other health problems. The treatment programme is split between two phases:\nMSF uses foods designed specifically for treatment of severe malnutrition. During phase 1, a type of therapeutic milk called F-75 is fed to patients. F-75 is a relatively low energy, low fat/protein milk powder that must be mixed with water and given to patients to prepare their bodies for phase 2. During phase 2, therapeutic milk called F-100, which is higher in energy/fat/protein content than F-75, is given to patients, usually along with a peanut butter mixture called Plumpy'nut. F-100 and Plumpy'nut are designed to quickly provide large amounts of nutrients so that patients can be treated efficiently. Other special food fed to populations in danger of starvation includes enriched flour and porridge, as well as a high protein biscuit called BP5. BP5 is a popular food for treating populations because it can be distributed easily and sent home with individuals, or it can be crushed and mixed with therapeutic milk for specific treatments.\nDehydration, sometimes due to diarrhoea or cholera, may also be present in a population, and MSF set up rehydration centres to combat this. A special solution called Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS), which contains glucose and electrolytes, is given to patients to replace fluids lost. Antibiotics are also sometimes given to individuals with diarrhoea if it is known that they have cholera or dysentery.\nWater and sanitation.\nClean water is essential for hygiene, for consumption and for feeding programmes (for mixing with powdered therapeutic milk or porridge), as well as for preventing the spread of water-borne disease. As such, MSF water engineers and volunteers must create a source of clean water. This is usually achieved by modifying an existing water well, by digging a new well and/or starting a water treatment project to obtain clean water for a population. Water treatment in these situations may consist of storage sedimentation, filtration and/or chlorination depending on available resources.\nSanitation is an essential part of field missions, and it may include education of local medical staff in proper sterilisation techniques, sewage treatment projects, proper waste disposal, and education of the population in personal hygiene. Proper wastewater treatment and water sanitation are the best way to prevent the spread of serious water-borne diseases, such as cholera. Simple wastewater treatment systems can be set up by volunteers to protect drinking water from contamination. Garbage disposal could include pits for normal waste and incineration for medical waste. However, the most important subject in sanitation is the education of the local population, so that proper waste and water treatment can continue once MSF has left the area.\nStatistics.\nIn order to accurately report the conditions of a humanitarian emergency to the rest of the world and to governing bodies, data on a number of factors are collected during each field mission. The rate of malnutrition in children is used to determine the malnutrition rate in the population, and then to determine the need for feeding centres. Various types of mortality rates are used to report the seriousness of a humanitarian emergency, and a common method used to measure mortality in a population is to have staff constantly monitoring the number of burials at cemeteries. By compiling data on the frequency of diseases in hospitals, MSF can track the occurrence and location of epidemic increases (or \"seasons\") and stockpile vaccines and other drugs. For example, the \"Meningitis Belt\" (sub-Saharan Africa, which sees the most cases of meningitis in the world) has been \"mapped\" and the meningitis season occurs between December and June. Shifts in the location of the Belt and the timing of the season can be predicted using cumulative data over many years.\nIn addition to epidemiological surveys, MSF also uses population surveys to determine the rates of violence in various regions. By estimating the scopes of massacres, and determining the rate of kidnappings, rapes, and killings, psychosocial programmes can be implemented to lower the suicide rate and increase the sense of security in a population. Large-scale forced migrations, excessive civilian casualties and massacres can be quantified using surveys, and MSF can use the results to put pressure on governments to provide help, or even expose genocide. MSF conducted the first comprehensive mortality survey in Darfur in 2004.\nHowever, there may be ethical problems in collecting these statistics.\nInnovation and use of technology.\nIn 2014 MSF partnered with satellite operator SES, other NGOs Archemed, Fondation Follereau, Friendship Luxembourg and German Doctors, and the Luxembourg government in the pilot phase of SATMED, a project to use satellite broadband technology to bring eHealth and telemedicine to isolated areas of developing countries. SATMED was first deployed in Sierra Leone in support of the fight against Ebola.\nGovernance and structure.\nList of international presidents:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn addition to the Geneva global headquarters and five regional operational centers, as of 2020 MSF had national offices as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn-house organisations.\nEpicentre.\nIn 1986, MSF created Epicentre, an in-house research organisation, to support its activities. Epicentre conducts training, publishes scientific papers and develops new techniques for MSF. It performs epidemiological research, conducts clinical vaccine trials during outbreaks MSF is responding to, experiments on vaccine stability, and analysis of vaccine deployment strategy.\nCampaign for Access to Essential Medicines.\nThe Campaign for Access to Essential Medicines was initiated in 1999 to increase access to essential medicines in developing countries. \"Essential medicines\" are those drugs that are needed in sufficient supply to treat a disease common to a population. However, most diseases common to populations in developing countries are no longer common to populations in developed countries; therefore, pharmaceutical companies find that producing these drugs is no longer profitable and may raise the price per treatment, decrease development of the drug (and new treatments) or even stop production of the drug. MSF often lacks effective drugs during field missions, and started the campaign to put pressure on governments and pharmaceutical companies to increase funding for essential medicines.\nIn 2006, MSF tried to use its influence to urge the drug maker Novartis to drop its case against India's patent law that prevents Novartis from patenting its drugs in India. A few years earlier, Novartis also sued South Africa to prevent it from importing cheaper AIDS drugs. On 1 April 2013, it was announced that the Indian court invalidated Novartis's patent on imatinib (Gleevec). This decision makes the drug available via generics on the Indian market at a considerably lower price.\nIn March 2017, Els Torreele who had been leading the campaign from 1999 to 2003 returned to MSF as the executive director of the Access Campaign. For the following three years she led a global analysis and advocacy team whose goal was to guarantee that appropriate medicines, vaccines and diagnostics are developed, available, affordable and adapted to people's needs.\nAs of 2022, the most critical subjects of the campaign were rising antimicrobial resistance and outbreaks of epidemic diseases such as Ebola and COVID. Still, a lot of vaccines, diagnostics and medicines were inaccessible for people in need.\nSecurity risks to staff.\nMSF staff are sometimes attacked or kidnapped. In some countries, humanitarian-aid organisations are viewed as helping the enemy. If an aid mission is perceived to be exclusively set up for victims on one side of the conflict, it may come under attack. However, the war on terrorism has generated attitudes among some groups in US-occupied countries that non-governmental aid organisations such as MSF are allied with or even work for the Coalition forces. Insecurity in cities in Afghanistan and Iraq rose significantly following United States operations, and MSF has declared that providing aid in these countries was too dangerous. The organisation was forced to evacuate its teams from Afghanistan on 28 July 2004, after five staff (Afghans Fasil Ahmad and Besmillah, Belgian H\u00e9l\u00e8ne de Beir, Norwegian Egil Tyn\u00e6s, and Dutchman Willem Kwint) were killed on 2 June in an ambush by unidentified militia near Khair Kh\u0101na in Badghis Province. In June 2007, Elsa Serfass, a staff member with MSF-France, was killed in the Central African Republic and in January 2008, two expatriate staff (Damien Lehalle and Victor Okumu) and a national staff member (Mohammed Bidhaan Ali) were killed in an organised attack in Somalia resulting in the closing of the project.\nArrests and abductions in politically unstable regions can also occur for volunteers, and in some cases, MSF field missions can be expelled entirely from a country. Arjan Erkel, Head of Mission in Dagestan in the North Caucasus, was kidnapped and held hostage in an unknown location by unknown abductors from 12 August 2002 until 11 April 2004. Paul Foreman, head of MSF-Holland, was arrested in Sudan in May 2005 for refusing to divulge documents used in compiling a report on rapes carried out by the pro-government Janjaweed militias (see Darfur conflict). Foreman cited the privacy of the women involved, and MSF alleged that the Sudanese government had arrested him because it disliked the bad publicity generated by the report.\nIncidents.\nBelow is a partial list of notable incidents of direct violence against MSF staff or facilities, in chronological order:\nAwards.\n1999 Nobel Peace Prize.\nThe then president of MSF, James Orbinski, gave the Nobel Peace Prize speech on behalf of the organisation. In the opening, he discusses the conditions of the victims of the Rwandan genocide and focuses on one of his woman patients:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There were hundreds of women, children and men brought to the hospital that day, so many that we had to lay them out on the street and even operate on some of them there. The gutters around the hospital ran red with blood. The woman had not just been attacked with a machete, but her entire body rationally and systematically mutilated. Her ears had been cut off. And her face had been so carefully disfigured that a pattern was obvious in the slashes. She was one among many\u2014living an inhuman and simply indescribable suffering. We could do little more for her at the moment than stop the bleeding with a few necessary sutures. We were completely overwhelmed, and she knew that there were so many others. She said to me in the clearest voice I have ever heard, 'Allez, allez...ummera, ummerasha'\u2014'Go, go...my friend, find and let live your courage.'\u2014\u200a\nOrbinski affirmed the organisation's commitment to publicising the issues MSF encountered, stating\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Silence has long been confused with neutrality, and has been presented as a necessary condition for humanitarian action. From its beginning, MSF was created in opposition to this assumption. We are not sure that words can always save lives, but we know that silence can certainly kill.\u2014\u200a\nOther recognition.\nMSF's \"Bracelet of Life\", the \"Middle Upper Arm Circumference\" (MUAC) measuring band, was included in , a 2025 exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art featuring \"widely recognized design icons [...] highlighting pivotal moments in design history.\" The museum also added MUAC to its Architecture and Design collection.\nNamesakes.\nA number of other unrelated non-governmental organisations have adopted names ending in \"\" or \"Without Borders\", inspired by , for example: Engineers Without Borders, ('Lawyers Without Borders'), ('Reporters Without Borders'), ('Clowns Without Borders'), ('Libraries Without Borders'), and Homeopaths Without Borders.\nThe French game show ('Games Without Borders') is older than MSF, being first broadcast in Europe in 1965.\nEthical concerns and criticism.\nQuestions about the ethical treatment of MSF staff, clients and communities by MSF as a result of some of its policies and practices have arisen, with issues being canvassed by employees, others in the development sector, and the media.\nMSF has maintained separate employment conditions and pay for its \"national staff\" (those employed locally for field missions) and its \"international staff\" (those deployed from regional or national units to field missions in other countries). The international staff tend to hold the senior posts on a mission, with the national staff most often reporting to the senior staff who have come from elsewhere. There are ongoing complaints from national staff that they are treated less favourably, employed on more dangerous tasks, paid considerably less, and are without access to benefits of housing, health care, and other advantages afforded incoming expatriate staff. MSF stated in 2020 that this policy would be reviewed with the intent to eliminate differential treatment. These practices, amongst other concerns, were the catalyst for a 2020 statement by 1,000 of its current and former employees outlining their concerns regarding the organisation's perceived structural racism. Included in the collective staff statement was testimony of personal experiences of racism within MSF, both in the form of adverse treatment in the workplace, and what is perceived as a white supremacist and colonial mindset expressed in the formation and implementation of programmes.\nWhile MSF hires ninety percent of its staff for missions \"in-country\", the organisation continues to have a preponderance of Europeans in its higher management. Despite the percentage of its international programme coordinators originating from the Global South rising from 24 percent to 46 percent over the decade 2012\u22122022, the international president Christos Christou acknowledged that the highest echelons of MSF were still dominated by those from the Global North. With its headquarters and five operational units located in western Europe, MSF's policies and operations were characterised in the 2020 MSF-staff statement as \"Eurocentric\".\nIn 2018, there were revelations of sexual misconduct by MSF employees, including sexual harassment and abuse of patients, local community members or other MSF staff. Nineteen people were fired as a result of MSF's investigations of complaints. The complaints ranged from sexual harassment by MSF colleagues; exploitation of local (and possibly underage or solely \"survival sex\") sex workers by field staff, against MSF policy; and disparaging attitudes and remarks from staff regarding the supposed sexual availability of patients or community members, or an expressed intent to barter medical treatment for sex. Nearly all the resulting dismissals related to inter-staff sexual misconduct.\nAnother controversy involved images taken without informed consent of vulnerable patients, some of whom were minors without adult guardians. Some images were criticised as exploitative and objectifying. They included a photograph of a mother mourning the death of her baby, with the boy's body visible; child rape survivors and sexual and domestic abuse survivors, with details of their experiences included. Intended to increase awareness of dire conditions prevailing in places where MSF works and the need for their programmes, the images were used on MSF and community websites and in print publications. Licensing of the images were available for sale to image databases. The ethics of exposing devastated or victimised individuals, sometimes with partially identifying information was questioned. Following the criticism, MSF decided to cease use of the images. The removal of the images was in turn also criticised.\nMSF's funding model has come under scrutiny after BlackRock donated $500,000 towards its COVID-19 crisis fund, leading to calls of hypocrisy from staff and other humanitarian organisations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20501", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20501", "title": "Moose", "text": "Largest species of deer\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe moose (pl.: 'moose'; used in North America) or elk (pl.: 'elk' or 'elks'; used in Eurasia) (Alces alces) is the world's tallest, largest and heaviest extant species of deer and the only species in the genus Alces. It is also the tallest, and the second-largest, land animal in North America, falling short only to the American bison in body mass. Most adult male moose have broad, palmate (\"open-hand shaped\") antlers; other members of the deer family have pointed antlers with a dendritic (\"twig-like\") configuration. Moose inhabit the circumpolar boreal forests or temperate broadleaf and mixed forests of the Northern Hemisphere, thriving in cooler, temperate areas as well as subarctic climates.\nHunting shaped the relationship between moose and humans, both in Eurasia and North America. Prior to the early modern period (around 1600\u20131700), moose were one of many valuable sources of sustenance for certain North American Indians. Hunting and habitat loss have reduced the moose's range; this fragmentation has led to sightings of \"urban moose\" in some areas. The moose has been reintroduced to some of its former habitats. Currently, the greatest populations occur in Canada. Additionally, substantial numbers are found in Alaska, the northern states of the contiguous United States, Fennoscandia, the Baltic states, the Caucasus region, Poland, Eastern Europe, Mongolia, Kazakhstan, and Russia.\nPredominantly a browser, the moose's diet consists of both terrestrial and aquatic vegetation, depending on the season, with branches, twigs and dead wood making up a large portion of their winter diet. Predators of moose include wolves, bears, humans, wolverines (rarely, though may take calves), and (rarely, if swimming in the ocean) orcas. Unlike most other deer species, moose do not form herds and are solitary animals, aside from calves who remain with their mother until the cow begins estrus again (typically 18 months after the birth of a calf). At this point, the cow chases her calf away. Although generally slow-moving and sedentary, moose can become defensively aggressive, and move very quickly if angered or startled. Their mating season in the autumn features energetic fights between males competing for a female.\nMoose have played a prominent role in the culture of people in the Northern Hemisphere. Evidence suggests they were hunted by humans as far back as the most recent Ice Age.\nTaxonomy.\nEtymology.\n\"Alces alces\" is called a \"moose\" in North American English, but an \"elk\" in British English. The word \"elk\" in North American English refers to a completely different species of deer, \"Cervus canadensis\", also called the wapiti (from Algonquin). A mature male moose is called a bull, a mature female a cow, and an immature moose of either sex a calf.\nIn Classical Antiquity, the animal was known as () in Greek and in Latin, words probably borrowed from a Germanic language or another language of northern Europe. By the 8th century, during the Early Middle Ages, the species was known in , derived from the Proto-Germanic: \"*elho-\", \"*elhon-\" and possibly connected with the . Later, in Middle English, the species became known as , , or , also appearing in the Latinized form \"alke\", with the \"alce\" borrowed directly from the .\nThe word \"elk\" remained in usage because of English-speakers' familiarity with the species in Continental Europe; however, without any living animals around to serve as a reference, the meaning became rather vague, and by the 17th century \"elk\" had a meaning similar to \"large deer\". Dictionaries of the 18th century simply described \"elk\" as a deer that was \"as large as a horse\".\nThe word \"moose\" had first entered English by 1606 and is borrowed from the Algonquian languages (compare the Narragansett and Eastern Abenaki ; according to early sources, these were likely derived from \"moosu\", meaning 'he strips off'), and possibly involved forms from multiple languages mutually reinforcing one another. The Proto-Algonquian form was \"*mo\u00b7swa\".\nDescription.\nOn average, an adult moose stands high at the shoulder, which is more than higher than the next-largest deer on average, the wapiti. The tail is short (6\u00a0cm to 8\u00a0cm in length) and vestigial in appearance; unlike other ungulates the moose tail is too short to swish away insects. Males (or \"bulls\") normally weigh from and females (or \"cows\") typically weigh , depending on racial or clinal as well as individual age or nutritional variations. The head-and-body length is , with the vestigial tail adding only a further . The largest of all the races is the Alaskan subspecies (\"A. a. gigas\"), which can stand over at the shoulder, has a span across the antlers of and averages in males and in females.&lt;ref name=\"Nancy Long / Kurt Savikko\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Typically, however, the antlers of a mature bull are between . The largest confirmed size for this species was a bull shot at the Yukon River in September 1897 that weighed and measured high at the shoulder. There have been reported cases of even larger moose, including a bull killed in 2004 that weighed , and a bull that reportedly scaled , but none are authenticated and some may not be considered reliable.\nAntlers.\nBull moose have antlers like other members of the deer family. The size and growth rate of antlers is determined by diet and age. Size and symmetry in the number of antler points signals bull moose health and cows may select mates based on antler size and symmetry. Bull moose use their antlers to display dominance, to discourage competition, and to spar or fight rivals.\nThe male's antlers grow as cylindrical beams projecting on each side of the head at right angles to the midline of the skull, and then fork. The lower prong of this fork may be either simple, or divided into two or three tines, with some flattening. Most moose have antlers that are broad and palmate (flat) with tines (points) along the outer edge. Within the ecologic range of the moose in Europe, northern populations display the palmate pattern of antlers, while the antlers of European moose residing the southerly portion of its range are typically of the cervina dendritic pattern and comparatively small, perhaps due to evolutionary pressures of hunting by humans, who prize the large palmate antlers. European moose with antlers intermediate between the palmate and the dendritic form are found in the middle of the north-south range. Moose with antlers have more acute hearing than those without antlers; a study of trophy antlers using a microphone found that the palmate antler acts as a parabolic reflector, amplifying sound at the moose's ear.\nThe antlers of mature Alaskan adult bull moose (5 to 12 years old) have a maximum spread greater than . By the age of 13, moose antlers decline in size and symmetry. The widest spread recorded was across. An Alaskan moose also holds the record for the heaviest weight at .\nAntler beam diameter, not the number of tines, indicates age. In North America, moose (\"A. a. americanus\") antlers are usually larger than those of Eurasian moose and have two lobes on each side, like a butterfly. Eurasian moose antlers resemble a seashell, with a single lobe on each side. In the North Siberian moose (\"A. a. bedfordiae\"), the posterior division of the main fork divides into three tines, with no distinct flattening. In the common moose (\"A. a. alces\") this branch usually expands into a broad palmation, with one large tine at the base and a number of smaller snags on the free border. There is, however, a Scandinavian breed of the common moose in which the antlers are simpler and recall those of the East Siberian animals. The palmation appears to be more marked in North American moose than in the typical Scandinavian moose.\nAfter the mating season males drop their antlers to conserve energy for the winter. A new set of antlers will then regrow in the spring. Antlers take three to five months to fully develop, making them one of the fastest growing animal organs. Antler growth is \"nourished by an extensive system of blood vessels in the skin covering, which contains numerous hair follicles that give it a 'velvet' texture.\" This requires intense grazing on a highly-nutritious diet. By September the velvet is removed by rubbing and thrashing which changes the colour of the antlers. Immature bulls may not shed their antlers for the winter, but retain them until the following spring. Birds, carnivores and rodents eat dropped antlers as they are full of protein and moose themselves will eat antler velvet for the nutrients.\nIf a bull moose is castrated, either by accidental or chemical means, he will shed his current set of antlers within two weeks and then immediately begin to grow a new set of misshapen and deformed antlers that he will wear the rest of his life without ever shedding again; similarly deformed antlers can result from a deficiency of testosterone caused by cryptorchidism or old age. These deformed antlers are composed of living bone which is still growing or able to grow, since testosterone is needed to stop antler growth; they may take one of two forms. \"Cactus antlers\" or velericorn antlers usually retain the approximate shape of a normal moose's antlers but have numerous pearl-shaped exostoses on their surface; being made of living bone, they are easily broken but can grow back. Perukes () are constantly growing, tumor-like antlers with a distinctive appearance similar to coral. Like roe deer, moose are more likely to develop perukes, rather than cactus antlers, than the more developed cervine deer, but unlike roe deer, moose do not suffer fatal decalcification of the skull as a result of peruke growth, but rather can support their continued growth until they become too large to be fully supplied with blood. The distinctive-looking perukes (often referred to as \"devil's antlers\") are the source of several myths and legends among many groups of Inuit as well as several other tribes of indigenous peoples of North America.\nIn extremely rare circumstances, a cow moose may grow antlers. This is usually attributed to a hormone imbalance.\nProboscis and olfaction.\nThe moose proboscis is distinctive among living cervids due to its large size; it also features nares that can be sealed shut when the moose is browsing aquatic vegetation. The moose proboscis likely evolved as an adaptation to aquatic browsing, with loss of the rhinarium, and development of a superior olfactory column separate from an inferior respiratory column. This separation contributes to the moose's keen sense of smell, which they employ to detect water sources, to find food under snow, and to detect mates or predators.\nHooves.\nAs with all members of the order Artiodactyla (even-toed ungulates), moose feet have two large keratinized hooves corresponding to the third and fourth toe, with two small posterolateral dewclaws (vestigial digits), corresponding to the second and fifth toe. The hoof of the fourth digit is broader than that of the third digit, while the inner hoof of the third digit is longer than that of the fourth digit. This foot configuration may favor striding on soft ground. The moose hoof splays under load, increasing surface area, which limits sinking of the moose foot into soft ground or snow, and which increases efficiency when swimming. The body weight per footprint surface area of the moose foot is intermediate between that of the pronghorn foot, (which have stiff feet lacking dewclaws\u2014optimized for high-speed running) and the caribou foot (which are more rounded with large dewclaws, optimized for walking in deep snow). The moose's body weight per surface area of footprint is about twice that of the caribou.\nSkin and fur.\nMoose skin is typical of the deer family. Moose fur consists of four types of hair: eyelashes, whiskers, guard hairs and wool hairs. Hair length and hair density varies according to season, age, and body region. The coat has two layers\u2014a top layer of long guard hairs and a soft wooly undercoat. The guard hairs are hollow and filled with air for better insulation, which also helps them stay afloat when swimming.\nDewlap.\nBoth male and female moose have a dewlap or bell, which is a fold of skin under the chin. Its exact function is unknown, but some morphologic analyses suggest a cooling (thermoregulatory) function. Other theories include a fitness signal in mating, as a visual and olfactory signal, or as a dominance signal by males, as are the antlers.\nEcology and biology.\nDiet.\nThe moose is a browsing herbivore and is capable of consuming many types of plant or fruit. The average adult moose needs to consume per day to maintain its body weight. Much of a moose's energy is derived from terrestrial vegetation, mainly consisting of forbs and other non-grasses, and fresh shoots from trees such as willow and birch. As these terrestrial plants are rather low in sodium, as much as half of its diet usually consists of aquatic plants, including lilies and pondweed, which while lower in energy content, provide the moose with its sodium requirements. In winter, moose are often drawn to roadways, to lick salt that is used as a snow and ice melter. A typical moose, weighing , can eat up to of food per day.\nMoose lack upper front teeth, but have eight sharp incisors on the lower jaw. They also have a tough tongue, lips and gums, which aid in the eating of woody vegetation. Moose have six pairs of large, flat molars and, ahead of those, six pairs of premolars, to grind up their food. A moose's upper lip is very sensitive, to help distinguish between fresh shoots and harder twigs, and is prehensile, for grasping their food. In the summer, moose may use this prehensile lip for grabbing branches and pulling, stripping the entire branch of leaves in a single mouthful, or for pulling forbs, like dandelions, or aquatic plants up by the base, roots and all. A moose's diet often depends on its location, but they seem to prefer the new growths from deciduous trees with a high sugar content, such as white birch, trembling aspen and striped maple, among many others. To reach high branches, a moose may bend small saplings down, using its prehensile lip, mouth or body. For larger trees a moose may stand erect and walk upright on its hind legs, allowing it to reach branches up to or higher above the ground. Moose may consume ferns from time to time.\nMoose are excellent swimmers and are known to wade into water to eat aquatic plants. This trait serves a second purpose in cooling down the moose on summer days and ridding itself of black flies. Moose are thus attracted to marshes and river banks during warmer months as both provide suitable vegetation to eat and water to wet themselves in. Moose have been known to dive over to reach plants on lake bottoms, and the complex snout may assist the moose in this type of feeding. Moose are the only deer that are capable of feeding underwater. As an adaptation for feeding on plants underwater, the nose is equipped with fatty pads and muscles that close the nostrils when exposed to water pressure, preventing water from entering the nose. Other species can pluck plants from the water too, but these need to raise their heads in order to swallow.\nMoose are not grazing animals but browsers (concentrate selectors), and their diet varies on a continuum between soft-leaf browsing and browsing of lignified plant matter. Like giraffes, moose carefully select foods with less fiber and more concentrations of nutrients. Thus, the moose's digestive system has evolved to accommodate this relatively low-fiber diet. Unlike most hooved, domesticated animals (ruminants), moose cannot digest hay, and feeding it to a moose can be fatal. The moose's varied and complex diet is typically expensive for humans to provide, and free-range moose require a lot of forested hectarage for sustainable survival, which is one of the main reasons moose have never been widely domesticated.\nNatural predators.\nA full-grown moose has few enemies except Siberian tigers (\"Panthera tigris tigris\") which regularly prey on adult moose, but a pack of gray wolves (\"Canis lupus\") can still pose a threat, especially to females with calves. Brown bears (\"Ursus arctos\") are also known to prey on moose of various sizes and are the only predator besides the wolf to attack moose both in Eurasia and North America. In Western Russia, moose provide about 15% annual estimated dietary energy content for brown bears and are the most important food source for these predators during spring. However, Brown bears are more likely to scavenge a wolf kill or to take young moose than to hunt adult moose on their own. Black bears (\"Ursus americanus\") and cougars (\"Puma concolor\") can be significant predators of moose calves in May and June and can, in rare instances, prey on adults (mainly cows rather than the larger bulls). Wolverines (\"Gulo gulo\") are most likely to eat moose as carrion but have killed moose, including adults, when the large ungulates are weakened by harsh winter conditions. Orcas (\"Orcinus orca\") are the moose's only confirmed marine predator as they have been known to prey on moose and other deer swimming between islands out of North America's Northwest Coast. However, such kills are rare and a matter of opportunity, as moose are not a regular part of the orca diet. There is at least one recorded instance of a moose being scavenged by a Greenland shark (\"Somniosus microcephalus\").\nIn some areas, moose are the primary source of food for wolves. Moose usually flee upon detecting wolves. Wolves usually follow moose at a distance of , occasionally at a distance of . Attacks from wolves against young moose may last seconds, though sometimes they can be drawn out for days with adults. Sometimes, wolves will chase moose into shallow streams or onto frozen rivers, where their mobility is greatly impeded. Moose will sometimes stand their ground and defend themselves by charging at the wolves or lashing out at them with their powerful hooves. Wolves typically kill moose by tearing at their haunches and perineum, causing massive blood loss. Occasionally, a wolf may immobilize a moose by biting its sensitive nose, the pain of which can paralyze a moose. Wolf packs primarily target calves and elderly animals, but can and will take healthy, adult moose. Moose between the ages of two and eight are seldom killed by wolves. Though moose are usually hunted by packs, there are cases in which single wolves have successfully killed healthy, fully-grown moose.\nResearch into moose predation suggests that their response to perceived threats is learned rather than instinctual. In practical terms this means moose are more vulnerable in areas where wolf or bear populations were decimated in the past but are now rebounding. These same studies suggest, however, that moose learn quickly and adapt, fleeing an area if they hear or smell wolves, bears, or scavenger birds such as ravens.\nMoose are also subject to various diseases and forms of parasitism. In northern Europe, the moose botfly is a parasite whose range seems to be spreading.\nParasites.\nMoose typically carry a heavy burden of parasites, both externally and internally. Parasitosis is an important cause of moose morbidity and mortality and also contributes to vulnerability to predators. Ectoparasites of moose include the moose nose bot fly, and winter ticks. Endoparasites of moose include dog tapeworm, meningeal worm, lungworm, and roundworm.\nSocial structure and reproduction.\nMoose are mostly diurnal. They are generally solitary with the strongest bonds between mother and calf. Although moose rarely gather in groups, there may be several in close proximity during the mating season.\nRutting and mating occurs in September and October. During the rut, mature bulls will cease feeding completely for a period of approximately two weeks; this fasting behavior has been attributed to neurophysiological changes related to redeployment of olfaction for detection of moose urine and moose cows. The males are polygynous and will seek several females to breed with. During this time both sexes will call to each other. Males produce heavy grunting sounds that can be heard from up to away, while females produce wail-like sounds. Males will fight for access to females. Initially, the males assess which of them is dominant and one bull may retreat, however, the interaction can escalate to a fight using their antlers.\nFemale moose have an eight-month gestation period, usually bearing one calf, or twins if food is plentiful, in May or June. Twinning can run as high as 30% to 40% with good nutrition Newborn moose have fur with a reddish hue in contrast to the brown appearance of an adult. The young will stay with the mother until just before the next young are born. The lifespan of an average moose is about 15\u201325 years. Moose populations are stable at 25 calves for every 100 cows at 1 year of age. With availability of adequate nutrition, mild weather, and low predation, moose have a huge potential for population expansion.\nAggression.\nMoose are not typically aggressive towards humans, but will be aggressive when provoked or frightened. Moose attack more people than bears and wolves combined, but usually with only minor consequences. Moose injure more people than any other wild mammal; worldwide, only hippopotamuses injure more. When harassed or startled by people or in the presence of a dog, moose may charge. Also, as with bears or most wild animals, moose accustomed to being fed by people may act aggressively when denied food. During the fall mating season, bulls may be aggressive toward humans. Cows are protective of young calves and will attack humans who come close, especially if they come between mother and calf. Moose are not territorial, do not view humans as food, and usually will not pursue humans who run away.\nMoose are unpredictable. They are most likely to attack if annoyed or harassed, or if approached too closely. A moose that has been harassed may vent its anger on anyone in the vicinity, and they often do not make distinctions between their tormentors and innocent passersby. Moose are very limber animals with highly flexible joints and sharp, pointed hooves, and are capable of kicking with both front and back legs. Moose can kick in all directions, including sideways. Thus, there is no safe side from which to approach. Moose often give warning signs prior to attacking, displaying aggression by means of body language. Maintained eye contact is usually the first sign of aggression, while laid-back ears or a lowered head is a sign of agitation. When the hairs on the back of the moose's neck and shoulders (hackles) stand up, a charge is usually imminent. The Anchorage Visitor Centers warn tourists that \"...a moose with its hackles raised is a thing to fear.\"\nMoose cows are more likely to emit protest moans when courted by small males. This attracts the attention of large males, promotes male-male competition and violence, reduces harassment of cows by small males, and increases mating opportunities with large males. This in turn means that the cow moose has at least a small degree of control over which bulls she mates with.\nMoose often show aggression to other animals as well, especially predators. Bears are common predators of moose calves and, rarely, adults. Alaskan moose have been reported to successfully fend off attacks from both black and brown bears. Moose have been known to stomp attacking wolves, which makes them less preferred as prey to the wolves. Moose are fully capable of killing bears and wolves. In one rare event, a female moose killed two adult male wolves. A moose of either sex that is confronted by danger may let out a loud roar, more resembling that of a predator than a prey animal. European moose are often more aggressive than North American moose, such as the moose in Sweden, which often become very agitated at the sight of a predator. However, like all ungulates known to attack predators, the more aggressive individuals are always darker in color, with the darkest coloring usually in areas facing the opponent, thus serving as a natural warning to other animals.\nHabitat, range, and distribution.\nHabitat.\nMoose require habitat with adequate edible plants (e.g., pond grasses, young trees and shrubs), cover from predators, and protection from extremely hot or cold weather. Moose travel among different habitats with the seasons to address these requirements. Moose are cold-adapted mammals with thickened skin, dense, heat-retaining coat, and a low surface:volume ratio, which provides excellent cold tolerance but poor heat tolerance. Moose survive hot weather by accessing shade or cooling wind, or by immersion in cool water. In hot weather, moose are often found wading or swimming in lakes or ponds. When heat-stressed, moose may fail to adequately forage in summer and may not gain adequate body fat to survive the winter. Also, moose cows may not calve without adequate summer weight gain. Moose require access to both young forest for browsing and mature forest for shelter and cover. Forest disturbed by fire and logging promotes the growth of fodder for moose. Moose also require access to mineral licks, safe places for calving and aquatic feeding sites.\nMoose avoid areas with little or no snow as this increases the risk of predation by wolves and avoid areas with deep snow, as this impairs mobility. Thus, moose select habitat on the basis of trade-offs between risk of predation, food availability, and snow depth. With reintroduction of bison into boreal forest, there was some concern that bison would compete with moose for winter habitat, and thereby worsen the population decline of moose. However, this does not appear to be a problem. Moose prefer sub-alpine shrublands in early winter, while bison prefer wet sedge valley meadowlands in early winter. In late winter, moose prefer river valleys with deciduous forest cover or alpine terrain above the tree line, while bison preferred wet sedge meadowlands or sunny southern grassy slopes.\nNorth America.\nAfter expanding for most of the 20th century, the moose population of North America has been in steep decline since the 1990s. Populations expanded greatly with improved habitat and protection, but now the moose population is declining rapidly. This decline has been attributed to opening of roads and landscapes into the northern range of moose, allowing deer to become populous in areas where they were not previously common. This encroachment by deer on moose habitat brought moose into contact with previously unfamiliar pathogens, including brainworm and liver fluke, and these parasites are believed to have contributed to the population decline of moose.\nIn North America, the moose range includes almost all of Canada (excluding the arctic and Vancouver Island), most of Alaska, northern and eastern North Dakota, northern New England, the Adirondack Mountain region and Taconic highlands of northeast New York State, the upper Rocky Mountains, northern Minnesota, northern Wisconsin, Michigan's Upper Peninsula, and Isle Royale in Lake Superior. In the West, moose populations extend across Canada (British Columbia and Alberta). Isolated groups have been verified as far south as the mountains of Utah and Colorado and as far west as the Lake Wenatchee area of the Washington Cascades. In the northwestern US, the range includes Wyoming, Montana, Idaho, and smaller areas of Washington, and Oregon. Moose have extended their range southwards in the western Rocky Mountains, with initial sightings in Yellowstone National Park in 1868, and then to the northern slope of the Uinta Mountains in Utah in the first half of the twentieth century. This is the southernmost naturally established moose population in the United States. In 1978, a few breeding pairs were reintroduced in western Colorado, and the state's moose population is now more than 2,400.\nIn northeastern North America, the Eastern moose's history is very well documented: moose meat was a staple in the diet of indigenous peoples for centuries. The common name \"moose\" was brought into English from the word used by those who lived in present day coastal Rhode Island. The indigenous\npeople often used moose hides for leather and its meat as an ingredient in pemmican, a type of dried jerky used as a source of sustenance in winter or on long journeys.\nThe historical range of the subspecies extended from well into Quebec, the Maritimes, and Eastern Ontario south to include all of New England finally ending in the very northeastern tip of Pennsylvania in the west, cutting off somewhere near the mouth of the Hudson River in the south. The moose has been extinct in much of the eastern U.S. for as long as 150 years, due to colonial era overhunting and destruction of its habitat: Dutch, French, and British colonial sources all attest to its presence in the mid 17th century from Maine south to areas within of present-day Manhattan. However, by the 1870s, only a handful of moose existed in this entire region in very remote pockets of forest; less than 20% of suitable habitat remained.\nSince the 1980s, however, moose populations have rebounded, thanks to regrowth of plentiful food sources, abandonment of farmland, better land management, clean-up of pollution, and natural dispersal from the Canadian Maritimes and Quebec. South of the Canada\u2013US border, Maine has most of the population with a 2012 headcount of about 76,000 moose. Dispersals from Maine over the years have resulted in healthy, growing populations each in Vermont and New Hampshire, notably near bodies of water and as high up as above sea level in the mountains. In Massachusetts, moose had gone extinct by 1870, but re-colonized the state in the 1960s, with the population expanding from Vermont and New Hampshire; by 2010, the population was estimated at 850\u2013950. Moose reestablished populations in eastern New York and Connecticut and appeared headed south towards the Catskill Mountains, a former habitat.\nIn the Midwest U.S., moose are primarily limited to the upper Great Lakes region, but strays, primarily immature males, have been found as far south as eastern Iowa.\nMoose were successfully introduced on Newfoundland in 1878 and 1904, where they are now the dominant ungulate. However, they are not native to Newfoundland, and their negative impacts on flora and fauna, including endemic species, is well documented. They have been somewhat less successfully on Anticosti Island in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence.\nDecline in population.\nSince the 1990s, moose populations have declined dramatically in much of temperate North America, although they remain stable in Arctic and subarctic regions. The exact causes of specific die-offs are not determined, but most documented mortality events were due to wolf predation, bacterial infection due to injuries sustained from predators, and parasites from white-tailed deer to which moose have not developed a natural defense, such as liver flukes, brain worms and winter tick infestations. Predation of moose calves by brown bear is also significant. Landscape change from salvage logging of forest damage caused by the mountain pine beetle has resulted in greater foraging in logged areas by female moose, and this is the lead hypothesis as to why the moose population is declining in eastern North American forests, as this likely leads to increased predation. An alternate hypotheses among biologists for generalized, non-hunting declines in moose populations at the southern extent of their range is increasing heat stress brought on by the rapid seasonal temperature upswings as a result of human-induced climate change. Biologists studying moose populations typically use warm-season, heat-stress thresholds of between . However, the minor average temperature increase of 0.83\u20131.11\u00a0\u00b0C (1.5\u20132\u00a0\u00b0F), over the last 100 years, has resulted in milder winters that induce favorable conditions for ticks, parasites and other invasive species to flourish within the southern range of moose habitat in North America. The moose population in New Hampshire fell from 7,500 in the early 2000s to a 2014 estimate of 4,000 and in Vermont the numbers were down to 2,200 from a high of 5,000 animals in 2005. Much of the decline has been attributed to the winter tick, which, between 2017 and 2019, accounted for 74% of all winter mortality and 91% of winter calf deaths in Vermont. Moose with heavy tick infections will rub their fur down to the skin raw trying to get the ticks off, making them look white when their outer coat rubs off. Locals call them ghost moose. Loss of the insulating winter coat through attempts to rid the moose of winter tick increases the risk of hypothermia in winter.\nEurope and Asia.\nIn Europe, moose are currently found in large numbers throughout Norway, Sweden, Finland, Latvia, Estonia, Poland, with more modest numbers in the southern Czech Republic, Belarus, and northern Ukraine. They are also widespread through Russia on up through the borders with Finland south towards the border with Estonia, Belarus and Ukraine and stretching far away eastwards to the Yenisei River in Siberia. The European moose was native to most temperate areas with suitable habitat on the continent and even Scotland from the end of the last Ice Age, as Europe had a mix of temperate boreal and deciduous forest. Up through Classical times, the species was certainly thriving in both Gaul and Magna Germania, as it appears in military and hunting accounts of the age. However, as the Roman era faded into medieval times, the beast slowly disappeared: soon after the reign of Charlemagne, the moose disappeared from France, where its range extended from Normandy in the north to the Pyrenees in the south. Farther east, it survived in Alsace and the Netherlands until the 9th century as the marshlands in the latter were drained and the forests were cleared away for feudal lands in the former. It was gone from Switzerland by the year 1000, from the western Czech Republic by 1300, from Mecklenburg in Germany by c. 1600, and from Hungary and the Caucasus since the 18th and 19th century, respectively.\nBy the early 20th century, the last strongholds of the European moose appeared to be in Fennoscandian areas and patchy tracts of Russia, with a few migrants found in what is now Estonia and Lithuania. The USSR and Poland managed to restore portions of the range within its borders (such as the 1951 reintroduction into Kampinos National Park and the later 1958 reintroduction in Belarus), but political complications limited the ability to reintroduce it to other portions of its range. Attempts in 1930 and again in 1967 in marshland north of Berlin were unsuccessful. At present in Poland, populations are recorded in the Biebrza river valley, Kampinos, and in Bia\u0142owie\u017ca Forest. It has migrated into other parts of Eastern Europe and has been spotted in eastern and southern Germany. Unsuccessful thus far in recolonizing these areas via natural dispersal from source populations in Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, Czech Republic, and Slovakia, it appears to be having more success migrating south into the Caucasus. It is listed under Appendix III of the Bern Convention.\nIn 2008, two moose were reintroduced into the Scottish Highlands in Alladale Wilderness Reserve. The moose disappeared as a breeding species from Denmark about 4,500 years ago (in the last century, a very small number have lived for periods in Zealand without establishing a population after swimming across the \u00d8resund from Sweden), but in 2016\u201317 ten were introduced to Lille Vildmose from Sweden. In 2020, this population had increased to about 25 animals.\nThe East Asian moose populations confine themselves mostly to the territory of Russia, with much smaller populations in Mongolia and Northeastern China. Moose populations are relatively stable in Siberia and increasing on the Kamchatka Peninsula. In Mongolia and China, where poaching took a great toll on moose, forcing them to near extinction, they are protected, but enforcement of the policy is weak and demand for traditional medicines derived from deer parts is high. In 1978, the Regional Hunting Department transported 45 young moose to the center of Kamchatka. These moose were brought from Chukotka, home to the largest moose on the planet. Kamchatka now regularly is responsible for the largest trophy moose shot around the world each season. As it is a fertile environment for moose, with a milder climate, less snow, and an abundance of food, moose quickly bred and settled along the valley of the Kamchatka River and many surrounding regions. The population in the past 20 years has risen to over 2,900 animals.\nThe size of the moose varies. Following Bergmann's rule, population in the south (\"A. a. cameloides\") usually grow smaller, while moose in the north and northeast (\"A. a. buturlini\") can match the imposing sizes of the Alaskan moose (\"A. a. gigas\") and are prized by trophy hunters.\nNew Zealand.\nIn 1900, an attempt to introduce moose into the Hokitika area failed; then in 1910 ten moose (four bulls and six cows) were introduced into Fiordland. This area is considered a less than suitable habitat, and subsequent low numbers of sightings and kills have led to some presumption of this population's failure. The last proven sighting of a moose in New Zealand was in 1952. However, a moose antler was found in 1972, and DNA tests showed that hair collected in 2002 was from a moose. There has been extensive searching, and while automated cameras failed to capture photographs, evidence was seen of bedding spots, browsing, and antler marks.\nEvolutionary history.\nMoose are members of the subfamily Capreolinae. Members of the moose lineage extend back into the Pliocene-Early Pleistocene. Some scientists group the moose and all its extinct relatives into one genus, \"Alces\", while others, such as Augusto Azzaroli, restrict \"Alces\" to the living species, placing the fossil species into the genera \"Cervalces\" (stag moose) and \"Libralces\".\nThe earliest known species in the moose lineage is \"Libralces gallicus\", which lived in the Pliocene-Early Pleistocene. \"Libralces gallicus\" came from the warm savannas of Pliocene Europe, with the best-preserved skeletons being found in southern France. \"L. gallicus\" was 1.25 times larger than the Alaskan moose in linear dimensions, making it nearly twice as massive. \"L. gallicus\" had many striking differences from its modern descendants. It had a longer, narrower snout and a less-developed nasal cavity, more resembling that of a modern deer, lacking any sign of the modern moose-snout. Its face resembled that of the modern wapiti. However, the rest of its skull structure, skeletal structure and teeth bore strong resemblance to those features that are unmistakable in modern moose, indicating a similar diet. Its antlers consisted of a horizontal bar long, with no tines, ending in small palmations. Its skull and neck structure suggest an animal that fought using high-speed impacts, much like the Dall sheep, rather than locking and twisting antlers the way modern moose combat. Their long legs and bone structure suggest an animal that was adapted to running at high speeds over rough terrain.\n\"Libralces gallicus\" was followed by \"Cervalces carnutorum\" during the first half of the Early Pleistocene. \"Cervalces carnutorum\" was soon followed by a much larger species called \"Cervalces latifrons\" (broad-fronted stag-moose), which first appeared during the late Early Pleistocene. Many fossils of \"Cervalces latifrons\" have been found across Eurasia. Like its descendants, it inhabited mostly northern latitudes, and was probably well-adapted to the cold. \"C. latifrons\" was the largest deer known to have ever existed, standing more than tall at the shoulders. This is bigger than even the Irish elk, which was tall at the shoulders. Its antlers were smaller than the Irish elk's, but comparable in size to those of \"L. gallicus\". However, the antlers had a shorter horizontal bar and larger palmations, more resembling those of a modern moose. Probably sometime in the Middle Pleistocene, \"Cervalces latifrons\" migrated into North America, giving rise to the stag moose (\"Cervalces scotti\"). The modern moose is thought to have evolved from \"Cervalces latifrons\" at around the end of the Middle Pleistocene to the beginning of the Late Pleistocene, probably somewhere in East Asia, with the earliest fossils of the species in Europe dating to the early Late Pleistocene. The modern moose only arrived in North America around 15,000 years ago, at the end of the Late Pleistocene.\nPopulations.\nNorth America:\nEurope and Asia:\nRelationship with humans.\nHistory.\nEuropean rock drawings and cave paintings reveal that moose have been hunted since the Stone Age. Excavations in Alby, Sweden, adjacent to the Stora Alvaret have yielded moose antlers in wooden hut remains from 6000\u00a0BC, indicating some of the earliest moose hunting in northern Europe. In northern Scandinavia one can still find remains of trapping pits used for hunting moose. These pits, which can be up to in area and deep, would have been camouflaged with branches and leaves. They would have had steep sides lined with planks, making it impossible for the moose to escape once it fell in. The pits are normally found in large groups, crossing the moose's regular paths and stretching over several kilometers. Remains of wooden fences designed to guide the animals toward the pits have been found in bogs and peat. In Norway, an early example of these trapping devices has been dated to around 3700\u00a0BC. Trapping elk in pits is an extremely effective hunting method. As early as the 16th\u00a0century the Norwegian government tried to restrict their use, but the method was in use until the 19th\u00a0century.\nThe earliest recorded description of the moose is in Julius Caesar's \"Commentarii de Bello Gallico\", where it is described thus:\nThere are also [animals], which are called \"alces\" (moose). The shape of these, and the varied color of their skins, is much like roes, but in size they surpass them a little and are destitute of horns, and have legs without joints and ligatures; nor do they lie down for the purpose of rest, nor, if they have been thrown down by any accident, can they raise or lift themselves up. Trees serve as beds to them; they lean themselves against them, and thus reclining only slightly, they take their rest; when the huntsmen have discovered from the footsteps of these animals whither they are accustomed to betake themselves, they either undermine all the trees at the roots, or cut into them so far that the upper part of the trees may appear to be left standing. When they have leant upon them, according to their habit, they knock down by their weight the unsupported trees, and fall down themselves along with them.\nIn book 8, chapter 16 of Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\" from AD\u00a077, the elk and an animal called achlis, which is presumably the same animal, are described thus:\n ... there is, also, the elk, which strongly resembles our steers, except that it is distinguished by the length of the ears and of the neck. There is also the achlis, which is produced in the land of Scandinavia; it has never been seen in this city, although we have had descriptions of it from many persons; it is not unlike the moose, but has no joints in the hind leg. Hence, it never lies down, but reclines against a tree while it sleeps; it can only be taken by previously cutting into the tree, and thus laying a trap for it, as otherwise, it would escape through its swiftness. Its upper lip is so extremely large, for which reason it is obliged to go backwards when grazing; otherwise, by moving onwards, the lip would get doubled up.\nAs food.\nMoose are hunted as a game species in many of the countries where they are found. Moose meat tastes, wrote Henry David Thoreau in \"The Maine Woods\", \"like tender beef, with perhaps more flavour; sometimes like veal\". While the flesh has protein levels similar to those of other comparable red meats (e.g. beef, deer and wapiti), it has a low fat content, and the fat that is present consists of a higher proportion of polyunsaturated fats than saturated fats.\nDr. Valerius Geist, who emigrated to Canada from the Soviet Union, wrote in his 1999 book \"Moose: Behaviour, Ecology, Conservation\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Sweden, no fall menu is without a mouthwatering moose dish. The Swedes fence their highways to reduce moose fatalities and design moose-proof cars. Sweden is less than half as large as the Canadian province of British Columbia, but the annual take of moose in Sweden\u2014upward of 150,000\u2014is twice that of the total moose harvest in North America.\nBoosting moose populations in Alaska for hunting purposes is one of the reasons given for allowing aerial or airborne methods to remove wolves in designated areas, e.g., Craig Medred: \"A kill of 124 wolves would thus translate to [the survival of] 1488 moose or 2976 caribou or some combination thereof\". Some scientists believe that this artificial inflation of game populations is actually detrimental to both caribou and moose populations as well as the ecosystem as a whole. This is because studies have shown that when these game populations are artificially boosted, it leads to both habitat destruction and a crash in these populations.\nConsumption of offal.\nCadmium levels are high in Finnish moose liver and kidneys, with the result that consumption of these organs from moose more than one year old is prohibited in Finland. As a result of a study reported in 1988, the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources recommended against the consumption of moose and deer kidneys and livers. Levels of cadmium were found to be considerably higher than in Scandinavia. The New Brunswick Department of Natural Resources advises hunters not to consume cervid offal.\nCadmium intake has been found to be elevated amongst all consumers of moose meat, though the meat was found to contribute only slightly to the daily cadmium intake. However the consumption of moose liver or kidneys significantly increased cadmium intake, with the study revealing that heavy consumers of moose organs have a relatively narrow safety margin below the levels which would probably cause adverse health effects.\nVehicle collisions.\nThe center of mass of a moose is above the hood of most passenger cars. In a collision, the impact crushes the front roof beams and individuals in the front seats. Collisions of this type are frequently fatal; seat belts and airbags offer little protection. In collisions with higher vehicles (such as trucks), most of the deformation is to the front of the vehicle and the passenger compartment is largely spared. Moose collisions have prompted the development of a vehicle test referred to as the \"moose test\" (, ). A Massachusetts study found that moose\u2013vehicular collisions had a very high human fatality rate and that such collisions caused the death of 3% of the Massachusetts moose population annually.\nMoose warning signs are used on roads in regions where there is a danger of collision with the animal. The triangular warning signs common in Sweden, Norway, and Finland have become coveted souvenirs among tourists traveling in these countries, causing road authorities so much expense that the moose signs have been replaced with imageless generic warning signs in some regions.\nIn Ontario, Canada, an estimated 265 moose die each year as a result of collision with trains (as of 2019[ [update]]). Moose\u2013train collisions were more frequent in winters with above-average snowfall. In January 2008, the Norwegian newspaper \"Aftenposten\" estimated that some 13,000 moose had died in collisions with Norwegian trains since 2000. The state agency in charge of railroad infrastructure (Jernbaneverket) plans to spend 80 million Norwegian kroner to reduce collision rate in the future by fencing the railways, clearing vegetation from near the tracks, and providing alternative snow-free feeding places for the animals elsewhere.\nIn the Canadian province of New Brunswick, collisions between automobiles and moose are frequent enough that all new highways have fences to prevent moose from accessing the road, as has long been done in Finland, Norway, and Sweden. A demonstration project, Highway\u00a07 between Fredericton and Saint John, which has one of the highest frequencies of moose collisions in the province, did not have these fences until 2008, although it was and continues to be extremely well signed. Newfoundland and Labrador recommended that motorists use caution between dusk and dawn because that is when moose are most active and most difficult to see, increasing the risk of collisions. Local moose sightings are often reported on radio stations so that motorists can take care while driving in particular areas. An electronic \"moose detection system\" was installed on two sections of the Trans-Canada Highway in Newfoundland in 2011, but the system proved unreliable and was removed in 2015. As of 2024[ [update]], the moose population in Newfoundland was increasing along with the number of road accidents.\nIn Sweden, a road will not be fenced unless it experiences at least one moose accident per km per year.\nIn eastern Germany, where the scarce population is slowly increasing, there were two road accidents involving moose since 2000.\nDomestication.\nDomestication of moose was investigated in the Soviet Union before World War II. Early experiments were inconclusive, but with the creation of a moose farm at Pechora-Ilych Nature Reserve in 1949, a small-scale moose domestication program was started, involving attempts at selective breeding of animals on the basis of their behavioural characteristics. Since 1963, the program has continued at Kostroma Moose Farm, which had a herd of 33 tame moose as of 2003. Although at this stage the farm is not expected to be a profit-making enterprise, it obtains some income from the sale of moose milk and from visiting tourist groups. Its main value, however, is seen in the opportunities it offers for the research in the physiology and behavior of the moose, as well as in the insights it provides into the general principles of animal domestication.\nIn Sweden, there was a debate in the late 18th century about the national value of using the moose as a domestic animal. Among other things, the moose was proposed to be used in postal distribution, and there was a suggestion to develop a moose-mounted cavalry. Such proposals remained unimplemented, mainly because the extensive hunting for moose that was deregulated in the 1790s nearly drove it to extinction. While there have been documented cases of individual moose (eg \u00c4lgen Stolta) being used for riding and/or pulling carts and sleds, Bj\u00f6rkl\u00f6f concludes no wide-scale usage has occurred outside fairy tales.\nHeraldry.\nAs one of the Canadian national symbols, the moose occurs on several Canadian coats of arms, including Newfoundland and Labrador, and Ontario. Moose is also a common coat of arms in Europe as well; for example, in Finland, it appears on the coats of arms of Hirvensalmi and M\u00e4nts\u00e4l\u00e4 municipalities. The seals of Maine and Michigan feature moose as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20503", "revid": "50475931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20503", "title": "Medieval warfare", "text": " \nMedieval warfare is the warfare of the Middle Ages. Technological, cultural, and social advancements had forced a severe transformation in the character of warfare from antiquity, changing military tactics and the role of cavalry and artillery (see military history). In terms of fortification, the Middle Ages saw the emergence of the castle in Europe, which then spread to the Holy Land (modern day Israel and Palestine).\nOrganization.\nThe medieval knight was usually a mounted and armoured soldier, often connected with nobility or royalty, although (especially in north-eastern Europe) knights could also come from the lower classes, and could even be enslaved persons. The cost of their armour, horses, and weapons was great; this, among other things, helped gradually transform the knight, at least in western Europe, into a distinct social class separate from other warriors. During the crusades, holy orders of Knights fought in the Holy Land (see Knights Templar, the Hospitallers, etc.).\nThe light cavalry consisted usually of lighter armed and armoured men, who could have lances, javelins or missile weapons, such as bows or crossbows. In much of the Middle Ages, light cavalry usually consisted of wealthy commoners. Later in the Middle Ages, light cavalry would also include sergeants who were men who had trained as knights but could not afford the costs associated with the title. Light cavalry was used as scouts, skirmishers or outflankers. Many countries developed their styles of light cavalries, such as Hungarian mounted archers, Spanish jinetes, Italian and German mounted crossbowmen and English currours.\nThe infantry was recruited and trained in a wide variety of manners in different regions of Europe all through the Middle Ages, and probably always formed the most numerous part of a medieval field army. Many infantrymen in prolonged wars would be mercenaries. Most armies contained significant numbers of spearmen, archers and other unmounted soldiers.\nRecruiting.\nIn the earliest Middle Ages, it was the obligation of every noble to respond to the call to battle with his equipment, archers, and infantry. This decentralized system was necessary due to the social order of the time but could lead to motley forces with variable training, equipment and abilities. The more resources the noble had access to, the better his troops would typically be.\nTypically the feudal armies consisted of a core of highly skilled knights and their household troops, mercenaries hired for the time of the campaign and feudal levies fulfilling their feudal obligations, who usually were little more than rabble. They could, however, be efficient in disadvantageous terrain. Towns and cities could also field militias.\nAs central governments grew in power, a return to the citizen and mercenary armies of the classical period also began, as central levies of the peasantry began to be the central recruiting tool. It was estimated that the best infantrymen came from the younger sons of free land-owning yeomen, such as the English archers and Swiss pikemen. England was one of the most centralized states in the Late Middle Ages, and the armies that fought the Hundred Years' War were mostly paid professionals.\nIn theory, every Englishman had an obligation to serve for forty days. Forty days was not long enough for a campaign, especially one on the continent. Thus the scutage was introduced, whereby most Englishmen paid to escape their service and this money was used to create a permanent army. However, almost all high medieval armies in Europe were composed of a great deal of paid core troops, and there was a large mercenary market in Europe from at least the early 12th century.\nAs the Middle Ages progressed in Italy, Italian cities began to rely mostly on mercenaries to do their fighting rather than the militias that had dominated the early and high medieval period in this region. These would be groups of career soldiers who would be paid a set rate. Mercenaries tended to be effective soldiers, especially in combination with standing forces, but in Italy, they came to dominate the armies of the city-states. This made them problematic; while at war they were considerably more reliable than a standing army, at peacetime they proved a risk to the state itself like the Praetorian Guard had once been.\nMercenary-on-mercenary warfare in Italy led to relatively bloodless campaigns which relied as much on manoeuvre as on battles, since the condottieri recognized it was more efficient to attack the enemy's ability to wage war rather than his battle forces, discovering the concept of indirect warfare 500 years before Sir Basil Liddell Hart, and attempting to attack the enemy supply lines, his economy and his ability to wage war rather than risking an open battle, and manoeuvre him into a position where risking a battle would have been suicidal. Machiavelli understood this indirect approach as cowardice.\nFortifications.\nIn Europe, breakdowns in centralized power led to the rise of several groups that turned to large-scale pillage as a source of income. Most notably the Vikings, Arabs, Mongols, Huns, Cumans, Tartars, and Magyars raided significantly. As these groups were generally small and needed to move quickly, building fortifications was a good way to provide refuge and protection for the people and the wealth in the region.\nThese fortifications evolved throughout the Middle Ages, the most important form being the castle, a structure which has become almost synonymous with the medieval era in the popular eye. The castle served as a protected place for the local elites. Inside a castle they were protected from bands of raiders and could send mounted warriors to drive the enemy from the area, or to disrupt the efforts of larger armies to supply themselves in the region by gaining local superiority over foraging parties that would be impossible against the whole enemy host.\nFortifications were a very important part of warfare because they provided safety to the lord, his family, and his servants. They provided refuge from armies too large to face in open battle. The ability of the heavy cavalry to dominate a battle on an open field was useless against fortifications. Building siege engines was a time-consuming process, and could seldom be effectively done without preparations before the campaign. Many sieges could take months, if not years, to weaken or demoralize the defenders sufficiently. Fortifications were an excellent means of ensuring that the elite could not be easily dislodged from their lands \u2013 as Count Baldwin of Hainaut commented in 1184 on seeing enemy troops ravage his lands from the safety of his castle, \"they can't take the land with them\".\nSiege warfare.\nIn the medieval period besieging armies used a wide variety of siege engines including: scaling ladders; battering rams; siege towers and various types of catapults such as the mangonel, onager, ballista, and trebuchet. Siege techniques also included mining in which tunnels were dug under a section of the wall and then rapidly collapsed to destabilize the wall's foundation. Another technique was to bore into the enemy walls, however, this was not nearly as effective as other methods due to the thickness of castle walls.\nAdvances in the prosecution of sieges encouraged the development of a variety of defensive counter-measures. In particular, Medieval fortifications became progressively stronger \u2013 for example, the advent of the concentric castle from the period of the Crusades \u2013 and more dangerous to attackers \u2013 witness the increasing use of machicolations, as well the preparation of hot or incendiary substances. Arrow slits, concealed doors for sallies, and deep water wells were also integral to resisting siege at this time. Designers of castles paid particular attention to defending entrances, protecting gates with drawbridges, portcullises and barbicans. Wet animal skins were often draped over gates to repel fire. Moats and other water defences, whether natural or augmented, were also vital to defenders.\nIn the Middle Ages, virtually all large cities had city walls \u2013 Dubrovnik in Dalmatia is a well-preserved example \u2013 and more important cities had citadels, forts or castles. Great effort was expended to ensure a good water supply inside the city in case of siege. In some cases, long tunnels were constructed to carry water into the city. In other cases, such as the Ottoman siege of Shkodra, Venetian engineers had designed and installed cisterns that were fed by rain water channeled by a system of conduits in the walls and buildings. Complex systems of tunnels were used for storage and communications in medieval cities like T\u00e1bor in Bohemia. Against these would be matched the mining skills of teams of trained sappers, who were sometimes employed by besieging armies.\nUntil the invention of gunpowder-based weapons (and the resulting higher-velocity projectiles), the balance of power and logistics favoured the defender. With the invention of gunpowder, the traditional methods of defence became less and less effective against a determined siege.\nRelics.\nThe practice of carrying relics into battle is a feature that distinguishes medieval warfare from its predecessors or early modern warfare and possibly inspired by biblical references. The presence of relics was believed to be an important source of supernatural power that served both as a spiritual weapon and a form of defence; the relics of martyrs were considered by Saint John Chrysostom much more powerful than \"walls, trenches, weapons and hosts of soldiers\"\nIn Italy, the \"carroccio\" or \"carro della guerra\", the \"war wagon\", was an elaboration of this practice that developed during the 13th century. The \"carro della guerra\" of Milan was described in detail in 1288 by Bonvesin de la Riva in his book on the \"Marvels of Milan\". Wrapped in scarlet cloth and drawn by three yoke of oxen that were caparisoned in white with the red cross of Saint Ambrose, the city's patron, it carried a crucifix so massive it took four men to step it in place, like a ship's mast.\nNaval warfare.\nThe waters surrounding Europe can be grouped into two types which affected the design of craft that traveled and therefore the warfare. The Mediterranean and Black Seas were free of large tides, generally calm, and had predictable weather. The seas around the north and west of Europe experienced stronger and less predictable weather. The weather gauge, the advantage of having a following wind, was an important factor in naval battles, particularly to the attackers. Typically westerlies (winds blowing from west to east) dominated Europe, giving naval powers to the west an advantage. Medieval sources on the conduct of medieval naval warfare are less common than those about land-based war. Most medieval chroniclers had no experience of life on the sea and generally were not well informed. Maritime archaeology has helped provide information.\nEarly in the medieval period, ships in the context of warfare were used primarily for transporting troops. In the Mediterranean, naval warfare in the Middle Ages was similar to that under late Roman Empire: fleets of galleys would exchange missile fire and then try to board bow first to allow marines to fight on deck. This mode of naval warfare remained the same into the early modern period, as, for example, at the Battle of Lepanto. Famous admirals included Roger of Lauria, Andrea Doria and Hayreddin Barbarossa.\nLate medieval maritime warfare was divided in two distinct regions. In the Mediterranean, galleys were used for raiding along coasts, and in the constant fighting for naval bases. In the Atlantic and Baltic there was greater focus on sailing ships that were used mostly for troop transport, with galleys providing fighting support. Galleys were still widely used in the north and were the most numerous warships used by Mediterranean powers with interests in the north, especially the French and Iberian kingdoms.\nBulkier ships were developed which were primarily sail-driven, although the long lowboard Viking-style rowed longship saw use well into the 15th century. Their main purpose in the north remained the transportation of soldiers to fight on the decks of the opposing ship (as, for example, at the Battle of Svolder or the Battle of Sluys).\nLate medieval sailing warships resembled floating fortresses, with towers in the bows and at the stern (respectively, the forecastle and aftcastle). The large superstructure made these warships quite unstable, but the decisive defeats that the more mobile but considerably lower boarded longships suffered at the hands of high-boarded cogs in the 15th century ended the issue of which ship type would dominate northern European warfare.\nIntroduction of guns.\nThe introduction of guns was the first step towards major changes in naval warfare, but it only slowly changed the dynamics of ship-to-ship combat. The first guns on ships were introduced in the 14th century and consisted of small wrought-iron pieces placed on the open decks and in the fighting tops, often requiring only one or two men to handle them. They were designed to injure, kill or simply stun, shock and frighten the enemy before boarding.\nAs guns were made more durable to withstand stronger gunpowder charges, they increased their potential to inflict critical damage to the vessel rather than just their crews. Since these guns were much heavier than the earlier anti-personnel weapons, they had to be placed lower in the ships, and fire from gunports, to avoid ships becoming unstable. In Northern Europe the technique of building ships with clinker planking made it difficult to cut ports in the hull; clinker-built (or clench-built) ships had much of their structural strength in the outer hull. The solution was the gradual adoption of carvel-built ships that relied on an internal skeleton structure to bear the weight of the ship.\nThe first ships to actually mount heavy cannon capable of sinking ships were galleys, with large wrought-iron pieces mounted directly on the timbers in the bow. The first example is known from a woodcut of a Venetian galley from 1486. Heavy artillery on galleys was mounted in the bow which fit conveniently with the long-standing tactical tradition of attacking head-on and bow-first. The ordnance on galleys was quite heavy from its introduction in the 1480s, and capable of quickly demolishing medieval-style stone walls that still prevailed until the 16th century.\nThis temporarily upended the strength of older seaside fortresses, which had to be rebuilt to cope with gunpowder weapons. The addition of guns also improved the amphibious abilities of galleys as they could assault supported with heavy firepower, and could be even more effectively defended when beached stern-first. Galleys and similar oared vessels remained uncontested as the most effective gun-armed warships in theory until the 1560s, and in practice for a few decades more, and were considered a grave risk to sailing warships.\nRise of infantry.\nIn the medieval period, the mounted cavalry long held sway on the battlefield. Heavily armoured mounted knights represented a formidable foe for reluctant peasant draftees and lightly armoured freemen. To defeat mounted cavalry, infantry used swarms of missiles or a tightly packed phalanx of men, techniques honed in antiquity by the Greeks.\nSwiss pikemen.\nThe use of long pikes and densely packed foot troops was not uncommon in the Middle Ages. The Flemish footmen at the Battle of the Golden Spurs met and overcame French knights in 1302, as the Lombards did in Legnano in 1176 and the Scots held their own against heavily armoured English cavalry. During the St. Louis crusade, dismounted French knights formed a tight lance-and-shield phalanx to repel Egyptian cavalry. The Swiss used pike tactics in the late medieval period. While pikemen usually grouped and awaited a mounted attack, the Swiss developed flexible formations and aggressive manoeuvring, forcing their opponents to respond. The Swiss won at Morgarten, Laupen, Sempach, Grandson and Murten, and between 1450 and 1550 every leading prince in Europe (except the English and Scottish) hired Swiss pikemen, or emulated their tactics and weapons (e.g., the German Landsknechte).\nWelsh and English longbowmen.\nThe Welsh and English longbowmen used a single-piece longbow (but some bows later developed a composite design) to deliver arrows that could penetrate contemporary mail and damage/dent plate armour. The longbow was a difficult weapon to master, requiring long years of use and constant practice. A skilled longbowman could shoot about 12 shots per minute. This rate of fire was far superior to competing weapons like the crossbow or early gunpowder weapons. The nearest competitor to the longbow was the much more expensive crossbow, used often by urban militias and mercenary forces. The crossbow had greater penetrating power and did not require the extended years of training. However, it lacked the rate of fire of the longbow.\nAt Cr\u00e9cy and Agincourt bowmen unleashed clouds of arrows into the ranks of knights. At Cr\u00e9cy, even 5,000 Genoese crossbowmen could not dislodge them from their hill. At Agincourt, thousands of French knights were brought down by armour-piercing bodkin point arrows and horse-maiming broadheads. Longbowmen decimated an entire generation of the French nobility.\nTransition to gunpowder warfare.\nIn 1326 the earliest known European picture of a gun appeared in a manuscript by Walter de Milemete. In 1350, Petrarch wrote that the presence of cannons on the battlefield was 'as common and familiar as other kinds of arms'.\nEarly artillery played a limited role in the Hundred Years' War, and it became indispensable in the Italian Wars of 1494\u20131559, marking the beginning of early modern warfare. Charles VIII, during his invasion of Italy, brought with him the first truly mobile siege train: culverins and bombards mounted on wheeled carriages, which could be deployed against an enemy stronghold immediately after arrival.\nStrategy and tactics.\nMedieval campaigns were planned with strategy in mind, such as maintaining unity in morale, planning troop movements, and mount offensives with numerical advantages. Medieval armies used strategic deception, such as misleading troop movements, to take opposing armies by surprise. They would also spread misinformation regarding army size and provisions.\nOne common tactic used in medieval warfare was raiding; this benefitted the attacking army by with new supplies and wealth while damaging the target's resources.\n\"De re militari\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"si vis pacem, para bellum\"If you want peace, prepare for war\nVegetius, \"De re militari\", preface to book 3.\nPublius Flavius Vegetius Renatus wrote \"De re militari (Concerning Military Matters)\" possibly in the late 4th\u00a0century. Described by historian Walter Goffart as \"the bible of warfare throughout the Middle Ages\", \"De re militari\" was widely distributed through the Latin West. While Western Europe relied on a single text for the basis of its military knowledge, the Byzantine Empire in Southeastern Europe had a succession of military writers. Though Vegetius had no military experience and \"De re militari\" was derived from the works of Cato and Frontinus, his books were the standard for military discourse in Western Europe from their production until the 16th century.\n\"De re militari\" was divided into five books: who should be a soldier and the skills they needed to learn, the composition and structure of an army, field tactics, how to conduct and withstand sieges, and the role of the navy. According to Vegetius, infantry was the most important element of an army because it was cheap compared to cavalry and could be deployed on any terrain. One of the tenets he put forward was that a general should only engage in battle when he was sure of victory or had no other choice. As archaeologist Robert Liddiard explains, \"Pitched battles, particularly in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, were rare.\" Although it is likely that many early medieval generals were unable to read Vegetius\u2019s work, Charlemagne\u2019s educational renaissance in the late 8th century was key to reproduction and dissemination of this document. \u00a0Knowledge was often transmitted orally; reading aloud was a standard teaching tool by literate clerics in assemblies, courts and military camps.\u00a0 \u00a0There is direct textual reference in the 9th century by Rabanus Maurus (Abbot of Fulda) who produced an adapted version of \"De re militari\" to suit a Christian ruler for \u201cpractical use\u201d, implying it was made accessible to commanders. \u00a0\"De re militari\" would become the most widely used military text up to the 18th century. \u00a0\nAlthough his work was widely reproduced, and over 200 copies, translations, and extracts survive today, the extent to which Vegetius affected the actual practice of warfare as opposed to its concept is unclear because of his habit of stating the obvious. Historian Michael Clanchy noted \"the medieval axiom that laymen are illiterate and its converse that clergy are literate\", so it may be the case that few soldiers read Vegetius' work. While their Roman predecessors were well-educated and had been experienced in warfare, the European nobility of the early medieval period were not renowned for their education, but from the 12th\u00a0century, it became more common for them to read.\nSome soldiers regarded the experience of warfare as more valuable than reading about it; for example, Geoffroi de Charny, a 14th-century knight who wrote about warfare, recommended that his audience should learn by observing and asking advice from their superiors. Vegetius remained prominent in medieval literature on warfare, although it is uncertain to what extent his work was read by the warrior class as opposed to the clergy. In 1489, King Henry VII of England commissioned the translation of \"De re militari\" into English, \"so every gentleman born to arms and all manner of men of war, captains, soldiers, victuallers and all others would know how they ought to behave in the feats of wars and battles\".\nSupplies and logistics.\nMedieval warfare largely predated the use of supply trains, which meant that armies had to acquire food supplies from the territory they were passing through. This meant that large-scale looting by soldiers was unavoidable, and was actively encouraged in the 14th century with its emphasis on \"chevauch\u00e9e\" tactics, where mounted troops would burn and pillage enemy territory in order to distract and demoralize the enemy while denying them their supplies.\nThrough the medieval period, soldiers were responsible for supplying themselves, either through foraging, looting, or purchases. Even so, military commanders often provided their troops with food and supplies, but this would be provided instead of the soldiers' wages, or soldiers would be expected to pay for it from their wages, either at cost or even with a profit.\nIn 1294, the same year John II de Balliol of Scotland refused to support Edward I of England's planned invasion of France, Edward I implemented a system in Wales and Scotland where sheriffs would acquire foodstuffs, horses and carts from merchants with compulsory sales at prices fixed below typical market prices under the Crown's rights of prise and purveyance. These goods would then be transported to Royal Magazines in southern Scotland and along the Scottish border where English conscripts under his command could purchase them. This continued during the First War of Scottish Independence which began in 1296, though the system was unpopular and was ended with Edward I's death in 1307.\nStarting under the rule of Edward II in 1307 and ending under the rule of Edward III in 1337, the English instead used a system where merchants would be asked to meet armies with supplies for the soldiers to purchase. This led to discontent as the merchants saw an opportunity to profiteer, forcing the troops to pay well above normal market prices for food.\nAs Edward III went to war with France in the Hundred Years' War (starting in 1337), the English returned to a practice of foraging and raiding to meet their logistical needs. This practice lasted throughout the war, extending through the remainder of Edward III's reign into the reign of Henry VI.\nRegional examples.\nArabs.\nThe initial Muslim conquests began in the 7th century after the death of the Islamic prophet Muhammad, and were marked by a century of rapid Arab expansion beyond the Arabian Peninsula under the Rashidun and Umayyad Caliphates. Under the Rashidun, the Arabs conquered the Persian Empire, along with Roman Syria and Roman Egypt during the Byzantine-Arab Wars, all within just seven years from 633 to 640. Under the Umayyads, the Arabs annexed North Africa and southern Italy from the Romans and the Arab Empire soon stretched from parts of the Indian subcontinent, across Central Asia, the Middle East, North Africa, and southern Italy, Italy, to the Iberian Peninsula and the Pyrenees.\nThe early Arab army mainly consisted of camel-mounted infantry, alongside a few Bedouin cavalry. Constantly outnumbered by their opponent, they did, however, possess the advantage of strategic mobility, their camel-borne nature allowing them to constantly outmaneuver larger Byzantine and Sassanid armies to take prime defensive positions. The Rashidun cavalry, while lacking the number and mounted archery skill of their Roman and Persian counterparts was for the most part skillfully employed, and played a decisive role in many crucial battles such as Battle of Yarmouk. During the 7th century, Arab armies employed weapons such as swords, spears, iron mace and lances. For protection, they used shields and wore helmets and coats of mail, although the latter was extremely rare. The bow and arrow was also utilized. Also, after the naval siege of Constantinople in the 670s, they started to employ greek fire.\nIn contrast to the Roman and Persian army at the time both had large numbers of heavy infantry and heavy cavalry (cataphracts and clibanarii) that were better equipped, heavily protected, and were more experienced and disciplined. The Arab invasions came at a time when both ancient powers were exhausted from the protracted Byzantine\u2013Sassanid Wars, particularly the bitterly fought Byzantine\u2013Sassanid War of 602\u2013628 which had brought both empires close to collapse. Also, the typically multi-ethnic Byzantine force was always wracked by dissension and lacked a unity of command, a similar situation also being encountered among the Sassanids who had been embroiled in a bitter civil war for a decade before the coming of the Arabs. In contrast, the Ridda Wars which preceded the Arab conflicts with both the Sasanids and the Byzantines, had forged the Caliphate's army into a united and loyal fighting force.\nVikings.\nThe Vikings were a feared force in Europe because of their savagery and speed of their attacks. Whilst seaborne raids were nothing new at the time, the Vikings refined the practice to a science through their shipbuilding, tactics and training. Unlike other raiders, the Vikings made a lasting impact on the face of Europe. During the Viking age, their expeditions, frequently combining raiding and trading, penetrated most of the old Frankish Empire, the British Isles, the Baltic region, Russia, and both Muslim and Christian Iberia. Many served as mercenaries, and the famed Varangian Guard, serving the Emperor of Constantinople, was drawn principally of Scandinavian warriors.\nViking longships were swift and easily manoeuvered; they could navigate deep seas or shallow rivers, and could carry warriors that could be rapidly deployed directly onto land due to the longships being able to land directly. The longship was the enabler of the Viking style of warfare that was fast and mobile, relying heavily on the element of surprise. The usual method was to approach a target with the element of surprise and then retire swiftly using guerrilla-style fighting. The fully armoured Viking raider would wear an iron helmet and a mail hauberk, and fight with a combination of axe, sword, shield, spear or great \"Danish\" two-handed axe, although the typical raider would be unarmoured, carrying only a bow and arrows, a seax, a shield and spear. European countries with a weak system of government would be unable to organize a suitable response and would naturally suffer the most to Viking raiders. Viking raiders always had the option to fall back in the face of a superior force or stubborn defence and then reappear to attack other locations or retreat to their bases. As time went on, Viking raids became more sophisticated, with coordinated strikes involving multiple forces and large armies, as the \"Great Heathen Army\" that ravaged Anglo-Saxon England in the 9th century. In time, the Vikings began to hold on to the areas they raided, first wintering and then consolidating footholds for further expansion later.\nAfter the Vikings consolidated their kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden, this period marks the end of significant raider activity both for plunder or conquest; adapting a more continental European tradition of warfare, whilst retaining an emphasis on naval power \u2013 the \"Viking\" clinker-built warship was used in the war until the 14th century. However, developments in shipbuilding elsewhere removed the advantage they previously enjoyed at sea, whilst castle building throughout frustrated and eventually ended Viking raids.\nThe Scandinavian armies of the High Middle Ages followed the usual pattern of the Northern European armies, but with a stronger emphasis on infantry. The terrain of Scandinavia favoured heavy infantry, and whilst the nobles fought mounted in the continental fashion, the Scandinavian peasants formed a well-armed and well-armoured infantry, of which approximately 30% to 50% would be archers or crossbowmen. The crossbow, the flatbow and the longbow were especially popular in Sweden and Finland. The chainmail, the lamellar armour and the coat of plates were the usual Scandinavian infantry armour before the era of plate armour.\nMongols.\n By 1241, having conquered large parts of Russia, the Mongols continued the invasion of Europe with a massive three-pronged advance, following the fleeing Cumans, who had established an uncertain alliance with King Bela IV of Hungary. They first invaded Poland, and finally, Hungary, culminating in the crushing defeat of the Hungarians in the Battle of Mohi. The Mongol aim seems to have consistently been to defeat the Hungarian-Cuman alliance. The Mongols raided across the borders to Austria and Bohemia in the summer when the Great Khan died, and the Mongol princes returned home to elect a new Great Khan.\nThe Golden Horde would frequently clash with Hungarians, Lithuanians and Poles in the thirteenth century, with two large raids in the 1260s and 1280s respectively. In 1284 the Hungarians repelled the last major raid into Hungary, and in 1287 the Poles repelled a raid against them. The instability in the Golden Horde seems to have quieted the western front of the Horde. Also, the large scale invasions and raiding that had previously characterized the expansion of the Mongols was cut short probably in some part due to the death of the last great Mongol leader, Tamerlane.\nThe Hungarians and Poles had responded to the mobile threat by extensive fortification-building, army reform in the form of better-armoured cavalry, and refusing battle unless they could control the site of the battlefield to deny the Mongols local superiority. The Lithuanians relied on their forested homelands for defence and used their cavalry for raiding into Mongol-dominated Russia. When attacking fortresses they would launch dead or diseased animals into fortresses to help spread disease.\nTurks and Central Asia.\nAn early Turkic group, the Seljuks, were known for their cavalry archers. These fierce nomads were often raiding empires, such as the Byzantine Empire, and they scored several victories using mobility and timing to defeat the heavy cataphracts of the Byzantines.\nOne notable victory was at Manzikert, where conflict among the generals of the Byzantines gave the Turks the perfect opportunity to strike. They hit the cataphracts with arrows, and outmanoeuvred them, then rode down their less mobile infantry with light cavalry that used scimitars (in use since the 9th century). When gunpowder was introduced, the Ottoman Turks of the Ottoman Empire hired the mercenaries that used the gunpowder weapons and obtained their instruction for the Janissaries. Out of these Ottoman soldiers rose the Janissaries (\"yeni ceri\"; \"new soldier\"), from which they also recruited many of their heavy infantry. Along with the use of cavalry and early grenades, the Ottomans mounted an offensive in the early Renaissance period and attacked Europe, taking Constantinople by massed infantry assaults.\nLike many other nomadic peoples, the Turks featured a core of heavy cavalry from the upper classes. These evolved into the Sipahis (feudal landholders similar to western knights and Byzantine \"pronoiai\") and Qapukulu (\"door slaves\", taken from youth like Janissaries and trained to be royal servants and elite soldiers, mainly cataphracts).\nAlready by the late 13th century, the Khilji dynasty utilized several siege technologies such as trebuchets, ballistas and wooden parapets by their war engineers. In order to breach a fortification's curtain walls, long earthen-ramps were used to fill up moats. In ranged military techniques, they used the powerful war-horses from Central Asia with mounted archers.\nEquipment.\nWeapons\nMedieval weapons consisted of many different types of ranged and hand-held objects:\nArmour\nArtillery and Siege engine\nAnimals\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20505", "revid": "50056326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20505", "title": "Magnetic tape", "text": "Data recording made of plastic film\nMagnetic tape is a medium for magnetic storage made of a thin, magnetizable coating on a long, narrow strip of plastic film. It was developed in Germany in 1928, based on the earlier magnetic wire recording from Denmark. Devices that use magnetic tape can with relative ease record and play back audio, visual, and binary computer data. \nMagnetic tape revolutionized sound recording and reproduction and broadcasting. It allowed radio, which had always been broadcast live, to be recorded for later or repeated airing. Since the early 1950s, magnetic tape has been used with computers to store large quantities of data and is still used for backup purposes.\nMagnetic tape begins to degrade after 10\u201320 years and therefore is not an ideal medium for long-term archival storage. The exception is data tape formats like LTO which are specifically designed for long-term archiving.\nInformation in magnetic tapes is often recorded in tracks which are narrow and long areas of information recorded magnetically onto the tape, which are separate from each other and often spaced apart from adjacent tracks. Tracks are often parallel to the length of the tape, in which case they are known as longitudinal tracks, or diagonal relative to the length of the tape in helical scan. There are also transverse scan and arcuate scanning, used in Quadruplex videotape. Azimuth recording is used to reduce or eliminate the spacing that exists between adjacent tracks.\nDurability.\nWhile good for short-term use, magnetic tape is highly prone to disintegration. Depending on the environment, this process may begin after 10\u201320 years.\nOver time, magnetic tape made in the 1970s and 1980s can suffer from a type of deterioration called sticky-shed syndrome. It is caused by hydrolysis of the binder in the tape and can render the tape unusable, but which can be treated by \"baking\" the tape at low temperature to remove binder layer moisture.\nSuccessors.\nSince the introduction of magnetic tape, other technologies have been developed that can perform the same functions, and therefore, replace it. Such as for example, hard disk drives in computers replacing cassette tape readers such as the Atari Program Recorder and the Commodore Datasette for software, CDs and MiniDiscs replacing cassette tapes for audio, and DVDs replacing VHS tapes. Despite this, technological innovation continues. As of 2014[ [update]] Sony and IBM continue to advance tape capacity.\nUses.\nAudio.\nMagnetic tape was invented for recording sound by Fritz Pfleumer in 1928 in Germany.\nBecause of escalating political tensions and the outbreak of World War II, these developments in Germany were largely kept secret. Although the Allies knew from their monitoring of Nazi radio broadcasts that the Germans had some new form of recording technology, its nature was not discovered until the Allies acquired German recording equipment as they invaded Europe at the end of the war. It was only after the war that Americans, particularly Jack Mullin, John Herbert Orr, and Richard H. Ranger, were able to bring this technology out of Germany and develop it into commercially viable formats. Bing Crosby, an early adopter of the technology, made a large investment in the tape hardware manufacturer Ampex.\nA wide variety of audiotape recorders and formats have been developed since. Some magnetic tape-based formats include:\nVideo.\nVideotape is magnetic tape used for storing video and usually sound in addition. Information stored can be in the form of either an analog or digital signal. Videotape is used in both video tape recorders (VTRs) and, more commonly, videocassette recorders (VCRs) and camcorders. Videotapes have also been used for storing scientific or medical data, such as the data produced by an electrocardiogram.\nSome magnetic tape-based formats include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20506", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20506", "title": "Medieval siege weaponry", "text": ""}
{"id": "20507", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20507", "title": "Mesocephalic", "text": ""}
{"id": "20509", "revid": "404133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20509", "title": "Mieszko II", "text": ""}
{"id": "20511", "revid": "43296941", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20511", "title": "Mabo v Queensland (No 2)", "text": "1992 High Court of Australia decision which recognised native title\nMabo v Queensland (No 2) (commonly known as the Mabo\" case or simply Mabo\"; ) is a landmark decision of the High Court of Australia that recognised the existence of Native Title in Australia. It was brought by Eddie Mabo and others against the State of Queensland, and decided on 3 June 1992. The case is notable for being the first in Australia to recognise pre-colonial land interests of Indigenous Australians within the common law of Australia.\n\"Mabo\" is of great legal, historical, and political importance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians. The decision rejected the notion that Australia was (i.e. owned by no one) at the time of British settlement, and recognised that Indigenous rights to land existed by virtue of traditional customs and laws and these rights had not been wholly lost upon colonisation.\nThe Prime Minister Paul Keating during his Redfern speech praised the decision, saying it \"establishes a fundamental truth, and lays the basis for justice\". Conversely, the decision was criticised by the government of Western Australia and various mining and pastoralist groups.\nSoon after the decision, the Keating government passed the \"Native Title Act 1993\" (Cth), which supplemented the rights recognised in \"Mabo\" and set out a new process for applicants to have their rights recognised through the newly established Native Title Tribunal and the Federal Court of Australia.\nBackground.\nHistory of Mer.\nThe case centred on the Murray Islands Group, consisting of Murray Island (known traditionally as Mer Island), Waua Islet and Daua Island. The islands have been inhabited by the Meriam people (a group of Torres Strait Islanders) for between 300 and 2,000 years.\nPrior to and after annexation by the British, rights to land on Mer is governed by Malo's Law, \"a set of religiously sanctioned laws which Merriam people feel bound to observe\". Under this law, the entirety of Mer is owned by different Meriam land owners and there is no concept of public ownership. Land is owned by the eldest son on behalf of a particular lineage or family so that land is jointly owned individually and communally. Unlike western law, title to land is orally based, although there is also a written tradition introduced to comply with State and Commonwealth inheritance and welfare laws. However, ownership is not 'one way' under this system of law, and an individual both owns the land and is owned by it. As such, they have the responsibility to care for and share it with their clan or family and maintain it for future generations. \nIn 1871, missionaries from the London Missionary Society arrived on the Torres Strait island of Darnley Island in an event known as \"The coming of the Light\" leading to the conversion to Christianity of much of the Torres Strait, including Mer Island. This however did not lead to a replacement of traditional native traditions, but a synthesis with traditional customs, including Malo's Law, being recognised within the framework of Christianity. Reverend David Passi, who gave evidence in the trial, explained that he believed that God had sent Malo to Mer Island and that \"Jesus Christ was where Malo was pointing.\"\nIn 1879, the islands were formally annexed by the State of Queensland.\nBy the 1900s, the traditional economic life of the Torres Strait gave way to wage labouring on fishing boats mostly owned by others. In the aftermath of the Great Depression and a subsequent cut in wages, Islanders in 1936 joined a strike instigated by Mer Islanders. This strike was the first organised Islander challenge to western authorities since colonisation.\nLegal background.\nPrior to \"Mabo\", the pre-colonial property interests of Indigenous Australians were not recognised by the Australian legal system. Litigation over this issue directly did not arise until the 1970s with the case of \"Milirrpum v Nabalco Pty Ltd\". In that case, native title was held to not exist and to never have existed in Australia.\nLater, in 1982, the plaintiffs, headed by Eddie Mabo, requested a declaration from the High Court that the Meriam people were entitled to property rights on Murray Island according to their local customs, original native ownership and their actual use and possession of the land. The State of Queensland was the respondent to the proceeding and argued that native title rights had never existed in Australia and even if it did they had been removed due to (at the latest) the passage of the \"Land Act 1910\" (Qld).\nPrior to judgment, the Queensland government passed the \"Queensland Coast Islands Declaratory Act 1985\" (Qld), which purported to extinguish the native title on the Murray Islands that Mabo and the other plaintiffs were seeking to claim. This was successfully challenged in \"Mabo v Queensland\" (1988) 166 CLR 186 (Mabo No 1) and declared as ineffective due to the act being inconsistent with the right to equality before the law, as established by the \"Racial Discrimination Act 1975\" (Cth).\nJudgment.\nThe court held that rights arising under native title were recognised within Australia's common law. These rights were sourced from Indigenous laws and customs and not from a grant from the Crown. However, these rights may be extinguished by State or Commonwealth legislation or by grants of land rights inconsistent with native title rights. Additionally, the acquisition of radical title to land by the Crown at British settlement did not by itself extinguish native title interests.\nA majority of the High Court found that:\nTerra nullius.\nVarious members of the court discussed the international law doctrine of ('no one's land'), meaning uninhabited or inhabited territory which is not under the jurisdiction of a state, and which can be acquired by a state through occupation. The court also discussed the analogous common law doctrine that \"desert and uncultivated land\" which includes land \"without settled inhabitants or settled law\" can be acquired by Britain by settlement, and that the laws of England are transmitted at settlement. A majority of the court rejected the notion that the doctrine of \"\" precluded the common law recognition of traditional Indigenous rights and interests in land at the time of British settlement of New South Wales.\nIn 2005, historian Michael Connor argued in \"The Invention of Terra Nullius\" that \"Mabo\" was wrongly decided as the British actually annexed Australia, rather than treating it as \".\" Responding to these criticisms, Mason stated, \"what the British thought about its international law grounds for establishing sovereignty over Australia, for annexing Australia, is beside the point\" with the decision actually concerned with answering the question, \"does the common law (as applied in the Australian colonies) exclude altogether the rights of the indigenous people so that forever the rights they formerly had are excluded?\"\nSignificance.\nThe case attracted widespread controversy and public debate. The prime minister, Paul Keating, praised the decision in his Redfern Speech, saying that it \"establishes a fundamental truth, and lays the basis for justice\". Richard Court, the premier of Western Australia, voiced opposition to the decision in comments echoed by various mining and pastoralist interest groups.\nDevelopment of native title.\nThe decision established the legal doctrine of native title, enabling further litigation for Indigenous land rights. Native title doctrine was eventually supplemented in statute by the Keating government in the \"Native Title Act 1993\" (Cth).\nThe recognition of native title by the decision gave rise to many significant legal questions. These included questions as to the validity of titles issued which were subject to the \"Racial Discrimination Act 1975\" (Cth), the permissibility of future development of land affected by native title, and procedures for determining whether native title existed in land.\nIn response to the judgment the Keating government enacted the \"Native Title Act 1993\" (Cth), which established the National Native Title Tribunal to hear native title claims at first instance. The act was subsequently amended by the Howard government in response to the Wik decision.\nLegal definition of an \"Indigenous person\".\nWithin his judgment, Justice Brennan endorsed a three-part legal test to legally recognise a person as Indigenous in relation to native title. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Membership of the indigenous people depends on biological descent from the indigenous people and on mutual recognition of a particular person's membership by that person and by the elders or other persons enjoying traditional authority among those people.\nThis definition was originally proposed and used by the Commonwealth Department of Aboriginal Affairs in the 1980s. This test has been used in later cases and in other legal contexts (including \"Love v Commonwealth\") to establish whether or not a person is Indigenous.\nAftermath.\nTen years following the \"Mabo\" decision, his wife Bonita Mabo claimed that issues remained within the community about land on Mer.\nOn 1 February 2014, the traditional owners of land on Badu Island received freehold title to in an act of the Queensland Government. An Indigenous land use agreement was signed on 7 July 2014.\nLegacy.\nMabo Day is an official holiday in the Torres Shire, celebrated on 3 June, and occurs during National Reconciliation Week in Australia.\nThe case was referenced in the 1997 comedy \"The Castle\", as an icon of legal rightness, embodied in the quote: \"In summing up, it\u2019s the Constitution, it\u2019s Mabo, it\u2019s justice, it\u2019s law, it\u2019s the vibe.\"\nIn 2009, as part of the Q150 celebrations, the \"Mabo\" High Court of Australia decision was announced as one of the Q150 Icons of Queensland for its role as a \"Defining Moment\".\nA straight-to-TV film titled \"Mabo\" was produced in 2012 by Blackfella Films in association with the ABC and SBS. It provided a dramatised account of the case, focusing on the effect it had on Mabo and his family.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20512", "revid": "9867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20512", "title": "MeatballWiki", "text": "Wiki dedicated to online communities\nMeatballWiki is a wiki dedicated to online communities, network culture, and hypermedia. Containing a record of experience on running wikis, it is intended for \"discussion about wiki philosophy, wiki culture, instructions and observations.\"\nAccording to founder Sunir Shah, it ran on \"a hacked-up version of UseModWiki\". In April 2013, after several spam attacks and a period of downtime, the site was made read-only. In March 2021, the site was de-spammed and reopened for editing as part of a rebuilding effort alongside Ward's Wiki and Community Wiki.\nFounding.\nMeatballWiki was started in 2000 by Sunir Shah, a forum administrator from Ontario, Canada, on Clifford Adams's Internet domain usemod.com. MeatballWiki was created as a place for discussion about Ward Cunningham's WikiWikiWeb and its operation, which were beyond the scope of WikiWikiWeb. As Sunir Shah stated in the WikiWikiWeb page referring to MeatballWiki: \"Community discussions about how to run the community itself should be left here. Abstract discussions, or objective analyses of community are encouraged on MeatballWiki.\" Shah created this site \"as a friendly fork of WikiWikiWeb.\" About the Meatball project, the website says: \"The web, and media like it, looks like a big bowl of meatball spaghetti. You've got content \u2013 the meatballs \u2013 linked together with the spaghetti.\"\nRelationship to wiki community.\nThe original intent of MeatballWiki was to offer observations and opinions about wikis and their online communities, with the intent of helping online communities, culture and hypermedia. \nIn \"Good Faith Collaboration\", Joseph M. Reagle Jr. describes MeatballWiki as \"the wiki about wiki collaboration\". Being a community about communities, MeatballWiki became the launching point for other wiki-based projects and a general resource for broader wiki concepts, reaching \"cult status\". It describes the general tendencies observed on wikis and other online communities, for example the life cycles of wikis and people's behavior on them.\nWhat differentiates MeatballWiki from many online meta-communities is that participants spend much of their time talking about sociology rather than technology, and when they do talk about technology, they do so in a social context.\nThe MeatballWiki members created a \"bus tour\" through existing wikis.\nBarnstars \u2013 badges that wiki editors use to express appreciation for another editor's work \u2013 were invented on MeatballWiki and adopted by Wikipedia in 2003.\nEvgeny Morozov of \"Boston Review\" notes that another Wikipedia norm around voting may also have stemmed from MeatballWiki.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20513", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20513", "title": "Marrakesh", "text": "City in Marrakesh\u2013Safi, Morocco\nMarrakesh or Marrakech (; , ) is the fourth-largest city in Morocco. It is one of the four imperial cities of Morocco and is the capital of the Marrakesh-Safi region. The city lies west of the foothills of the Atlas Mountains.\nThe city was founded circa 1070 by Abu Bakr ibn Umar as the capital of the Almoravid dynasty. The Almoravids established the first major structures in the city and shaped its layout for centuries to come. The red walls of the city, built by Ali ibn Yusuf in 1122\u20131123, and various buildings constructed in red sandstone afterwards, have given the city the nickname of the \"Red City\" or \"Ochre City\". Marrakesh grew rapidly and established itself as a cultural, religious, and trading center for the Maghreb. After a period of decline, Marrakesh regained its status in the early 16th century as the capital of the Saadian dynasty, with sultans Abdallah al-Ghalib and Ahmad al-Mansur embellishing the city with an array of sumptuous monuments. Beginning in the 17th century, the city became popular among Sufi pilgrims for its seven patron saints who are buried here. In 1912, the French Protectorate in Morocco was established and T'hami El Glaoui became Pasha of Marrakesh and generally held this position until the independence of Morocco and the reestablishment of the monarchy in 1956.\nMarrakesh comprises an old fortified city packed with vendors and their stalls. This medina quarter is a UNESCO World Heritage Site and contains the Jemaa el-Fnaa square, a large number of souks (markets), the Kutubiyya Mosque, and many other historic and cultural sites. The city serves as a major economic center and tourist destination. Real estate and hotel development in Marrakesh have grown dramatically in the 21st century. Marrakesh is particularly popular with the French, and numerous French celebrities own property in the city.\nMarrakesh is served by M\u00e9nara International Airport and by Marrakesh railway station, which connects the city to Casablanca and northern Morocco. Marrakesh has several universities and schools, including Cadi Ayyad University. A number of Moroccan football clubs are here, including Najm de Marrakech, KAC Marrakech, Mouloudia de Marrakech and Chez Ali Club de Marrakech. The Marrakesh Street Circuit hosts the World Touring Car Championship, Auto GP and FIA Formula Two Championship races.\nEtymology.\nThe exact meaning of the name is debated. One possible origin of the name Marrakesh is from the Berber (Amazigh) words \"amur (n) akush\", which means \"Land of God\". According to historian Susan Searight, however, the town's name was first documented in an 11th-century manuscript in the Qarawiyyin library in Fez, where its meaning was given as \"country of the sons of Kush\". The word \"mur\" is used now in Berber mostly in the feminine form \"tamurt\". The same word \"mur\" appears in Mauretania, the North African kingdom from antiquity, although the link remains controversial as this name possibly originates from \u03bc\u03b1\u03cd\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \"mauros\", the ancient Greek word for \"dark\". The common English spelling is \"Marrakesh\", although \"Marrakech\" (the French spelling) is also widely used. The name is spelled \"M\u1e5b\u1e5bakc\" in the Berber Latin alphabet, \"Marraquexe\" in Portuguese, \"Marrakech\" in Spanish. A typical pronunciation in Moroccan Arabic is \"merr\u0101kesh\" () with stress on the second syllable.\nFrom medieval times until around the beginning of the 20th century, the entire country of Morocco was known as the \"Kingdom of Marrakesh\", as the kingdom's historic capital city was often Marrakesh. The name for Morocco is still \"Marrakesh\" to this day in Persian and Urdu as well as many other South Asian languages. Various European names for Morocco (Marruecos, Marrocos, Maroc, Marokko, etc.) are directly derived from the name \"Murr\u0101kush\". Conversely, the city itself was in earlier times simply called \"Marocco City\" (or similar) by travelers from abroad. The name of the city and the country diverged after the Treaty of Fez divided Morocco into a French protectorate in Morocco and Spanish protectorate in Morocco, and the old interchangeable usage lasted widely until about the interregnum of Mohammed Ben Aarafa (1953\u20131955). The latter episode set in motion the country's return to independence, when Morocco officially became (\"al-Mamlaka al-Ma\u0121ribiyya\", \"The Maghreb Kingdom\"), its name no longer referring to the city of Marrakesh. Marrakesh is known by a variety of nicknames, including the \"Red City\" (), the \"Ochre City\" and \"the Daughter of the Desert\", and has been the focus of poetic analogies such as one comparing the city to \"a drum that beats an African identity into the complex soul of Morocco.\"\nHistory.\nThe Marrakesh area was inhabited by Berber farmers from Neolithic times, and numerous stone implements have been unearthed in the area. Marrakesh was founded by Abu Bakr ibn Umar, chieftain and second cousin of the Almoravid king Yusuf ibn Tashfin (c. 1061\u20131106). Historical sources cite a variety of dates for this event ranging between 1062 (454 in the Hijri calendar), according to Ibn Abi Zar and Ibn Khaldun, and 1078 (470 AH), according to Muhammad al-Idrisi. The date most commonly used by modern historians is 1070, although 1062 is still cited by some writers. \nThe Almoravids, a Berber dynasty seeking to reform Islamic society, ruled an emirate stretching from the edge of Senegal to the centre of Spain and from the Atlantic coast to Algiers. They used Marrakesh as their capital and established its first structures, including mosques and a fortified residence, the Ksar al-Hajjar, near the present-day Kutubiyya Mosque. These Almoravid foundations also influenced the layout and urban organization of the city for centuries to come. For example, the present-day Jemaa el-Fnaa originated from a public square in front of the Almoravid palace gates, the \"Rahbat al-Ksar\", and the major souks (markets) of the city developed roughly in the area between this square and the city's main mosque, where they remain today. The city developed the community into a trading centre for the Maghreb and sub-Saharan Africa. It grew rapidly and established itself as a cultural and religious centre, supplanting Aghmat, which had long been the capital of Haouz. Andalusi craftsmen from Cordoba and Seville built and decorated numerous monuments, importing the Cordoban Umayyad style characterised by carved domes and cusped arches. This Andalusian influence merged with designs from the Sahara and West Africa, creating a unique style of architecture which was fully adapted to the Marrakesh environment. Yusuf ibn Tashfin built houses, minted coins, and brought gold and silver to the city in caravans. His son and successor, Ali Ibn Yusuf, built the Ben Youssef Mosque, the city's main mosque, between 1120 and 1132. He also fortified the city with city walls for the first time in 1126\u20131127 and expanded its water supply by creating the underground water system known as the \"khettara\".\nIn 1125, the preacher Ibn Tumart settled in Tin Mal in the mountains to the south of Marrakesh, founding the Almohad movement. This new faction, composed mainly of Masmuda tribesmen, followed a doctrine of radical reform with Ibn Tumart as the \"mahdi\", a messianic figure. He preached against the Almoravids and influenced a revolt which succeeded in bringing about the fall of nearby Aghmat, but stopped short of bringing down Marrakesh following an unsuccessful siege in 1130. Ibn Tumart died shortly after in the same year, but his successor Abd al-Mu'min took over the political leadership of the movement and captured Marrakesh in 1147 after a siege of several months. The Almohads purged the Almoravid population over three days and established the city as their new capital. They went on to take over much of the Almoravids' former territory in Africa and the Iberian Peninsula. In 1147, shortly after the city's conquest, Abd al-Mu'min founded the Kutubiyya Mosque (or Koutoubia Mosque), next to the former Almoravid palace, to serve as the city's new main mosque. The Almoravid mosques were either demolished or abandoned as the Almohads enacted their religious reforms. Abd al-Mu'min was also responsible for establishing the Menara Gardens in 1157, while his successor Abu Ya'qub Yusuf (r. 1163\u20131184) began the Agdal Gardens. Ya'qub al-Mansur (r. 1184\u20131199), possibly on the orders of his father Abu Ya'qub Yusuf, was responsible for building the Kasbah, a citadel and palace district on the south side of the city. The Kasbah housed the center of government and the residence of the caliph, a title borne by the Almohad rulers to rival the eastern Abbasid Caliphate. In part because of these various additions, the Almohads also improved the water supply system and created water reservoirs to irrigate their gardens. Thanks to its economic, political, and cultural importance, Marrakesh hosted many writers, artists, and intellectuals, many of them from Al-Andalus, including the famous philosopher Averroes of Cordoba.\nThe death of Yusuf II in 1224 began a period of instability. Marrakesh became the stronghold of the Almohad tribal sheikhs and the \"ahl ad-dar\" (descendants of Ibn Tumart), who sought to claw power back from the ruling Almohad family. Marrakesh was taken, lost and retaken by force multiple times by a stream of caliphs and pretenders, such as during the brutal seizure of Marrakesh by the Sevillan caliph Abd al-Wahid II al-Ma'mun in 1226, which was followed by a massacre of the Almohad tribal sheikhs and their families and a public denunciation of Ibn Tumart's doctrines by the caliph from the pulpit of the Kasbah Mosque. After al-Ma'mun's death in 1232, his widow attempted to forcibly install her son, acquiring the support of the Almohad army chiefs and Spanish mercenaries with the promise to hand Marrakesh over to them for the sack. Hearing of the terms, the people of Marrakesh sought to make an agreement with the military captains and saved the city from destruction with a sizable payoff of 500,000 dinars. In 1269, Marrakesh was conquered by the Marinids, a Zenata tribe who overran the Almohads in Morocco. While Marrakesh remained a major city, it lost its capital status to Fez and underwent a period of relative decline.\nIn the early 16th century, Marrakesh again became the capital of Morocco. After a period when it was the seat of the Hintata emirs, it reestablished its status during the reigns of the Saadian sultans Abdallah al-Ghalib and Ahmad al-Mansur. Under the Saadian dynasty, Marrakesh experienced a new golden age. Thanks to the wealth amassed by the sultans, it was embellished with sumptuous palaces while its ruined monuments were restored. El Badi Palace, begun by Ahmad al-Mansur in 1578, was made with costly materials including marble from Italy. The palace was intended primarily for hosting lavish receptions for ambassadors from Spain, England, and the Ottoman Empire, showcasing Saadian Morocco as a nation whose power and influence reached as far as the borders of Niger and Mali. \nFor centuries Marrakesh has been known as the location of the tombs of Morocco's seven patron saints (\"sebaatou rizjel\"). When sufism was at the height of its popularity during the late 17th-century reign of Moulay Ismail, the festival of these saints was founded by Abu Ali al-Hassan al-Yusi at the request of the sultan. The tombs of several renowned figures were moved to Marrakesh to attract pilgrims, and the pilgrimage associated with the seven saints is now a firmly established institution. Pilgrims visit the tombs of the saints in a specific order, as follows: Sidi Yusuf Ali Sanhaji (1196\u201397), a leper; Qadi Iyyad or qadi of Ceuta (1083\u20131149), a theologian and author of Ash-Shifa (treatises on the virtues of Muhammad); Sidi Bel Abbas (1130\u20131204), known as the patron saint of the city and most revered in the region; Sidi Muhammad al-Jazuli (1465), a well known Sufi who founded the Jazuli brotherhood; Abdelaziz al-Tebaa (1508), a student of al-Jazuli; Abdallah al-Ghazwani (1528), known as Moulay al-Ksour; and Sidi Abu al-Qasim Al-Suhayli, (1185), also known as Imam al-Suhayli. Until 1867, European Christians were not authorized to enter the city unless they acquired special permission from the sultan; east European Jews were permitted.\nDuring the early 20th century, Marrakesh underwent several years of unrest. After the premature death in 1900 of the grand vizier Ba Ahmed, who had been designated regent until the designated sultan Abd al-Aziz became of age, the country was plagued by anarchy, tribal revolts, the plotting of feudal lords, and European intrigues. In 1907, Marrakesh caliph Moulay Abd al-Hafid was proclaimed sultan by the powerful tribes of the High Atlas and by Ulama scholars who denied the legitimacy of his brother, Abd al-Aziz. It was also in 1907 that Dr. Mauchamp, a French doctor, was murdered in Marrakesh, suspected of spying for his country. France used the event as a pretext for sending its troops from the eastern Moroccan town of Oujda to the major metropolitan center of Casablanca in the west. The French colonial army encountered strong resistance from Ahmed al-Hiba, a son of Sheikh Ma al-'Aynayn, who arrived from the Sahara accompanied by his nomadic Reguibat tribal warriors. On 30 March 1912, the French Protectorate in Morocco was established. After the Battle of Sidi Bou Othman, which saw the victory of the French Mangin column over the al-Hiba forces in September 1912, the French seized Marrakesh. The conquest was facilitated by the rallying of the Imzwarn tribes and their leaders from the powerful Glaoui family, leading to a massacre of Marrakesh citizens in the resulting turmoil.\nT'hami El Glaoui, known as \"Lord of the Atlas\", became Pasha of Marrakesh, a post he held virtually throughout the 44-year duration of the Protectorate (1912\u20131956). Glaoui dominated the city and became famous for his collaboration with the general residence authorities, culminating in a plot to dethrone Mohammed Ben Youssef (Mohammed V) and replace him with the Sultan's cousin, Ben Arafa. Glaoui, already known for his amorous adventures and lavish lifestyle, became a symbol of Morocco's colonial order. He could not, however, subdue the rise of nationalist sentiment, nor the hostility of a growing proportion of the inhabitants. Nor could he resist pressure from France, who agreed to terminate its Moroccan Protectorate in 1956 due to the launch of the Algerian War (1954\u20131962) immediately following the end of the war in Indochina (1946\u20131954), in which Moroccans had been conscripted to fight in Vietnam on behalf of the French Army. After two successive exiles to Corsica and Madagascar, Mohammed Ben Youssef was allowed to return to Morocco in November 1955, bringing an end to the despotic rule of Glaoui over Marrakesh and the surrounding region. A protocol giving independence to Morocco was then signed on 2 March 1956 between French Foreign Minister Christian Pineau and M\u2019Barek Ben Bakkai.\nSince the independence of Morocco, Marrakesh has thrived as a tourist destination. In the 1960s and early 1970s, the city became a trendy \"hippie mecca\". It attracted numerous western rock stars and musicians, artists, film directors and actors, models, and fashion divas, leading tourism revenues to double in Morocco between 1965 and 1970. Yves Saint Laurent, The Beatles, The Rolling Stones and Jean-Paul Getty all spent significant time in the city; Laurent bought a property here and renovated the Majorelle Gardens. Expatriates, especially those from France, have invested heavily in Marrakesh since the 1960s and developed many of the \"riads\" and palaces. Over the following decades, the demographic importance of the historic medina declined, due to much of it being converted from residential housing to commercial properties as well as due to the general expansion of the city beyond its traditional areas. In 1984, about 51% of the city's population lived in the medina, whereas only 22% did in 2004. \nUnited Nations agencies became active in Marrakesh beginning in the 1970s, and the city's international political presence has subsequently grown. In 1985, UNESCO declared the old town area of Marrakesh a UNESCO World Heritage Site, raising international awareness of the cultural heritage of the city. In the 1980s, Patrick Guerand-Hermes purchased the Ain el Quassimou, built by the family of Leo Tolstoy. On 15 April 1994, the Marrakesh Agreement was signed here to establish the World Trade Organisation, and in March 1997 Marrakesh served as the site of the World Water Council's first World Water Forum, which was attended by over 500 international participants.\nIn the 21st century, property and real estate development in the city has boomed, with a dramatic increase in new hotels and shopping centres, fuelled by the policies of Mohammed VI of Morocco, who aims to increase the number of tourists annually visiting Morocco to 20\u00a0million by 2020. In 2010, a major gas explosion occurred in the city. On 28 April 2011, a bomb attack took place in the Jemaa el-Fnaa square, killing 15 people, mainly foreigners. The blast destroyed the nearby Argana Cafe. Police sources arrested three suspects and claimed the chief suspect was loyal to Al-Qaeda, although Al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb denied involvement. In November 2016 the city hosted the 2016 United Nations Climate Change Conference. In September 2023, the city was affected by a deadly earthquake. From October 9 to October 15, 2023, the city hosted the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group.\nGeography.\nThe city is located in the Tensift River valley, with the Tensift River passing along the northern edge of the city. The Ourika River valley is about south of Marrakesh. The city has expanded north from the old centre with suburbs such as Daoudiat, Diour El Massakine, Sidi Abbad, Sakar and Amerchich, to the southeast with Sidi Youssef Ben Ali, to the west with Massira and Targa, and southwest to M'hamid beyond the airport. On the P2017 road leading south out of the city are large villages such as Douar Lahna, Touggana, Lagouassem, and Lahebichate, leading eventually through desert to the town of Tahnaout at the edge of the High Atlas, the highest mountainous barrier in North Africa. The average elevation of the snow-covered High Atlas lies above . It is mainly composed of Jurassic limestone. The mountain range runs along the Atlantic coast, then rises to the east of Agadir and extends northeast into Algeria before disappearing into Tunisia.\nClimate.\nMarrakesh features a hot semi-arid climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSh\") with long, hot dry summers and brief, mild to cool winters. Average temperatures range from in the winter to in the summer. The relatively wet winter and dry summer precipitation pattern of Marrakesh mirrors precipitation patterns found in Mediterranean climates. However, the city receives less rain than is typically found in a Mediterranean climate, which results in a semi-arid climate classification.\nBetween 1961 and 1990 the city averaged of precipitation annually. Barrows says of the climate, \"The region of Marrakesh is frequently described as desert in character, but, to one familiar with the southwestern parts of the United States, the locality does not suggest the desert, rather an area of seasonal rainfall, where moisture moves underground rather than by surface streams, and where low brush takes the place of the forests of more heavily watered regions. The location of Marrakesh on the north side of the Atlas, rather than the south, prevents it from being described as a desert city, and it remains the northern focus of the Saharan lines of communication, and its history, its types of dwellers, and its commerce and arts, are all related to the great south Atlas spaces that reach further into the Sahara desert.\"\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in \"PLOS One\" estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Marrakesh in 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Bir Lehlou in Western Sahara. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the coldest month by , while the temperature of the warmest month would increase by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nWater.\nMarrakesh's water supply relies partly on groundwater resources, which have lowered gradually over the last 40 years, attaining an acute decline in the early 2000s. Since 2002, groundwater levels have dropped by an average of 0.9 m per year in 80% of Marrakesh and its surrounding area. The most affected area experienced a drop of 37 m (more than 2 m per year).\nDemographics.\nAccording to the 2014 census, the population of Marrakesh was 928,850 against 843,575 in 2004. The number of households in 2014 was 217,245 against 173,603 in 2004.\nEconomy.\nMarrakesh is a vital component of the economy and culture of Morocco. Improvements to the highways from Marrakesh to Casablanca, Agadir and the local airport have led to a dramatic increase in tourism in the city, which now attracts over two million tourists annually. Because of the importance of tourism to Morocco's economy, King Mohammed VI vowed in 2012 to double the number of tourists, attracting 20\u00a0million a year to Morocco by 2020. The city is popular with the French, and many French celebrities have bought property in the city, including fashion moguls Yves St Laurent and Jean-Paul Gaultier. In the 1990s very few foreigners lived in the city, and real estate developments have dramatically increased in the last 15 years; by 2005 over 3,000 foreigners had purchased properties in the city, lured by its culture and the relatively cheap house prices. It has been cited in French weekly magazine \"Le Point\" as the second St Tropez: \"No longer simply a destination for a scattering of adventurous elites, bohemians or backpackers seeking Arabian Nights fantasies, Marrakech is becoming a desirable stopover for the European jet set.\" However, despite the tourism boom, the majority of the city's inhabitants are still poor, and as of 2010[ [update]], some 20,000 households still have no access to water or electricity. Many enterprises in the city are facing colossal debt problems.\nAfter the Great Recession and the 2008 financial crisis, in 2011, investments in real estate progressed substantially both in the area of tourist accommodation and social housing. The main developments have been in facilities for tourists including hotels and leisure centres such as golf courses and health spas, with investments of 10.9\u00a0billion dirham (US$1.28\u00a0billion) in 2011. The hotel infrastructure in recent years has experienced rapid growth. In 2012, alone, 19 new hotels were scheduled to open, a development boom often compared to Dubai. Royal Ranches Marrakech, one of Gulf Finance House's flagship projects in Morocco, is a resort under development in the suburbs and one of the world's first five star Equestrian Resorts. The resort is expected to make a significant contribution to the local and national economy, creating many jobs and attracting thousands of visitors annually; as of April 2012 it was about 45% complete.\nThe Avenue Mohammed VI, formerly Avenue de France, is a major city thoroughfare. It has seen rapid development of residential complexes and many luxury hotels. Avenue Mohammed VI contains what is claimed to be Africa's largest nightclub: Pacha Marrakech, a trendy club that plays house and electro house music. It also has two large cinema complexes, Le Colis\u00e9e \u00e0 Gueliz and Cin\u00e9ma Rif, and a new shopping precinct, Al Mazar.\nTrade and crafts are extremely important to the local tourism-fueled economy. There are 18 \"souks\" in Marrakesh, employing over 40,000 people in pottery, copperware, leather and other crafts. The \"souks\" contain a massive range of items from plastic sandals to Palestinian-style scarves imported from India or China. Local boutiques are adept at making western-style clothes using Moroccan materials. The \"Birmingham Post\" comments: \"The \"souk\" offers an incredible shopping experience with a myriad of narrow winding streets that lead through a series of smaller markets clustered by trade. Through the squawking chaos of the poultry market, the gory fascination of the open-air butchers' shops and the uncountable number of small and specialist traders, just wandering around the streets can pass an entire day.\" Marrakesh has several supermarkets including Marjane Acima, Asswak Salam and Carrefour, and three major shopping centres, Al Mazar Mall, Plaza Marrakech and Marjane Square; a branch of Carrefour opened in Al Mazar Mall in 2010. Industrial production in the city is centred in the neighbourhood of Sidi Ghanem Al Massar, containing large factories, workshops, storage depots and showrooms. Ciments Morocco, a subsidiary of a major Italian cement firm, has a factory in Marrakech.\nMarrakesh is one of North Africa's largest centers of wildlife trade, despite the illegality of most of this trade. Much of this trade can be found in the medina and adjacent squares. Tortoises are particularly popular for sale as pets, and Barbary macaques and snakes can also be seen. The majority of these animals suffer from poor welfare conditions in these stalls.\nPolitics.\nMarrakesh, the regional capital, constitutes a prefecture-level administrative unit of Morocco, Marrakech Prefecture, forming part of the region of Marrakech-Safi. Marrakesh is a major centre for law and jurisdiction in Morocco and most of the major courts of the region are here. These include the regional Court of Appeal, the Commercial Court, the Administrative Court, the Court of First Instance, the Court of Appeal of Commerce, and the Administrative Court of Appeal. Numerous organizations of the region are based here, including the regional government administrative offices, the Regional Council of Tourism office, and regional public maintenance organisations such as the Governed Autonomous Water Supply and Electricity and Maroc Telecom.\nOn 12 June 2009, Fatima-Zahra Mansouri, a then 33-year-old lawyer and daughter of a former assistant to the local authority chief in Marrakesh, was elected the first female mayor of the city, defeating outgoing Mayor Omar Jazouli by 54 votes to 35 in a municipal council vote. Mansouri became the second woman in the history of Morocco to obtain a mayoral position, after Asma Chaabi, mayor of Essaouira and was elected to serve as Marrakech's mayor for a second term in September 2021.\nSince the legislative elections in November 2011, the ruling political party in Marrakesh has, for the first time, been the Justice and Development Party or PDJ which also rules at the national level. The party, which advocates Islamism and Islamic democracy, won five seats; the National Rally of Independents (RNI) took one seat, while the PAM won three. In the partial legislative elections for the Gu\u00e9liz Ennakhil constituency in October 2012, the PDJ under the leadership of Ahmed El Moutassadik was again declared the winner with 10,452 votes. The PAM, largely consisting of friends of King Mohammed VI, came in second place with 9,794 votes.\nLandmarks.\nJemaa el-Fnaa.\nThe Jemaa el-Fnaa is one of the best-known squares in Africa and is the centre of city activity and trade. It has been described as a \"world-famous square\", \"a metaphorical urban icon, a bridge between the past and the present, the place where (spectacularized) Moroccan tradition encounters modernity.\" It has been part of the UNESCO World Heritage site since 1985. The square's name has several possible meanings; the most plausible etymology endorsed by historians is that it meant \"ruined mosque\" or \"mosque of annihilation\", referring to the construction of a mosque within the square in the late 16th century that was left unfinished and fell into ruin. The square was originally an open space for markets located on the east side of the \"Ksar el-Hajjar\", the main fortress and palace of the Almoravid dynasty who founded Marrakesh.\nHistorically this square was used for public executions by rulers who sought to maintain their power by frightening the public. The square attracted dwellers from the surrounding desert and mountains to trade here, and stalls were raised in the square from early in its history. It drew tradesmen, snake charmers, dancing boys, and musicians playing pipes, tambourines and African drums. Today the square attracts people from diverse backgrounds and tourists from all around the world. Snake charmers, acrobats, magicians, mystics, musicians, monkey trainers, herb sellers, story-tellers, dentists, pickpockets, and entertainers in medieval garb still populate the square.\nSouks.\nMarrakesh has the largest traditional market in Morocco and the image of the city is closely associated with its \"souks\". Historically, the souks of Marrakesh were divided into retail areas for particular goods such as leather, carpets, metalwork and pottery. These divisions still roughly exist, though with significant overlap. Many of the souks sell items like carpets and rugs, traditional Muslim attire, leather bags, and lanterns. Haggling is still a very important part of trade in the souks.\nThe Medina is also famous for its street food. Mechoui Alley is particularly famous for selling slow-roasted lamb dishes. The \"Ensemble Artisanal\", located near the Koutoubia Mosque, is a government-run complex of small arts and crafts which offers a range of leather goods, textiles and carpets. Young apprentices are taught a range of crafts in the workshop at the back of this complex.\nCity walls and gates.\nThe ramparts of Marrakesh, which stretch for some around the medina of the city, were built by the Almoravids in the 12th century as protective fortifications. The walls are made of a distinct orange-red clay and chalk, giving the city its nickname as the \"red city\"; they stand up to high and have 20 gates and 200 towers along them.\nOf the city's gates, one of the best-known is Bab Agnaou, built in the late 12th century by the Almohad caliph Ya'qub al-Mansur as the main public entrance to the new Kasbah. The gate's carved floral ornamentation is framed by three panels marked with an inscription from the Quran in Maghrebi script using foliated Kufic letters. The medina has at least eight main historic gates: Bab Doukkala, Bab el-Khemis, Bab ad-Debbagh, Bab Aylan, Bab Aghmat, Bab er-Robb, Bab el-Makhzen and Bab el-'Arissa. These date back to the 12th century during the Almoravid period and many of them have been modified since.\nGardens.\nThe city is home to a number of gardens, both historical and modern. The largest and oldest gardens in the city are the Menara Gardens to the west and the Agdal Gardens to the south. The Menara Gardens were established in 1157 by the Almohad ruler Abd al-Mu'min. They are centered around a large water reservoir surrounded by orchards and olive groves. A 19th-century pavilion stands at the edge of the reservoir. The Agdal Gardens were established during the reign of Abu Ya'qub Yusuf (r. 1163\u20131184) and extend over a larger area today, containing several water basins and palace structures. The Agdal Gardens cover about and are surrounded by a circuit of pis\u00e9 walls, while the Menara Gardens cover around . The water reservoirs for both gardens were supplied with water through an old hydraulic system known as \"khettara\"s, which conveyed water from the foothills of the nearby Atlas Mountains.\nThe Majorelle Garden, on Avenue Yacoub el Mansour, was at one time the home of the landscape painter Jacques Majorelle. Famed designer Yves Saint Laurent bought and restored the property, which features a stele erected in his memory, and the Museum of Islamic Art, which is housed in a dark blue building. The garden, open to the public since 1947, has a large collection of plants from five continents including cacti, palms and bamboo.\nThe Koutoubia Mosque is also flanked by another set of gardens, the Koutoubia Gardens. They feature orange and palm trees, and are frequented by storks. The Mamounia Gardens, more than 100 years old and named after Prince Moulay Mamoun, have olive and orange trees as well as a variety of floral displays. In 2016, at a location between the city and the Atlas Mountains, artist Andr\u00e9 Heller opened the ANIMA garden, which combines a diverse collection of plants with a display of works by famous artists such as Keith Haring and Pablo Picasso. In the same year, a large restored \"riad\" garden set within a historical mansion, located inside the medina, was opened to visitors as \"Le Jardin Secret\" ('The Secret Garden').\nPalaces and Riads.\nThe historic wealth of the city is manifested in palaces, mansions and other lavish residences. The best-known palaces today are the El Badi Palace and the Bahia Palace, as well as the main Royal Palace which is still in use as one of the official residences of the King of Morocco. \"Riads\" (Moroccan mansions, historically designating a type of garden) are common in Marrakesh. Based on the design of the Roman villa, they are characterized by an open central garden courtyard surrounded by high walls. This construction provided the occupants with privacy and lowered the temperature within the building. Numerous riads and historic residences exist through the old city, with the oldest documented examples dating back to the Saadian period (16th-17th centuries), while many others date from the 19th and 20th centuries.\nMosques.\nThe Koutoubia Mosque is one of the largest and most famous mosques in the city, located southwest of Jemaa el-Fnaa. The mosque was founded in 1147 by the Almohad caliph Abd al-Mu'min. A second version of the mosque was entirely rebuilt by Abd al-Mu'min around 1158, with Ya'qub al-Mansur possibly finalizing construction of the minaret around 1195. This second mosque is the structure that stands today. It is considered a major example of Almohad architecture and of Moroccan mosque architecture generally. Its minaret tower, the tallest in the city at in height, is considered an important landmark and symbol of Marrakesh. It likely influenced other buildings such as the Giralda of Seville and the Hassan Tower of Rabat.\nBen Youssef Mosque is named after the Almoravid sultan Ali ibn Yusuf, who built the original mosque in the 12th century to serve as the city's main Friday mosque. After being abandoned during the Almohad period and falling into ruin, it was rebuilt in the 1560s by Abdallah al-Ghalib and then completely rebuilt again Moulay Sliman at the beginning of the 19th century. The 16th-century Ben Youssef Madrasa is located next to it. Also next to it is the Almoravid Qubba, a rare architectural remnant of the Almoravid period which was excavated and restored in the 20th century. It is a domed kiosk that demonstrates a sophisticated style and is an important indication of the art and architecture of the period.\nThe Kasbah Mosque overlooks Place Moulay Yazid in the Kasbah district of Marrakesh, close to the El Badi Palace. It was built by the Almohad caliph Yaqub al-Mansour in the late 12th century to serve as the main mosque of the kasbah (citadel) where he and his high officials resided. It contended with the Koutoubia Mosque for prestige and the decoration of its minaret was highly influential in subsequent Moroccan architecture. The mosque was repaired by the Saadi sultan Moulay Abdallah al-Ghalib following a devastating explosion at a nearby gunpowder reserve in the second half of the 16th century. Notably, the Saadian Tombs were built just outside its southern wall in this period.\nAmong the other notable mosques of the city is the 14th-century Ben Salah Mosque, located east of the medina centre. It is one of the only major Marinid-era monuments in the city. The Mouassine Mosque (also known as the Al Ashraf Mosque) was built by the Saadian sultan Abdallah al-Ghalib between 1562\u201363 and 1572\u201373. It was part of a larger architectural complex which included a library, hammam (public bathhouse), and a madrasa (school). The complex also included a large ornate street fountain known as the Mouassine Fountain, which still exists today. The Bab Doukkala Mosque, built around the same time further west, has a similar layout and style as the Mouassine Mosque. Both the Mouassine and Bab Doukkala mosques appear to have been originally designed to anchor the development of new neighbourhoods after the relocation of the Jewish district from this area to the new \"mellah\" near the Kasbah.\nTombs.\nOne of the most famous funerary monuments in the city is the Saadian Tombs, which were built in the 16th century as a royal necropolis for the Saadian Dynasty. It is located next to the south wall of the Kasbah Mosque. The necropolis contains the tombs of many Saadian rulers including Muhammad al-Shaykh, Abdallah al-Ghalib, and Ahmad al-Mansur, as well as various family members and later sultans. It consists of two main structures, each with several rooms, standing within a garden enclosure. The most important graves are marked by horizontal tombstones of finely carved marble, while others are merely covered in colorful \"zellij\" tiles. Al-Mansur's mausoleum chamber is especially rich in decoration, with a roof of carved and painted cedar wood supported on twelve columns of carrara marble, and with walls decorated with geometric patterns in \"zellij\" tilework and vegetal motifs in carved stucco. The chamber next to it, originally a prayer room equipped with a \"mihrab\", was later repurposed as a mausoleum for members of the Alawi dynasty.\nThe city also holds the tombs of many Sufi figures. Of these, there are seven patron saints of the city, which are visited every year by pilgrims during the seven-day \"ziyara\" pilgrimage. During this time, pilgrims visit the tombs in the following order: Sidi Yusuf ibn Ali Sanhaji, Sidi al-Qadi Iyyad al-Yahsubi, Sidi Bel Abbas, Sidi Mohamed ibn Sulayman al-Jazouli, Sidi Abdellaziz Tabba'a, Sidi Abdellah al-Ghazwani, and lastly, Sidi Abderrahman al-Suhayli. Many of these mausoleums also serve as the focus of their own zawiyas (Sufi religious complexes with mosques), including: the Zawiya and mosque of Sidi Bel Abbes (the most important of them), the Zawiya of al-Jazuli, the Zawiya of Sidi Abdellaziz, the Zawiya of Sidi Yusuf ibn Ali, and the Zawiya of Sidi al-Ghazwani (also known as Moulay el-Ksour).\nMellah.\nThe Mellah of Marrakesh is the old Jewish Quarter (\"Mellah\") of the city, and is located in the kasbah area of the city's medina, east of Place des Ferblantiers. It was created in 1558 by the Saadians at the site where the sultan's stables were. At the time, the Jewish community consisted of a large portion of the city's tailors, metalworkers, bankers, jewelers, and sugar traders. During the 16th century, the Mellah had its own fountains, gardens, synagogues and souks. Until the arrival of the French in 1912, Jews could not own property outside of the Mellah; all growth was consequently contained within the limits of the neighborhood, resulting in narrow streets, small shops and higher residential buildings. The Mellah, today reconfigured as a mainly residential zone renamed Hay Essalam, currently occupies an area smaller than its historic limits and has an almost entirely Muslim population. The Slat al-Azama Synagogue (or Lazama Synagogue), built around a central courtyard, is in the Mellah. The Jewish cemetery here is the largest of its kind in Morocco. Characterized by white-washed tombs and sandy graves, the cemetery is within the Medina on land adjacent to the Mellah. According to the World Jewish Congress there were only 250 Moroccan Jews remaining in Marrakesh.\nHotels.\nAs one of the principal tourist cities in Africa, Marrakesh has over 400 hotels. Mamounia Hotel is a five-star hotel in the Art Deco-Moroccan fusion style, built in 1925 by Henri Prost and A. Marchis. It is considered the most eminent hotel of the city and has been described as the \"grand dame of Marrakesh hotels.\" The hotel has hosted numerous internationally renowned people including Winston Churchill, Prince Charles and Mick Jagger. Churchill used to relax within the gardens of the hotel and paint there. The 231-room hotel, which contains a casino, was refurbished in 1986 and again in 2007 by French designer Jacques Garcia. Other hotels include Eden Andalou Hotel, Hotel Marrakech, Sofitel Marrakech, Palm Plaza Hotel &amp; Spa, Royal Mirage Hotel, Piscina del Hotel, and Palmeraie Palace at the Palmeraie Rotana Resort. In March 2012, Accor opened its first Pullman-branded hotel in Marrakech, Pullman Marrakech Palmeraie Resort &amp; Spa. Set in a olive grove at La Palmeraie, the hotel has 252 rooms, 16 suites, six restaurants and a conference room.\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nThe Marrakech Museum, housed in the Dar Menebhi Palace in the old city centre, was built at the beginning of the 20th century by Mehdi Menebhi. The palace was carefully restored by the Omar Benjelloun Foundation and converted into a museum in 1997. The museum holds exhibits of both modern and traditional Moroccan art together with fine examples of historical books, coins and pottery produced by Moroccan Arab, Berber, and Jewish peoples.\nThe Dar Si Said Museum is to the north of the Bahia Palace. It was the mansion of Si Said, brother to Grand Vizier Ba Ahmad, and was constructed in the same era as Ahmad's own Bahia Palace. In the 1930s, during the French Protectorate period, it was converted into a museum of Moroccan art and woodcraft. After recent renovations, the museum reopened in 2018 as the National Museum of Weaving and Carpets.\nThe former home and villa of Jacques Majorelle, a blue-coloured building within the Majorelle Gardens, was converted into the Berber Museum (\"Mus\u00e9e Pierre Berg\u00e9 des Arts Berb\u00e8res\") in 2011, after previously serving as a museum of Islamic art. It exhibits a variety of objects of Amazigh (Berber) culture from across different regions of Morocco.\nThe House of Photography of Marrakech, opened by Patrick Menac\u2019h and Hamid Mergani in 2009, holds exhibits of vintage Moroccan photography from the 1870s to 1950s. The Mouassine Museum, by the same owners, consists of a historic 16th\u201317th-century house in the Mouassine neighbourhood which has been opened as a museum and cultural venue.\nElsewhere in the medina, the Dar El Bacha hosts the \"Mus\u00e9e des Confluences\", which opened in 2017. The museum holds temporary exhibits highlighting different facets of Moroccan culture as well as various art objects from different cultures across the world.\"\" Various other small and often privately owned museums also exist, such as the Mus\u00e9e Boucharouite and the Perfume Museum (\"Mus\u00e9e du Parfum\"). Dar Bellarj, an arts center located in a former mansion next to the Ben Youssef Mosque, also occasionally hosts art exhibits. The Tiskiwin Museum is housed in another restored medina mansion and features a collection of artifacts from across the former the trans-Saharan trade routes. A number of art galleries and museums are also found outside the medina, in Gueliz and its surrounding districts in the new city.\nMusic, theatre and dance.\nTwo types of music are traditionally associated with Marrakesh. Moroccan music is influenced by Andalusian classical music and typified by its \"oud\" accompaniment. By contrast, Gnaoua music is loud and funky with a sound reminiscent of the Blues. It is performed on handmade instruments such as castanets, \"ribabs\" (three-stringed banjos) and \"deffs\" (handheld drums). Gnaoua music's rhythm and crescendo take the audience into a mood of trance; the style is said to have emerged in Marrakesh and Essaouira as a ritual of deliverance from slavery. More recently, several Marrakesh female music groups have also risen to popularity.\nThe Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Royal de Marrakesh, the Institut Fran\u00e7ais and Dar Ch\u00e9rifa are major performing arts institutions in the city. The Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Royal, built by Tunisian architect Charles Boccara, puts on theatrical performances of comedy, opera, and dance in Arabic and French. A great number of storytellers, musicians and others also perform outdoor shows to entertain locals and tourists on the Jemaa el-Fnaa, especially at night.\nCrafts.\nThe arts and crafts of Marrakesh have had a wide and enduring impact on Moroccan handicrafts to the present day. Riad d\u00e9cor is widely used in carpets and textiles, ceramics, woodwork, metal work and \"zelij\". Carpets and textiles are weaved, sewn or embroidered, sometimes used for upholstering. Moroccan women who practice craftsmanship are known as \"Maalems\" (expert craftspeople) and make such fine products as Arabic and Berber carpets and shawls made of \"sabra\" (another name for rayon, also sometimes called cactus silk). Ceramics are in varying styles in monochrome, a limited tradition depicting bold forms and decorations.\nWood crafts are generally made of cedar, including the \"riad\" doors and palace ceilings. Orange wood is used for making ladles known as \"harira\" (lentil soup ladles). \"Thuya\" craft products are made of caramel coloured \"thuya\", a conifer indigenous to Morocco. Since this species is almost extinct, these trees are being replanted and promoted by the artists' cooperative Femmes de Marrakech.\nMetalwork made in Marrakesh includes brass lamps, iron lanterns, candle holders made from recycled sardine tins, and engraved brass teapots and tea trays used in the traditional serving of tea. Contemporary art includes sculpture and figurative paintings. Blue veiled \"Tuareg\" figurines and calligraphy paintings are also popular.\nFestivals.\nFestivals, both national and Islamic, are celebrated in Marrakesh and throughout the country, and some of them are observed as national holidays. Cultural festivals of note held in Marrakesh include the National Folklore Festival, the Marrakech Festival of Popular Arts (in which a variety of famous Moroccan musicians and artists participate), international folklore festival Marrakech Folklore Days and the Berber Festival. The International Film Festival of Marrakech, which aspires to be the North African version of the Cannes Film Festival, was established in 2001. The festival, which showcases over 100 films from around the world annually, has attracted Hollywood stars such as Martin Scorsese, Francis Ford Coppola, Susan Sarandon, Jeremy Irons, Roman Polanski and many European, Arab and Indian film stars. The Marrakech Bienniale was established in 2004 by Vanessa Branson as a cultural festival in various disciplines, including visual arts, cinema, video, literature, performing arts, and architecture.\nFood.\nSurrounded by lemon, orange, and olive groves, the city's culinary characteristics are rich and heavily spiced but not hot, using various preparations of \"Ras el hanout\" (which means \"Head of the shop\"), a blend of dozens of spices which include ash berries, chilli, cinnamon, grains of paradise, monk's pepper, nutmeg, and turmeric. A specialty of the city and the symbol of its cuisine is \"tanjia marrakshia\", affectionately referred to as \"bint ar-rimad\" ( \"daughter of the ash\"), a local meal prepared with beef meat, spices, and \"smen\" and slow-cooked in a ceramic pot in traditional oven in hot ashes. Tajines can be prepared with chicken, lamb, beef or fish, adding fruit, olives and preserved lemon, vegetables and spices, including cumin, peppers, saffron, turmeric, and \"ras el hanout\". The meal is prepared in a tajine pot and slow-cooked with steam. Another version of tajine includes vegetables and chickpeas seasoned with flower petals. Tajines may also be basted with \"smen\" Moroccan ghee that has a flavour similar to blue cheese.\nShrimp, chicken and lemon-filled \"briouats\" are another traditional specialty of Marrakesh. Rice is cooked with saffron, raisins, spices, and almonds, while couscous may have added vegetables. A \"pastilla\" is a filo-wrapped pie stuffed with minced chicken or pigeon that has been prepared with almonds, cinnamon, spices and sugar. Harira soup in Marrakesh typically includes lamb with a blend of chickpeas, lentils, vermicelli, and tomato paste, seasoned with coriander, spices and parsley. \"Kefta\" (mince meat), liver in \"cr\u00e9pinette\", \"merguez\" and tripe stew are commonly sold at the stalls of Jemaa el-Fnaa.\nThe desserts of Marrakesh include \"chebakia\" (sesame spice cookies usually prepared and served during Ramadan), tartlets of filo dough with dried fruit, or cheesecake with dates.\nThe Moroccan tea culture is practiced in Marrakesh; green tea with mint is served with sugar from a curved teapot spout into small glasses. Another popular non-alcoholic drink is orange juice. Under the Almoravids, alcohol consumption was common; historically, hundreds of Jews produced and sold alcohol in the city. In the present day, alcohol is sold in some hotel bars and restaurants.\nEducation.\nMarrakesh has several universities and schools, including Cadi Ayyad University (also known as the University of Marrakech), and its component, the \u00c9cole nationale des sciences appliqu\u00e9es de Marrakech (ENSA Marrakech), which was created in 2000 by the Ministry of Higher Education and specializes in engineering and scientific research, and the La facult\u00e9 des sciences et techniques-gueliz which known to be number one in Morocco in its kind of faculties. Cadi Ayyad University was established in 1978 and operates 13 institutions in the Marrakech Tensift Elhaouz and Abda Doukkala regions of Morocco in four main cities, including Kalaa of Sraghna, Essaouira and Safi in addition to Marrakech. Sup de Co Marrakech, also known as the \u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Commerce de Marrakech, is a private four-year college that was founded in 1987 by Ahmed Bennis. The school is affiliated with the \u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Commerce of Toulouse, France. \nBen Youssef Madrasa.\nThe Ben Youssef Madrasa, north of the Medina, was an Islamic college in Marrakesh named after the Almoravid sultan Ali ibn Yusuf (1106\u20131142) who expanded the city and its influence considerably. It is the largest madrasa in all of Morocco and was one of the largest theological colleges in North Africa, at one time housing as many as 900 students.\nThis education complex specialized in Quranic law and was linked to similar institutions in Fez, Taza, Sal\u00e9, and Meknes. The Madrasa was constructed by the Saadian Sultan Abdallah al-Ghalib (1557\u20131574) in 1564 as the largest and most prestigious madrasa in Morocco. The construction ordered by Abdallah al-Ghalib was completed in 1565, as attested by the inscription in the prayer room. Its 130 student dormitory cells cluster around a courtyard richly carved in cedar, marble and stucco. In accordance with Islam, the carvings contain no representation of humans or animals, consisting entirely of inscriptions and geometric patterns. One of the school's best known teachers was Mohammed al-Ifrani (1670\u20131745). After a temporary closure beginning in 1960, the building was refurbished and reopened to the public as a historical site in 1982.\nSport.\nFootball clubs based in Marrakesh include Najm de Marrakech, KAC Marrakech, Mouloudia de Marrakech and Chez Ali Club de Marrakech. The city contains the Circuit International Automobile Moulay El Hassan a race track which hosts the World Touring Car Championship and from 2017 FIA Formula E. The Marrakech Marathon is also held here. Roughly 5000 runners turn out for the event annually. Also, here takes place Grand Prix Hassan II tennis tournament (on clay) part of ATP World Tour series.\nGolf is a popular sport in Marrakech. The city has three golf courses just outside the city limits and played almost through the year. The three main courses are the Golf de Amelikis on the road to Ourazazate, the Palmeraie Golf Palace near the Palmeraie, and the Royal Golf Club, the oldest of the three courses.\nTransport.\nBus.\nBRT Marrakesh, a bus rapid transit system using trolleybuses was opened in 2017.\nRail.\nThe Marrakesh railway station is linked by several trains running daily to other major cities in Morocco such as Casablanca, Tangiers, Fez, Meknes and Rabat. The Casablanca\u2013Tangier high-speed rail line opened in November 2018.\nRoad.\nThe main road network within and around Marrakesh is well paved. The major highway connecting Marrakesh with Casablanca to the north is the A7, a toll expressway, in length. The road from Marrakesh to Settat, a stretch, was inaugurated by King Mohammed VI in April 2007, completing the highway to Tangiers. Highway A7 connects also Marrakesh to Agadir, to the south-west.\nAir.\nThe Marrakesh-Menara Airport (RAK) is southwest of the city centre. It is an international facility that receives several European flights as well as flights from Casablanca, the United States, and several Arab nations. The airport is at an elevation of at . It has two formal passenger terminals; these are more or less combined into one large terminal. A third terminal is being built. The existing T1 and T2 terminals offer a space of and have a capacity of 4.5\u00a0million passengers per year. The blacktopped runway is long and wide. The airport has parking space for 14 Boeing 737 and four Boeing 747 aircraft. The separate freight terminal has of covered space.\nHealthcare.\nMarrakesh has long been an important centre for healthcare in Morocco, and the regional rural and urban populations alike are reliant upon hospitals in the city. The psychiatric hospital installed by the Almohad caliph Ya'qub al-Mansur in the 12th century was described by contemporary historian 'Abd al-Wahfd al-Marrakushi as one of the greatest in the world at the time. A strong Andalusi influence was evident in this period, as one of the physicians in the hospital was from Denia in eastern Spain and many of the personal physicians of the caliphs came from places such as Seville, Zaragoza and Beja.\nA severe strain has been placed upon the healthcare facilities of the city in the last decade as the city population has grown dramatically. Ibn Tofail University Hospital is one of the major hospitals of the city. In February 2001, the Moroccan government signed a loan agreement worth eight million U.S. dollars with The OPEC Fund for International Development to help improve medical services in and around Marrakesh, which led to expansions of the Ibn Tofail and Ibn Nafess hospitals. Seven new buildings were constructed, with a total floor area of . New radiotherapy and medical equipment was provided and of existing hospital space was rehabilitated.\nIn 2009, king Mohammed VI inaugurated a regional psychiatric hospital in Marrakesh, built by the Mohammed V Foundation for Solidarity, costing 22\u00a0million \"dirhams\" (approximately 2.7\u00a0million U.S. dollars).\nThe hospital has 194 beds, covering an area of . Mohammed VI has also announced plans for the construction of a 450\u00a0million dirham military hospital in Marrakesh.\nInternational relations.\nMarrakesh is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20515", "revid": "164032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20515", "title": "Matilda of Ringelheim", "text": "German queen from 909 to 936\nMatilda of Ringelheim (c.\u2009892 \u2013 14 March 968), also known as Saint Matilda, was a Saxon noblewoman who became queen of Germany. Her husband, Henry the Fowler, was the first king from the Ottonian dynasty, and their eldest son, Otto the Great, restored the Holy Roman Empire in 962. Matilda founded several spiritual institutions and women's convents. She was considered to be extremely pious, righteous and charitable. Matilda's two hagiographical biographies and \"The Deeds of the Saxons\" serve as authoritative sources about her life and work.\nEarly life and dynastic connections.\nMatilda was born in around 892. She was a daughter of Reinhild and Dietrich. He was count of the Duchy of Saxony in the Kingdom of Germany, formed fifty years earlier after the Treaty of Verdun. Fighting against Charlemagne at that time had been the Saxon duke Widukind, from whom Dietrich was descended. \nIt was in Herford Abbey, in the Duchy of Saxony, that Matilda was raised by her grandmother (also called Matilda). She had three sisters; Amalrada, Bia and Fridarun. Fridarun was to go on to marry Charles the Simple, king of West Francia. Matilda also had a brother, Beuve, who would eventually become Beuve II, Bishop of Ch\u00e2lons-sur-Marne. Matilda was to have a niece called Fridarun, whose marriage to Count Wichmann the Elder meant there was an alliance between the House of Billung and the Ottonian family. This expanded their possessions to the west.\nMarriage to Henry I.\nWhen Matilda was seventeen, in 909, she married Henry, at the time duke of Saxony. He subsequently became king of East Francia. Henry's first marriage to Hatheburg of Merseburg had been annulled.\nSome twenty years later, in 929, Matilda received her dower, which Henry gave her in the so-called \"Hausordnung\". This dower amounted to land in Quedlinburg, P\u00f6hlde, Nordhausen, Grona (near G\u00f6ttingen) and Duderstadt. \nAs queen, Matilda took an interest in women's monasteries. Her influence on the king's reign is said to have been her strong sense of justice.\nChildren.\nMatilda bore the king five children: \nLife as a widow.\nHenry died in 936 in Memleben and was buried in Quedlinburg. It was here that Queen Matilda founded a convent in the same year. She lived there during the following years and took care of the family's legacy. Thus, Quedlinburg Abbey became not only the most important centre of prayer in the kingdom, but also a place to commemorate its famous dead. \nAs with other convents in the kingdom, Quedlinburg became a place for the education of noble families' daughters. Some became abbesses, securing a family's influence. One such was Matilda's own granddaughter, Matilda. She was the daughter of the above-mentioned Otto I and Adelheid of Burgundy. It was to this granddaughter that the queen, in 966, after 30 years' leadership, passed on responsibility for the convent. This Matilda thus became the first abbess of the convent in Quedlinburg. \nWith her other resources, Queen Matilda founded more convents, one of them in Enger in 947. Her last foundation was in 961, the convent of Nordhausen.\nOver the years 936\u2013946, Matilda's handling of her dower was disputed by her son Otto. He claimed his mother's possessions. Eventually this led to her fleeing into exile. Otto's wife, Queen Eadgyth, is said to have brought about a reconciliation: Matilda was to leave her wealth, and furthermore Otto was to be forgiven for his actions. \nThe above feud remains controversial to this day: to protect her legacy in the lead up to her death early in 968, Matilda acquired for all monasteries in eastern Saxony papal privileges. These were overridden after her death when Matilda's dower passed to Theophanu, the wife of Matilda's grandson Otto II.\nDeath.\nQueen Matilda died in the convent of Quedlinburg on 14 March 968, after a long illness. She was buried in Quedlinburg Abbey, next to her late husband. Throughout her life, Matilda had been dedicated to charity and her ecclesiastical foundations \u2013 as attested repeatedly in two hagiographies. A commemorative plaque can be found in the Walhalla memorial near Regensburg, Germany.\nLegacy.\nMatilda is the patron of the St. Mathilde church in Laatzen (Germany), the St. Mathilde church in Quedlinburg (Germany), the Melkite church in Aleppo (Syria), and the Mathilden-Hospital in Herford (Germany). Her feast day is 14 March."}
{"id": "20516", "revid": "39775925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20516", "title": "Monometer", "text": "In poetry, a monometer is a line of verse with just one metrical foot.\nExample.\nMonometer can be exemplified by this portion of Robert Herrick's poem \"Upon His Departure Hence\":\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left: 2em;\"&gt;\nThus I\nPasse by,\nAnd die:\nAs one,\nUnknown,\nAnd gone.\n&lt;/poem&gt;"}
{"id": "20517", "revid": "37295883", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20517", "title": "Mazar-i-Sharif", "text": "Mazar-i-Shar\u012bf, also known as Mazar-e Sharif or simply Mazar, is the fifth-largest city in Afghanistan by population, with the estimates varying from 500,000-680,000. It is the capital of Balkh province and is linked by highways with Kunduz in the east, Kabul in the southeast, Herat in the southwest and Termez, Uzbekistan in the north. It is about from the Uzbek border. The city is also a tourist attraction because of its famous shrines as well as the Islamic and Hellenistic archeological sites. The ancient city of Balkh is also nearby.\nThe region around Mazar-i-Sharif has been historically part of Greater Khorasan and was controlled by the Tahirids followed by the Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids (GhaderDiwane), Ilkhanids, Timurids, and Khanate of Bukhara until 1751 when it became part of the Durrani Empire (although under autonomous emirs). Eventually the city passed to a few local rulers before becoming part of Afghanistan in 1849.\nMazar-i-Sharif is the regional hub of northern Afghanistan, located in close proximity to both Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. It is also home to an international airport. It has the highest percentage of built-up land (91%) of all the Afghan provincial capitals, and it has additional built-up area extending beyond the municipal boundary but forming a part of the larger urban area. It is also the lowest-lying major city in the country, about above sea level. The city was spared the devastation that occurred in the country's other large cities during the Soviet\u2013Afghan War and subsequent civil war, and was long regarded as one of the safest cities in the country.\nOn 14 August 2021, Mazar-i-Sharif was seized by Taliban fighters, becoming the twenty-fifth provincial capital to be captured by the Taliban as part of the wider 2021 Taliban offensive.\nMazar Sharif is considered a smaller city in Afghanistan's city hierarchy, with a population of between 177,000 and 180,000 inhabitants.\nResearch shows that exposure to war and armed violence in Mazar-e-Sharif has led to the development of mental disorders, including depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and substance use disorders. Studies conducted in Mazar-e-Sharif, which were conducted after the fall of the Taliban and under conditions of relative security, show that despite a relative decrease in direct experience of war among the younger generation, the psychological effects of war continue to be severe in the form of daily stress and psychological problems, especially in men. These stresses and mental disorders are caused by past war events and socio-cultural problems that continue to have an impact on the mental health of individuals.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mazar-i-Sharif\" means \"tomb of the saint\", a reference to the purported tomb of Ali, cousin, son-in-law and companion of the Islamic prophet Muhammad. The tomb is housed in the large, blue-tiled sanctuary and mosque in the center of the city known as the Shrine of Ali or the Blue Mosque.\nHistory.\nAncient period.\nThe Achaemenids controlled the region from the sixth century BCE. Alexander the Great conquered the area but it was then incorporated into the Seleucid Empire after his death. The decline of the Seleucids consequently led to the emergence of the Greco-Bactrian kingdom. Around 130 BCE, the Sakas occupied the region and the Greco-Bactrian kingdom fell. The Yuezhi took Mazar-i-Sharif and the surrounding area which led to the creation of the Kushan Empire. The Sasanians subsequently controlled the area after the fall of the Kushans. The Islamic conquests reached Mazar-i-Sharif in 651 CE.\n9th century until 1919.\nThe region around Mazar-i-Sharif has been historically part of Greater Khorasan and was controlled by the Tahirids followed by the Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Ilkhanids, Timurids, and Khanate of Bukhara.\nThe poet Jalal al-Din Rumi was born somewhere in this area. His father Baha' Walad was descended from the first caliph Abu Bakr.\nThe Seljuk sultan Ahmed Sanjar ordered a city and shrine to be built on the location, which was later destroyed by Genghis Khan and his Mongol army in the 13th century, and then rebuilt. During the nineteenth century, due to the absence of drainage systems and the weak economy of the region, the excess water of this area flooded many acres of the land in the vicinity of residential areas causing a malaria epidemic in the region. The ruler of North Central Afghanistan decided to move the capital to Mazar-i-Sharif.\nThe city along with the region south of the Amu Darya became part of the Durrani Empire in around 1751. For the most part the region was controlled by autonomous Uzbek rulers. After the Bukharan-Durrani war of 1788\u20131790, Qilich Ali Beg of Khulm formed a mini-empire stretching from Balkh to Aybak, Saighan, Kahmard, Darra-i Suf, and Qunduz. When he died in 1817, the Balkh and Mazar-i Sharif region became an independent city state with Aqcha as its dependency. In November 1837 the Bukharans conquered the city but Balkh was still able to retain autonomy. In 1849 the city was conquered and annexed into Afghanistan.\nLate 20th century.\nDuring the 1980s Soviet\u2013Afghan War, Mazar-i-Sharif was a strategic base for the Soviet Army as they used its airport to launch air strikes on mujahideen rebels. Mazar-i-Sharif was also the main city that linked to Soviet territory in the north, especially the roads leading to the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic. As a garrison for the Soviet-backed Afghan Army, the city was under the command of General Abdul Rashid Dostum. Mujahideen militias Hezbe Wahdat and Jamiat-e Islami both attempted to contest the city but were repelled by the Army. Dostum mutinied against Mohammad Najibullah's government on March 19, 1992, shortly before its collapse, and formed his new party and militia, Junbish-e Milli. The party took over the city the next day. Afterwards Mazar-i-Sharif became the \"de facto\" capital of a relatively stable and secular proto-state in northern Afghanistan under the rule of Dostum. The city remained peaceful and prosperous, whilst rest of the nation disintegrated and was slowly taken over by fundamentalist Taliban forces. The city was called at the time a \"glittering jewel in Afghanistan's battered crown\". Money rolled in from foreign donors Russia, Turkey, newly independent Uzbekistan and others, with whom Dostum had established close relations. He printed his own currency for the region and established his own airline. The city remained relatively liberal as Kabul previously was, where activities such as coeducational schools and betting was legal as opposed to the Taliban dominated regions in the south of the country.\nThis peace was shattered in May 1997 when he was betrayed by one of his generals, warlord Abdul Malik Pahlawan who allied himself with the Taliban, forcing him to flee from Mazar-i-Sharif as the Taliban were getting ready to take the city through Pahlawan. Afterwards Pahlawan himself mutinied the Taliban on the deal and it was reported that between May and July 1997 that Pahlawan executed thousands of Taliban members, that he personally did many of the killings by slaughtering the prisoners as a revenge for the 1995 death of Abdul Ali Mazari. \"He is widely believed to have been responsible for the brutal massacre of up to 3,000 Taliban prisoners after inviting them into Mazar-i-Sharif.\" Several of the Taliban escaped the slaughtering and reported what had happened. Meanwhile, Dostum came back and took the city again from Pahlawan.\nHowever the Taliban retaliated in 1998 attacking the city and killing an estimated 8,000 non-combatants. At 10 am on 8 August 1998, the Taliban entered the city and for the next two days drove their pickup trucks \"up and down the narrow streets of Mazar-i-Sharif shooting to the left and right and killing everything that moved\u2014shop owners, cart pullers, women and children shoppers and even goats and donkeys.\" More than 8000 noncombatants were reported killed in Mazar-i-Sharif and later in Bamiyan. In addition, the Taliban were criticized for forbidding anyone from burying the corpses for the first six days (contrary to the injunctions of Islam, which demands immediate burial) while the remains rotted in the summer heat and were eaten by dogs. The Taliban also reportedly sought out and massacred members of the Hazara, while in control of Mazar.\nSince 2001.\nFollowing the September 11 attacks in 2001, Mazar-i-Sharif was the first Afghan city to fall to the U.S.-backed Afghan military alliance, Northern Alliance (United Front). The Taliban's defeat in Mazar quickly turned into a rout from the rest of the north and west of Afghanistan. After the Battle of Mazar-i-Sharif in November 2001, the city was officially captured by forces of the Northern Alliance. They were joined by the United States Special Operations Forces and supported by U.S. Air Force aircraft. After this battle, the Northern Alliance advanced towards the city of Kunduz, which was the last remaining Taliban stronghold in northern Afghanistan. The siege of the city lasted two weeks with the city being captured on November 25. Around 8,000 Taliban fighters were captured. They were taken to Mazar-i-Sharif and then to Sheberghan prison in Jowzjan Province. Between 400 and 3,000 prisoners were reportedly massacred by the Northern Alliance during the journey and buried in mass graves in the Dasht-e Leili desert west of Sheberghan.\nThe city slowly came under the control of the Karzai administration after 2002, which is led by President Hamid Karzai. The 209th Corps (Shaheen) of the Afghan National Army is based at Mazar-i-Sharif, which provides military assistance to northern Afghanistan. The Afghan Border Police headquarters for the Northern Zone is also located in the city. Despite the security put in place, there are reports of Taliban activities and assassinations of tribal elders. Officials in Mazar-i-Sharif reported that between 20 and 30 Afghan tribal elders have been assassinated in Balkh Province in the last several years. There is no conclusive evidence as to who is behind it but majority of the victims are said to have been associated with the Hezb-i Islami political party.\nSmall-scale clashes between militias belonging to different commanders persisted throughout 2002, and were the focus of intensive UN peace-brokering and small arms disarmament programme. After some pressure, an office of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission opened an office in Mazar in April 2003. There were reports about northern Pashtun civilians being ethnically cleansed by the other groups, mainly by ethnic Tajiks, Hazaras and Uzbeks.\nNATO-led peacekeeping forces in and around the city provided assistance to the Afghan government. ISAF Regional Command North, led by Germany, is stationed at Camp Marmal which lies next to Mazar-i-Sharif Airport. Since 2006, Provincial Reconstruction Team Mazar-i-Sharif had unit commanders from Sweden on loan to ISAF. The unit is stationed at Camp Northern Lights which is located west of Camp Marmal. Camp Nidaros, located within Camp Marmal, has soldiers from Latvia and Norway and is led by an ISAF-officer from Norway.\nIn 2006, the discovery of new Hellenistic remains was announced.\nOn April 1, 2011, ten foreign employees working for United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) were killed by angry demonstrators in the city. The demonstration was organized in retaliation to pastors Terry Jones and Wayne Sapp's March 21 Qur'an-burning in Florida, United States. Among the dead were five Nepalis, a Norwegian, Romanian and Swedish nationals, two of them were said to be decapitated. Terry Jones, the American pastor who was going to burn Islam's Holy Book, denied his responsibility for incitement. President Barack Obama strongly condemned both the Quran burning, calling it an act of \"extreme intolerance and bigotry\", and the \"outrageous\" attacks by protesters, referring to them as \"an affront to human decency and dignity.\" \"No religion tolerates the slaughter and beheading of innocent people, and there is no justification for such a dishonorable and deplorable act.\" U.S. legislators, including Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, also condemned both the burning and the violence in reaction to it.\nBy July 2011 violence grew to a record high in the insurgency. In late July 2011, NATO troops also handed control of Mazar-i-Sharif to local forces amid rising security fears just days after it was hit by a deadly bombing. Mazar-i-Sharif is the sixth of seven areas to transition to Afghan control, but critics say the timing is political and there is skepticism over Afghan abilities to combat the Taliban insurgency.\nOn 10 November 2016, a suicide attacker rammed a truck bomb into the wall of the German consulate in Mazar-i-Sharif. Eight people were killed and more than a hundred others were injured.\nOn 21 April 2017, a coordinated Taliban attack killed more than 100 people at Camp Shaheen, the Afghan Army base in Mazar-i-Sharif.\nIn November 2018, VOA reported that 40 houses in Qazil Abad, an immediate suburb of Mazar-i-Sharif, used unexploded Soviet Grad surface-to-surface rockets as construction materials. As a result, several people were killed and wounded from explosions over the years. These rockets, left behind by the Soviet Army in 1989 at the end of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, were used as cheap building materials by the poor residents of the village. It was estimated that over 400 rockets were incorporated into the village as wall and ceiling beams, door-stoppers, and even footbridges used by children. When the rest of the world discovered this fact, the Danish demining group of the Danish Refugee Council visited the village and, after asking the residents, began demining and rebuilding the village, safely removing and disposing of the rockets through controlled detonation at the border with Uzbekistan.\nPresident Ghani visited the city on 11 August 2021 to rally local warlords to fight the Taliban. On 14 August, the Taliban captured Mazar-i-Sharif along with Sharana and Asadabad, the provincial capitals of Paktika and Kunar provinces respectively. Local government forces and regional leaders Abdul Rashid Dostum and Atta Mohammad Noor fled to neighboring Uzbekistan.\nOn 21 April 2022, Islamic State \u2013 Khorasan Province killed 31 people by bombing a Shia mosque. A week later, 11 people were killed in a double bombing.\nMazar-i-Sharif is also known for the Afghan song \"Bia ke berem ba Mazar\" (\"Come let's go to Mazar\") by Sarban.\nGeography.\nClimate.\nMazar-i-Sharif has a cold steppe climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"BSk\") with hot summers and cold winters. Precipitation is low and mostly falls between December and April. The climate in Mazar-i-Sharif is very hot during the summer with daily temperatures of over from June to August. The winters are cold with temperatures falling below freezing; it may snow from November through March.\nDemographics.\nThe city of Mazar-i-Sharif has a total population of 500,207, and is the fourth-largest city of Afghanistan by population. It has a total land area of 8,304 Hectares with 77,615 total number of dwellings.\nThe November 2003 issue of \"National Geographic\" magazine indicated the ethnic composition as Pashtuns 15%, Hazaras 12%, Tajiks 53%, Turkmens 10%, and Uzbeks 20%. Occasional ethnic violence has been reported in the region in the last decades, mainly between Pashtuns and the other groups. In 2011 news reports mentioned assassinations taking place in the area but with no evidence as to who is behind them.\nThe dominant language in Mazar-i-Sharif is an eastern dialect of Persian known as Dari, followed by Pashto, and Uzbek.\nEconomy.\nMazar-i-Sharif serves as the major trading center in northern Afghanistan. The local economy is dominated by trade, agriculture and Karakul sheep farming. Small-scale oil and gas exploitation have also boosted the city's prospects. It is also the location of consulates of India and Pakistan for trading and political links.\nMain sights.\nThe modern city of Mazar-i Sharif is centred around the Shrine of Ali. Much restored, it is one of Afghanistan's most glorious monuments. Outside Mazar-i Sharif lies the ancient city of Balkh. The city is a centre for the traditional buzkashi sport, and the Blue Mosque is the focus of northern Afghanistan's Nowruz celebration. Although most Muslims believe that the real grave of Ali is found within Imam Ali Mosque in Najaf, Iraq, others still come to Mazar-i-Sharif to pay respect.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nRail.\nIt became the first city in Afghanistan to connect itself by rail with a neighboring country. Rail service from Mazar-i-Sharif to Uzbekistan began in December 2011 and cargo on freight trains arrive at a station near Mazar-i-Sharif Airport, where the goods are reloaded onto trucks or airplanes and sent to their last destinations across Afghanistan.\nAir.\nAs of June 2016 Mazar-i-Sharif Airport has direct air connections to Kabul, Mashad, Tehran, and Istanbul.\nRoad.\nHighway AH76 links Mazar-i-Sharif to Sheberghan in the west, and Pul-e Khomri and Kabul to the south-east. Roads to the east link it to Kunduz. Roads to the north link it to the Uzbek border town Termez, where it becomes highway M39 going north to Samarkand and Tashkent. Roads to the south link it to Bamiyan Province and the mountainous range of central Afghanistan.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20518", "revid": "37752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20518", "title": "Metaphor", "text": "Figure of speech of implicit comparison\nA metaphor is a figure of speech that, for rhetorical effect, refers to one thing by mentioning another. It may provide clarity or identify hidden similarities between two different ideas. Metaphors are usually meant to create a likeness or an analogy.\nAnalysts group metaphors with other types of figurative language, such as hyperbole, metonymy, and simile. According to Grammarly, \"Figurative language examples include similes, metaphors, personification, hyperbole, allusions, and idioms.\" One of the most commonly cited examples of a metaphor in English literature comes from the \"All the world's a stage\" monologue from \"As You Like It\":\n&lt;poem&gt;All the world's a stage,\nAnd all the men and women merely players;\nThey have their exits and their entrances \nAnd one man in his time plays many parts,\nHis Acts being seven ages. At first, the infant...\n\u2014William Shakespeare, \"As You Like It\", 2/7&lt;/poem&gt;\nThis quotation expresses a metaphor because the world is not literally a stage, and most humans are not literally actors and actresses playing roles. By asserting that the world is a stage, Shakespeare uses points of comparison between the world and a stage to convey an understanding about the mechanics of the world and the behavior of the people within it.\nIn the ancient Hebrew Book of Psalms (around 1000 B.C.), one finds vivid and poetic examples of metaphor such as, \"The Lord is my rock, my fortress and my deliverer; my God is my rock, in whom I take refuge, my shield and the horn of my salvation, my stronghold\" and \"The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want\". Some recent linguistic theories view all language in essence as metaphorical. The etymology of a word may uncover a metaphorical usage which has since become obscured with persistent use - such as for example the English word \"window\", etymologically equivalent to \"wind eye\".\nThe word\"\u00a0metaphor\" itself is a metaphor, coming from a Greek term meaning 'transference (of ownership)'. The user of a metaphor alters the reference of the word, \"carrying\" it from one semantic \"realm\" to another. The new meaning of the word might derive from an analogy between the two semantic realms, but also from other reasons such as the distortion of the semantic realm - for example in sarcasm.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"metaphor\" derives from the 16th-century Old French word , which comes from the Latin , 'carrying over', and in turn from the Greek (), 'transference (of ownership)', from (), 'to carry over, to transfer' and that from (), 'behind, along with, across' + (), 'to bear, to carry'.\nParts of a metaphor.\n\"The Philosophy of Rhetoric\" (1936) by rhetorician I. A. Richards describes a metaphor as having two parts: the tenor and the vehicle. The tenor is the subject to which attributes are ascribed. The vehicle is the object whose attributes are borrowed. In the previous example, \"the world\" is compared to a stage, describing it with the attributes of \"the stage\"; \"the world\" is the tenor, and \"a stage\" is the vehicle; \"men and women\" is the secondary tenor, and \"players\" is the secondary vehicle.\nOther writers employ the general terms \"ground\" and \"figure\" to denote the tenor and the vehicle. Cognitive linguistics uses the terms \"target\" and \"source\", respectively.\nPsychologist Julian Jaynes coined the terms \"metaphrand\" and \"metaphier\", plus two new concepts, \"paraphrand\" and \"paraphier\".\n\"Metaphrand\" is equivalent to the metaphor-theory terms \"tenor\", \"target\", and \"ground\". \"Metaphier\" is equivalent to the metaphor-theory terms \"vehicle\", \"figure\", and \"source\". In a simple metaphor, an obvious attribute of the metaphier exactly characterizes the metaphrand (e.g. \"the ship plowed the seas\"). With an inexact metaphor, however, a metaphier might have associated attributes or nuances \u2013 its paraphiers \u2013 that enrich the metaphor because they \"project back\" to the metaphrand, potentially creating new ideas \u2013 the paraphrands \u2013 associated thereafter with the metaphrand or even leading to a new metaphor. For example, in the metaphor \"Pat is a tornado\", the metaphrand is \"Pat\"; the metaphier is \"tornado\". As metaphier, \"tornado\" carries paraphiers such as power, storm and wind, counterclockwise motion, and danger, threat, destruction, etc. The metaphoric meaning of \"tornado\" is inexact: one might understand that 'Pat is powerfully destructive' through the paraphrand of physical and emotional destruction; another person might understand the metaphor as 'Pat can spin out of control'. In the latter case, the paraphier of 'spinning motion' has become the paraphrand 'psychological spin', suggesting an entirely new metaphor for emotional unpredictability, a possibly apt description for a human being hardly applicable to a tornado.\nBased on his analysis, Jaynes claims that metaphors not only enhance description, but \"increase enormously our powers of perception...and our understanding of [the world], and literally create new objects\".\nAs a type of comparison.\nMetaphors are most frequently compared with similes. A metaphor asserts the objects in the comparison are identical on the point of comparison, while a simile merely asserts a similarity through use of words such as \"like\" or \"as\". For this reason a common-type metaphor is generally considered more forceful than a simile.\nThe metaphor category contains these specialized types:\nIt is said that a metaphor is \"a condensed analogy\" or \"analogical fusion\" or that they \"operate in a similar fashion\" or are \"based on the same mental process\" or yet that \"the basic processes of analogy are at work in metaphor.\" It is also pointed out that \"a border between metaphor and analogy is fuzzy\" and \"the difference between them might be described (metaphorically) as the distance between things being compared.\"\nMetaphor vs metonymy.\nMetaphor is distinct from metonymy, as the two concepts embody different fundamental modes of thought. Metaphor works by bringing together concepts from different conceptual domains, whereas metonymy uses one element from a given domain to refer to another closely related element. A metaphor creates new links between otherwise distinct conceptual domains, whereas a metonymy relies on pre-existent links within such domains.\nFor example, in the phrase \"lands belonging to the crown\", the word \"crown\" is a metonymy because some monarchs do indeed wear a crown, physically. In other words, there is a pre-existent link between \"crown\" and \"monarchy\". On the other hand, when Ghil'ad Zuckermann argues that the Israeli language is a \"phoenicuckoo cross with some magpie characteristics\", he is using metaphor.\nThere is no physical link between a language and a bird. The reason the metaphors \"phoenix\" and \"cuckoo\" are used is that on the one hand hybridic \"Israeli\" is based on Hebrew, which, like a phoenix, rises from the ashes; and on the other hand, hybridic \"Israeli\" is based on Yiddish, which like a cuckoo, lays its egg in the nest of another bird, tricking it to believe that it is its own egg. Furthermore, the metaphor \"magpie\" is employed because, according to Zuckermann, hybridic \"Israeli\" displays the characteristics of a magpie, \"stealing\" from languages such as Arabic and English.\nSubtypes.\nA dead metaphor is a metaphor in which the sense of a transferred image has become absent. The phrases \"to grasp a concept\" and \"to gather what you've understood\" use physical action as a metaphor for understanding. The audience does not need to visualize the action; dead metaphors normally go unnoticed. Some distinguish between a dead metaphor and a clich\u00e9. Others use \"dead metaphor\" to denote both.\nA mixed metaphor is a metaphor that leaps from one identification to a second inconsistent with the first, e.g.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I smell a rat [...] but I'll nip him in the bud\"\u2014\u200a\nThis form is often used as a parody of metaphor itself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If we can hit that bull's-eye then the rest of the dominoes will fall like a house of cards... Checkmate.\u2014\u200a\nAn extended metaphor, or conceit, sets up a principal subject with several subsidiary subjects or comparisons. In the above quote from \"As You Like It\", the world is first described as a stage and then the subsidiary subjects men and women are further described in the same context.\nAn implicit metaphor has no specified tenor, although the vehicle is present. M. H. Abrams offers the following as an example of an implicit metaphor: \"That reed was too frail to survive the storm of its sorrows\". The reed is the vehicle for the implicit tenor, someone's death, and the storm is the vehicle for the person's sorrows.\nMetaphor can serve as a device for persuading an audience of the user's argument or thesis, the so-called rhetorical metaphor.\nIn rhetoric and literature.\nAristotle writes in his work the \"Rhetoric\" that metaphors make learning pleasant: \"To learn easily is naturally pleasant to all people, and words signify something, so whatever words create knowledge in us are the pleasantest.\" When discussing Aristotle's \"Rhetoric\", Jan Garret stated \"metaphor most brings about learning; for when [Homer] calls old age \"stubble\", he creates understanding and knowledge through the genus, since both old age and stubble are [species of the genus of] things that have lost their bloom\". Metaphors, according to Aristotle, have \"qualities of the exotic and the fascinating; but at the same time we recognize that strangers do not have the same rights as our fellow citizens\".\nEducational psychologist Andrew Ortony gives more explicit detail: \"Metaphors are necessary as a communicative device because they allow the transfer of coherent chunks of characteristics \u2013 perceptual, cognitive, emotional and experiential \u2013 from a vehicle which is known to a topic which is less so. In so doing they circumvent the problem of specifying one by one each of the often unnameable and innumerable characteristics; they avoid discretizing the perceived continuity of experience and are thus closer to experience and consequently more vivid and memorable.\"\nAs style in speech and writing.\nAs a characteristic of speech and writing, metaphors can serve the poetic imagination. This allows Sylvia Plath, in her poem \"Cut\", to compare the blood issuing from her cut thumb to the running of a million soldiers, \"redcoats, every one\"; and enabling Robert Frost, in \"The Road Not Taken\", to compare a life to a journey.\nMetaphors can be implied and extended throughout pieces of literature.\nLarger applications.\nSonja K. Foss characterizes metaphors as \"nonliteral comparisons in which a word or phrase from one domain of experience is applied to another domain\".\nShe argues that since reality is mediated by the language we use to describe it, the metaphors we use shape the world and our interactions to it.\nThe term \"metaphor\" can characterise basic or general aspects of experience and cognition:\nConceptual metaphors.\nSome theorists have suggested that metaphors are not merely stylistic, but are also cognitively important. In \"Metaphors We Live By\" (1980), George Lakoff and Mark Johnson argue that metaphors are pervasive in everyday life, not only in language but also in thought and action. A common definition of metaphor presents it as a comparison that shows how two things, which are not alike in most ways, are similar in another important way. In this context, metaphors contribute to the creation of multiple meanings within polysemic complexes across different languages. Furthermore, Lakoff and Johnson explain that a metaphor is essentially the understanding and experiencing of one kind of thing in terms of another, which they refer to as a \"conduit metaphor\". According to this view, a speaker can put ideas or objects into containers and then send them along a conduit to a listener, who removes the object from the container to make meaning of it. Thus, communication is conceptualized as something that ideas flow into, with the container being separate from the ideas themselves. Lakoff and Johnson provide several examples of daily metaphors in use, including \"argument is war\" and \"time is money\". These metaphors occur widely in various contexts to express personal meanings. In addition, the authors suggest that communication can be viewed as a machine: \"Communication is not what one does with the machine, but is the machine itself.\"\nMoreover, experimental evidence shows that \"priming\" people with material from one area can influence how they perform tasks and interpret language in a metaphorically related area.\nOmnipresent metaphor may provide an indicator for researching the functionality of language.\nAs a foundation of our conceptual system.\nCognitive linguists emphasize that metaphors serve to facilitate the understanding of one conceptual domain\u2014typically an abstraction such as \"life\", \"theories\" or \"ideas\"\u2014through expressions that relate to another, more familiar conceptual domain\u2014typically more concrete, such as \"journey\", \"buildings\" or \"food\". For example: one \"devours\" a book of \"raw\" facts, tries to \"digest\" them, \"stews\" over them, lets them \"simmer on the back-burner\", \"regurgitates\" them in discussions, and \"cooks\" up explanations, hoping they do not seem \"half-baked\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A convenient short-hand way of capturing this view of metaphor is the following: Conceptual Domain (A) is Conceptual Domain (B), which is what is called a \"conceptual metaphor\". A conceptual metaphor consists of two conceptual domains, in which one domain is understood in terms of another. A conceptual domain is any coherent organization of experience. For example, we have coherently organized knowledge about journeys that we rely on in understanding life.\nLakoff and Johnson greatly contributed to establishing the importance of conceptual metaphor as a framework for thinking in language, leading scholars to investigate the original ways in which writers used novel metaphors and to question the fundamental frameworks of thinking in conceptual metaphors.\nFrom a sociological, cultural, or philosophical perspective, one asks to what extent ideologies maintain and impose conceptual patterns of thought by introducing, supporting, and adapting fundamental patterns of thinking metaphorically. The question is to what extent the ideology fashion and refashion the idea of the nation as a container with borders, and how enemies and outsiders are represented. \nSome cognitive scholars have attempted to take on board the idea that different languages have evolved radically different concepts and conceptual metaphors, while others hold to the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis. German philologist Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767\u20131835) contributed significantly to this debate on the relationship between culture, language, and linguistic communities. Humboldt remains, however, relatively unknown in English-speaking nations. Andrew Goatly, in \"Washing the Brain\", takes on board the dual problem of conceptual metaphor as a framework implicit in the language as a system and the way individuals and ideologies negotiate conceptual metaphors. Neural biological research suggests that some metaphors are innate, as demonstrated by reduced metaphorical understanding in psychopathy.\nJames W. Underhill, in \"Creating Worldviews: Ideology, Metaphor &amp; Language\" (Edinburgh UP), considers the way individual speech adopts and reinforces certain metaphoric paradigms. This involves a critique of both communist and fascist discourse. Underhill's studies are situated in Czech and German, which allows him to demonstrate the ways individuals are thinking both within and resisting the modes by which ideologies seek to appropriate key concepts such as \"the people\", \"the state\", \"history\", and \"struggle\".\nThough metaphors can be considered to be \"in\" language, Underhill's chapter on French, English and ethnolinguistics demonstrates that language or languages cannot be conceived of in anything other than metaphoric terms.\nSeveral other philosophers have embraced the view that metaphors may also be described as examples of a linguistic \"category mistake\" which have the potential of leading unsuspecting users into considerable obfuscation of thought within the realm of epistemology. Included among them is the Australian philosopher Colin Murray Turbayne. In his book \"The Myth of Metaphor\", Turbayne argues that the use of metaphor is an essential component within the context of any language system which claims to embody richness and depth of understanding. In addition, he clarifies the limitations associated with a literal interpretation of the mechanistic Cartesian and Newtonian depictions of the universe as little more than a \"machine\" \u2013 a concept which continues to underlie much of the scientific materialism which prevails in the modern Western world. He argues further that the philosophical concept of \"substance\" or \"substratum\" has limited meaning at best and that physicalist theories of the universe depend upon mechanistic metaphors which are drawn from deductive logic in the development of their hypotheses. By interpreting such metaphors literally, Turbayne argues that modern man has unknowingly fallen victim to only one of several metaphorical models of the universe which may be more beneficial in nature.\nIn his book \"In Other Shoes: Music, Metaphor, Empathy, Existence\" Kendall Walton also places the formulation of metaphors at the center of a \"Game of Make Believe,\" which is regulated by tacit norms and rules. These \"principles of generation\" serve to determine several aspects of the game which include: what is considered to be fictional or imaginary, as well as the fixed function which is assumed by both objects and people who interact in the game. Walton refers to such generators as \"props\" which can serve as means to the development of various imaginative ends. In \"content oriented\" games, users derive value from such props as a result of the intrinsic fictional content which they help to create through their participation in the game. As familiar examples of such content oriented games, Walton points to putting on a play of \"Hamlet\" or \"playing cops and robbers\". Walton further argues, however, that not all games conform to this characteristic. In the course of creating fictions through the use of metaphor we can also perceive and manipulate props into new improvised representations of something entirely different in a game of \"make-believe\". Suddenly the properties of the props themselves take on primary importance. In the process the participants in the game may be only partially conscious of the \"prop oriented\" nature of the game itself.\nNonlinguistic metaphors.\nMetaphors can map experience between two nonlinguistic realms. Musicologist Leonard B. Meyer demonstrated how purely rhythmic and harmonic events can express human emotions.\nArt theorist Robert Vischer argued that when we look at a painting, we \"feel ourselves into it\" by imagining our body in the posture of a nonhuman or inanimate object in the painting. For example, the painting \"The Lonely Tree\" by Caspar David Friedrich shows a tree with contorted, barren limbs. Looking at the painting, some recipients may imagine their limbs in a similarly contorted and barren shape, evoking a feeling of strain and distress. \nNonlinguistic metaphors may be the foundation of our experience of visual and musical art, as well as dance and other art forms.\nIn historical linguistics.\nIn historical onomasiology or in historical linguistics, a metaphor is defined as a semantic change based on a similarity in form or function between the original concept and the target concept named by a word.\nFor example, \"mouse\": \"small, gray rodent with a long tail\" \u2192 \"small, gray computer device with a long cord\".\nSome recent linguistic theories hold that language evolved from the capability of the brain to create metaphors that link actions and sensations to sounds.\nHistorical theories.\nAristotle discusses the creation of metaphors at the end of his \"Poetics\": \"But the greatest thing by far is to be a master of metaphor. It is the one thing that cannot be learnt from others; and it is also a sign of genius, since a good metaphor implies an intuitive perception of the similarity in dissimilars.\"\nBaroque literary theorist Emanuele Tesauro defines the metaphor \"the most witty and acute, the most strange and marvelous, the most pleasant and useful, the most eloquent and fecund part of the human intellect\". There is, he suggests, something divine in metaphor: the world itself is God's poem and metaphor is not just a literary or rhetorical figure but an analytic tool that can penetrate the mysteries of God and His creation.\nFriedrich Nietzsche makes metaphor the conceptual center of his early theory of society in \"On Truth and Lies in the Non-Moral Sense\". Some sociologists have found his essay useful for thinking about metaphors used in society and for reflecting on their own use of metaphor. Sociologists of religion note the importance of metaphor in religious worldviews, and that it is impossible to think sociologically about religion without metaphor.\nPsychological effects.\nPsychological research has shown that metaphors influence perception, reasoning, and decision-making by shaping how people conceptualize abstract ideas. Studies in cognitive linguistics suggest that metaphors are not merely stylistic devices but fundamental to human cognition, as they structure the way people understand and interact with the world. Experiments demonstrate that different metaphorical framings can alter judgment and behavior. For example, a study by Thibodeau and Boroditsky (2011) found that describing crime as a \"beast preying on the city\" led participants to support more punitive law enforcement policies, whereas framing crime as a \"virus infecting the city\" increased support for social reform and prevention measures. Similarly, studies on political discourse suggest that metaphors shape attitudes toward policy decisions, with metaphors like \"tax relief\" implying that taxation is an inherent burden, thus influencing public opinion.\nMetaphors also play a crucial role in how people experience crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. A study by Baranowski et al. (2024) analyzed the use of metaphorical imagery in professional healthcare literature and found that metaphors significantly influenced how healthcare workers perceived and emotionally responded to the pandemic. Their research identified different categories of metaphorical framings\u2014such as war metaphors (\"fighting the pandemic\") and transformational metaphors (\"lessons learned from the crisis\")\u2014which led to varying emotional responses among healthcare workers. While war metaphors were widely used, they could also induce feelings of helplessness if the metaphor implied an unwinnable battle. In contrast, metaphors that framed the pandemic as a challenge or learning opportunity tended to promote a sense of empowerment and resilience. These findings align with previous research showing that metaphors can significantly impact emotional processing and coping strategies in stressful situations.\nMoreover, metaphorical language can impact emotions and mental health. For instance, describing depression as \"drowning\" or \"a dark cloud\" can intensify the emotional experience of distress, while framing it as \"a journey with obstacles\" can encourage resilience and problem-solving approaches. These findings highlight the pervasive role of metaphors in shaping thought processes, reinforcing the idea that language not only reflects but also constructs reality.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20519", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20519", "title": "Mathematics of musical scales", "text": ""}
{"id": "20521", "revid": "1584593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20521", "title": "Monk (disambiguation)", "text": "A monk is a person who practices a strict religious and ascetic lifestyle.\nMonk may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20522", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20522", "title": "Maasai Mara", "text": "National Reserve in Narok County, Kenya\nMaasai Mara, sometimes also spelt Masai Mara and locally known simply as The Mara, is a large national game reserve in Narok County, Kenya, contiguous with the Serengeti National Park in Tanzania. It is named in honour of the Maasai people, the ancestral inhabitants of the area, who migrated to the area from the Nile Basin. Their description of the area when looked at from afar: \"Mara\" means \"spotted\" in the Maa language because of the short bushy trees which dot the landscape.\nMaasai Mara is one of the wildlife conservation and wilderness areas in Africa, with its populations of lions, leopards, cheetahs and African bush elephants. It also hosts the Great Migration, which secured it as one of the Seven Natural Wonders of Africa, and as one of the ten Wonders of the World.\nThe Great Migration usually happens in July depending on weather as the wildebeest moves in large numbers crossing the Mara River from Tanzania.\nThe Greater Mara ecosystem encompasses areas known as the Maasai Mara National Reserve, the Mara Triangle, several Maasai group ranches, and Maasai Mara conservancies.\nHistory.\nWhen Maasai Mara was originally established in 1961 as a wildlife sanctuary, it covered only of the current area, including the Mara Triangle. The area was extended to the east in 1961 to cover and converted to a Game Reserve. The Narok County Council took over management of the reserve at this time. Part of the reserve was given National Reserve status in 1974, and the remaining area of was returned to local communities. An additional were removed from the reserve in 1976, and the park was reduced to in 1984.\nThe Maasai people make up a community that spans northern, central and southern Kenya and northern parts of Tanzania. The Maasai rely on their lands to sustain their cattle, as well as themselves and their families. Before the reserve's establishment, the Maasai were forced to move out of their native lands. Some of this was due to smallpox outbreaks among the people as well as rinderpest outbreaks among the cattle.\nTradition continues to play a major role in the lives of modern-day Maasai people, who are known for their tall stature, patterned shukas and beadwork. In 2008, an estimated half a million individuals spoke the Maa language. This number includes not only the Maasai but also Samburu and Ilchamus people in Kenya.\nGeography.\nThe total area under conservation in the Greater Maasai Mara ecosystem amounts to almost .\nIt is the northernmost section of the Mara-Serengeti ecosystem, which covers around in Tanzania and Kenya. Maasai pastoral ranches are to the north, east and west. To the south is the Serengeti National Park, the Siria/Oloololo escarpment is to the west. The Mara River, along with its tributaries the Sand and Talek rivers, are the major rivers draining the reserve. Shrubs and trees run along most drainage lines and cover the hills.\nThe terrain of the reserve is primarily open grassland with seasonal riverlets. In the south-east region are clumps of the distinctive acacia tree. The western border is the Esoit (Siria) Escarpment of the East African Rift, which is a system of rifts some long, from Ethiopia's Red Sea through Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi and into Mozambique. Wildlife tends to be most concentrated here, as the swampy ground means that access to water is always good, while tourist disruption is minimal. The easternmost border is from Nairobi, and hence it is the eastern regions which are most visited by tourists.\nIt has a semi-arid climate with biannual rains and two distinct rainy seasons. The 'long rains' last around six to eight weeks in April and May and the 'short rains', in November and December, last around four weeks. There is a significant rainfall gradient: around per year in the east to /year in the west.\nElevation: ; Rainfall: /month; Temperature range: \nWildlife.\nBlue wildebeest are the dominant inhabitants of the Maasai Mara. Around July of each year, these animals migrate north from the Serengeti plains in search of fresh pasture, and return to the south around October. The Great Migration is one of the most impressive natural events worldwide. It involves some 1.3 million blue wildebeest, Thomson's gazelles, topi, common elands, and Grant's zebras.\nAll members of the \"Big Five\" \u2013 lions, African leopards, African bush elephants, African buffaloes and black rhinoceros \u2013 can be seen at Maasai Mara.\nThe Maasai Mara is the only protected area in Kenya with an indigenous black rhino population unaffected by translocations. Due to its size, the Mara can support one of the largest populations in Africa. The population of black rhinos was fairly numerous until 1960, but it was severely depleted by poaching in the 1970s and early 1980s, dropping to a low of 15 individuals. Numbers have been slowly increasing, but the population was still only up to an estimated 23 in 1999. The Mara Conservancy, one of the managing bodies of the reserve, reported 120 black rhinos in 1971 and 18 in 1984. They claimed one black rhino in 2001 when they began management and a stable 25-30 in 2023.\nLarge carnivores are found in the reserve. Lions are the most dominant and are found here in large numbers. The spotted hyena is another abundant carnivore that often compete with lions for food. Leopards occur anywhere in the reserve where there are trees for them to escape to. East African cheetahs also occur in high numbers on the open savanna, hunting gazelle and wildebeest. African wild dogs are quite rare here due to the widespread transmission of diseases like canine distemper and the heavy competition they face with lions, who can often ravage their populations. Their packs also roam and travel far distances throughout the plains, making it hard to track them. Smaller carnivores include African wolves, black-backed jackals, African striped weasels, caracals, servals, honey badgers, aardwolves, African wildcats, side-striped jackals, bat-eared foxes, Striped polecats, African civets, genets, several mongoose species and African clawless otters.\nThe area has been named an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International. More than 500 species of birds have been identified in the park, many of which are migrants, with almost 60 species being raptors. It is an important area for the threatened birds that call this area home for at least part of the year. These include: vultures, marabou storks, secretary birds, hornbills, crowned cranes, ostriches, long-crested eagles, African pygmy-falcons and the lilac-breasted roller, which is the national bird of Kenya.\nAdministration.\nAs of 2023, Mara Conservancy manages the Mara Triangle on behalf of the county, while the County Government of Narok manages the Narok Sector. The more visited eastern part of the park, known as the Maasai Mara National Reserve, is managed by the Narok County Council. The Mara Triangle in the western part is managed Mara Conservancy, on behalf of the county, since the early 2000s.\nThe outer areas were administered by ranches of the Maasai community. The land was then subdivided, though some members received greater benefits than the majority of landowners. This weakened regulatory system threatens sustainable management of the Mara.\nResearch.\nSince October 2012, the Mara-Meru Cheetah Project has worked in the Mara monitoring the cheetah population, estimating population status and dynamics, and evaluating the predator impact and human activity on cheetah behavior and survival.\nThe Mara Predator Conservation Programme also operates in the Maasai Mara, cataloging and monitoring lion populations throughout the region.\nThe spotted hyena is also studied in the Maasai Mara.\nA flow assessment and trans-boundary river basin management plan between Kenya and Tanzania was completed for the river to sustain the ecosystem and the basic needs of 1 million people who depend on its water.\nBig Cat Diary.\nThe BBC Television show titled \"Big Cat Diary\" was filmed in the Maasai Mara. The show followed the lives of the big cats living in the reserve. The show highlighted scenes from the Reserve's Musiara marsh area and the Leopard Gorge, the Fig Tree Ridge areas and the Mara River, separating the Serengeti and the Maasai Mara.\nPhotography competition.\nIn 2018, the Angama Foundation, a non-profit affiliated with Angama Mara, one of the Mara's luxury safari camps, launched the Greatest Maasai Mara Photographer of the Year competition, showcasing the Mara as a year-round destination and raise funds for conservation initiatives active in the Mara. The competition ran for six years, ending in 2023. The inaugural winner was British photographer Anup Shah. The 2019 winner was Lee-Anne Robertson from South Africa. Paolo Torchio won in 2020, Harry Collins in 2021, Preeti and Prashant Chacko in 2022, and Shravan Rao in 2023.\nThreats.\nBetween 1989 and 2003, ungulates were monitored in the Maasai Mara on a monthly basis; the survey revealed a decline of giraffes by 75%, of common warthogs by 80%, of hartebeest by 76%, and of impala by 67%, attributed to the increased number of livestock grazing in the park and an increase in poaching.\nThe rise of local populations in areas neighbouring the reserve has led to the formation of conservation organisations such as the Mara Elephant Project. The project aims to ensure the peaceful and prosperous co-existence of humans alongside wildlife. According to the project, human wildlife conflict is seen as a leading threat to the reserve as the population continues to grow. Tourism has increased exponentially. Less than 10 lodges were in the area in the late 1970s. The end of the moratorium saw facilities increase to 140 in 2008, and nearly 200 in 2016.\nThe growth in population creates a demand for land and resources leading to unplanned infrastructure growth. The weak cash economy creates a need to further subdivide the outlying ranch areas. These new owners have converted some land away from traditional grazing fields, negatively affecting wildlife migration. A rise in fencing exacerbates the restriction in free movement for migration, and grazing opportunities are diminished.\nThe Mara Conservancy encourages conservation efforts in the Reserve and has accomplished several of their goals since taking stewardship. According to their website, as of 2022 they have arrested 4,500 poachers, vaccinated 100,000 dogs against rabies and distemper, improved access roads, and provided security for the local community and tourist facilities.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20523", "revid": "10653874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20523", "title": "Maasai people", "text": "Ethnic group of Kenya and Tanzania\nThe Maasai () are a Nilotic ethnic group inhabiting northern, central and southern Kenya and northern Tanzania, near the African Great Lakes region. Their native language is the Maasai language, a Nilotic language related to Dinka, Kalenjin and Nuer. Except for some elders living in rural areas, most Maasai people speak the official languages of Kenya and Tanzania\u2014Swahili and English.\nThe Maasai population has been reported as numbering 1,189,522 in Kenya in the 2019 census compared to 377,089 in the 1989 census. However, many Maasai view the census as government meddling and either refuse to participate or actively provide false information.\nHistory.\nThe Maasai inhabit the African Great Lakes region and arrived via South Sudan. Most Nilotic speakers in the area, including the Maasai, the Turkana and the Kalenjin, are pastoralists and have a reputation as fearsome warriors and cattle rustlers. The Maasai and other groups in East Africa have adopted customs and practices from neighbouring Cushitic-speaking groups, including the age-set system of social organisation, circumcision, and vocabulary terms.\nOrigin, migration and assimilation.\nMany ethnic groups that had already formed settlements in the region were forcibly displaced by the incoming Maasai. Other, mainly Southern Cushitic groups, were assimilated into Maasai society. The Nilotic ancestors of the Kalenjin likewise absorbed some early Cushitic populations.\nSettlement in East Africa.\nThe Maasai territory reached its largest size in the mid-19th century and covered almost all of the Great Rift Valley and adjacent lands from Mount Marsabit in the north to Dodoma in the south. At this time the Maasai, as well as the larger Nilotic group they were part of, raised cattle as far east as the Tanga coast in Tanganyika (now mainland Tanzania). Raiders used spears and shields In 1852, there was a report of a concentration of 800 Maasai warriors on the move in what is now Kenya. In 1857, after having depopulated the \"Wakuafi wilderness\" in what is now southeastern Kenya, Maasai warriors threatened Mombasa on the Kenyan coast.\nBecause of this migration the Maasai are the southernmost Nilotic speakers. The period of expansion was followed by the Maasai \"Emutai\" of 1883\u20131902. This period was marked by epidemics of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, rinderpest (see 1890s African rinderpest epizootic) and smallpox. The estimate first put forward by a German lieutenant in what was then northwest Tanganyika was that 90% of cattle and half of wild animals perished from rinderpest. German doctors in the same area claimed that \"every second\" African had a pock-marked face as the result of smallpox. This period coincided with drought. Rains failed in 1897 and 1898.\nThe Austrian explorer Oscar Baumann travelled in Maasai lands between 1891 and 1893 and described the old Maasai settlement in the Ngorongoro Crater in the 1894 book (Through the lands of the Maasai to the source of the Nile). By one estimate two-thirds of the Maasai died during this period. Maasai in Tanganyika (now mainland Tanzania) were displaced from the fertile lands between Mount Meru and Mount Kilimanjaro and most of the fertile highlands near Ngorongoro in the 1940s. More land was taken to create wildlife reserves and national parks: Amboseli National Park, Nairobi National Park, Maasai Mara, Samburu National Reserve, Lake Nakuru National Park and Tsavo in Kenya; and Lake Manyara, Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Tarangire and Serengeti National Park in what is now Tanzania.\nMaasai are pastoralists and have resisted the urging of the Tanzanian and Kenyan governments to adopt a more sedentary lifestyle. They have demanded grazing rights to many of the national parks in both countries.\nThe Maasai people stood against slavery and never condoned the traffic of human beings, and outsiders looking for people to enslave avoided the Maasai.\nEssentially there are twenty-two geographic sectors or sub-tribes of the Maasai community, each one having its customs, appearance, leadership and dialects. These subdivisions are known as 'nations' or 'iloshon' in the Maa language: the Keekonyokie, Ildamat, Purko, Wuasinkishu, Siria, Laitayiok, Loitai, Ilkisonko, Matapato, Dalalekutuk, Ilooldokilani, Ilkaputiei, Moitanik, Ilkirasha, Samburu, Ilchamus, Laikipiak, Loitokitoki, Larusa, Salei, Sirinket and Parakuyo.\nGenetics.\nRecent advances in genetic analyses have helped shed some light on the ethnogenesis of the Maasai people. Genetic genealogy, a tool that uses the genes of modern populations to trace their ethnic and geographic origins, has also helped clarify the possible background of modern Maasai.\nAutosomal DNA.\nThe Maasai's autosomal DNA has been examined in a comprehensive study by Tishkoff et al. (2009) on the genetic affiliations of various populations in Africa. According to the study's authors, the Maasai \"have maintained their culture in the face of extensive genetic introgression\". Tishkoff et al. also indicate that: \"Many Nilo-Saharan-speaking populations in East Africa, such as the Maasai, show multiple cluster assignments from the Nilo-Saharan [...] and Cushitic [...] AACs, in accord with linguistic evidence of repeated Nilotic assimilation of Cushites over the past 3000 years and with the high frequency of a shared East African\u2013specific mutation associated with lactose tolerance.\"\nMaasai display significant West-Eurasian admixture at roughly ~20%. This type of West-Eurasian ancestry reaches up to 40-50% among specific populations of the Horn of Africa, specifically among Amharas. Genetic data and archeologic evidence suggest that East African pastoralists received West Eurasian ancestry (~25%) through Afroasiatic-speaking groups from Northern Africa or the Arabian Peninsula, and later spread this ancestry component southwards into certain Khoisan groups roughly 2,000 years ago, resulting in ~5% West-Eurasian ancestry among Southern African hunter-gatherers.\nA 2019 archaeogenetic study sampled ancient remains from Neolithic inhabitants of Tanzania and Kenya, and found them to have strongest affinities with modern Horn of Africa groups. They modelled the Maasai community as having ancestry that is ~47% Pastoral Neolithic Cushitic-related and ~53% Sudanese Dinka-related.\nY-DNA.\nA Y chromosome study by Wood et al. (2005) tested various Sub-Saharan populations, including 26 Maasai men from Kenya, for paternal lineages. The authors observed haplogroup E1b1b-M35 (not M78) in 35% of the studied Maasai. E1b1b-M35-M78 in 15%, their ancestor with the more northerly Cushitic men, who possess the haplogroup at high frequencies lived more than 13,000 years ago. The second most frequent paternal lineage among the Maasai was Haplogroup A3b2, which is commonly found in Nilotic populations, such as the Alur; it was observed in 27% of Maasai men. The third most frequently observed paternal DNA marker in the Maasai was E1b1a1-M2 (E-P1), which is very common in the Sub-Saharan region; it was found in 12% of the Maasai samples. Haplogroup B-M60 was also observed in 8% of the studied Maasai, which is also found in 30% (16/53) of Southern Sudanese Nilotes.\nMitochondrial DNA.\nAccording to an mtDNA study by Castri et al. (2008), which tested Maasai individuals in Kenya, the maternal lineages found among the Maasai are quite diverse but similar in overall frequency to that observed in other Nilo-Hamitic populations from the region, such as the Samburu. Most of the tested Maasai belonged to various macro-haplogroup L sub-clades, including L0, L2, L3, L4 and L5. Some maternal gene flow from North and Northeast Africa was also reported, particularly via the presence of mtDNA haplogroup M lineages in about 12.5% of the Maasai samples.\nCulture.\nReligion.\nThe monotheistic Maasai worship a single deity called \"Enkai\", \"Nkai\" or \"Engai\". Engai has a dual nature, represented by two colours: Engai Narok (Black God) is benevolent, and Engai Na-nyokie (Red God) is vengeful.\nThere are also two pillars or totems of Maasai society: Oodo Mongi, the Red Cow and Orok Kiteng, the Black Cow with a subdivision of five clans or family trees. The Maasai also have a totemic animal, which is the lion. The killing of a lion is used by the Maasai in the rite of passage ceremony. The \"Mountain of God\", Ol Doinyo Lengai, is located in northernmost Tanzania and can be seen from Lake Natron in southernmost Kenya. The central human figure in the Maasai religious system is the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;laibon whose roles include shamanistic healing, divination and prophecy, and ensuring success in war or adequate rainfall. Today, they have a political role as well due to the elevation of leaders. Whatever power an individual laibon had was a function of personality rather than position. Many Maasai have also adopted Christianity or Islam. The Maasai produce intricate jewellery and sell these items to tourists.\nBody modification.\nThe piercing and stretching of earlobes are common among the Maasai as with other tribes, and both men and women wear metal hoops on their stretched earlobes. Various materials have been used to both pierce and stretch the lobes, including thorns for piercing, twigs, bundles of twigs, stones, the cross-section of elephant tusks and empty film canisters. Women wear various forms of beaded ornaments in both the ear lobe and smaller piercings at the top of the ear. Among Maasai males, circumcision is practiced as a ritual of transition from boyhood to manhood. Women are also circumcised (as described below in social organisation).\nThis belief and practice are not unique to the Maasai. In rural Kenya, a group of 95 children aged between six months and two years were examined in 1991/92. 87% were found to have undergone the removal of one or more deciduous canine tooth buds. In an older age group (3\u20137 years of age), 72% of the 111 children examined exhibited missing mandibular or maxillary deciduous canines.\nGenital cutting.\nTraditionally, the Maasai conduct elaborate rite of passage rituals which include surgical genital mutilation to initiate children into adulthood. The Maa word for circumcision, \"emorata,\" is applied to this ritual for both males and females. This ritual is typically performed by the elders, who use a sharpened knife and makeshift cattle hide bandages for the procedure.\nThe male ceremony refers to the excision of the prepuce (foreskin). In the male ceremony, the boy is expected to endure the operation in silence. Expressions of pain bring dishonor upon him, albeit only temporarily. Importantly, any exclamations or unexpected movements on the part of the boy can cause the elder to make a mistake in the delicate and tedious process, which can result in severe lifelong scarring, dysfunction, and pain.\nYoung women also undergo female genital mutilation as part of an elaborate rite of passage ritual called \"Emuatare,\" the ceremony that initiates young Maasai girls into adulthood through ritual mutilation and then into early arranged marriages. The Maasai believe that female genital mutilation is necessary and Maasai men may reject any woman who has not undergone it as either not marriageable or worthy of a much-reduced bride price. In Eastern Africa uncircumcised women, even highly educated members of parliament such as Linah Kilimo, can be accused of not being mature enough to be taken seriously. The Maasai activist Agnes Pareyio campaigns against the practice. The female rite-of-passage ritual has recently seen excision replaced in rare instances with a \"cutting with words\" ceremony involving singing and dancing in its place. However, despite changes to the law and education drives, the practice remains deeply ingrained, highly valued and nearly universally practised by members of the culture.\nHair.\nUpon reaching the age of 3 \"moons\", the child is named and the head is shaved clean apart from a tuft of hair, which resembles a cockade, from the nape of the neck to the forehead.\nAmong the men, warriors are the only members of the Maasai community to wear long hair, which they weave in thinly braided strands. Graduation from warrior to junior elder takes place at a large gathering known as Eunoto. The long hair of the former warriors is shaved off; elders must wear their hair short. Warriors who do not have sexual relations with women who have not undergone the \"Emuatare\" ceremony are especially honoured at the Eunoto gathering.\nThis would symbolise the healing of the woman.\nTwo days before boys are circumcised, their heads are shaved. When warriors go through the \"Eunoto\" and become elders, their long plaited hair is shaved off.\nMusic and dance.\nMaasai music traditionally consists of rhythms provided by a chorus of vocalists singing harmonies while a song leader, or olaranyani, sings the melody. Unlike most other African tribes, Maasai widely use drone polyphony.\nWomen chant lullabies, humming songs, and songs praising their sons. The Namba, a call-and-response harmony pattern, repetition of nonsensical phrases, monophonic melodies, repeated phrases following each verse being sung on a descending scale, and singers responding to their verses are characteristic of singing by women. When many Maasai women gather together, they sing and dance among themselves.&lt;ref name=\"mediatheque/mm4165\"&gt;\n&lt;/ref&gt;\nEunoto, the coming-of-age ceremony of the warrior, can involve ten or more days of singing, dancing and ritual. The warriors of the Il-Oodokilani perform a kind of march-past as well as the Adumu, or aigus, sometimes referred to as \"the jumping dance\" by non-Maasai. (Both adumu and aigus are Maa verbs meaning \"to jump\" with adumu meaning \"To jump up and down in a dance\".)\nCuisine.\nTraditionally, the Maasai cuisine consisted of raw meat, raw milk, honey and raw blood from cattle\u2014note that the Maasai cattle are of the Zebu variety.\nTraditional Maasai lifestyle centres around their cattle, which constitute their primary source of food.\nThey eat their meat, drink their milk daily, and drink their blood on occasion.\nIn a patriarchal culture that views women as property, a man's wealth is measured in cattle, wives and children. A herd of 50 cattle is respectable, and the more wives and children the better. A man who has plenty of one but not the other is considered to be poor.\nThe Maasai also herd goats and sheep, including the Red Maasai sheep, as well as the more prized cattle.\nBulls, goats, and lambs are slaughtered for meat on special occasions and ceremonies.\nMost of the milk is consumed as fermented milk or buttermilk (a by-product of butter making).\nMilk consumption figures are very high by any standards.\nFruits are consumed as snacks. They constitute a major part of the food ingested by children and women looking after cattle as well as morans in the bush.\nThe Maasai's entire way of life has historically depended on their cattle, but cattle numbers have been dwindling in recent times.\nThe Maasai have grown dependent on food such as sorghum, rice, potatoes and cabbage (known to the Maasai as goat leaves).\nA 2010 study of the Maasai diet found that more than 58% of the modern Maasai diet consists of plant foods, especially ugali and cornmeal. Another study found that the staple foods of the Maasai are cows\u2019 milk (fresh or boiled) and ugali.\nOne common misconception about the Maasai is that each young man is supposed to kill a lion before he can be circumcised and enter adulthood. Lion hunting was an activity of the past, but it has been banned in East Africa \u2013 yet lions are still hunted when they maul Maasai livestock. Nevertheless, killing a lion gives one great value and celebrity status in the community.\nMedicine and healthcare.\nThe Maasai people traditionally used the environment when making their medicines, and many still do, due to the high cost of Western treatments. These medicines are derived from trees, shrubs, stems, roots, etc. These can then be used in a multitude of ways including being boiled in soups and ingested to improve digestion and cleanse the blood. Some of these remedies can also be used in the treatment or prevention of diseases. The Maasai people also add herbs to different foods to avoid stomach upsets and give digestive aid. The use of plant-based medicine remains an important part of Maasai life.\nEducating Maasai women to use clinics and hospitals during pregnancy has enabled more infants to survive. The exception is found in extremely remote areas. A corpse rejected by scavengers is seen as having something wrong with it, and liable to cause social disgrace; therefore, it is not uncommon for bodies to be covered in fat and blood from a slaughtered ox.\nClothing.\nMaasai clothing symbolises ethnic group membership, a pastoralist lifestyle, as well as an individual's social position. From this they can decide the roles they undertake for the tribe. Jewellery also can show an individual's gender, relationship status, and age. Maasai traditional clothing is both a means of tribal identification and symbolism: young men, for example, wear black for several months following their circumcision.\nThe Maasai began to replace animal skin, calf hides and sheep skin with commercial cotton cloth in the 1960s.\nSh\u00fak\u00e0 is the Maa word for sheets traditionally worn and wrapped around the body. These are typically red, sometimes integrated with other colours and patterns. One-piece garments known as kanga, a Swahili term, are common. Maasai near the coast may wear kikoi, a sarong-like garment that comes in many different colours and textiles\nInfluences from the outside world.\nA traditional pastoral lifestyle has become increasingly difficult due to modern outside influences. Garrett Hardin's article outlining the \"tragedy of the commons\", as well as Melville Herskovits' \"cattle complex\" influenced ecologists and policymakers about the harm Maasai pastoralists were causing to savannah rangelands. This was later contested by some anthropologists. British colonial policymakers in 1951 removed all Maasai from the Serengeti National Park and relegated them to areas in and around the Ngorongoro Conservation Area (NCA).\nDue to an increasing population, loss of cattle due to disease, and lack of available rangelands because of new park boundaries and competition from other tribes, the Maasai were forced to develop new ways of sustaining themselves. Many Maasai began to cultivate maize and other crops to get by, a practice that was culturally viewed negatively. Cultivation was first introduced to the Maasai by displaced WaArusha and WaMeru women who married Maasai men.\nIn 1975, the Ngorongoro Conservation Area banned cultivation, forcing the tribe to participate in Tanzania's economy. They have to sell animals and traditional medicines to buy food. The ban on cultivation was lifted in 1992 and cultivation became an important part of Maasai livelihood once more. Park boundaries and land privatisation has continued to limit the Maasai livestock's grazing area.\nThroughout the years, various projects have attempted to help the Maasai people. These projects help find ways to preserve Maasai traditions while also encouraging modern education for their children.\nEmerging employment among the Maasai people include farming, business, and wage employment in both the public and private sectors.\nMany Maasai have also moved away from the nomadic life to positions in commerce and government.\nEviction from ancestral land.\nThe Maasai community was reportedly being targeted with live ammunition and tear gas in June 2022 in Tanzania, in a government plan to seize a piece of Maasai land for elite private luxury development. Lawyers, human rights groups, and activists who brought the matter to light claimed that Tanzanian security forces tried to forcefully evict the indigenous Maasai people from their ancestral land for the establishment of a luxury game reserve by Otterlo Business Corporation (OBC) for the royals ruling the United Arab Emirates. As of 18 June 2022, approximately 30 Maasai people had been injured and at least one killed, at the hands of the Tanzanian government Field Force Unit (FFU) while protesting the government's plans of what it claims are delimiting a 1500 sq km of land as a game reserve, an act which violates a 2018 East African Court of Justice (EACJ) injunction on the land dispute, per local activists. By reclassifying the area as a game reserve, the authorities aimed to systematically expropriate Maasai settlements and grazing in the area, experts warned.\nThis was not the first time Maasai territory was encroached upon. Big-game hunting firms along with the government have long attacked the groups. The 2022 attacks are the latest escalation, which has left more than 150,000 Maasai displaced from the Loliondo and Ngorongoro areas as per the United Nations. A hunting concession already situated in Loliondo is owned by OBC, a company that has been allegedly linked to the significantly wealthy Emirati royal family as per Tanzanian lawyers, environmentalists as well as human rights activists. Anuradha Mittal, the executive director of the environmental think-tank, Oakland Institute cited that OBC was not a \"safari company for just everyone, it has operations for the royal family\".\nA 2019 United Nations report described OBC as a luxury-game hunting company \"based in the United Arab Emirates\" that was granted a hunting license by the Tanzanian government in 1992 permitting \"the UAE royal family to organise private hunting trips\" in addition to denying the Maasai people access to their ancestral land and water for herding cattle.\nWhen approached, the UAE government refrained from giving any statements. Meanwhile, the OBC commented on the matter without addressing alleged links with Emirati royals, stating that \"there is no eviction in Loliondo\" and calling it a \"reserve land protected area\" owned by the government.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20524", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20524", "title": "Medieval fortification", "text": "Fortifications built during the middle ages\nMedieval fortification refers to military methods that cover the development of fortification construction and use in Europe, during the period roughly from the fall of the Western Roman Empire until the Renaissance. During this millennium, fortifications changed warfare and in turn were modified to suit new tactics, weapons, and siege techniques.\nFortification types.\nArcher towers.\nTowers of medieval castles were usually made of stone, wood or a combination of both (with a stone base supporting a wooden loft). Often toward the later part of the era they included battlements and arrow loops. Arrow loops were vertical slits in the wall through which archers inside shot arrows at the attackers, but made it extremely difficult for attackers to get many arrows back through at the defenders.\nSiege Defenses.\nSieges were common during the Middle Ages and because of this many cities fortified their walls and castles to defend against the use of siege engines by their attackers1. Many cities utilized catapults that would hurl stones and other missiles at enemy siege engines and soldiers. The most commonly used catapult for defense was the trebuchet, a torsion powered catapult that dominated the Middle Ages both offensively and defensively. The trebuchet was known for its considerable force but required a longer loading time compared to other siege engines, sometimes taking up to an hour, which lead to some cities using catapults such as the mangonel and onager instead, which could put projectiles downrange much faster than the trebuchet. The trebuchet\u2019s destructive force caused engineers to thicken walls, round out towers, and to redesign fortifications so that they could employ trebuchets for defense. The Ayyubids between 1196 and 1218 built towers mounted with massive trebuchets, which hypothetically would use their height advantage to take out opposing siege engines. Ballistas were another type of catapult utilized as a defensive weapon, however they were not often used. This is because their missiles sometimes lacked the force to dismantle enemy siege engines and their immobility confined them to the top of a city's towers were they could easily be taken out by enemy catapults, including offensive ballistas which were usually employed for the very reason of dismantling defenses on the top of towers and keeping defenders off of a wall's battlements. After the invention of cannons near the beginning of 12th century CE, many torsion powered catapults became largely obsolete and cannons became commonplace medieval siege engines by the 15th century. While mostly used for offensive purposes, the first recorded use of a cannon in Europe was to defend the city of Algeciras during the siege of 1343-44. However slow to load, cannons proved to be devastating weapons that could level a city's walls or destroy siege engines with only a single projectile. \nCity walls.\nAn exact nature of the walls of a medieval town or city would depend on the resources available for building them, the nature of the terrain, and the perceived threat. In northern Europe, early in the period, walls were likely to have been constructed of wood and proofed against small forces. Especially where stone was readily available for building, the wood will have been replaced by stone to a higher or lower standard of security. This would have been the pattern of events in the Five Boroughs of the Danelaw in England.\nIn many cases, the wall would have had an internal and an external \"pomoerium\". This was a strip of clear ground immediately adjacent the wall. The word is from the late medieval, derived from the classical Latin \"post murum\" (\"behind the wall\").\nAn external pomoerium, stripped of bushes and building, gave defenders a clear view of what was happening outside and an unobstructed field of shot. An internal pomoerium gave ready access to the rear of the curtain wall to facilitate movement of the garrison to a point of need. By the end of the sixteenth century, the word had developed further in common use, into \"pomery\".\nAlso by that time, the medieval walls were no longer secure against a serious threat from an army, as they were not designed to be strong enough to resist cannon fire. They were sometimes rebuilt, as at Berwick on Tweed, or retained for use against thieves and other threats of a lower order. Very elaborate and complex schemes for town defenses were developed in the Netherlands and France, but these belong mainly to the post-medieval periods. By 1600, the medieval wall is likely to have been seen more as a platform for displaying hangings and the pomery as a gathering ground for spectators, or as a source of building stone and a site for its use, respectively. However, a few, such as those of Carcassonne and Dubrovnik, survived fairly well and have been restored to a nearly complete state.\nMedieval walls that were no longer adequate for defending were succeeded by the star fort. After the invention of the explosive shell, star forts became obsolete as well.\nHarbors.\nHarbors or some sort of water access were often essential to the construction of medieval fortifications. It was a direct route for trading and fortification. Having direct access to a body of water provided a route for resupply in times of war, an additional method of transportation in times of peace, and potential drinking water for a besieged castle or fortification. The concept of rivers or harbors coming directly up to the walls of fortifications was especially used by the English as they constructed castles throughout Wales.\nThere is evidence that harbors were fortified, with wooden structures in the water creating a semi-circle around the harbor, or jetties, as seen in an artist's reconstruction of Hedeby, in Denmark, with an opening for ships to access the land. Usually, these wooden structures would have small bases at either end, creating a 'watch' and defense platform.\nChurches and monasteries.\nReligion was a central part of the lives of medieval soldiers, and churches, chapels, monasteries, and other buildings of religious function were often included within the walls of any fortification, be it temporary or permanent. A place to conduct religious services was usually essential to the morale of the soldiers.\nMottes and baileys.\nMotte-and-bailey was the prevalent form of castle during 11th and 12th centuries. A courtyard (called a bailey) was protected by a ditch and a palisade (strong timber fence). Often the entrance was protected by a lifting bridge, a drawbridge or a timber gate tower. Inside the bailey were stables, workshops, and a chapel.\nThe motte was the final refuge in this type of castle. It was a raised earth mound, and varied considerably, with these mounds being 3 metres to 30 metres in height (10 feet to 100 feet), and from in diameter. There was a tower on top of the motte. In most cases, the tower was made of timber, though some were also made of stones. Stone towers were found in natural mounds, as artificial ones were not strong enough to support stone towers. Larger mottes had towers with many rooms, including the great hall. Smaller ones had only a watch tower.\nConstruction.\nConstruction could sometimes take decades. The string of Welsh castles Edward I of England had built were an exception in that he focused much of the resources of his kingdom on their speedy construction. In addition to paid workers, forced levies of labourers put thousands of men on each site and shortened construction to a few years.\nLocation.\nNature could provide very effective defenses for the castle. For this reason many castles were built on larger hills, cliffs, close to rivers, lakes or even caves.\nMaterials.\nMaterials that were used in the building of castles varied through history. Wood was used for most castles until 1066. They were cheap and were quick to construct. The reason wood fell into disuse as a material is that it is quite flammable. Soon stone became more popular.\nStone castles took years to construct depending on the overall size of the castle. Stone was stronger and of course much more expensive than wood. Most stone had to be quarried miles away, and then brought to the building site. But with the invention of the cannon and gunpowder, castles soon lost their power.\nCosts.\nCosts for the walls depended on the material used. Wood would cost very little and was quick to build, but was weak. Stone was strong but very expensive and time-consuming to construct.\nManpower.\nWork was done by teams of craftsmen assisted by local labor. For larger projects, skilled labor would often be brought in from surrounding areas.\nWalls.\nThe height of walls varied widely by castle, but were often thick. They were usually topped with crenellation or parapets that offered protection to defenders. Some also featured machicolations (from the French \"machicoulis\", approximately \"neck-crusher\") which consisted of openings between a wall and a parapet, formed by corbelling out the latter, allowing defenders to throw stones, boiling water, and so forth, upon assailants below. Some castles featured additional inner walls, as additional fortifications from which to mount a defense if outer walls were breached.\nGates.\nAny entrance through a wall, being an opening, forms an obvious weak point. To be practical, the entryway would have to accommodate supplies being brought through, yet difficult for attackers to breach. For example, passage over ditches or moats would have to be withdrawn to deny attackers. The use of multiple walls or ditches around an entrance would also make it difficult for defenders to use the entrance practically, necessitating better methods of control. Gates came in many forms, from the simple stone buttress and timber blocks, to the massive and imposing stone archways and thick wooden doors most associated with medieval citadels.\nKilling fields.\nA killing field was an area between the main wall and a secondary wall, so when the first wall was breached the attackers would run into the killing field to be confronted by another wall from which soldiers bombarded them. Soldiers would be positioned atop the second wall and armed with any variety of weapons, ranging from bows to crossbows to simple rocks.\nMoats.\nA moat was a common addition to medieval fortifications, and the principal purpose was to simply increase the effective height of the walls and to prevent digging under the walls. In many instances, natural water paths were used as moats, and often extended through ditches to surround as much of the fortification as possible. Provided this was not so unnaturally contrived as to allow an attacker to drain the system, it served two defensive purposes. It made approaching the curtain wall of the castle more difficult and the undermining of the wall virtually impossible. To position a castle on a small island was very favorable from a defensive point of view, although it made deliveries of supplies and building materials more cumbersome and expensive.\nKeeps.\nA keep is a strong central tower which normally forms the heart of a castle. Often the keep is the most defended area of a castle, and as such may form the main habitation area for a noble or lord, or contain important stores such as the armoury or the main well.\nStairs.\nStairs were also constructed to contain trick or stumble steps. These were steps that had different rise height or tread depth from the rest and would cause anyone running up the stairs to stumble or fall, so slowing down the attackers' progress.\nDoors.\nA typical exterior wooden door might be made out of two or more layers of oak planks. The grain of the wood would run vertically on the front layer and horizontally on the back, like a simple form of plywood. The two layers would be held together by iron studs, and the structure might be strengthened and stiffened with iron bands.\nThe studs themselves were pointed on the front so that attackers would damage their weapons (swords, axes, etc.) while trying to break through.\nTransition to modern fortification.\nFrom the mid-15th century onwards, the power of cannons grew and medieval walls became obsolete as they were too thin to offer any realistic protection against prolonged bombardment. As a consequence of this, medieval walls were often upgraded with the addition of artillery platforms or bastions, and battlements were replaced by thick parapets with embrasures. In many cases, the medieval walls were dismantled and their stonework, which was still valuable as construction material, was reused in the construction of the new fortifications. The resulting space is often seen in old city centers of Europe even to this day, as broader streets often outline where the old wall once stood (evident for example in Prague and Florence, Italy).\nThe transition between medieval and early modern fortification can be seen in the fortifications of Rhodes in Greece and the fortifications of Famagusta in Cyprus.\nDefensive obstacles.\nJust as modern military engineers enhance field fortifications with obstacles such as barbed wire, medieval engineers used a number of obstacle types including abatis, caltrops, cheval de frise, and trou de loup.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20525", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20525", "title": "McGwire", "text": ""}
{"id": "20527", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20527", "title": "Mark Whitacre", "text": "American businessperson and money launderer\nMark Edward Whitacre (born May 1, 1957) is an American business executive who came to public attention in 1995 when, as president of the Decatur, Illinois-based BioProducts Division at Archer Daniels Midland (ADM), he became the highest-level corporate executive in U.S. history to become a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) whistleblower. For three years (1992\u201395), Whitacre acted as a cooperating witness for the FBI, which was investigating ADM for price fixing. In the late 1990s, Whitacre was sentenced to nine years in federal prison for embezzling $9.5 million from ADM at the same time he was assisting the federal price-fixing investigation.\nADM investigated Whitacre's activities and, upon discovering suspicious activity, requested the FBI investigate Whitacre for embezzlement. As a result of $9.5\u00a0million in various frauds, Whitacre lost his whistleblower's immunity, and consequently spent eight and a half years in federal prison. He was released in December 2006. Whitacre is currently the chief science officer and President of Operations at Cypress Systems, a California biotechnology firm.\nEarly life and education.\nWhitacre holds B.S. and M.S. degrees from Ohio State University, and earned a PhD in nutritional biochemistry from Cornell University (1983).\nPer Whitacre\u2019s official website, while he was in prison from 1998 to 2006, he received more graduate degrees via correspondence. For example, he received a Juris Doctor and a Master of Laws from an online State Bar of California accredited Northwestern California University School of Law. In addition, Whitacre also received in prison via correspondence another Juris Doctor, a Master of Business Administration, a PhD in psychology, and a PhD in economics from Kensington University, an unaccredited distance education institution closed in 2003.\nCareer.\nWhitacre was a PhD scientist at Ralston Purina after he graduated from Cornell University in early 1983. He then was Vice President at Evonik from 1984 to 1989 prior to joining ADM. In late 1989, Whitacre became the President of the BioProducts Division at ADM. In 1992, he was promoted to Corporate Vice President of ADM, as well as being President of the BioProducts Division. On August 9, 1995, Whitacre was terminated for conducting a $9.5 million fraud after ADM learned that he was an FBI informant for three years. Whitacre wore a wire for the FBI assisting in one of the largest price fixing cases in U.S. history, against ADM.\nAfter leaving ADM in August 1995, Whitacre was hired as the CEO of Future Health Technologies (FHT), which soon was renamed Biomar International. He worked at Biomar until his incarceration began during early 1998.\nIn December 2006, after his release from federal prison, Whitacre was hired by Cypress Systems Inc., a California biotechnology company, as the President of Technology and Business Development. In March 2008, Whitacre was promoted to the company's Chief Operating Officer (COO) and President of operations.\nLegal issues.\nADM price-fixing.\nIn 1992, during an ADM-initiated investigation of corporate espionage and sabotage, Whitacre informed an FBI agent that he and other ADM executives were involved in an illegal multinational lysine price-fixing scheme. Whitacre's wife pressured him into becoming a whistleblower after she threatened to go to the FBI herself.\nOver the next three years, Whitacre worked with FBI agents to collect information and record conversations with both ADM executives and its competitors. ADM ultimately settled federal charges for more than $100\u00a0million and paid hundreds of millions of dollars more to plaintiffs and customers ($400\u00a0million alone on a high-fructose corn syrup class action case).\nWhitacre embezzlement.\nA few years into the price-fixing investigation, Whitacre confessed to his FBI handlers that he had been involved with corporate kickbacks and money laundering at ADM. Whitacre was later convicted of embezzling $9\u00a0million; some of this criminal activity occurred during the time he was cooperating with the FBI.\nSentencing and release.\nWhitacre pled guilty to tax evasion and fraud and was sent to prison on March 4, 1998. Although some officials in the FBI and the Department of Justice opposed the length of the penalty, Whitacre was sentenced to nine years in Federal prison. In December 2006, he was released on good behavior after serving eight and a half years.\nDiffering perspectives.\nKurt Eichenwald.\nIn his 2000 book, \"The Informant\", Kurt Eichenwald, a former \"The New York Times\" reporter, portrays Whitacre as a complex figure: while working for the FBI as one of the best and most effective undercover cooperating witnesses the U.S. government ever had, Whitacre was simultaneously committing a $9\u00a0million white-collar crime. According to Eichenwald, preceding the investigation Whitacre was scammed by a group in Nigeria in an advance fee fraud, and suggests that Whitacre's losses in the scam may have been the initial reason behind his embezzlement activity at ADM.\nEichenwald writes that Whitacre lied and became delusional in a failed attempt to save himself, making the FBI investigation much more difficult. \"The Informant\" details Whitacre's bizarre behavior, including Whitacre cracking under pressure, increasing his mania, telling the media that FBI agents tried to force him to destroy tapes (a story that Whitacre later recanted), and attempting suicide. Two doctors later diagnosed Whitacre as suffering from bipolar disorder. Eichenwald concludes that Whitacre's sentence was unjust because of his mental instability at the time.\nEichenwald, two prosecutors, an FBI agent, and Mark Whitacre (during his incarceration) were featured on a September 15, 2000, episode of the radio program \"This American Life\" about the ADM case. Eichenwald referred to Whitacre's sentence as \"excessive and a law enforcement failure\" because Whitacre never received credit for his substantial cooperation in assisting the government with the massive price-fixing case.\nFeature film.\n\"The Informant!\" is a Warner Bros. feature film released on September 18, 2009. Produced by Jennifer Fox and directed by Steven Soderbergh, the dark comedy/drama film stars Matt Damon as Whitacre. The screenplay by Scott Z. Burns is based on Kurt Eichenwald's book, \"The Informant\", with most of the filming done in Central Illinois (Blue Mound, Springfield, Moweaqua and Decatur). In the movie, the character of Whitacre is portrayed as exhibiting bizarre behavior, including delusions, mania, and compulsively lying. It was eventually learned that Whitacre was suffering from bipolar disorder.\nJames B. Lieber.\nIn his 2000 book, \"Rats In The Grain\", attorney James B. Lieber focuses on ADM's price-fixing trial and presents Whitacre as an American hero overpowered by ADM's vast political clout. \"Rats In The Grain\" presents evidence that the U.S. Department of Justice often subjugated itself to ADM's political power and well-connected attorneys in prosecuting Whitacre.\nLieber reveals that, in 1996, \"ADM CEO, Mr. Dwayne Andreas, told \"The Washington Post\" that he had known about Whitacre's frauds for three years\" and speculates that Whitacre was fired and turned over to the Federal authorities only after ADM learned he had been working as an FBI mole. If he knew about Whitacre's embezzlement for three years, Lieber asks, why didn't Andreas fire Whitacre immediately? Lieber surmises: \"There were only two logical explanations for Andreas' behavior: either he did not think the funds were stolen (in other words, they were approved) or he didn't care.\"\nBased on the fact that other ADM executives committed crimes such as financial fraud by a former treasurer and technology thefts by others, Lieber concludes that fraud was well-known and widespread at ADM during the 1990s. Lieber suggests that ADM would have not turned Whitacre over to the authorities if he had not been a mole for the FBI.\nLike Eichenwald, Lieber concludes that Whitacre's lengthy prison sentence was excessive and unjust when one takes into account Whitacre's cooperation in the much larger price-fixing case.\nLieber also poses this question: \"Where will the government obtain the next Mark Whitacre after potential whistleblowers observe how Whitacre was treated?\"\nClemency and pardon support.\nAppeals for Whitacre's full pardon or clemency to the White House were supported by several current and former justice department officials: Dean Paisley, a retired 25-year veteran and former FBI supervisor on the price-fixing case; two other FBI agents involved with the case; a former Attorney General of the United States; one of the former Asst. U.S. Attorneys who prosecuted Whitacre; two prosecutors from the Canadian Department of Justice; several Senators and Congressmen; Cornell University and Ohio State University professors; Major League Baseball Hall of Famer Harmon Killebrew; Chuck Colson; and numerous top executives of corporations.\nIn 2008, more than ten years after the original conviction, Paisley and two other FBI agents went public with praise for Whitacre. Paisley concluded that \"Whitacre's fraud case was minuscule as compared to the ADM case Whitacre cooperated with.\" \"Had it not been for the fraud conviction,\" Paisley said, \"he would be a national hero. Well, he is a national hero.\" Paisley added, \"Without him, the biggest antitrust case we've ever had would not have been.\" On August 4, 2010, in a Discovery Channel documentary, \"Undercover: Operation Harvest King\", several FBI agents stated that \"Whitacre got a raw deal.\" In addition, official letters from the FBI in support of a Whitacre pardon were published in Floyd Perry's September 2009 book, \"Mark Whitacre: Against All Odds.\"\nDiscovery Channel TV documentary.\nA Discovery Channel TV documentary titled \"Undercover: Operation Harvest King\", which documents Mark Whitacre's role in the ADM price fixing case, aired several times during 2009 and 2010. Discovery Channel interviewed the three FBI agents who handled the Mark Whitacre/ADM case (i.e., Dean Paisley, Brian Shepard and Robert Herndon), along with Mark and Ginger Whitacre.\nPersonal life.\nWhitacre married his high school sweetheart, Ginger Gilbert, on June 16, 1979. Together they have three children.\nWhitacre became a Christian during his incarceration, and since his prison release during December 2006, he has been often interviewed by the Christian community-including the Christian Broadcasting Network (CBN)-about redemption, second chances, and the importance of his faith. Forbes reported that Whitacre was guest speaker at the Quantico FBI Academy during 2011 about second chances, and he was keynote speaker for the 40th Annual NAPSA (Pre Trial Services and U.S. Federal Probation) Conference in 2012 along with Robert F. Kennedy Jr.\nReferences.\nInline citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20528", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20528", "title": "Saint Methodius of Thessaloniki", "text": ""}
{"id": "20529", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20529", "title": "Marakesh Agreement", "text": ""}
{"id": "20531", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20531", "title": "Marrakesh Agreement", "text": "April 1994 international free trade agreement signed in Marrakech, Morocco\nThe Marrakesh Agreement, manifested by the Marrakesh Declaration, was an agreement signed in Marrakesh, Morocco, by 123 nations on 15 April 1994, marking the culmination of the 8-year-long Uruguay Round and establishing the World Trade Organization, which officially came into being on 1 January 1995.\nThe agreement developed out of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), supplemented by a number of other agreements on issues including trade in services, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, trade-related aspects of intellectual property and technical barriers to trade. It also established a new, more efficient and legally binding means of dispute resolution. The various agreements which make up the Marrakesh Agreement combine as an indivisible whole; no entity can be party to any one agreement without being party to them all.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20534", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20534", "title": "Mad", "text": "Mad, mad, MAD or M. A. D. may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20536", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20536", "title": "Mammals", "text": ""}
{"id": "20537", "revid": "39150892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20537", "title": "Mainz", "text": "Capital of Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany\nMainz (; see below) is the capital and largest city of the German state of Rhineland-Palatinate, and with around 223,000 inhabitants, it is Germany's 35th-largest city. It lies in the Rhine-Main Metropolitan Region\u2014Germany's second-largest metropolitan region after Rhine-Ruhr\u2014which also encompasses the cities of Frankfurt am Main, Wiesbaden, Darmstadt, Offenbach am Main, and Hanau.\nMainz is located at the northern end of the Upper Rhine Plain, on the left bank of the Rhine. It is the largest city of Rhenish Hesse, a region of Rhineland-Palatinate that was historically part of Hesse, and is one of Germany's most important wine regions because of its mild climate. Mainz is connected to Frankfurt am Main by the Rhine-Main S-Bahn rapid transit system. Before 1945, Mainz had six boroughs on the other side of the Rhine (see: ). Three have been incorporated into Wiesbaden (see: ), and three are now independent.\nMainz was founded as Castrum \"Mogontiacum\" by Roman general Nero Claudius Drusus in the 1st century BC on the northern frontier of the Roman Empire, and became the capital of the Roman province of Germania Superior. The city was settled by the Franks from 459 on, and in the 8th century it became an important city within the Holy Roman Empire, as capital of the Electorate of Mainz and seat of the Archbishop-Elector of Mainz, the primate of Germany. Mainz Cathedral is one of the three Rhenish Imperial Cathedrals along with Speyer Cathedral and Worms Cathedral. Since the 12th century, Mainz was one of the ShUM-cities\u2014a league formed by the cities of Speyer, Worms and Mainz\u2014which are referred to as the cradle of Ashkenazi Jewish life and as the center of Jewish life during medieval times. The Jewish heritage of these cities is one of a kind, and has been declared the UNESCO World Heritage Site of \"ShUM Sites of Speyer, Worms and Mainz\". Mainz is the birthplace of Johannes Gutenberg, who invented the printing press and introduced letterpress printing to Europe, starting the global spread of the printing press. Mainz was heavily damaged in World War II; more than 30 air raids destroyed around half of the old town in the city centre, but many buildings were rebuilt post-war.\nLike most cities in the Rhineland, Mainz holds extensive carnival celebrations, that are known as the second-most important in Germany, after the celebrations in Cologne. The borough of Lerchenberg is the seat of ZDF (Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen, lit. \"Second German Television\"), the second-most important German public service television broadcaster, as well as of 3sat, another television broadcaster, that is jointly operated by public broadcasters from Germany (ARD and ZDF), Austria (ORF), and Switzerland (SRG SSR).\nNames and etymology.\nAlthough the city is situated opposite the mouth of the Main, the name of Mainz is not from \"Main\", the similarity being perhaps reinforced by folk-etymological reanalysis. \"Main\" is from Latin \"Moenis\" (also \"Moenus\" or \"Menus\"), the name the Romans used for the river. Linguistic analysis of the many forms that the name \"Mainz\" has taken on make it clear that it is a simplification of \"Mogontiacum\". The name appears to be Celtic, however, it had also become Roman and was selected by them with a special significance. The Roman soldiers defending Gallia had adopted the Gallic god Mogons (Mogounus, Moguns, Mogonino), for the meaning of which etymology offers two basic options: \"the great one\", similar to Latin magnus, which was used in aggrandizing names such as \"Alexander magnus\", \"Alexander the Great\" and \"Pompeius magnus\", \"Pompey the Great\", or the god of \"might\" personified as it appears in young servitors of any type whether of noble or ignoble birth.\nMainz has a number of different names in other languages and dialects. In Latin it is known as () or and, in the local Hessian dialect, it is \"M\u00e4\u00e4nz\" or \"Meenz\" . It is known as in French, in Italian, in Spanish, in Portuguese, in Polish, () in Yiddish, and in Czech and Slovak ().\nBefore the 20th century, Mainz was commonly known in the Anglosphere either as \"Mentz\", its English version, or by its French version \"Mayence\". It is the namesake of two American cities named Mentz.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nMainz is on the 50th latitude north, on the left bank of the Rhine. The east of the city is opposite where the Main falls into it. As of 2021[ [update]], the population was 217,272. The city is part of the FrankfurtRheinMain area of 5.9 million people. Mainz can easily be reached from Frankfurt International Airport in 30 minutes by commuter railway or regional trains RE 2 RE 3 RB 31.\nThe river port of Mainz is located on the Rhine and thus on one of the most important waterways in Germany. The container port hub is north of the town centre.\nAfter the last ice age, sand dunes were deposited in the Rhine valley at what was to become the western edge of the city. The Mainz Sand Dunes area is now a nature reserve with a unique landscape and rare \"steppe\" vegetation for this area.\nWhile the Mainz legion camp was founded in 13/12 BC on the K\u00e4strich hill, the associated vici and canabae (civilian settlements) were erected towards the Rhine. Historical sources and archaeological findings both prove the importance of the military and civilian Mogontiacum as a port city on the Rhine.\nClimate.\nMainz features a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\", Trewartha: \"Dobk\"). The city is one of the warmest in Germany in winter.\nHistory.\nRoman Mogontiacum.\nThe Roman stronghold or \"castrum Mogontiacum\", the precursor to Mainz, was founded by the Roman general Drusus perhaps as early as 13/12 BC. As related by Suetonius the existence of \"Mogontiacum\" is well established by four years later (the account of the death and funeral of Nero Claudius Drusus). \nMogontiacum was an important military town throughout Roman times, probably due to its strategic position at the confluence of the Main and the Rhine. The town of \"Mogontiacum\" grew up between the fort and the river. The castrum was the base of Legio XIV \"Gemina\" and XVI \"Gallica\" (AD 9\u201343), XXII \"Primigenia\", IV \"Macedonica\" (43\u201370), I \"Adiutrix\" (70\u201388), XXI \"Rapax\" (70\u201389), and XIV \"Gemina\" (70\u201392), among others. Mainz was also a base of a Roman river fleet, the Classis Germanica. Remains of Roman troop ships (navis lusoria) and a patrol boat from the late 4th century were discovered in 1982/86 and may now be viewed in the Museum of Ancient Seafaring. A temple dedicated to Isis Panthea and Magna Mater was discovered in 2000 and is open to the public. The city was the provincial capital of Germania Superior, and had an important funeral monument dedicated to Drusus, to which people made pilgrimages for an annual festival from as far away as Lyon. Among the famous buildings were the largest theatre north of the Alps and a bridge across the Rhine. The city was also the site of the assassination of emperor Severus Alexander in 235.\nAlemanni forces under Rando sacked the city in 368. From the last day of 405 or 406, the Siling and Asding Vandals, the Suebi, the Alans, and other Germanic tribes crossed the Rhine, possibly at Mainz. Christian chronicles relate that the bishop, Aureus, was put to death by the Alemannian Crocus.\nThroughout the changes of time, the Roman castrum never seems to have been permanently abandoned as a military installation, which is a testimony to Roman military judgement. Different structures were built there at different times. The current citadel originated in 1660, but it replaced previous forts. It was used in World War II. One of the sights at the citadel is still the cenotaph raised by legionaries to commemorate their general, Drusus.\nFrankish Mainz.\nIn the 4th century, Alemans repeatedly invaded the neighborhood of Mogontiacum. In 357, the city was liberated by the Emperor Julian. The last emperor to station troops serving the western empire at Mainz was Valentinian III (reigned 425\u2013455), who relied heavily on his \"Magister militum per Gallias\", Flavius A\u00ebtius. In 451, Attila's Huns sacked the city.\nThe Franks from the middle and upper Rhine area took Mainz shortly before 460. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire in 476, the Franks under the rule of Clovis I gained control over western Europe by the year 496. Clovis, son of Childeric, became king of the Salians in 481, ruling from Tournai. He converted from paganism to Catholic Christianity. Theudebert I (c. 500\u2013547 or 548) had installed Sidonius as bishop of Mainz. Dagobert I (605/603\u2013639) reinforced the walls of Mainz.\nCharlemagne (768\u2013814), through a succession of wars against other tribes, built a vast Frankish empire in Europe. Mainz from its central location became important to the empire and to Christianity. Meanwhile, language change was gradually working to divide the Franks.\nAfter the death of Charlemagne, distinctions between France and Germany began to be made. The Rhine roughly formed the border of their territories, whereby the three important episcopal cities of Mainz, Worms and Speyer with their counties to the left of the Rhine were assigned to East Francia.\nChristian Mainz.\nIn the early Middle Ages, Mainz played a significant role in the Christianisation of the German and Slavic peoples. The first archbishop in Mainz, Boniface, was killed in 754 while attempting to convert the Frisians to Christianity and is buried in Fulda. The archbishopric of Mainz was established in 781 when Boniface's successor Lullus was granted the pallium by Pope Adrian I. Throughout history, the Archbishops of Mainz held high positions, including serving as archchancellors of the Holy Roman Empire. Notably, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Mainz is unique as it is the only diocese in the world with an episcopal see called a Holy See (sancta sedes). \nIbrahim ibn Yaqub, a 10th-century Hispano-Arabic, Sephardi Jewish traveler, writes the following about the city:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mainz [Magh\u0101nja] is a very large city, partly inhabited and partly cultivated fields. It is in the land of the Franks, on a river called the Rhine [R\u012bn]. Wheat, barley, rye, grapevines and fruit are plentiful.\nIn 1244, Archbishop Siegfried III granted Mainz a city charter, allowing the citizens to establish and elect a city council. In 1461, a feud between two archbishops, Diether von Isenburg and Adolf II von Nassau, caused unrest in the city. Following Archbishop Adolf's raid on Mainz in 1462, those who opposed him, including Johannes Gutenberg, were either expelled or imprisoned. Ultimately, after the death of Archbishop Adolf II, Diether von Isenburg was reinstated as the Archbishop of Mainz, duly elected by the chapter and appointed by the Pope.\nEarly Jewish community.\nThe Jewish community of Mainz dates back to the 10th century CE. It is noted for its religious education. Rabbi Gershom ben Judah (960\u20131040) taught there, among others. He concentrated on the study of the Talmud, creating a German Jewish tradition. Mainz is also the legendary home of the martyred Rabbi Amnon of Mainz, that the composition of the Unetanneh Tokef prayer is attributed to him. From the late 12th century rabbis met in synods.\nThe city of Mainz responded to the Jewish population in a variety of ways, behaving in a capricious manner towards them. Sometimes they were allowed freedom and were protected; at other times, they were persecuted. Jews were attacked in the Rhineland massacres of 1096 and by mobs in 1283. The Jews were expelled in 1438, 1462 (after which they were invited to return), and in 1470. Outbreaks of the Black Death were usually blamed on the Jews, at which times they were massacred, such as the murder of 6000 Jews in 1349.\nOutside of the medieval city centre, there is a Jewish cemetery, with over 1500 headstones dating from the 11th through the 19th centuries. The earliest known gravestone is date to 1062 or 1063, and these early gravestones resemble those found in Italy in the 8th\u20139th centuries.\nRepublic of Mainz.\nDuring the French Revolution, the French Revolutionary army occupied Mainz in 1792; the Archbishop-elector of Mainz, Friedrich Karl Josef von Erthal, had already fled to Aschaffenburg by the time the French marched in. On 18 March 1793, the Jacobins of Mainz, with other German democrats from about 130 towns in the Rhenish Palatinate, proclaimed the 'Republic of Mainz'. Led by Georg Forster, representatives of the Mainz Republic in Paris requested political affiliation of the Mainz Republic with France, but too late: Prussia was not entirely happy with the idea of a democratic free state on German soil (although the French dominated Mainz was neither free nor democratic). Prussian troops had already occupied the area and besieged Mainz by the end of March 1793. After a siege of 18 weeks, the French troops in Mainz surrendered on 23 July 1793; Prussians occupied the city and ended the Republic of Mainz. It came to the Battle of Mainz in 1795 between Austria and France. Members of the Mainz Jacobin Club were mistreated or imprisoned and punished for treason.\nIn 1797, the French returned. The army of Napoleon Bonaparte occupied the German territory to the west of the Rhine, and the Treaty of Campo Formio awarded France this entire area, initially as the Cisrhenian Republic. On 17 February 1800, the French \"D\u00e9partement du Mont-Tonnerre\" was founded here, with Mainz as its capital, the Rhine being the new eastern frontier of la Grande Nation. Austria and Prussia could not but approve this new border with France in 1801. However, after several defeats in Europe during the War of the Sixth Coalition, the weakened Napoleon and his troops had to leave Mainz in May 1814.\nRhenish Hesse.\nIn 1816, the part of the former French D\u00e9partement which is known today as Rhenish Hesse () was awarded to the Hesse-Darmstadt, Mainz being the capital of the new Hessian province of Rhenish Hesse. From 1816 to 1866, a part of the German Confederation, Mainz was the most important fortress in the defence against France, and had a strong garrison of Austrian, Prussian and Bavarian troops.\nOn the afternoon of 18 November 1857, a huge explosion rocked Mainz when the city's powder magazine, the \"Pulverturm\", exploded. Approximately 150 people were killed and at least 500 injured; 57 buildings were destroyed and a similar number severely damaged in what was to be known as the \"Powder Tower Explosion\" or \"Powder Explosion\".\nDuring the Austro-Prussian War in 1866, Mainz was declared a neutral zone. After the founding of the German Empire in 1871, Mainz no longer was as important a stronghold, because in the Franco-Prussian War France had lost the territory of Alsace-Lorraine to Germany (which France had occupied bit by bit from 1630 to 1795), and this defined the new border between the two countries.\nIndustrial expansion.\nFor centuries the inhabitants of the fortress of Mainz had suffered from a severe shortage of space which led to disease and other inconveniences. In 1872 Mayor Carl Wallau and the council of Mainz persuaded the military government to sign a contract to expand the city. Beginning in 1874, the city of Mainz assimilated the \"Gartenfeld\", an idyllic area of meadows and fields along the banks of the Rhine to the north of the rampart. The city expansion more than doubled the urban area which allowed Mainz to participate in the Industrial Revolution which had previously avoided the city for decades.\nEduard Krey\u00dfig was the man who made this happen. Having been the master-builder of the city of Mainz since 1865, Krey\u00dfig had the vision for the new part of town, the \"Neustadt\". He also planned the first sewer system for the old part of town since Roman times and persuaded the city government to relocate the railway line from the Rhine side to the west end of the town. The main station was built from 1882 to 1884 according to the plans of Philipp Johann Berdell\u00e9.\nKrey\u00dfig constructed a number of state-of-the-art public buildings, including the Mainz town hall \u2013 which was the largest of its kind in Germany at that time \u2013 as well a synagogue, the Rhine harbour and a number of public baths and school buildings. Krey\u00dfig's last work was Christ Church (\"Christuskirche\"), the largest Protestant church in the city and the first building constructed solely for the use of a Protestant congregation. In 1905 the demolition of the entire circumvallation and the Rheingauwall was taken in hand, according to the imperial order of Wilhelm II.\n20th century.\nDuring the German Revolution of 1918 the Mainz Workers' and Soldiers' Council was formed which ran the city from 9 November until the arrival of French troops under the terms of the occupation of the Rhineland agreed in the Armistice. The French occupation was confirmed by the Treaty of Versailles which went into effect 28 June 1919. The Rhineland (in which Mainz is located) was to be a demilitarized zone until 1935 and the French garrison, representing the \"Triple Entente\", was to stay until reparations were paid.\nIn 1923 Mainz participated in the Rhineland separatist movement that proclaimed a Rhenish Republic. It collapsed in 1924. The French withdrew on 30 June 1930. Adolf Hitler became chancellor of Germany in January 1933 and his political opponents, especially those of the Social Democratic Party, were either incarcerated or murdered. Some were able to move away from Mainz in time. One was the political organizer for the SPD, Friedrich Kellner, who went to Laubach, where, as the chief justice inspector of the district court, he continued his opposition against the Nazis by recording their misdeeds in a 900-page diary.\nIn March 1933, a detachment from the National Socialist Party in Worms brought the party to Mainz. They hoisted the swastika on all public buildings and began to denounce the Jewish population in the newspapers. In 1936, the Nazis remilitarized the Rhineland with great fanfare, the first move of Nazi Germany's meteoric expansion. The former Triple Entente took no action.\nDuring World War II the citadel at Mainz hosted the Oflag XII-B prisoner of war camp. The city was also the location of four subcamps of the Hinzert concentration camp, mostly for Luxembourgish, Polish, Dutch and Soviet prisoners, but also Belgian, French and Italian.\nDuring World War II, several air raids destroyed about 80 per cent of the city's centre, including most of the historic buildings. Mainz was captured on 22 March 1945 against uneven German resistance (staunch in some sectors and weak in other parts of the city) by the 90th Infantry Division under William A. McNulty, a formation of the XII Corps under Third Army commanded by General George S. Patton Jr.\nFrom 1945 to 1949, the city was part of the French zone of occupation. When the state of Rhineland-Palatinate was founded on 30 August 1946 by the commander of the French army on the French occupation zone Marie Pierre K\u0153nig, Mainz became the capital of the new state. In 1962, the diarist, Friedrich Kellner, returned to spend his last years in Mainz. His life in Mainz, and the impact of his writings, is the subject of the Canadian documentary \"\".\nFollowing the withdrawal of French forces from Mainz, the United States Army Europe occupied the military bases in Mainz. \nRecent history.\nNowadays the Jewish community is growing rapidly, and a new synagogue by the architect Manuel Herz was constructed in 2010 on the site of the one destroyed by the Nazis on \"Kristallnacht\" in 1938. As of 2021[ [update]], the Jewish community Mainz has 985 members.\nToday the United States Army Europe and Africa only occupies McCulley Barracks in Wackernheim and the Mainz Sand Dunes as training areas. Mainz is home to the headquarters of the \"Bundeswehr\"'s \"Landeskommando Rhineland-Palatinate\" and other units.\nCityscape.\nArchitecture.\nThe destruction caused by the Bombing of Mainz in World War II led to the most intense phase of building in the history of the town. During the last war in Germany, more than 30 air raids destroyed about 80 per cent of the city's centre, including most of the historic buildings. The attack on the afternoon of 27 February 1945 remains the most destructive of all 33 bombings that Mainz has suffered in World War II in the collective memory of most of the population living then. This air raid made an already hard-hit city even more levelled.\nNevertheless, the post-war reconstruction took place very slowly. While cities such as Frankfurt had been rebuilt fast by a central authority, only individual efforts were initially successful in rebuilding Mainz. The reason for this was that the French wanted Mainz to expand and become a model city. Mainz lay within the French-controlled sector of Germany and it was a French architect and town-planner, Marcel Lods, who produced a Le Corbusier-style plan of an ideal architecture. But the first interest of the inhabitants was the restoration of housing areas. Even after the failure of the model city plans it was the initiative of the French (founding of the Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz, elevation of Mainz to the state capital of Rhineland-Palatinate, the early resumption of the Mainz carnival) driving the city in a positive development after the war. The City Plan of 1958 by Ernst May allowed a regulated reconstruction for the first time. In 1950, the seat of the government of Rhineland-Palatinate had been transferred to the new Mainz and in 1963 the seat of the new ZDF, notable architects were Adolf Bayer, Richard J\u00f6rg and Egon Hartmann. At the time of the two-thousand-years-anniversary in 1962 the city was largely reconstructed. During the 1950s and 1960s, the Oberstadt had been extended, M\u00fcnchfeld and Lerchenberg added as suburbs, the Altstadttangente (intersection of the old town), new neighbourhoods as Westring and S\u00fcdring contributed to the extension. By 1970 there remained only a few ruins. The new town hall of Mainz had been designed by Arne Jacobsen and finished by Dissing+Weitling. The town used Jacobsens activity for the Danish Novo company erecting a new office and warehouse building to contact him. The urban renewal of the old town changed the inner city. In the framework of the preparation of the cathedrals millennium, pedestrian zones were developed around the cathedral, in northern direction to the Neubrunnenplatz and in a southern direction across the Leichhof to the Augustinerstra\u00dfe and Kirschgarten. The 1980s brought the renewal of the fa\u00e7ades on the Markt and a new inner-city neighbourhood on the K\u00e4strich. During the 1990s the Kisselberg and the \"Fort Malakoff Center\" at the site of the old police barracks were built.\nAdministration.\nThe city of Mainz is divided into 15 local districts according to the main statute of the city of Mainz. Each local district has a district administration of 13 members and a directly elected mayor, who is the chairman of the district administration. This local council decides on important issues affecting the local area, however, the final decision on new policies is made by Mainz's municipal council.\nIn accordance with section 29 paragraph 2 Local Government Act of Rhineland-Palatinate, which refers to municipalities of more than 150,000 inhabitants, the city council has 60 members.\nDistricts of the town are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUntil 1945, the districts of Bischofsheim (now an independent town), Ginsheim-Gustavsburg (which together are an independent town) belonged to Mainz. The former districts Am\u00f6neburg, Kastel, and Kostheim \u2013 (in short, \"AKK\") are now administered by the city of Wiesbaden (on the north bank of the river). The AKK was separated from Mainz when the Rhine was designated the boundary between the French occupation zone (the later state of Rhineland-Palatinate) and the U.S. occupation zone (Hesse) in 1945.\nCoat of arms.\nThe coat of arms of Mainz is derived from the coat of arms of the Archbishops of Mainz and features two six-spoked silver wheels connected by a silver cross on a red background.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMainz has a population of about 220,000 and is the largest city in Rhineland-Palatinate. Mainz passed 100,000 in 1908. In 1945, After WWII, right side of the Rhine river, which were a part of Mainz, became a part of Wiesbaden and other part of Hesse due to its occupation zone where Mainz and Rhineland-Palatinate were French occupation zone and Wiesbaden and Hesse were American occupation zone where both cities became its state capital in 1946. Mainz lost 21.1% of population at this time. Mainz and Wiesbaden has rivalries who the better city on the Rhine river are even today. Mainz became an attractive city, especially for young people due to its radio and television broadcasters, Universities and good workplaces. Mainz's population grow normally and Mainz passed 200,000 in 2011.\nForeign populations.\nThe following list shows the largest foreign populations in Mainz as of 2022[ [update]]:\nPolitics.\nMayor.\nThe mayor of Mainz was Michael Ebling of the Social Democratic Party (SPD) until he was promoted State Minister of the Interior in the government of Rhineland-Palatinate in October 2022. The new mayoral election was held on 12 February 2023, with a runoff after Mainz carnival. The final election took place 5 March 2023. The new elected mayor is Nino Haase, independent.\nElection 2019 of the council:\nCity council.\nThe Mainz city council governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 26 May 2019, and the results were as follows:\nCulture.\nMainz is home to a Carnival, the \"Mainzer Fassenacht\" or \"Fastnacht\", which has developed since the early 19th century. Carnival in Mainz has its roots in the criticism of social and political injustices under the shelter of cap and bells. Today, the uniforms of many traditional Carnival clubs still imitate and caricature the uniforms of the French and Prussian troops of the past. The height of the carnival season is on Rosenmontag (\"rose Monday\"), when there is a large parade in Mainz, with more than 500,000 people celebrating in the streets.\nThe first-ever Katholikentag, a festival-like gathering of German Catholics, was held in Mainz in 1848.\nJohannes Gutenberg, credited with the invention of the printing press, was born here and died here. Since 1968 the Mainzer Johannisnacht commemorates the person Johannes Gutenberg in his native city. The Mainz University, which was refounded in 1946, is named after Gutenberg; the earlier University of Mainz that dated back to 1477 had been closed down by Napoleon's troops in 1798.\nMainz was one of three important centres of Jewish theology and learning in Central Europe during the Middle Ages. Known collectively as \"Shum\", the cities of Speyer, Worms and Mainz played a key role in the preservation and propagation of Talmudic scholarship.\nThe city is the seat of Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen (literally, \"Second German Television\", ZDF), one of two federal nationwide TV broadcasters. There are also a couple of radio stations based in Mainz. The Mainzer Stadtschreiber (City clerk in Mainz) is an annual German literature award.\nOther cultural aspects of the city include:\nSports.\nThe local football club 1. FSV Mainz 05 has a long history in the German football leagues. Since 2004 it has competed in the Bundesliga (First German soccer league) except a break in second level in 2007\u201308 season. Mainz is closely associated with renowned coach J\u00fcrgen Klopp, who spent the vast majority of his playing career at the club and was also the manager for seven years, leading the club to Bundesliga football for the first time. After leaving Mainz Klopp went on to win two Bundesliga titles and reaching a Champions League final with Borussia Dortmund. In the summer of 2011, the club opened its new stadium called Coface Arena, which was later renamed Opel Arena. Further relevant football clubs are TSV Schott Mainz, SV Gonsenheim, Fontana Finthen, FC Fortuna Mombach and FVgg Mombach 03.\nThe local wrestling club ASV Mainz 1888 is currently in the top division of team wrestling in Germany, the Bundesliga. In 1973, 1977, 2012 and 2023 the ASV Mainz 1888 won the German championship.\nIn 2007 the Mainz Athletics won the German Men's Championship in baseball.\nAs a result of the 2008 invasion of Georgia by Russian troops, Mainz acted as a neutral venue for the Georgian Vs Republic of Ireland football game.\nThe biggest basketball club in the city is the ASC Theresianum Mainz. Its men's team is playing in the Regionalliga and its women's team is playing in the 2.DBBL.\nUSC Mainz.\nUniversit\u00e4ts-Sportclub Mainz (University Sports Club Mainz) is a German sports club based in Mainz (Germany). It was founded on 9 September 1959 by Berno Wischmann primarily for students of the University of Mainz. It is considered one of the most powerful Athletics Sports clubs in Germany. 50 athletes of USC have distinguished themselves in a half-century in club history at Olympic Games, World and European Championships. In particular in the decathlon dominated USC athletes for decades: Already at the European Championships in Budapest in 1966, Mainz won three (Werner von Moltke, J\u00f6rg Mattheis and Horst Beyer) all decathlon medals. In the all-time list of the USC, there are nine athletes who have achieved more than 8,000 points \u2013 at the head of Siegfried Wentz (8762 points in 1983) and Guido Kratschmer (1980 world record with 8667 points). The most successful athlete of the association is more fighter, sprinter and long jumper Ingrid Becker (Olympic champion in 1968 in the pentathlon and Olympic champion in 1972 in the 4 \u00d7 100 Metres Relay and European champion in 1971 in the long jump). The most famous athletes of the present are the sprinter Marion Wagner (world champion in 2001 in the 4 \u00d7 100 Metres Relay) and the pole vaulters Carolin Hingst (Eighth of the 2008 Olympics in Beijing) and Anna Battke.\nThree world titles adorn the balance of USC Mainz. For the discus thrower, Lars Riedel attended (1991 and 1993) and the already mentioned sprinter Marion Wagner (2001). Added to 5 titles at the European Championships, a total of 65 international medals and 260 victories at the German Athletics Championships.\nThe players of USC's basketball section played from the season 1968/69 to the season 1974/75 in the National Basketball League (BBL) of the German Basketball Federation (DBB). As a finalist to winning the DBB Cup in 1971 USC Mainz played in the 1971\u201372 FIBA European Cup Winners' Cup against the Italian Cup winners of Fides Napoli.\nMainz Athletics.\nThe Baseball and Softball Club Mainz Athletics is a German baseball and softball club located in the city of Mainz in Rhineland-Palatinate. The Athletics is one of the largest clubs in the Baseball-Bundesliga S\u00fcd in terms of membership, claiming to have hundreds of active players. The club has played in the Baseball-Bundesliga for more than two decades and has won the German Championship in 2007 and 2016.\nEconomy.\nMainz is one of the top three 'European Rising Innovative Cities 2022' and was awarded second place in the 'European Rising Innovative City 2022' category. In the Future Map 2025, published by Handelsblatt, the city of Mainz was ranked seventh out of 400 German districts and independent cities, making it one of the places with 'high future opportunities'.\nWine centre.\nMainz is documented to be a wine-growing region since bishop Boniface acquired a vineyard bordering the city wall and further vine plantations in Bretzenheim in 752 and is one of the centres of the German wine industry. Since 2008, the city is a member of the Great Wine Capitals Global Network (GWC), an association of well-known wineculture-cities of the world. Many wine traders work in the city. The sparkling wine producer Kupferberg produced in Mainz-Hechtsheim and Henkell \u2013 now located on the other side of the river Rhine \u2013 were once founded in Mainz. The famous Blue Nun, one of the first branded wines, was marketed by the Sichel family. The \"Haus des Deutschen Weines\" (House of German Wine), is located in the city. The Mainzer Weinmarkt (wine market) is one of the great wine fairs in Germany.\nOther industries.\nThe Schott AG, one of the world's largest glass manufacturers, as well as the Werner &amp; Mertz, a large chemical factory, are based in Mainz. Other companies such as IBM, QUINN Plastics, or Novo Nordisk have their German administration in Mainz as well. BioNTech, a biotechnology company developing immunotherapies including a vaccine against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was founded in 2008 in Mainz by scientists U\u011fur \u015eahin, and \u00d6zlem T\u00fcreci, with the Austrian oncologist Christoph Huber.\nJohann-Joseph Krug, founder of France's famous Krug champagne house in 1843, was born in Mainz in 1800.\nTransport.\nMainz is a major transport hub in southern Germany. It is an important component in European distribution, as it has the fifth largest inter-modal port in Germany. The Port of Mainz, now handling mainly containers, is a sizable industrial area to the north of the city, along the banks of the Rhine. In order to open up space along the city's riverfront for residential development, it was shifted further northwards in 2010.\nRail.\nMainz Central Station or \"Mainz Hauptbahnhof\", is frequented by 80,000 travelers and visitors each day and is therefore one of the busiest 21 stations in Germany. It is a stop for the S-Bahn line S8 of the Rhein-Main-Verkehrsverbund. Additionally, the Mainbahn line to Frankfurt Hbf starts at the station. It is served by 440 daily local and regional trains (StadtExpress, RE and RB) and 78 long-distance trains (IC, EC and ICE). Intercity-Express lines connect Mainz with Frankfurt (Main), Karlsruhe Hbf, Worms Hauptbahnhof and Koblenz Hauptbahnhof. It is a terminus of the West Rhine Railway and the Mainz\u2013Ludwigshafen railway, as well as the Alzey\u2013Mainz Railway erected by the Hessische Ludwigsbahn in 1871. Access to the East Rhine Railway is provided by the Kaiserbr\u00fccke, a railway bridge across the Rhine at the north end of Mainz.\nPublic transportation.\nThe Mainz Central Station is an interchange point for the Mainz tramway network, and an important bus junction for the city and region (RNN, ORN and MVG).\nCycling.\nMainz offers a wide array of bicycle transportation facilities and events, including several miles of on-street bike lanes. The Rheinradweg (Rhine Cycle Route) is an international cycle route, running from the source to the mouth of the Rhine, traversing four countries at a distance of . Another cycling tour runs towards Bingen and further to the Middle Rhine, a UNESCO World Heritage Site (2002).\nAir transportation.\nMainz is served by Frankfurt Airport, the busiest airport by passenger traffic in Germany by far, the third busiest in Europe and the ninth busiest worldwide in 2009. Located about east of Mainz, it is connected to the city by an S-Bahn line.\nThe small Mainz Finthen Airport, located just southwest of Mainz, is used by general aviation only. Another airport, Frankfurt-Hahn Airport located about west of Mainz, is served by a few low-cost carriers.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMainz is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMainz has friendly relations with:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20538", "revid": "7523687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20538", "title": "Mujahedin", "text": ""}
{"id": "20540", "revid": "27738727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20540", "title": "Maria Feodorovna (Dagmar of Denmark)", "text": "Empress of Russia from 1881 to 1894\nMaria Feodorovna (; 26 November 1847 \u2013 13 October 1928), known before her marriage as Princess Dagmar of Denmark, was Empress of Russia from 1881 to 1894 as the wife of Emperor Alexander III. She was the fourth child and second daughter of Christian IX of Denmark and Louise of Hesse-Kassel. Maria\u2019s eldest son, Nicholas, was the last Emperor of Russia, ruling from 1 November 1894 until his abdication on 15 March 1917.\nAppearance and personality.\nDagmar was known for her beauty. Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge said that Dagmar was \"sweetly pretty\" and commented favorably on her \"splendid dark eyes\". Her fianc\u00e9 Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsesarevich of Russia was enthusiastic about her beauty. He wrote to his mother that \"she is even prettier in real life than in the portraits that we had seen so far. Her eyes speak for her: they are so kind, intelligent, animated.\" When she was tsarevna, Thomas W. Knox met her at Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich of Russia's wedding and wrote favorably about her beauty compared to that of the bride, Duchess Marie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. He wrote that Dagmar was \"less inclined to stoutness than the bride, she does not display such a plumpness of shoulder, and her neck rises more swan-like and gives fuller play to her finely formed head, with its curly hair and Grecian outline of face.\" He also commented favorably on \"her keen, clear, and flashing eyes.\"\nDagmar was intelligent. When considering Dagmar for her second son, Prince Alfred, Queen Victoria judged that \"Dagmar is cleverer [than her older sister, Alexandra]... she is a very nice girl.\" When she married, she was unable to speak any Russian. However, within a few years, she mastered the language and was so proficient that her husband wrote to her in Russian. She told an American minister to Russia that \"the Russian language is full of power and beauty, it equals the Italian in music, the English in vigorous power and copiousness.\" She claimed that \"for compactness of expression\", Russian rivaled \"Latin, and for the making of new words is equal to the Greek.\"\nDagmar was very fashionable. John Logan, a visitor to Russia, described her as \"the best dressed woman in Europe\". He claimed that Empress Elisabeth of Austria \"excelled her in beauty\" but that \"no one touched\" her \"in frocks\". Charles Frederick Worth, a Parisian couturier, greatly admired her style. He said, \"Bring to me any woman in Europe-- queen, artiste, or bourgeoise-- who can inspire me as does Madame Her Majesty, and I will make her confections while I live and charge her nothing.\"\nDagmar was very charming and likable. After meeting her, Thomas W. Knox wrote, \"No wonder the emperor likes her, and no wonder the Russians like her. I like her, and I am neither emperor nor any other Russian, and never exchanged a thousand words with her in my life.\" Maria von Bock, the daughter of Pyotr Stolypin, wrote, \"kind, amiable, simple in her discourse, Maria Feodorovna was an Empress from head to toe, combining an inborn majesty with such goodness that she was idolized by all who knew her.\" Meriel Buchanan wrote that she possessed a \"gracious and delightful charm of manner.\" Andrew Dickson White, the U.S. minister to Russia, said that she was \"graceful, with a most kindly face and manner\" and that she was \"in every way cordial and kindly.\" Nadine Wonar-Larsky, her lady-in-waiting, noted that \"her smile cheered everyone and her gracious manner always suggested a touch of personal feeling which went straight to the hearts of her subjects. She also possessed that priceless royal gift of never forgetting a face or name.\"\nEarly life.\nPrincess Marie Sophie Frederikke Dagmar was born on 26 November 1847 at her parents' residence in the Yellow Mansion, an 18th-century town house at 18 Amaliegade, which is located immediately adjacent to the Amalienborg Palace complex, the principal residence of the Danish royal family in the district of Frederiksstaden in central Copenhagen. She was the fourth child and second daughter of the then Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg, a member of a princely cadet line, and his wife Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel. She was baptised as a Lutheran in the Yellow Mansion with Queen Caroline Amalie of Denmark as her Godmother, and named after her kinswoman Marie Sophie Frederikke of Hesse-Kassel, Queen Dowager of Denmark, as well as the popular medieval Danish queen, Dagmar of Bohemia, in accordance with the national romantic fashion of the time. Growing up, she was known by the name Dagmar. Most of her adult life, however, she was known as Maria Feodorovna, the name which she took when she converted to Orthodoxy immediately before her 1866 marriage to the future Emperor Alexander III. Within her family, she was known as \"Minnie\" throughout her life.\nIn 1852 Dagmar's father became heir-presumptive to the throne of Denmark, largely due to the succession rights of his wife Louise as niece of King Christian VIII. In 1853, he was given the title Prince of Denmark and he and his family were given an official summer residence, Bernstorff Palace, north of Copenhagen. It quickly became Princess Louise's favorite residence, and the family often stayed there. The children grew up within a close-knit family, in what is described as a humble but happy environment. During the children's childhood, the father only had his officer salary to live on, and the family lived a relatively simple life according to royal norms. Their household only had six employees, and Dagmar and her siblings were allowed to walk around the streets of Copenhagen during their childhood and do such things as go to the market and visit cafes. Only very rarely did they take part in ceremonial functions and then immediately had to take off their fine clothes again so as not to risk getting them dirty. Dagmar's parents emphasized giving the children a simple civic upbringing that placed great emphasis on royal duties. Later, all the children became known for their effortless ability to interact with people, their sense of duty and ability to represent.\nDagmar was closest to her eldest sister, Alexandra, and they maintained a strong connection to each other all their lives. The two princesses shared a room in the Yellow Mansion and were raised together. The sisters received the same education deemed appropriate for upper-class girls: they were taught housekeeping by their mother, and learned to dance, play music, paint and draw, and speak French, English, and German by tutors. However, the father also insisted that they learn gymnastics and sports, which was more unusual for girls. During their upbringing, Dagmar and Alexandra were given swimming lessons by the Swedish pioneer of swimming for women, Nancy Edberg; she would later welcome Edberg to Russia, where she came on royal scholarship to hold swimming lessons for women. Dagmar is described as lively and intelligent, sweet but less beautiful than Alexandra, and better at painting and drawing than her sisters, who, on the other hand, were more talented in music.\nUpon the death of King Frederick VII in 1863, Dagmar's father became King of Denmark, as she turned 16 years old. Due to the brilliant marital alliances of his children, he became known as the \"Father-in-law of Europe\". Dagmar's eldest brother would succeed his father as King Frederik VIII of Denmark (one of whose sons would be elected as King of Norway). Her elder, and favourite, sister, Alexandra married Albert Edward, the Prince of Wales (the future King Edward VII) in March 1863. Alexandra, along with being queen consort of King Edward VII, was also mother of George V of the United Kingdom, which helps to explain the striking resemblance between their sons Nicholas II and George V. Within months of Alexandra's marriage, Dagmar's second older brother, Vilhelm, was elected as King George I of Greece. Her younger sister was Thyra, Duchess of Cumberland. She also had a younger brother, Valdemar.\nEngagements and marriage.\nFirst engagement.\nAt the end of 1863, as the daughter and sister of the kings of Denmark and Greece and sister-in-law of the Prince of Wales, Dagmar was now considered one of Europe's most coveted princesses. She received a proposal from Crown Prince Umberto of Italy, but was reluctant to marry him because she found him unattractive. Her mother was also reluctant to support such a marriage as she saw a greater status in the prospect of Dagmar marrying into the Russian imperial family. Due to the rise of Slavophile ideology in the Russian Empire, Alexander II of Russia searched for a bride for the heir apparent, Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsesarevich of Russia, in countries other than the German states that had traditionally provided consorts for the tsars. Princess Dagmar was one of the candidates, and as early as 1860 the emperor had made his first inquiries about a possible engagement. There were also already family ties between the two families, as Dagmar's uncle had been married to the emperor's sister.\nIn 1864, the Russian Empress Maria Alexandrovna announced that her son would visit Denmark, and during the summer Nicholas, or \"Nixa\" as he was known in his family, arrived at Fredensborg Palace, where the Danish royal family was staying. Nicholas had never met Dagmar, but had for a number of years collected photographs of her, and both families wanted the marriage. When they met, Dagmar and Nicholas were mutually attracted, and Nicholas wrote to his mother:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I came here as if in a fever (...) I can not describe to you what came over me, when we approached Fredenborg and I finally saw the sweet Dagmar. How can I describe it? She is so beautiful, direct, intelligent, experienced, and yet shy at the same time. She is even more beautiful in reality than in the pictures we have seen so far.\nAfter returning to Russia to obtain his father's permission, Nicholas proposed to Dagmar on 28 September 1864 in the Bernstorff Palace Gardens and received a yes. The engagement was announced at Bernstorff Palace later the same day. Her future mother-in-law Maria Alexandrovna (Marie of Hesse) gave her a six-strand pearl necklace and Nicholas gave her a diamond bracelet. In total, the betrothal gifts Dagmar received from her future in-laws cost 1.5 million rubles.\nThe engagement was popular in both countries and at the same time ensured the Danish royal family even better connections. The engagement took place right during the Second Schleswig War between Denmark on one side and Prussia and Austria on the other, and during the peace negotiations after the war in October 1864, Dagmar unsuccessfully asked her future father-in-law to help Denmark against Prussia over the disputed territory of Schleswig-Holstein. In a letter, she asked Alexander II of Russia: \"Use your power to mitigate the terrible conditions which the Germans have brutally forced Papa to accept... the sad plight of my fatherland, which makes my heart heavy, has inspired me to turn to you.\" It is believed that she did it with the consent of her parents, but it is not known if it was at their request. Her appeal was in vain, but from that moment on she became known for her anti-Prussian views.\nAs Nicholas continued on his journey to Florence, Dagmar and Nicholas exchanged daily love letters for months. When he grew ill, Nicholas sent fewer letters and Dagmar teasingly asked him if he had fallen in love with \"a dark-eyed Italian\". In April, Nicholas grew gravely ill with cerebrospinal meningitis. Alexander II of Russia sent a telegram to Dagmar: \"Nicholas has received the Last Rites. Pray for us and come if you can.\" On 22 April 1865, Nicholas died in the presence of his parents, brothers, and Dagmar. His last wish was that Dagmar would marry his younger brother, the future Alexander III.\nDagmar was devastated by Nicholas' death. Nicholas' parents struggled to \"pull Princess Dagmar away from the corpse and carry her out.\" She was so heartbroken when she returned to her homeland that her relatives were seriously worried about her health. She had already become emotionally attached to Russia and often thought of the huge, remote country that was to have been her home. Many were sympathetic towards Dagmar. Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge wrote of \"poor dear Minny's sorrow and the blight which has fallen upon her young life.\" Queen Victoria wrote \"how terrible for poor Dagmar... the poor parents and bride are most deeply to be pitied.\"\nSecond engagement and marriage.\nAlexander II of Russia and Maria Alexandrovna had grown fond of Dagmar, and they wanted her to marry their new heir, Tsarevich Alexander. In an affectionate letter, Alexander II told Dagmar that he hoped she would still consider herself a member of their family. Maria Alexandrovna tried to convince Louise of Hesse-Kassel to send Dagmar to Russia immediately, but Louise insisted that Dagmar must \"strengthen her nerves... [and] avoid emotional upsets.\" Dagmar, who sincerely mourned Nicholas, and Alexander, who was in love with his mother's lady-in-waiting Maria Meshcherskaya and attempted to renounce his place as heir to the throne in order to marry her, were both initially reluctant. However, under pressure from his parents, Alexander decided to go to Denmark.\nIn June 1866, Tsarevich Alexander arrived in Copenhagen with his brothers Grand Duke Vladimir and Grand Duke Alexei. While looking over photographs of Nicholas, Alexander asked Dagmar if \"she could love him after having loved Nixa, to whom they were both devoted.\" She answered that she could love no one but him, because he had been so close to his brother. Alexander recalled that \"we both burst into tears... [and] I told her that my dear Nixa helped us much in this situation and that now of course he prays about our happiness.\" On 17 June, he proposed to her during a picnic to the beach at Helleb\u00e6k by the coast of the \u00d8resund strait near Elsinore and received a yes. The engagement was announced on 23 June at Fredensborg Palace. Both Dagmar and Alexander quickly embraced the prospect of marrying each other, and were soon described as genuinely enthusiastic.\nIn the time leading up to Dagmar's departure to Russia, many festive events took place in Copenhagen, On 22 September 1866, Dagmar left Copenhagen on board the Danish royal yacht \"Slesvig\" escorted by the armoured frigate \"Peder Skram\", and accompanied by her brother, Crown Prince Frederik. Hans Christian Andersen, who had occasionally been invited to tell stories to Dagmar and her siblings when they were children, was among the crowd which flocked to the quay in order to see her off. The writer remarked in his diary, \"Yesterday, at the quay, while passing me by, she stopped and took me by the hand. My eyes were full of tears. What a poor child! Oh Lord, be kind and merciful to her! They say that there is a brilliant court in Saint Petersburg and the tsar's family is nice; still, she heads for an unfamiliar country, where people are different and religion is different and where she will have none of her former acquaintances by her side.\"\nDagmar was warmly welcomed in Kronstadt by the emperor's brother Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich of Russia and escorted to St. Petersburg, where she was greeted by her future mother-in-law and sister-in-law on 24 September. \nThe weather on this September day was almost summery with temperatures of more than 20 degrees, which was noted by the poet Fyodor Ivanovich Tyutchev in the welcome poem dedicated to the arrival of the princess: \"The sky is light blue...\" On the 29th, she made her formal entry in to the Russian capital dressed in a Russian national costume in blue and gold and traveled with the Empress to the Winter Palace where she was introduced to the Russian public on a balcony. Catherine Radziwill described the occasion: \"rarely has a foreign princess been greeted with such enthusiasm\u2026 from the moment she set foot on Russian soil, succeeded in winning to herself all hearts. Her smile, the delightful way she had of bowing to the crowds\u2026, laid immediately the foundation of \u2026popularity\"\nIn the following weeks, Dagmar was educated in Russian court etiquette. She converted to Orthodoxy on 24 October\u00a0[O.S. 12 October]\u00a01866 and became \"Grand Duchess Maria Feodorovna of Russia\" the following day. However, at the Russian court, where French was practically the first language, she was often called \"Marie\". The lavish wedding took place on 9 November\u00a0[O.S. 28 October]\u00a01866 in the Imperial Chapel of the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg. Financial constraints had prevented her parents from attending the wedding, and in their stead, they sent her brother, Crown Prince Frederick. Her brother-in-law, the Prince of Wales, had also travelled to Saint Petersburg for the ceremony; pregnancy had prevented the Princess of Wales from attending. After the wedding night, Alexander wrote in his diary, \"I took off my slippers and my silver embroidered robe and felt the body of my beloved next to mine... How I felt then, I do not wish to describe here. Afterwards we talked for a long time.\"\nAfter the many wedding parties were over the newlyweds moved into the Anichkov Palace in Saint Petersburg where they were to live for the next 15 years, when they were not taking extended holidays at their summer villa Livadia in the Crimean Peninsula. Despite the fact that their relationship began under such strange circumstances, Maria and Alexander had an exceptionally happy marriage, and during almost thirty years of marriage, the spouses maintained a sincere devotion to each other. She was widely recognized as \"the only person on the face of the earth in whom the Autocrat of all the Russias puts any real trust. In his gentle consort, he has unlimited confidence.\" Despite her anti-Russian sentiments, Queen Victoria wrote favorably about Maria and Alexander's marriage. She wrote that \"[Maria] seems quite happy and contented with her fat, good-natured husband who seems far more attentive and kind to her than one would have thought...I think they are very domestic and happy and attached to each other; he makes a very good husband.\"\nOn 18 May 1868, Maria gave birth to their eldest child, Nicholas, the future Nicholas II, at the Alexander Palace in Tsarskoye Selo south of Saint Petersburg. In his diary, the then Tsarevich Alexander recorded the momentous event of the birth of his first child,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Around 12.30 my wife came to the bedroom and lay down on a couch where everything was prepared. The pains became stronger and stronger, and Minny suffered very much. Papa ... helped me hold my darling the whole time. Finally, at 2.30, the last minute came and suddenly all her suffering stopped. God sent us a son whom we named Nicholas. What a joy it was! It is impossible to imagine. I sprang to embrace my darling wife, and she instantly became cheerful and was terribly happy. I had been weeping like a child but suddenly my heart became light and cheerful.\nThe entire imperial family was present at the birth of Alexander and Maria's first child. In a letter to her mother, Queen Louise, the Tsarevna wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;.. this bothered me immensely! The Emperor held me by one hand, my Sasha by the other, whilst every so often the Empress kissed me.\nHer next son, Alexander, born in 1869, died from meningitis in infancy. She would bear Alexander four more children who reached adulthood: George (b. 1871), Xenia (b.\u00a01875), Michael (b. 1878), and Olga (b. 1882). As a mother, she doted on and was quite possessive of her sons. She had a more distant relationship with her daughters. Her favorite child was George, and Olga and Michael were closer to their father. She was lenient towards George, and she could never bear to punish him for his pranks. Her daughter Olga remembered that \"mother had a great weakness for him.\"\nHeir's wife.\nSince her mother-in-law, Empress Maria Alexandrovna, was in fragile health and spent long periods abroad for health reasons, Maria Feodorovna often had to fulfill the role of first lady of the court. She did not have the best conditions to become popular in Russia, as most Russians disliked her having married Alexander after first having been engaged to his brother. However, she quickly overcame this obstacle, and became beloved by the Russian public, a popularity she never really lost. Early on, she made it a priority to learn the Russian language and to try to understand the Russian people. Baroness Editha von Rahden wrote that \"the Czarevna is forming a real, warm sympathy for that country which is receiving her with so much enthusiasm.\" In 1876, she and her husband visited Helsinki and were greeted by cheers, most of which were \"directed to the wife of the heir apparent.\"\nMaria rarely interfered with politics, preferring to devote her time and energies to her family, charities, and the more social side of her position. She had also seen the student protests of Kiev and St. Petersburg in the 1860s, and when police were beating students, the students cheered on Maria Feodorovna to which she replied, \"They were quite loyal, they cheered me. Why do you allow the police to treat them so brutally?\" Her one exception to official politics was her militant anti-German sentiment because of the annexation of Danish territories by Prussia in 1864, a sentiment also expressed by her sister, Alexandra. Prince Gorchakov remarked about that policy that \"it is our belief, that Germany will not forget that both in Russia and in England a Danish Princess has her foot on the steps of the throne\".\nMaria arranged the marriage between her brother George I of Greece and her cousin-in-law Olga Constantinovna of Russia. When George visited St. Petersburg in 1867, she contrived to have George spend time with Olga. She convinced Olga's parents of her brother's suitability. In a letter, her father Christian IX of Denmark praised her for her shrewd arranging of the marriage: \"Where in the world have you, little rogue, ever learned to intrigue so well, since you have worked hard on your uncle and aunt, who were previously decidedly against a match of this kind.\"\nMaria's relationship with her father-in-law, Alexander II, deteriorated because she did not accept his second marriage to Catherine Dolgorukov. She refused to allow her children to visit their grandfather's second wife and his legitimized bastards, which caused Alexander's anger. She confided in Sophia Tolstaya that \"there were grave scenes between me and the Sovereign, caused by my refusal to let my children to him.\" At a Winter Palace reception in February 1881, she refused to kiss Catherine and only gave Catherine her hand to kiss. Alexander II was furious and chastised his daughter-in-law: \"Sasha is a good son, but you \u2013 you have no heart\".\nIn 1873, Maria, Alexander, and their two eldest sons made a journey to the United Kingdom. The imperial couple and their children were entertained at Marlborough House by the Prince and Princess of Wales. The royal sisters Maria and Alexandra delighted London society by dressing alike at social gatherings. The following year, Maria and Alexander welcomed the Prince and Princess of Wales to St. Petersburg; they had come for the wedding of the Prince's younger brother, Alfred, to Grand Duchess Maria Alexandrovna, daughter of Tsar Alexander II and the sister of the tsarevich.\nEmpress of Russia.\nOn the morning of 13 March 1881, Maria's father-in-law Alexander II of Russia was killed by a bomb attack carried out by the revolutionary socialist political organization \"Narodnaya Volya\" on his way back to the Winter Palace from a military parade. His leg was blown to pieces by the second of two bombs, and in her diary, Maria described how the wounded, still living Emperor was taken to the palace: \"His legs were crushed terribly and ripped open to the knee; a bleeding mass, with half a boot on the right foot, and only the sole of the foot remaining on the left.\" Alexander II died of blood loss a few hours later. After her father-in-law's gruesome death, she was worried about her husband's safety. In her diary, she wrote, \"Our happiest and serenest times are now over. My peace and calm are gone, for now I will only ever be able to worry about Sasha.\" Her favorite sister, the Princess of Wales, and brother-in-law Prince of Wales, stayed in Russia for several weeks after the funeral.\nAlexander and Maria were crowned at the Assumption Cathedral in the Kremlin in Moscow on 27 May 1883. Just before the coronation, a major conspiracy had been uncovered, which cast a pall over the celebration. Nevertheless, over 8000 guests attended the splendid ceremony. Because of the many threats against Maria and Alexander III, the head of the security police, General Cherevin, shortly after the coronation urged the Tsar and his family to relocate to Gatchina Palace, a more secure location 50 kilometres outside St. Petersburg. The huge palace had 900 rooms and was built by Catherine the Great. The Romanovs heeded the advice. Maria and Alexander III lived at Gatchina for 13 years, and it was here that their five surviving children grew up. Under heavy guard, Alexander III and Maria made periodic trips from Gatchina to the capital to take part in official events, continuing to use the Anichkov Palace when staying there in preference to the Winter Palace.\nMaria was a universally beloved Empress. Duchess Cecilie of Mecklenburg-Schwerin wrote that Maria's \"bearing, her distinguished and forceful personality, and the intelligence which shone in her face, made her the perfect figure of a queen... She was extraordinarily well-loved in Russia, and everyone had confidence in her... and [was] a real mother to her people.\"\nMaria was active in philanthropic work. Her husband called her \"the Guardian Angel of Russia\". As Empress, she assumed patronage of the Marie Institutions that her mother-in-law had run: It encompassed 450 charitable establishments. In 1882, she founded many establishments called Marie schools to give young girls an elementary education. She was the patroness of the Russian Red Cross Society. During a cholera epidemic in the late 1870s, she visited the sick in hospitals.\nMaria was the head of the social scene. She loved to dance at the balls of high society, and she became a popular socialite and hostess of the Imperial balls at Gatchina. Her daughter Olga commented, \"Court life had to run in splendor, and there my mother played her part without a single false step\". A contemporary remarked on her success: \"of the long gallery of Tsarinas who have sat in state in the Kremlin or paced in the Winter Palace, Marie Feodorovna was perhaps the most brilliant\". Alexander used to enjoy joining in with the musicians, although he would end up sending them off one by one. When that happened, Maria knew the party was over.\nAs tsarevna, and then as tsarina, Maria Feodorovna had something of a social rivalry with the popular Grand Duchess Marie Pavlovna, wife of her Russian brother-in-law, Grand Duke Vladimir. This rivalry had echoed the one shared by their husbands, and served to exacerbate the rift within the family. While she knew better than to publicly criticise both the Grand Duke and Duchess in public, Maria Feodorovna referred to Marie Pavlovna with the caustic epithet of \"Empress Vladimir\".\nNearly each summer, Maria, Alexander and their children would make an annual trip to Denmark, where her parents, King Christian IX and Queen Louise, hosted family reunions. Maria's brother, King George I, and his wife, Queen Olga, would come up from Athens with their children, and the Princess of Wales, often without her husband, would come with some of her children from the United Kingdom. In contrast to the tight security observed in Russia, the tsar, tsarina and their children relished the relative freedom that they could enjoy at Bernstorff and Fredensborg. The annual family meetings of monarchs in Denmark was regarded as suspicious in Europe, where many assumed they secretly discussed state affairs. Otto von Bismarck nicknamed Fredensborg \"Europe's Whispering Gallery\" and accused Queen Louise of plotting against him with her children. Maria also had a good relationship with the majority of her in-laws, and was often asked to act as a mediator between them and the tsar. In the words of her daughter Olga: \"She proved herself extremely tactful with her in-laws, which was no easy task\".\nDuring Alexander III's reign, the monarchy's opponents quickly disappeared underground. A group of students had been planning to assassinate Alexander III on the sixth anniversary of his father's death at the Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg. The plotters had stuffed hollowed-out books with dynamite, which they intended to throw at the Tsar when he arrived at the cathedral. However, the Russian secret police uncovered the plot before it could be carried out. Five students were hanged in 1887; amongst them was Aleksandr Ulyanov, older brother of Vladimir Lenin.\nThe biggest threat to the lives of the tsar and his family, however, came not from terrorists, but from a derailment of the imperial train in the fall of 1888. Maria and her family had been at lunch in the dining car when the train jumped the tracks and slid down an embankment, causing the roof of the dining car to nearly cave in on them.\nWhen Maria's eldest sister Alexandra visited Gatchina in July 1894, she was surprised to see how weak her brother-in-law Alexander III had become. At the time Maria had long known that he was ill and did not have long left. She now turned her attention to her eldest son, the future Nicholas II, for it was on him that both her personal future and the future of the dynasty now depended.\nNicholas had long had his heart set on marrying Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine, a favourite grandchild of Queen Victoria. Despite the fact that she was their godchild, neither Alexander III nor Maria approved of the match. Nicholas summed up the situation as follows: \"I wish to move in one direction, and it is clear that Mama wishes me to move in another\u00a0\u2013 my dream is to one day marry Alix.\" Maria and Alexander found Alix shy and somewhat peculiar. They were also concerned that the young Princess was not possessed of the right character to be Empress of Russia. Nicholas's parents had known Alix as a child and formed the impression that she was hysterical and unbalanced, which may have been due to the loss of her mother and youngest sister, Marie, to diphtheria when she was just six. It was only when Alexander III's health was beginning to fail that they reluctantly gave permission for Nicholas to propose.\nEmpress Dowager.\nOn 1 November 1894, Alexander III died aged just 49 at Livadia. In her diary Maria wrote, \"I am utterly heartbroken and despondent, but when I saw the blissful smile and the peace in his face that came after, it gave me strength.\" Two days later, the Prince and Princess of Wales arrived at Livadia from London. While the Prince of Wales took it upon himself to involve himself in the preparations for the funeral, the Princess of Wales spent her time comforting grieving Maria, including praying with her and sleeping at her bedside. \nMaria Feodorovna's birthday was a week after the funeral, and as it was a day in which court mourning could be somewhat relaxed, Nicholas used the day to marry Alix of Hesse-Darmstadt, who took the name Alexandra Feodorovna.\nAs Empress Dowager, Maria was much more popular than either Nicholas or Alexandra. During her son's coronation in May 1896, she, Nicholas, and Alexandra arrived in separate carriages. She was greeted with \"almost deafening\" applause. Visiting writer Kate Kool noted that she \"provoked more cheering from the people than did her son. The people have had thirteen years in which to know this woman and they have learned to love her very much.\" Richard Harding Davis, an American journalist, was surprised that she \"was more loudly greeted than either the Emperor or the Czarina.\"\nOnce the death of Alexander III had receded, Maria again took a brighter view of the future. \"Everything will be all right\", as she said. Maria continued to live in the Anichkov Palace in St. Petersburg and at Gatchina Palace.\nAs a new Imperial Train was constructed for Nicholas II in time for his coronation, Alexander III's \"Temporary Imperial Train\" (composed of the cars that had survived the Borki disaster and a few converted standard passenger cars) was transferred to the Empress Dowager's personal use.\nDuring the first years of her son's reign, Maria often acted as the political adviser to the Tsar. Uncertain of his own ability and aware of her connections and knowledge, Tsar Nicholas II often told the ministers that he would ask her advice before making decisions, and the ministers sometimes suggested this themselves. It was reportedly on her advice that Nicholas initially kept his father's ministers. Maria herself estimated that her son was of a weak character and that it was better that he was influenced by her than someone worse. Her daughter Olga remarked upon her influence: \"she had never before taken the least interest \u2026 now she felt it was her duty. Her personality was magnetic and her zest of activity was incredible. She had her finger on every educational pulse in the empire. She would work her secretaries to shreds, but she did not spare herself. Even when bored in committee she never looked bored. Her manner and, above all, her tact conquered everybody\". After the death of her spouse, Maria came to be convinced that Russia needed reforms to avoid a revolution. According to courtier Paul Benckendorff there was a scene when Maria asked her son not to appoint the conservative Viktor von Wahl as minister for internal affairs: \"during which one [the empress dowager] almost threw herself at his [the tsar's] knees' begging him not to make this appointment and to choose someone who could make concessions. She said that if Nicholas did not agree, she would 'leave for Denmark, and then without me here let them twist your head around'\". Nicholas did appoint her favored candidate in 1904, and she reportedly told that candidate, the liberal reformist Pyotr Sviatopolk-Mirsky, to accept by saying: \"You must fulfil my son's wish; If you do, I will give you a kiss\". After the first few years of his reign, Nicholas II replaced his mother as his political confidant and adviser with his wife, Empress Alexandra.\nMaria Feodorovna's grandson-in-law, Prince Felix Yusupov, noted that she had great influence in the Romanov family. Sergei Witte praised her tact and diplomatic skill. Nevertheless, despite her social tact, she did not get along well with her daughter-in-law, Tsarina Alexandra, holding her responsible for many of the woes that beset her son Nicholas and the Russian Empire in general. She was appalled with Alexandra's inability to win favour with the public, and also that she did not give birth to an heir until almost ten years after her marriage, after bearing four daughters. The fact that Russian court custom dictated that an empress dowager took precedence over an empress consort, combined with the possessiveness that Maria had of her sons, and her jealousy of Empress Alexandra only served to exacerbate tensions between mother-in-law and daughter-in-law. Sophie Buxhoeveden remarked of this conflict: \"Without actually clashing they seemed fundamentally unable \u2026 to understand one another\", and her daughter Olga commented: \"they had tried to understand each other and failed. They were utterly different in character, habits and outlook\". Maria was sociable and a good dancer, with an ability to ingratiate herself with people, while Alexandra, though intelligent and beautiful, was very shy and closed herself off from the Russian people.\nBy the turn of the twentieth century, Maria was spending increasing time abroad. In 1906, following the death of their father, King Christian IX, she and her sister, Alexandra, who had become queen-consort of the United Kingdom in 1901, purchased the villa of Hvid\u00f8re. The following year, a change in political circumstances allowed Maria Feodorovna to be welcomed to England by King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, Maria's first visit to England since 1873. Following a visit in early 1908, Maria Feodorovna was present at her brother-in-law and sister's visit to Russia that summer. A little under two years later, Maria Feodorovna travelled to England yet again, this time for the funeral of her brother-in-law, King Edward VII, in May 1910. During her nearly three-month visit to England in 1910, Maria Feodorovna attempted, unsuccessfully, to get her sister, now Queen Dowager Alexandra, to claim a position of precedence over her daughter-in-law, Queen Mary.\nEmpress Maria Feodorovna, the mistress of Langinkoski retreat, was also otherwise a known friend of Finland. During the first Russification period, she tried to have her son halt the constraining of the grand duchy's autonomy and to recall the unpopular Governor-General Nikolai Bobrikov from Finland to some other position in Russia itself. During the second Russification period, at the start of the First World War, the Empress Dowager, travelling by her special train through Finland to Saint Petersburg, expressed her continued disapprobation for the Russification of Finland by having an orchestra of a welcoming committee play the March of the Pori Regiment and the Finnish national anthem \"Maamme\", which at the time were under the explicit ban from Franz Albert Seyn, the Governor-General of Finland.\nIn 1899, Maria's second son, George, died of tuberculosis in the Caucasus. During the funeral, she kept her composure, but at the end of the service, she ran from the church clutching her son's top hat that been atop the coffin and collapsed in her carriage sobbing.\nIn 1901, Maria arranged Olga's disastrous marriage to Duke Peter Alexandrovich of Oldenburg. For years Nicholas refused to grant his unhappy sister a divorce, only relenting in 1916 in the midst of the War. When Olga attempted to contract a morganatic marriage with Nikolai Kulikovsky, Maria Feodorovna and the tsar tried to dissuade her, yet, they did not protest too vehemently. Indeed, Maria Feodorovna was one of the few people who attended the wedding in November 1916.\nIn 1912, Maria faced trouble with her youngest son, when he secretly married his mistress, much to the outrage and scandal of both Maria Feodorovna and Nicholas.\nMaria Feodorovna disliked Rasputin and unsuccessfully tried to convince Nicholas and Alexandra to send him away. She considered Rasputin a dangerous charlatan and despaired of Alexandra's obsession with \"crazy, dirty, religious fanatics\". She was concerned that Rasputin's activities damaged the prestige of the Imperial family and asked Nicholas and Alexandra to send him away. Nicholas remained silent and Alexandra refused. Maria recognized the empress was the true regent and that she also lacked the capability for such a position: \"My poor daughter-in-law does not perceive that she is ruining the dynasty and herself. She sincerely believes in the holiness of an adventurer, and we are powerless to ward off the misfortune, which is sure to come.\" When the Tsar dismissed minister Vladimir Kokovtsov in February 1914 on the advice of Alexandra, Maria again reproached her son, who answered in such a way that she became even more convinced that Alexandra was the real ruler of Russia, and she called upon Kokovtsov and said to him: \"My daughter-in-law does not like me; she thinks that I am jealous of her power. She does not perceive that my one aspiration is to see my son happy. Yet I see we are nearing some kind of catastrophe and the Tsar listens to no one but flatterers\u2026 Why do you not tell the Tsar everything that you think and know\u2026 if it is not already too late\".\nWorld War I.\nIn May 1914, Maria Feodorovna travelled to England to visit her sister. While she was in London, World War I broke out (July 1914), forcing her to hurry home to Russia. In Berlin the German authorities prevented her train from continuing toward the Russian border. Instead she had to return to Russia by way of (neutral) Denmark and Finland. Upon her return in August, she took up residence at Yelagin Palace, which was closer to St. Petersburg (renamed Petrograd in August 1914) than Gatchina. During the war she served as president of Russia's Red Cross. As she had done a decade earlier in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905, she also financed a sanitary train.\nDuring the war, there was great concern within the imperial house about the influence Empress Alexandra had upon state affairs through the Tsar, and the influence Grigori Rasputin was believed to have upon her, as it was considered to provoke the public and endanger the safety of the imperial throne and the survival of the monarchy. \nOn behalf of the imperial relatives of the Tsar, both the Empress's sister Grand Duchess Elizabeth Feodorovna and her cousin Grand Duchess Victoria Feodorovna had been selected to mediate and ask Empress Alexandra to banish Rasputin from court to protect her and the throne's reputation, but without success. In parallel, several of the Grand Dukes had tried to intervene with the Tsar, but with no more success.\nDuring this conflict of 1916\u20131917, Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna reportedly planned a coup d'\u00e9tat to depose the Tsar with the help of four regiments of the imperial guard which were to invade the Alexander Palace, force the Tsar to abdicate and replace him with his underage son under the regency of her son Grand Duke Kirill.\nThere are documents that support the fact that in this critical situation, Maria Feodorovna was involved in a planned coup d'\u00e9tat to depose her son from the throne in order to save the monarchy. The plan was reportedly for Maria to make a final ultimatum to the Tsar to banish Rasputin unless he wished for her to leave the capital, which would be the signal to unleash the coup. Exactly how she planned to replace her son is unconfirmed, but two versions are available: first, that Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia would take power in Maria's name, and that she herself would thereafter become sole empress of Russia (like Catherine the Great did over 100 years prior); the other version further claims that Grand Duke Paul Alexandrovich of Russia would replace the Tsar with his son, the heir to the throne, Maria's grandson Alexei, upon which Maria and Paul Alexandrovich would share power as regents during his minority. Maria was asked to make her appeal to the Tsar after Empress Alexandra had asked the Tsar to dismiss minister Alexei Polivanov. Initially, she refused to make the appeal, and her sister-in-law Grand Duchess Maria Pavlovna stated to the French Ambassador: \"It's not want of courage or inclination that keeps her back. It's better that she don't. She's too outspoken and imperious. The moment she starts to lecture her son, her feelings run away with her; she sometimes says the exact opposite of what she should; she annoys and humiliates him. Then he stands on his dignity and reminds his mother he is the emperor. They leave each other in a rage\". Eventually, she was however convinced to make the appeal. Reportedly, Empress Alexandra was informed about the planned coup, and when Maria Feodorovna made the ultimatum to the Tsar, the empress convinced him to order his mother to leave the capital. Consequently, the Empress Dowager left Petrograd to live in the Mariinskyi Palace in Kiev the same year. She never again returned to Russia's capital. Empress Alexandra commented about her departure: \"it's much better Motherdear stays \u2026 at Kiev, where the climate is better and she can live as she wishes and hears less gossip\".\nIn Kiev, Maria engaged in the Red Cross and hospital work, and in September, the 50th anniversary of her arrival in Russia was celebrated with great festivities, during which she was visited by her son, Nicholas II, who came without his wife. Empress Alexandra wrote to the Tsar: \"When you see Motherdear, you must rather sharply tell her how pained you are, that she listens to slander and does not stop it, as it makes mischief and others would be delighted, I am sure, to put her against me\u2026\" Maria did ask Nicholas II to remove both Rasputin and Alexandra from all political influence, but shortly after, Nicholas and Alexandra broke all contact with the Tsar's family.\nWhen Rasputin was murdered, part of the Imperial relatives asked Maria to return to the capital and use the moment to replace Alexandra as the Tsar's political adviser. Maria refused, but she did admit that Alexandra should be removed from influence over state affairs: \"Alexandra Feodorovna must be banished. Don't know how but it must be done. Otherwise she might go completely mad. Let her enter a convent or just disappear\".\n\"The anti-German pair\".\nMaria and her sister Queen Alexandra, who was married to King Edward VII, were anti-German and made no secret of their feelings. Born Danish princesses, Maria and Alexandra resented the Prussian annexation of the former Danish territory of Schleswig-Holstein during the Second Schleswig War. They deeply hated and distrusted the German Kaiser Wilhelm II, whom Alexandra accused in 1900 of being \"inwardly our enemy\".\nKnown as the \"international anti-German pair\", both sisters frequently interfered in the foreign policy of their respective empires, through diplomacy or espionage, in the hope of undermining German interests. In 1905, the German Kaiser Wilhelm II wrote to Nicholas II accusing the Tsar's mother of (in collusion with Alexandra and Edward VII) fomenting anti-German sentiment at the Russian court through the diplomat Alexander von Benckendorff. The German Kaiser described von Benckendorff as having met secretly with Maria in Copenhagen at the request of Edward VII to discuss strengthening the Anglo-Russian union in an attempt to isolate Germany and curb its growing influence in Asia.\nRevolution and exile.\nRevolution came to Russia in 1917, first with the February Revolution, then with Nicholas II's abdication on 15 March. After travelling from Kiev to meet with her deposed son, Nicholas II, in Mogilev, Maria returned to the city, where she quickly realised how Kiev had changed and that her presence was no longer wanted. She was persuaded by her family there to travel to the Crimea by train with a group of other refugee Romanovs, arriving at the end of March.\nAfter a time living in one of the imperial residences in the Crimea, she received reports that her sons, her daughter-in-law and her grandchildren had been murdered. However, she publicly rejected the report as a rumour. On the day after the murder of the Tsar's family, Maria received a messenger from Nicky, \"a touching man\" who told of how difficult life was for her son's family in Yekaterinburg. \"And nobody can help or liberate them \u2013 only God! My Lord save my poor, unlucky Nicky, help him in his hard ordeals!\" In her diary she comforted herself: \"I am sure they all got out of Russia and now the Bolsheviks are trying to hide the truth.\" She firmly held on to this conviction until her death. The truth was too painful for her to admit publicly. Her letters to her son and his family have since almost all been lost; but in one that survives, she wrote to Nicholas: \"You know that my thoughts and prayers never leave you. I think of you day and night and sometimes feel so sick at heart that I believe I cannot bear it any longer. But God is merciful. He will give us strength for this terrible ordeal.\" Maria's daughter Olga Alexandrovna commented further on the matter, \"Yet I am sure that deep in her heart my mother had steeled herself to accept the truth some years before her death.\"\nAlthough Maria Feodorovna steadfastly believed Nicholas and his family survived, she firmly regarded Franziska Schanzkowska (famously known as \"Anna Anderson\") as a fraud falsely claiming to be her granddaughter, Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia. Maria vehemently opposed her daughter Olga Alexandrovna meeting with the imposter, which Olga did in 1925. Olga came to the conclusion Schanzkowska was an imposter, noting afterwards in a letter to former adjunct Anatole Mordvinov that Maria Feodorovna \"isn't interested at all\" in the imposter and the dowager empress \"opposed my trip, but I had to go for the sake of the family.\" She also wrote that Schanzkowska's supporters subsequently accused Maria Feodorovna of ordering Olga (as well as others who knew Anastasia and refuted Schanzkowska's claim) to reject Shanzkowska's claim to be Anastasia, which Olga called a \"huge lie\".\nDespite the overthrow of the monarchy in 1917, the former Empress Dowager Maria at first refused to leave Russia. Only in early April 1919, at the urging of her sister, Queen Dowager Alexandra, did she begrudgingly depart, fleeing Crimea over the Black Sea to London. King George V sent the battleship HMS \"Marlborough\" to retrieve his aunt. The party of 17 Romanovs included her daughter the Grand Duchess Xenia and five of Xenia's sons plus six dogs and a canary.\nAfter a brief stay in the British base in Malta, they travelled to England on the British battleship , and she stayed with her sister, Alexandra. Although Queen Alexandra never treated her sister badly and they spent time together at Marlborough House in London and at Sandringham House in Norfolk, Maria, as a deposed empress dowager, felt that she was now \"number two\", in contrast to her sister, a popular queen dowager, and she returned to her native Denmark in November 1919. After living briefly with her nephew, King Christian X, in a wing of the Amalienborg Palace, she chose her holiday villa Hvid\u00f8re, which was originally a summer retreat near Copenhagen, as her new permanent home in 1923.\nThere were many Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9es in Copenhagen who continued to regard her as the Empress and often asked her for help. The All-Russian Monarchical Assembly held in 1921 offered her the \"locum tenens\" of the Russian throne but she declined with the evasive answer \"Nobody saw Nicky killed\" and therefore there was a chance her son was still alive. She provided financial support to Nikolai Sokolov, who studied the circumstances of the death of the Tsar's family, but they never met. The Grand Duchess Olga sent a telegram to Paris cancelling an appointment because it would have been too difficult for the old and sick woman to hear the terrible story of her son and his family.\nDeath and burial.\nIn November 1925, Maria's favourite sister, Queen Alexandra, died. That was the last loss that she could bear. \"She was ready to meet her Creator,\" wrote her son-in-law, Grand Duke Alexander Mikhailovich, about Dowager Empress Maria's last years. On 13 October 1928 at Hvid\u00f8re near Copenhagen, in a house she had once shared with her sister Queen Alexandra, Dowager Empress Maria died at the age of 80 of heart failure, having outlived four of her six children. Following services in Copenhagen's Russian Orthodox Alexander Nevsky Church, the Empress was interred at Roskilde Cathedral on the island of Zealand, the traditional burial site for Danish monarchs since the 15th century.\nIn 2005, Queen Margrethe II of Denmark and President Vladimir Putin of Russia and their respective governments agreed that the Empress's remains should be returned to St. Petersburg in accordance with her wish to be interred next to her husband. A number of ceremonies took place from 23 to 28 September 2006. The funeral service, attended by high dignitaries, including the Crown Prince and Crown Princess of Denmark and Prince and Princess Michael of Kent, did not pass without some turbulence. The crowd around the coffin was so great that a young Danish diplomat fell into the grave before the coffin was interred. On 26\u00a0September 2006, a statue of Maria Feodorovna was unveiled near her favourite Cottage Palace in Peterhof. Following a service at Saint Isaac's Cathedral, she was interred next to her husband Alexander III in the Peter and Paul Cathedral on 28 September 2006, 140 years after her first arrival in Russia and almost 78 years after her death.\nIssue.\nEmperor Alexander III and Maria Feodorovna had four sons and two daughters:\nLegacy.\nThe Dagmarinkatu street in T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6, Helsinki, and the Maria Hospital, which also previously operated in Helsinki, are named after Empress Maria Feodorovna.\nShe is portrayed by Helen Hayes in the 1956 Hollywood historical drama \"Anastasia\". Irene Worth portrays her in the 1971 epic Nicholas and Alexandra. Ursula Howells played the role in one episode of the 1974 drama Fall of Eagles. Gwyneth Strong and Jane Lapotaire portrayed the Empress as a teenager and adult woman respectively in the 1975 television series \"Edward the Seventh\". Olivia de Havilland portrayed her in the 1986 television film \"\". In the 1997 American animated version of the film \"Anastasia\", directed by Don Bluth and Gary Goldman, Maria Feodorovna is voiced by Angela Lansbury.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20541", "revid": "50682600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20541", "title": "Montauban", "text": "Administrative division in Occitania, France\n \nMontauban (, ; ) is a commune in the southern French department of Tarn-et-Garonne. It is the capital of the department and lies north of Toulouse. Montauban is the most populated town in Tarn-et-Garonne, and the sixth most populated of Occitanie behind Toulouse, Montpellier, N\u00eemes, Perpignan and B\u00e9ziers. In 2019, there were 61,372 inhabitants, called \"Montalbanais\". The town has been classified in the French Towns and Lands of Art and History network since 2015.\nThe town, built mainly of a reddish brick, stands on the right bank of the Tarn at its confluence with the Tescou.\nHistory.\nMontauban is the second oldest (after Mont-de-Marsan) of the \"bastides\" of southern France. Its foundation dates from 1144 when Count Alphonse Jourdain of Toulouse, granted it a liberal charter. The inhabitants were drawn chiefly from Montauriol, a village which had grown up around the neighbouring monastery of St Th\u00e9odard.\nIn the 13th century the town suffered much from the ravages of the Albigensian war and from the Inquisition, but by 1317 it had recovered sufficiently to be chosen by John XXII as the head of a diocese of which the basilica of St Th\u00e9odard became the cathedral.\nIn 1360, under the Treaty of Br\u00e9tigny, it was ceded to the English; they were expelled by the inhabitants in 1414. In 1560 the bishops and magistrates embraced Protestantism, expelled the monks, and demolished the cathedral. Ten years later it became one of the four Huguenot strongholds under the Peace of Saint-Germain, and formed a small independent republic. It was the headquarters of the Huguenot rebellion of 1621, and successfully withstood an 86-day siege by Louis XIII.\nBecause Montauban was a Protestant town, it resisted and held its position against the royal power, refusing to give allegiance to the Catholic King. To scare off the King's opponents and speed up the end of the siege, 400 cannonballs were fired, but Montauban resisted and the royal army was vanquished. Saint Jacques church is still marked by the cannonballs, and every year in September, the city celebrates \"les 400 coups\" (the 400 shots), which has become a common phrase in French.\nMontauban did not submit to royal authority until after the fall of La Rochelle in 1629, when its fortifications were destroyed by Cardinal Richelieu. The Protestants again suffered persecution later in the century, as Louis XIV began to persecute Protestants by sending troops to their homes (dragonnades) and then in 1685 revoked the Edict of Nantes, which had granted the community tolerance.\nDuring World War II, Leonardo da Vinci's \"Mona Lisa\" was briefly hidden in a secret vault behind a wine cellar at Montauban.\nClimate.\nMontauban has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\"), with mild winters and hot summers. The town experienced severe droughts in 2003, 2006, 2012 and 2015. On 31 August 2015, the Tarn-et-Garonne area was particularly struck by a wave of violent storms. These storms, accompanied by very strong winds, created a tornado, which caused considerable damage in a large part of the department. Montauban was particularly affected, with winds measured between 130 and 150 kilometers per hour (a record) in the city center.\nSights.\nIts fortifications have been replaced by boulevards beyond which extend numerous suburbs, while on the left bank of the Tarn is the suburb of Villebourbon, which is connected to the town by a remarkable bridge of the early 14th century. This bridge is known as \"Pont Vieux\" (i.e. \"Old Bridge\"). King Philip the Fair of France officially launched the building of the bridge in 1303 while on a tour to Toulouse. The project took 30 years to complete, and the bridge was inaugurated in 1335. The main architects were \u00c9tienne de Ferri\u00e8res and Mathieu de Verdun. It is a pink brick structure over in length, but while its fortified towers have disappeared, it is otherwise in a good state of preservation. The bridge was designed to resist the violent floods of the Tarn, and indeed it successfully withstood the two terrible millennial floods of 1441 and 1930. The bridge is a straight level bridge, which is quite unusual for Medieval Europe, where lack of technological skills meant that most bridges were of the humpback type.\nThe \"Mus\u00e9e Ingres\", on the site of a castle of the Counts of Toulouse and once the residence of the bishops of Montauban, stands at the east end of the bridge. It belongs chiefly to the 17th century, but some portions are much older, notably an underground chamber known as the Hall of the Black Prince (\"Salle du Prince Noir\"). It comprises most of the work (including his \"Jesus among the Teachers of the Law\") of Jean Ingres, the celebrated painter, whose birth in Montauban is commemorated by an elaborate monument. It is the largest museum of Ingres paintings in the world. The museum also contains some sculptures by famous sculptor Antoine Bourdelle, another native of Montauban, as well as collections of antiquities (Greek vases) and 18th and 19th ceramics.\nThe \"Place Nationale\" is a square of the 17th century, entered at each corner by gateways giving access to a large open space surrounded by pink brick houses supported by double rows of arcades.\nThe is located in the palace built by the \"intendant\" of Montauban (the equivalent of a \"pr\u00e9fet\" before the French Revolution), and is a large elegant 18th century mansion, built of pink bricks and white stone, with a steep roof of blue gray slates, in a style combining northern and southern French styles of architecture.\nThe chief churches of Montauban are the cathedral, remarkable only for the possession of the \"Vow of Louis XIII\", one of the masterpieces of Ingres, and the church of St Jacques (14th and 15th centuries), dedicated to Saint James of Compostela, the fa\u00e7ade of which is surmounted by a handsome octagonal tower, the base of which is in Romanesque style, while the upper levels, built later, are in Gothic style.\nEconomy.\nThe commercial importance of Montauban is due rather to its trade in agricultural produce, horses, game and poultry, than to its industries, which include nursery-gardening, cloth-weaving, cloth-dressing, flour-milling, wood-sawing, and the manufacture of furniture, silk-gauze and straw hats.\nHowever, due to the proximity of Toulouse and the cheaper cost of industrial grounds, more and more mechanical products are being manufactured there.\nDemographics.\nMontauban is the centre of an urban area with 79,300 inhabitants as of 2017.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTransport.\nThe town is a railway junction, and the station Gare de Montauban-Ville-Bourbon offers connections with Toulouse, Bordeaux, Paris, Brive-la-Gaillarde, Marseille and several regional destinations. Montauban communicates with the Garonne via the Canal de Montech. The nearest airport is Toulouse\u2013Blagnac Airport, located south of Montauban.\nMonuments.\nFounded in 1144 by the Comte de Toulouse, the town of Montauban has some particularities: its center's red brick streets intersect at right angles and meet at the National Square (Place Nationale) which is ranked among the most beautiful squares of France. Some buildings and architectural complexes are distinguished, such as \"le Mus\u00e9e Ingres\", \"la Place Nationale\", \"le Pont vieux\", \"L\u2019\u00e9glise Saint Jacques\", \"la Cath\u00e9drale Notre Dame\", \u00ab l\u2019Ancien Coll\u00e8ge des J\u00e9suites \u00bb, \u00ab le Mus\u00e9um \u00bb.\nSport.\nThe town is home of the rugby union club US Montauban. The team gained promotion from the Pro D2 competition for the 2006\u201307 Top 14 season. The whole town supports rugby, but the athletic club is also very efficient and national results have been regular since 2007. Some athletes in Montauban's athletic club are international athletes. Every year, since 2004, the Rene Arcuset cross country race has been organized in the city.\nMovies.\nIn the movie \"Les Tontons Flingueurs\" a French classic by Georges Lautner, shot and released in 1963, Lino Ventura's character is a businessman from Montauban. Called to Paris for a personal case, he is nicknamed by Bernard Blier's character \"Le gugusse de Montauban\" (the guy from Montauban.) The \"gugusse\" will later answer: \"one should never leave Montauban\". Recently, a round-about in the center of the town was renamed \"Tonton Flingueurs' round-about\" and placards with drawings of the actors have been displayed.\nPersonalities.\nMontauban was the birthplace of:\nMontauban was the death place of:\nInstitutions.\nMontauban is the seat of a bishop and a court of assize. It has tribunals of first instance and of commerce, a chamber of commerce and a board of trade arbitration, lyc\u00e9es and a training college, schools of commerce and viticulture, a branch of the Bank of France, and a faculty of Protestant theology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20542", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20542", "title": "Rail transport modelling", "text": "Modeling trains hobby\nRailway modelling (British English) or model railroading (US and Canada) is a hobby in which rail transport systems are modelled at a reduced scale.\nThe scale models include locomotives, rolling stock, streetcars, tracks, signalling, cranes, and landscapes including: countryside, roads, bridges, buildings, vehicles, harbors, urban landscape, model figures, lights, and features such as rivers, hills, tunnels, and canyons.\nThe earliest model railways were the 'carpet railways' in the 1840s. The first documented model railway was the Railway of the Prince Imperial (French: Chemin de fer du Prince Imp\u00e9rial) built in 1859 by Emperor Napoleon III for his then 3-year-old son, also Napoleon, in the grounds of the Ch\u00e2teau de Saint-Cloud in Paris. It was powered by clockwork and ran in a figure-of-eight. Electric trains appeared around the start of the 20th century, but these were crude likenesses. Model trains today are more realistic, in addition to being much more technologically advanced. Today modellers create model railway layouts, often recreating real locations and periods throughout history. \nThe world's oldest working model railway is a model designed to train signalmen on the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway. It is located in the National Railway Museum, York, England and dates back to 1912. It remained in use until 1995. The model was built as a training exercise by apprentices of the company's Horwich Works and supplied with rolling stock by Bassett-Lowke.\nGeneral description.\nInvolvement ranges from possession of a train set to spending hours and large sums of money on a large and exacting model of a railroad and the scenery through which it passes, called a \"layout\". Hobbyists, called \"railway modellers\" or \"model railroaders\", may maintain models large enough to ride (see \"Live steam, Ridable miniature railway\" and \"Backyard railroad\").\nModellers may collect model trains, building a landscape for the trains to pass through. They may also operate their own railroad in miniature. For some modellers, the goal of building a layout is to eventually run it as if it were a real railroad (if the layout is based on the fancy of the builder) or as the real railroad did (if the layout is based on a prototype). If modellers choose to model a prototype, they may reproduce track-by-track reproductions of the real railroad in miniature, often using prototype track diagrams and historic maps.\nLayouts vary from a circle or oval of track to realistic reproductions of real places modelled to scale. Probably the largest model landscape in the UK is in the Pendon Museum in Oxfordshire, UK, where an EM gauge (same 1:76.2 scale as 00 but with more accurate track gauge) model of the Vale of White Horse in the 1930s is under construction. The museum also houses one of the earliest scenic models \u2013 the Madder Valley layout built by John Ahern. This was built in the late 1930s to late 1950s and brought in realistic modelling, receiving coverage on both sides of the Atlantic in the magazines \"Model Railway News\" and \"Model Railroader\". Bekonscot in Buckinghamshire is the oldest model village and includes a model railway, dating from the 1930s. The world's largest model railroad in H0 scale is the \"Miniatur Wunderland\" in Hamburg, Germany. The largest live steam layout, with of track is Train Mountain in Chiloquin, Oregon, U.S.\nOperations form an important aspect of rail transport modelling with many layouts being dedicated to emulating the operational aspects of a working railway. These layouts can become extremely complex with multiple routes, movement patterns and timetabled operation. The British outline model railway of Banbury Connections in New South Wales, Australia, is one of the world's most complicated model railways.\nModel railroad clubs exist where enthusiasts meet. Clubs often display models for the public. One specialist branch concentrates on larger scales and gauges, commonly using track gauges from . Models in these scales are usually hand-built and powered by live steam, or diesel-hydraulic, and the engines are often powerful enough to haul dozens of human passengers.\nThe Tech Model Railroad Club (TMRC) at MIT in the 1950s pioneered automatic control of track-switching by using telephone relays.\nThe oldest society is 'The Model Railway Club' (established 1910), near Kings Cross, London, UK. As well as building model railways, it has 5,000 books and periodicals. Similarly, 'The Historical Model Railway Society' at Butterley, near Ripley, Derbyshire specialises in historical matters and has archives available to members and non-members.\nScales and gauges.\nThe words \"scale\" and \"gauge\" seem at first interchangeable but their meanings are different. \"Scale\" is the model's measurement as a proportion to the original, while \"gauge\" is the measurement between the rails.\nThe size of engines depends on the scale and can vary from tall for the largest rideable live steam scales such as 1:4, down to matchbox size for the smallest: Z-scale (1:220) or T scale (1:450). A typical HO (1:87) engine is tall, and long. The most popular scales are: G scale, Gauge 1, O scale, S scale, HO scale (in Britain, the similar OO), TT scale, and N scale (1:160 in the United States, but 1:148 in the UK). HO and OO are the most popular. Popular narrow-gauge scales include Sn3, HOn3 and Nn3, which are the same in scale as S, HO and N except with a narrower spacing between the tracks (in these examples, a scale instead of the standard gauge).\nThe largest common scale is 1:8, with 1:4 sometimes used for park rides. G scale (Garden, ) is most popular for backyard modelling. It is easier to fit a G scale model into a garden and keep scenery proportional to the trains. Gauge 1 and Gauge 3 are also popular for gardens. O, S, HO, and N scale are more often used indoors.\nAt first, model railways were not to scale. Aided by trade associations such as the National Model Railroad Association (NMRA) and \"Normen Europ\u00e4ischer Modellbahnen\" (NEM), manufacturers and hobbyists soon arrived at \"de facto\" standards for interchangeability, such as gauge, but trains were only a rough approximation to the real thing. Official scales for the gauges were drawn up but not at first rigidly followed and not necessarily correctly proportioned for the gauge chosen. 0 (zero) gauge trains, for instance, operate on track too widely spaced in the United States as the scale is accepted as 1:48 whereas in Britain 0 gauge uses a ratio of 43.5:1 or 7\u00a0mm/1 foot and the gauge is near to correct. British OO standards operate on track significantly too narrow. The 4\u00a0mm/1 foot scale on a gauge corresponds to a track gauge of , (undersized). gauge corresponds to standard gauge in H0 (half-0) 3.5\u00a0mm/1 foot or 1:87.1. This arose due to British locomotives and rolling stock being smaller than those found elsewhere, leading to an increase in scale to enable H0 scale mechanisms to be used. Most commercial scales have standards that include wheel flanges that are too deep, wheel treads that are too wide, and rail tracks that are too large. In H0 scale, the rail heights are codes 100, 87, 83, 70, 55, 53, and 40 -- the height in thousandths of an inch from base to railhead (so code 100 is a tenth of an inch and represents 156-pound rail).\nLater, modellers became dissatisfied with inaccuracies and developed standards in which everything is correctly scaled. These are used by modellers but have not spread to mass-production because the inaccuracies and overscale properties of the commercial scales ensure reliable operation and allow for shortcuts necessary for cost control. The finescale standards include the UK's P4, and the even finer S4, which uses track dimensions scaled from the prototype. This 4\u00a0mm:1\u00a0ft modelling uses wheels or less wide running on track with a gauge of . Check-rail and wing-rail clearances are similarly accurate. \nA compromise of P4 and OO is \"EM\" which uses a gauge of with more generous tolerances than P4 for check clearances. It gives a better appearance than OO though pointwork is not as close to reality as P4. It suits many where time and improved appearance are important. There is a small following of finescale OO which uses the same 16.5mm gauge as OO, but with the finer scale wheels and smaller clearances as used with EM- it is essentially 'EM-minus-1.7mm.'\nModules.\nMany groups build modules, which are sections of layouts, and can be joined together to form a larger layout, for meetings or for special occasions. For each kind of module system, there is an interface standard, so that modules made by different participants may be connected, even if they have never been connected before. Many of these module types are listed in the Layout standards organizations section of this article.\nCouplers and connectors.\nIn addition to different scales, there are also different types of couplers for connecting cars, which are not compatible with each other.\nIn HO, the Americans standardized on horn-hook, or X2F couplers. Horn hook couplers have largely given way to a design known as a working knuckle coupler which was popularized by the Kadee Quality Products Co., and which has subsequently been emulated by a number of other manufactures in recent years. Working knuckle couplers are a closer approximation to the \"automatic\" couplers used on the prototype there and elsewhere. Also in HO, the European manufacturers have standardized, but on a coupler mount, not a coupler: many varieties of coupler can be plugged in (and out) of the NEM coupler box. None of the popular couplers has any resemblance to the prototype three-link chains generally used on the continent.\nFor British modellers, whose most popular scale is OO, the normal coupler is a tension-lock coupler, which, again has no pretence of replicating the usual prototype three-link chain couplers. Bachmann and more recently Hornby have begun to offer models fitted with NEM coupler pockets. This theoretically enables modellers of British railways to substitute any other NEM362 coupler, though many Bachmann models place the coupler pocket at the wrong height. A fairly common alternative is to use representations of chain couplings as found on the prototype, though these require large radius curves to be used to avoid derailments.\nOther scales have similar ranges of non-compatible couplers available. In all scales couplers can be exchanged, with varying degrees of difficulty.\nLandscaping.\nSome modellers pay attention to landscaping their layout, creating a fantasy world or modelling an actual location, often historic. Landscaping is termed \"scenery building\" or \"scenicking\".\nConstructing scenery involves preparing a sub-terrain using a wide variety of building materials, including (but not limited to) screen wire, a lattice of cardboard strips, or carved stacks of expanded polystyrene (styrofoam) sheets. A scenery base is applied over the sub-terrain; typical base include casting plaster, plaster of Paris, hybrid paper-pulp (papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9) or a lightweight foam/fiberglass/bubblewrap composite as in Geodesic Foam Scenery.\nThe scenery base is covered with substitutes for ground cover, which may be Static Grass or scatter. \"Scatter\" or \"flock\" is a substance used in the building of dioramas and model railways to simulate the effect of grass, poppies, fireweed, track ballast and other scenic ground cover. Scatter used to simulate track ballast is usually fine-grained ground granite. Scatter which simulates coloured grass is usually tinted sawdust, wood chips or ground foam. Foam or natural lichen or commercial scatter materials can be used to simulate shrubbery. An alternative to scatter, for grass, is static grass which uses static electricity to make its simulated grass actually stand up.\nBuildings and structures can be purchased as kits, or built from cardboard, balsa wood, basswood, other soft woods, paper, or polystyrene or other plastic. Trees can be fabricated from materials such as Western sagebrush, candytuft, and caspia, to which adhesive and model foliage are applied; or they can be bought ready-made from specialist manufacturers. Water can be simulated using polyester casting resin, polyurethane, or rippled glass. Rocks can be cast in plaster or in plastic with a foam backing. Castings can be painted with stains to give colouring and shadows.\nWeathering.\n\"Weathering\" refers to making a model look used and exposed to weather by simulating dirt and wear on real vehicles, structures and equipment. Most models come out of the box looking new, because unweathered finishes are easier to produce. Also, the wear a freight car or building undergoes depends not only on age but where it is used. Rail cars in cities accumulate grime from building and automobile exhaust and graffiti, while cars in deserts may be subjected to sandstorms which etch or strip paint. A model that is weathered would not fit as many layouts as a pristine model which can be weathered by its purchaser.\nThere are many weather techniques that include, but are not limited to, painting (by either drybrushing or an airbrush), sanding, breaking, and even the use of chemicals to cause corrosion. Some processes become very creative depending on the skill of the modeller. For instance several steps may be taken to create a rusting effect to ensure not only proper colouring, but also proper texture and lustre.\nWeathering purchased models is common, at the least, weathering aims to reduce the plastic-like finish of scale models. The simulation of grime, rust, dirt, and wear adds realism. Some modellers simulate fuel stains on tanks, or corrosion on battery boxes. In some cases, evidence of accidents or repairs may be added, such as dents or freshly painted replacement parts, and weathered models can be nearly indistinguishable from their prototypes when photographed appropriately.\nMethods of power.\nStatic diorama models or \"push along\" scale models are a branch of model railways for unpowered locomotives, examples are Lone Star and Airfix models. Powered model railways are now generally operated by low voltage direct current (DC) electricity supplied via the tracks, but there are exceptions, such as M\u00e4rklin and Lionel Corporation, which use alternating current (AC). Modern Digital Command Control (DCC) systems use alternating current. Other locomotives, particularly large models, can use steam. Steam and clockwork-driven engines are still sought by collectors.\nClockwork.\nMost early models for the toy market were powered by clockwork and controlled by levers on the locomotive. Although this made control crude the models were large and robust enough that handling the controls was practical. Various manufacturers introduced slowing and stopping tracks that could trigger levers on the locomotive and allow station stops.\nElectricity.\nThe first miniature electric trains used a three-rail track, with non-insulated wheels resting on the two outer rails that were in contact with the metal sleepers. The insulated central rail supplied the current to a skid under the locomotive. The outer rails ensured the return of the current. The current was alternating, supplied by the domestic network, lowered by various means (transformer or serial resistances). This kind of track made sense at the time as models were metal and conductive. Modern plastics were not available and insulation was a problem. In addition the notion of accurate models had yet to evolve and toy trains and track were crude tinplate.\nIn 1938, Hornby, a manufacturer of \u2018O\u2019 scale model trains in the UK, launched a range of \u2018OO\u2019 scale electric trains (Hornby Dublo) with 1/76 scale rolling stock using 1/87 scale 16.5 mm wide track with a third centre rail. The power supply was 12 V DC and the track was equipped with an electrically insulated central rail and two non-insulated running rails. In 1959 Hornby abandoned its three-rail track in favour of a two-rail track for its \u2018OO\u2019 scale electric trains.\nOther systems such as M\u00e4rklin instead used, since 1953, fine metal studs to replace the central rail, allowing existing three-rail models to use more realistic track.\nA variation on the three-rail system, early introduced by Trix in 1935, used a track with three insulated rails that allowed two trains to be independently controlled on the same track. The use of a catenary made it possible for three trains to be independently controlled. The center rail ensured the common return of the current. That system, known as Trix Express or Trix Twin in the UK, which first used alternative current and then direct current after 1953, was abandoned in 1997 when M\u00e4rklin took over Trix. This three-rail system enabled DC and AC locomotives to run on the same track.\nWhen DC motors with more powerful magnets began to be used for model trains in the 1950s, the two-rail track was generally preferred because at the same time accuracy became important. The two insulated rails from each other are to be used with insulated wheels on the same axle. In the direction of travel, the right-hand rail carries the positive potential and the left-hand rail the negative. This system excludes certain track layouts such as the reversing loop, the reversing triangle and the diagonal in a circle without insulated sections and suitable cabling.\nWhere the model is of an electric locomotive, it may be supplied by overhead lines, like the full-size locomotive. Before Digital Command Control became available, this was one way of controlling two trains separately on the same track. The electric-outline model would be supplied by the overhead wire and the other model could be supplied by one of the running rails. The other running rail would act as a common return.\nEarly electric trains ran on trackside batteries because few homes in the late 19th century and early 20th century had electricity. Today, inexpensive train sets running on batteries are again common but regarded as toys and seldom used by hobbyists. Batteries located in the model often power garden railway and larger scale systems because of the difficulty in obtaining reliable power supply through the outdoor rails. The high-power consumption and current draw of large-scale garden models is more easily and safely met with internal rechargeable batteries. Most large-scale battery-powered models use radio control.\nLive steam.\nEngines powered by live steam are often built in large outdoor gauges of and , are also available in Gauge 1, G scale, 16 mm scale and can be found in O and OO/HO. Hornby Railways produce live steam locomotives in OO, based on designs first arrived at by an amateur modeller. Other modellers have built live steam models in HO/OO, OO9 and N, and there is one in Z in Australia.\nInternal combustion.\nOccasionally gasoline-electric models, patterned after real diesel-electric locomotives, come up among hobbyists and companies like Pilgrim Locomotive Works have sold such locomotives. Large-scale petrol-mechanical and petrol-hydraulic models are available but unusual and pricier than the electrically powered versions.\nScratch building.\nModern manufacturing techniques can allow mass-produced models to cost-effectively achieve a high degree of precision and realism. In the past this was not the case and scratch building was very common. Simple models are made using cardboard engineering techniques. More sophisticated models can be made using a combination of etched sheets of brass and low temperature castings. Parts that need machining, such as wheels and couplings are purchased.\nEtched kits are still popular, still accompanied by low temperature castings. These kits produce models that are not covered by the major manufacturers or in scales that are not in mass production. Laser machining techniques have extended this ability to thicker materials for scale steam and other locomotive types. Scratch builders may also make silicone rubber moulds of the parts they create, and cast them in various plastic resins (see Resin casting), or plasters. This may be done to save duplication of effort, or to sell to others. Resin \"craftsman kits\" are also available for a wide range of prototypes.\nControl.\nThe first clockwork (spring-drive) and live steam locomotives ran until out of power, with no way for the operator to stop and restart the locomotive or vary its speed. The advent of electric trains, which appeared commercially in the 1890s, allowed control of the speed by varying the current or voltage. As trains began to be powered by transformers and rectifiers more sophisticated throttles appeared, and soon trains powered by AC contained mechanisms to change direction or go into neutral gear when the operator cycled the power. Trains powered by DC can change direction by reversing polarity.\nElectricity permits control by dividing the layout into isolated blocks, where trains can be slowed or stopped by lowering or cutting power to a block. Dividing a layout into blocks permits operators to run more than one train with less risk of a fast train catching and hitting a slow train. Blocks can also trigger signals or other accessories, adding realism or whimsy. Three-rail systems often insulate one of the common rails on a section of track, and use a passing train to complete the circuit and activate an accessory.\nMany layout builders are choosing digital operation of their layouts rather than the more traditional DC design. Of the several competing systems, the command system offered by the majority of manufacturers in 2020 was a variant of Digital Command Control (DCC). The advantages of DCC are that track voltage is constant (usually in the range of 20 volts AC) and the command throttle sends a signal to small circuit cards, or decoders, hidden inside the piece of equipment which control several functions of an individual locomotive, including speed, direction of travel, lights, smoke and various sound effects. This allows more realistic operation in that the modeller can operate independently several locomotives on the same stretch of track. Several manufacturers also offer software that can provide computer-control of DCC layouts.\nIn large scales, particularly for garden railways, radio control and DCC in the garden have become popular.\nModel railway manufacturers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLayout standards organizations.\nSeveral organizations exist to set standardizations for connectibility between individual layout sections (commonly called \"modules\"). This is so several (or hundreds, given enough space and power) people or groups can bring together their own modules, connect them together with as little trouble as possible, and operate their trains. Despite different design and operation philosophies, different organizations have similar goals; standardized ends to facilitate connection with other modules built to the same specifications, standardized electricals, equipment, curve radii.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20544", "revid": "49408354", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20544", "title": "Morphophonology", "text": "Study of the interaction between morphology and phonology\nMorphophonology (also morphophonemics or morphonology) is the branch of linguistics that studies the interaction between morphological and phonological or phonetic processes. Its chief focus is the sound changes that take place in morphemes (minimal meaningful units) when they combine to form words.\nThe origins of morphophonology trace back to the early 20th century with foundational works in structural linguistics. Notable contributions include Roman Jakobson's insights into phonological alternations and Chomsky and Halle's \"The Sound Pattern of English\" (1968), which formalized the relationship between phonology and morphology within generative grammar. Subsequent theories, such as Autosegmental phonology and Optimality theory, have refined the analysis of morphophonological patterns.\nMorphophonological analysis often involves an attempt to give a series of formal rules or constraints that successfully predict the regular sound changes occurring in the morphemes of a given language. Such a series of rules converts a theoretical underlying representation into a surface form that is heard. The units of which the underlying representations of morphemes are composed are sometimes called morphophonemes. The surface form produced by the morphophonological rules may consist of phonemes (which are then subject to ordinary phonological rules to produce speech sounds or \"phones\"), or else the morphophonological analysis may bypass the phoneme stage and produce the phones themselves.\nMorphophonology bridges the gap between morphology and phonology, offering insights into the dynamic interactions between word formation and sound patterns. It continues to evolve as a field, integrating innovative approaches and broadening our understanding of linguistic systems globally.\nMorphophonemes and morphophonological rules.\nWhen morphemes combine, they influence each other's sound structure (whether analyzed at a phonetic or phonemic level), resulting in different variant pronunciations for the same morpheme. Morphophonology attempts to analyze these processes. A language's morphophonological structure is generally described with a series of rules that, ideally, can predict every morphophonological alternation that takes place in the language.\nAn example of a morphophonological alternation in English is provided by the plural morpheme, written as \"-s\" or \"-es\". Its pronunciation varies among , , and , as in \"cats\", \"dogs\", and \"horses\" respectively. A purely phonological analysis would most likely assign to these three endings the phonemic representations , , . On a morphophonological level, however, they may all be considered to be forms of the underlying object , which is a morphophoneme realized as one of the phonemic forms . The different forms it takes are dependent on the segment at the end of the morpheme to which it attaches: the dependencies are described by morphophonological rules. (The behaviour of the English past tense ending \"-ed\" is similar: it can be pronounced , or , as in \"hoped\", \"bobbed\" and \"added\".)\nThe plural suffix \"-s\" can also influence the form taken by the preceding morpheme, as in the case of the words \"leaf\" and \"knife\", which end with in the singular/but have in the plural (\"leaves\", \"knives\"). On a morphophonological level, the morphemes may be analyzed as ending in a morphophoneme , which becomes voiced when a voiced consonant (in this case the of the plural ending) is attached to it. The rule may be written symbolically as \u2192 [\u03b1voice] / [\u03b1voice]. This expression is called Alpha Notation in which \u03b1 can be + (positive value) or \u2212 (negative value).\nCommon conventions to indicate a morphophonemic rather than phonemic representation include double slashes (\u2afd\u00a0\u00a0\u2afd) (as above, implying that the transcription is 'more phonemic than simply phonemic'). This is the only convention consistent with the IPA. Other conventions include pipes (|\u00a0\u00a0|), double pipes (\u2016\u00a0\u00a0\u2016) and braces ({\u00a0\u00a0}). Braces, from a convention in set theory, tend to be used when the phonemes are all listed, as in and for the English plural and past-tense morphemes and above.\nFor instance, the English word \"cats\" may be transcribed phonetically as , phonemically as and morphophonemically as , if the plural is argued to be underlyingly , assimilating to after a voiceless nonsibilant. The tilde ~ may indicate morphological alternation, as in or for \"kneel~knelt\" (the plus sign '+' indicates a morpheme boundary).\nTypes of changes.\nInflected and agglutinating languages may have extremely complicated systems of morphophonemics. Examples of complex morphophonological systems include:\nRelation with phonology.\nUntil the 1950s, many phonologists assumed that neutralizing rules generally applied before allophonic rules. Thus phonological analysis was split into two parts: a morphophonological part, where neutralizing rules were developed to derive phonemes from morphophonemes; and a purely phonological part, where phones were derived from the phonemes. Since the 1960s (in particular with the work of the generative school, such as Chomsky and Halle's \"The Sound Pattern of English\") many linguists have moved away from making such a split, instead regarding the surface phones as being derived from the underlying morphophonemes (which may be referred to using various terminology) through a single system of (morpho)phonological rules.\nThe purpose of both phonemic and morphophonemic analysis is to produce simpler underlying descriptions for what appear on the surface to be complicated patterns. In purely phonemic analysis the data is just a set of words in a language, while for morphophonemic analysis, the words must be considered in grammatical paradigms to take account of the underlying morphemes. It is postulated that morphemes are recorded in the speaker's \"lexicon\" in an invariant (morphophonemic) form, which, in a given environment, is converted by rules into a surface form. The analyst attempts to present as completely as possible a system of underlying units (morphophonemes) and a series of rules that act on them, to produce surface forms consistent with the linguistic data.\nIsolation forms.\nThe isolation form of a morpheme is the form in which that morpheme appears in isolation (when it is not subject to the effects of any other morpheme). In the case of a bound morpheme, such as the English past tense ending \"-ed\", it is generally not possible to identify an isolation form since such a morpheme does not occur in isolation.\nIt is often reasonable to assume that the isolation form of a morpheme provides its underlying representation. For example, in some varieties of American English, \"plant\" is pronounced , while \"planting\" is , where the morpheme \"plant-\" appears in the form . Here, the underlying form can be assumed to be , corresponding to the isolation form, since rules can be set up to derive the reduced form from this (but it would be difficult or impossible to set up rules that would derive the isolation form from an underlying ).\nThat is not always the case, however; the isolation form itself is sometimes subject to neutralization that does not apply to some other instances of the morpheme. For example, the French word \"petit\" (\"small\") is pronounced in isolation without the final sound, but in certain derived forms (such as the feminine \"petite\"), the is heard. If the isolation form were adopted as the underlying form, the information that there is a final \"t\" would be lost, and it would then be difficult to explain the appearance of the \"t\" in the inflected forms. Similar considerations apply to languages with final obstruent devoicing, in which the isolation form undergoes loss of voicing contrast, but other forms may not.\nIf the grammar of a language includes two rules rule A and rule B ordered such that A precedes B, a derivation may result in rule A creating the necessary environment for rule B to apply, even though that environment did not exist beforehand. In this case, the two rules are said to be in a \"feeding relationship\".\nIf rule A is ordered before B in the derivation in which rule A destroys the environment to which rule B applies, both rules are in a \"bleeding order\".\nIf A is ordered before B, and B creates an environment in which A could have applied, B is then said to counterfeed A, and the relationship is \"counterfeeding\".\nIf A is ordered before B, there is a \"counterbleeding\" relationship if B destroys the environment that A applies to and has already applied and so B has missed its chance to bleed A.\n\"Conjunctive ordering\" is the ordering that ensures that all rules are applied in a derivation before the surface representation occurs. Rules applied in a feeding relationship are said to be \"conjunctively ordered\".\n\"Disjunctive ordering\" is a rule that applies and prevents the other rule from applying in the surface representation. Such rules have a bleeding relationship and are said to be \"disjunctively ordered\".\nOrthography.\nThe principle behind alphabetic writing systems is that the letters (graphemes) represent phonemes. However, many orthographies based on such systems have correspondences between graphemes and phonemes that are not exact, and it is sometimes the case that certain spellings better represent a word's morphophonological structure rather than the purely phonological structure. An example is that the English plural morpheme is written \"-s\", regardless of whether it is pronounced or : \"cats and \"dogs, not \"dogz\".\nThe above example involves active morphology (inflection), and morphophonemic spellings are common in this context in many languages. Another type of spelling that can be described as morphophonemic is the kind that reflects the etymology of words. Such spellings are particularly common in English; examples include science\" vs. \"unconscious\" , prejudice\" vs. prequel\" , sign signature\" , nation\" vs. nationalism\" , and special\" vs. species\" .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20545", "revid": "50611213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20545", "title": "Mirror", "text": "Object that reflects an image \nA mirror, also known as a looking glass, is an object that reflects an image. Light that bounces off a mirror forms an image of whatever is in front of it, which is then focused through the lens of the eye or a camera. Mirrors reverse the direction of light at an angle equal to its incidence. This allows the viewer to see themselves or objects behind them, or even objects that are at an angle from them but out of their field of view, such as around a corner. Natural mirrors have existed since prehistoric times, such as the surface of water, but people have been manufacturing mirrors out of a variety of materials for thousands of years, like stone, metals, and glass. In modern mirrors, metals like silver or aluminium are often used due to their high reflectivity, applied as a thin coating on glass because of its naturally smooth and very hard surface.\nA mirror is a wave reflector. Light consists of waves, and when light waves reflect from the flat surface of a mirror, those waves retain the same degree of curvature and vergence, in an equal yet opposite direction, as the original waves. This allows the waves to form an image when they are focused through a lens, just as if the waves had originated from the direction of the mirror. The light can also be pictured as rays (imaginary lines radiating from the light source, that are always perpendicular to the waves). These rays are reflected at an equal yet opposite angle from which they strike the mirror (incident light). This property, called specular reflection, distinguishes a mirror from objects that diffuse light, breaking up the wave and scattering it in many directions (such as flat-white paint). Thus, a mirror can be any surface in which the texture or roughness of the surface is smaller (smoother) than the wavelength of the waves.\nWhen looking at a mirror, one will see a mirror image or reflected image of objects in the environment, formed by light emitted or scattered by them and reflected by the mirror towards one's eyes. This effect gives the illusion that those objects are behind the mirror, or (sometimes) in front of it. When the surface is not flat, a mirror may behave like a reflecting lens. A plane mirror yields a real-looking undistorted image, while a curved mirror may distort, magnify, or reduce the image in various ways, while keeping the lines, contrast, sharpness, colors, and other image properties intact.\nA mirror is commonly used for inspecting oneself, such as during personal grooming; hence the old-fashioned name \"looking glass\". This use, which dates from prehistory, overlaps with uses in decoration and architecture. Mirrors are also used to view other items that are not directly visible because of obstructions; examples include rear-view mirrors in vehicles, security mirrors in or around buildings, and dentist's mirrors. Mirrors are also used in optical and scientific apparatus such as telescopes, lasers, cameras, periscopes, and industrial machinery.\nAccording to superstitions breaking a mirror is said to bring seven years of bad luck.\nThe terms \"mirror\" and \"reflector\" can be used for objects that reflect any other types of waves. An acoustic mirror reflects sound waves. Objects such as walls, ceilings, or natural rock-formations may produce echos, and this tendency often becomes a problem in acoustical engineering when designing houses, auditoriums, or recording studios. Acoustic mirrors may be used for applications such as parabolic microphones, atmospheric studies, sonar, and seafloor mapping. An atomic mirror reflects matter waves and can be used for atomic interferometry and atomic holography.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe first mirrors used by humans were most likely pools of still water, or shiny stones. The requirements for making a good mirror are a surface with a very high degree of flatness (preferably but not necessarily with high reflectivity), and a surface roughness smaller than the wavelength of the light.\nThe earliest manufactured mirrors were pieces of polished stone such as obsidian, a naturally occurring volcanic glass. Examples of obsidian mirrors found at \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck in Anatolia (modern-day Turkey) have been dated to around 6000\u00a0BCE. Mirrors of polished copper were crafted in Mesopotamia from 4000\u00a0BCE, and in ancient Egypt from around 3000\u00a0BCE. Polished stone mirrors from Central and South America date from around 2000\u00a0BCE onwards.\nBronze Age to Early Middle Ages.\nBy the Bronze Age most cultures were using mirrors made from polished discs of bronze, copper, silver, or other metals. The people of Kerma in Nubia were skilled in the manufacturing of mirrors. Remains of their bronze kilns have been found within the temple of Kerma. In China, bronze mirrors were manufactured from around 2000\u00a0BC, some of the earliest bronze and copper examples being produced by the Qijia culture. Such metal mirrors remained the norm through to Greco-Roman Antiquity and throughout the Middle Ages in Europe. During the Roman Empire silver mirrors were in wide use by servants.\nSpeculum metal is a highly reflective alloy of copper and tin that was used for mirrors until a couple of centuries ago. Such mirrors may have originated in China and India. Mirrors of speculum metal or any precious metal were hard to produce and were only owned by the wealthy.\nCommon metal mirrors tarnished and required frequent polishing. Bronze mirrors had low reflectivity and poor color rendering, and stone mirrors were much worse in this regard. These defects explain the New Testament reference in 1 Corinthians 13 to seeing \"as in a mirror, darkly.\"\nThe Greek philosopher Socrates urged young people to look at themselves in mirrors so that, if they were beautiful, they would become worthy of their beauty, and if they were ugly, they would know how to hide their disgrace through learning.\nGlass began to be used for mirrors in the 1st century CE, with the development of soda-lime glass and glass blowing. The Roman scholar Pliny the Elder claims that artisans in Sidon (modern-day Lebanon) were producing glass mirrors coated with lead or gold leaf in the back. The metal provided good reflectivity, and the glass provided a smooth surface and protected the metal from scratches and tarnishing. However, there is no archeological evidence of glass mirrors before the third century.\nThese early glass mirrors were made by blowing a glass bubble, and then cutting off a small circular section from 10 to 20 cm in diameter. Their surface was either concave or convex, and imperfections tended to distort the image. Lead-coated mirrors were very thin to prevent cracking by the heat of the molten metal. Due to the poor quality, high cost, and small size of glass mirrors, solid-metal mirrors (primarily of steel) remained in common use until the late nineteenth century.\nSilver-coated metal mirrors were developed in China as early as 500 CE. The bare metal was coated with an amalgam, then heated until the mercury boiled away.\nMiddle Ages and Renaissance.\nThe evolution of glass mirrors in the Middle Ages followed improvements in glassmaking technology. Glassmakers in France made flat glass plates by blowing glass bubbles, spinning them rapidly to flatten them, and cutting rectangles out of them. A better method, developed in Germany and perfected in Venice by the 16th century, was to blow a cylinder of glass, cut off the ends, slice it along its length, and unroll it onto a flat hot plate. Venetian glassmakers also adopted lead glass for mirrors, because of its crystal-clarity and its easier workability.\nDuring the early European Renaissance, a fire-gilding technique developed to produce an even and highly reflective tin coating for glass mirrors. The back of the glass was coated with a tin-mercury amalgam, and the mercury was then evaporated by heating the piece. This process caused less thermal shock to the glass than the older molten-lead method. The date and location of the discovery is unknown, but by the 16th century Venice was a center of mirror production using this technique. These Venetian mirrors were up to square.\nFor a century, Venice retained the monopoly of the tin amalgam technique. Venetian mirrors in richly decorated frames served as luxury decorations for palaces throughout Europe, and were very expensive. For example, in the late seventeenth century, the Countess de Fiesque was reported to have traded an entire wheat farm for a mirror, considering it a bargain. However, by the end of that century the secret was leaked through industrial espionage. French workshops succeeded in large-scale industrialization of the process, eventually making mirrors affordable to the masses, in spite of the toxicity of mercury's vapor.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nThe invention of the ribbon machine in the late Industrial Revolution allowed modern glass panes to be produced in bulk. The Saint-Gobain factory, founded by royal initiative in France, was an important manufacturer, and Bohemian and German glass, often rather cheaper, was also important.\nThe invention of the silvered-glass mirror is credited to German chemist Justus von Liebig in 1835. His wet deposition process involved the deposition of a thin layer of metallic silver onto glass through the chemical reduction of silver nitrate. This silvering process was adapted for mass manufacturing and led to the greater availability of affordable mirrors.\nContemporary technologies.\nMirrors are often produced by the wet deposition of silver, or sometimes nickel or chromium (the latter used most often in automotive mirrors) via electroplating directly onto the glass substrate.\nGlass mirrors for optical instruments are usually produced by vacuum deposition methods. These techniques can be traced to observations in the 1920s and 1930s that metal was being ejected from electrodes in gas discharge lamps and condensed on the glass walls forming a mirror-like coating. The phenomenon, called sputtering, was developed into an industrial metal-coating method with the development of semiconductor technology in the 1970s.\nA similar phenomenon had been observed with incandescent light bulbs: the metal in the hot filament would slowly sublimate and condense on the bulb's walls. This phenomenon was developed into the method of evaporation coating by Pohl and Pringsheim in 1912. John D. Strong used evaporation coating to make the first aluminium-coated telescope mirrors in the 1930s. The first dielectric mirror was created in 1937 by Auwarter using evaporated rhodium.\nThe metal coating of glass mirrors is usually protected from abrasion and corrosion by a layer of paint applied over it. Mirrors for optical instruments often have the metal layer on the front face, so that the light does not have to cross the glass twice. In these mirrors, the metal may be protected by a thin transparent coating of a non-metallic (dielectric) material. The first metallic mirror to be enhanced with a dielectric coating of silicon dioxide was created by Hass in 1937. In 1939 at the Schott Glass company, Walter Geffcken invented the first dielectric mirrors to use multilayer coatings.\nBurning mirrors.\nThe Greek in Classical Antiquity were familiar with the use of mirrors to concentrate light. Parabolic mirrors were described and studied by the mathematician Diocles in his work \"On Burning Mirrors\". Ptolemy conducted a number of experiments with curved polished iron mirrors, and discussed plane, convex spherical, and concave spherical mirrors in his \"Optics\".\nParabolic mirrors were also described by the Caliphate mathematician Ibn Sahl in the tenth century.\nTypes of mirrors.\nMirrors can be classified in many ways; including by shape, support, reflective materials, manufacturing methods, and intended application.\nBy shape.\nTypical mirror shapes are planar and curved mirrors.\nThe surface of curved mirrors is often a part of a sphere. Mirrors that are meant to precisely concentrate parallel rays of light into a point are usually made in the shape of a paraboloid of revolution instead; they are used in telescopes (from radio waves to X-rays), in antennas to communicate with broadcast satellites, and in solar furnaces. A segmented mirror, consisting of multiple flat or curved mirrors, properly placed and oriented, may be used instead.\nMirrors that are intended to concentrate sunlight onto a long pipe may be a circular cylinder or of a parabolic cylinder.\nBy structural material.\nThe most common structural material for mirrors is glass, due to its transparency, ease of fabrication, rigidity, hardness, and ability to take a smooth finish.\nBack-silvered mirrors.\nThe most common mirrors consist of a plate of transparent glass, with a thin reflective layer on the back (the side opposite to the incident and reflected light) backed by a coating that protects that layer against abrasion, tarnishing, and corrosion. The glass is usually soda-lime glass, but lead glass may be used for decorative effects, and other transparent materials may be used for specific applications.\nA plate of transparent plastic may be used instead of glass, for lighter weight or impact resistance. Alternatively, a flexible transparent plastic film may be bonded to the front and/or back surface of the mirror, to prevent injuries in case the mirror is broken. Lettering or decorative designs may be printed on the front face of the glass, or formed on the reflective layer. The front surface may have an anti-reflection coating.\nFront-silvered mirrors.\nMirrors which are reflective on the front surface (the same side of the incident and reflected light) may be made of any rigid material. The supporting material does not necessarily need to be transparent, but telescope mirrors often use glass anyway. Often a protective transparent coating is added on top of the reflecting layer, to protect it against abrasion, tarnishing, and corrosion, or to absorb certain wavelengths.\nFlexible mirrors.\nThin flexible plastic mirrors are sometimes used for safety, since they cannot shatter or produce sharp flakes. Their flatness is achieved by stretching them on a rigid frame. These usually consist of a layer of evaporated aluminium between two thin layers of transparent plastic.\nBy reflective material.\nIn common mirrors, the reflective layer is usually some metal like silver, tin, nickel, or chromium, deposited by a wet process; or aluminium, deposited by sputtering or evaporation in vacuum. The reflective layer may also be made of one or more layers of transparent materials with suitable indices of refraction.\nThe structural material may be a metal, in which case the reflecting layer may be just the surface of the same. Metal concave dishes are often used to reflect infrared light (such as in space heaters) or microwaves (as in satellite TV antennas). Liquid metal telescopes use a surface of liquid metal such as mercury.\nMirrors that reflect only part of the light, while transmitting some of the rest, can be made with very thin metal layers or suitable combinations of dielectric layers. They are typically used as beamsplitters. A dichroic mirror, in particular, has surface that reflects certain wavelengths of light, while letting other wavelengths pass through. A cold mirror is a dichroic mirror that efficiently reflects the entire visible light spectrum while transmitting infrared wavelengths. A hot mirror is the opposite: it reflects infrared light while transmitting visible light. Dichroic mirrors are often used as filters to remove undesired components of the light in cameras and measuring instruments.\nIn X-ray telescopes, the X-rays reflect off a highly precise metal surface at almost grazing angles, and only a small fraction of the rays are reflected. In flying relativistic mirrors conceived for X-ray lasers, the reflecting surface is a spherical shockwave (wake wave) created in a low-density plasma by a very intense laser-pulse, and moving at an extremely high velocity.\nNonlinear optical mirrors.\nA phase-conjugating mirror uses nonlinear optics to reverse the phase difference between incident beams. Such mirrors may be used, for example, for coherent beam combination. The useful applications are self-guiding of laser beams and correction of atmospheric distortions in imaging systems.\nPhysical principles.\nWhen a sufficiently narrow beam of light is reflected at a point of a surface, the surface's normal direction formula_1 will be the bisector of the angle formed by the two beams at that point. That is, the direction vector formula_2 towards the incident beams's source, the normal vector formula_1, and direction vector formula_4 of the reflected beam will be coplanar, and the angle between formula_1 and formula_4 will be equal to the angle of incidence between formula_1 and formula_2, but of opposite sign.\nThis property can be explained by the physics of an electromagnetic plane wave that is incident to a flat surface that is electrically conductive or where the speed of light changes abruptly, as between two materials with different indices of refraction.\nMore specifically, a concave parabolic mirror (whose surface is a part of a paraboloid of revolution) will reflect rays that are parallel to its axis into rays that pass through its focus. Conversely, a parabolic concave mirror will reflect any ray that comes from its focus towards a direction parallel to its axis. If a concave mirror surface is a part of a prolate ellipsoid, it will reflect any ray coming from one focus toward the other focus.\nA convex parabolic mirror, on the other hand, will reflect rays that are parallel to its axis into rays that seem to emanate from the focus of the surface, behind the mirror. Conversely, it will reflect incoming rays that converge toward that point into rays that are parallel to the axis. A convex mirror that is part of a prolate ellipsoid will reflect rays that converge towards one focus into divergent rays that seem to emanate from the other focus.\nSpherical mirrors do not reflect parallel rays to rays that converge to or diverge from a single point, or vice versa, due to spherical aberration. However, a spherical mirror whose diameter is sufficiently small compared to the sphere's radius will behave very similarly to a parabolic mirror whose axis goes through the mirror's center and the center of that sphere; so that spherical mirrors can substitute for parabolic ones in many applications.\nA similar aberration occurs with parabolic mirrors when the incident rays are parallel among themselves but not parallel to the mirror's axis, or are divergent from a point that is not the focus \u2013 as when trying to form an image of an object that is near the mirror or spans a wide angle as seen from it. However, this aberration can be sufficiently small if the object image is sufficiently far from the mirror and spans a sufficiently small angle around its axis.\nMirror images.\nMirrors reflect an image to the observer. However, unlike a projected image on a screen, an image does not actually exist on the surface of the mirror. For example, when two people look at each other in a mirror, both see different images on the same surface. When the light waves converge through the lens of the eye they interfere with each other to form the image on the surface of the retina, and since both viewers see waves coming from different directions, each sees a different image in the same mirror. Thus, the images observed in a mirror depend upon the angle of the mirror with respect to the eye. The angle between the object and the observer is always twice the angle between the eye and the normal, or the direction perpendicular to the surface. This allows animals with binocular vision to see the reflected image with depth perception and in three dimensions.\nThe mirror forms a \"virtual image\" of whatever is in the opposite angle from the viewer, meaning that objects in the image appear to exist in a direct line of sight\u2014behind the surface of the mirror\u2014at an equal distance from their position in front of the mirror. Objects behind the observer, or between the observer and the mirror, are reflected back to the observer without any actual change in orientation; the light waves are simply reversed in a direction perpendicular to the mirror. However, when viewer is facing the object and the mirror is at an angle between them, the image appears inverted 180\u00b0 along the direction of the angle.\nObjects viewed in a (plane) mirror will appear laterally inverted (e.g., if one raises one's right hand, the image's left hand will appear to go up in the mirror), but not vertically inverted (in the image a person's head still appears above their body). However, a mirror does not actually \"swap\" left and right any more than it swaps top and bottom. A mirror swaps front and back. To be precise, it reverses the object in the direction perpendicular to the mirror surface (the normal), turning the three dimensional image inside out (the way a glove stripped off the hand can be turned inside out, turning a left-hand glove into a right-hand glove or vice versa). When a person raises their left hand, the actual left hand raises in the mirror, but gives the illusion of a right hand raising because the imaginary person in the mirror is literally inside-out, hand and all. If the person stands side-on to a mirror, the mirror really does reverse left and right hands, that is, objects that are physically closer to the mirror always appear closer in the virtual image, and objects farther from the surface always appear symmetrically farther away regardless of angle.\nLooking at an image of oneself with the front-back axis flipped results in the perception of an image with its left-right axis flipped. When reflected in the mirror, a person's right hand remains directly opposite their real right hand, but it is perceived by the mind as the left hand in the image. When a person looks into a mirror, the image is actually front-back reversed (inside-out), which is an effect similar to the hollow-mask illusion. Notice that a mirror image is fundamentally different from the object (inside-out) and cannot be reproduced by simply rotating the object. An object and its mirror image are said to be chiral.\nFor things that may be considered as two-dimensional objects (like text), front-back reversal cannot usually explain the observed reversal. An image is a two-dimensional representation of a three-dimensional space, and because it exists in a two-dimensional plane, an image can be viewed from front or back. In the same way that text on a piece of paper appears reversed if held up to a light and viewed from behind, text held facing a mirror will appear reversed, because the image of the text is still facing away from the observer. Another way to understand the reversals observed in images of objects that are effectively two-dimensional is that the inversion of left and right in a mirror is due to the way human beings perceive their surroundings. A person's reflection in a mirror appears to be a real person facing them, but for that person to really face themselves (i.e.: twins) one would have to physically turn and face the other, causing an actual swapping of right and left. A mirror causes an illusion of left-right reversal because left and right were \"not\" swapped when the image appears to have turned around to face the viewer. The viewer's egocentric navigation (left and right with respect to the observer's point of view; i.e.: \"my left...\") is unconsciously replaced with their allocentric navigation (left and right as it relates another's point of view; \"...your right\") when processing the virtual image of the apparent person behind the mirror. Likewise, text viewed in a mirror would have to be physically turned around, facing the observer and away from the surface, actually swapping left and right, to be read in the mirror.\nOptical properties.\nReflectivity.\nThe reflectivity of a mirror is determined by the percentage of reflected light per the total of the incident light. The reflectivity may vary with wavelength. All or a portion of the light not reflected is absorbed by the mirror, while in some cases a portion may also transmit through. Although some small portion of the light will be absorbed by the coating, the reflectivity is usually higher for first-surface mirrors, eliminating both reflection and absorption losses from the substrate.\nThe reflectivity is often determined by the type and thickness of the coating. When the thickness of the coating is sufficient to prevent transmission, all of the losses occur due to absorption. Aluminium is harder and more resistant to tarnishing than silver, and will reflect 85 to 90% of the light in the visible to near-ultraviolet range, but experiences a drop in its reflectance between 800 and 900\u00a0nm. Gold is very soft and easily scratched, but does not tarnish. Gold is greater than 96% reflective to near and far-infrared light between 800 and 12000\u00a0nm, but poorly reflects visible light with wavelengths shorter than 600\u00a0nm (yellow). Silver is expensive, soft, and quickly tarnishes, but has the highest reflectivity in the visual to near-infrared of any metal. Silver can reflect up to 98 or 99% of light to wavelengths as long as 2000\u00a0nm, but loses nearly all reflectivity at wavelengths shorter than 350\u00a0nm.\nDielectric mirrors can reflect greater than 99.99% of light, but only for a narrow range of wavelengths, ranging from a bandwidth of only 10\u00a0nm to as wide as 100\u00a0nm for tunable lasers. However, dielectric coatings can also enhance the reflectivity of metallic coatings and protect them from scratching or tarnishing. Dielectric materials are typically very hard and relatively cheap, however the number of coats needed generally makes it an expensive process. In mirrors with low tolerances, the coating thickness may be reduced to save cost, and simply covered with paint to absorb transmission.\nSurface quality.\nSurface quality, or surface accuracy, measures the deviations from a perfect, ideal surface shape. Increasing the surface quality reduces distortion, artifacts, and aberration in images, and helps increase coherence, collimation, and reduce unwanted divergence in beams. For plane mirrors, this is often described in terms of flatness, while other surface shapes are compared to an ideal shape. The surface quality is typically measured with items like interferometers or optical flats, and are usually measured in wavelengths of light (\u03bb). These deviations can be much larger or much smaller than the surface roughness. A normal household-mirror made with float glass may have flatness tolerances as low as 9\u201314\u03bb per inch (25.4\u00a0mm), equating to a deviation of 5600 through 8800 nanometers from perfect flatness. Precision ground and polished mirrors intended for lasers or telescopes may have tolerances as high as \u03bb/50 (1/50 of the wavelength of the light, or around 12\u00a0nm) across the entire surface. The surface quality can be affected by factors such as temperature changes, internal stress in the substrate, or even bending effects that occur when combining materials with different coefficients of thermal expansion, similar to a bimetallic strip.\nSurface roughness.\nSurface roughness describes the texture of the surface, often in terms of the depth of the microscopic scratches left by the polishing operations. Surface roughness determines how much of the reflection is specular and how much diffuses, controlling how clear or cloudy the image will be.\nFor perfectly specular reflection, the surface roughness must be kept smaller than the wavelength of the light. Microwaves, which sometimes have a wavelength greater than an inch (~25\u00a0mm) can reflect specularly off a metal screen-door, continental ice-sheets, or desert sand, while visible light, having wavelengths of only a few hundred nanometers (a few hundred-thousandths of an inch), must meet a very smooth surface to produce specular reflection. For wavelengths that are approaching or are even shorter than the diameter of the atoms, such as X-rays, specular reflection can only be produced by surfaces that are at a grazing incidence from the rays.\nSurface roughness is typically measured in microns, wavelength, or grit size, with ~80,000\u2013100,000\u00a0grit or ~\u00bd\u03bb\u2013\u00bc\u03bb being \"optical quality\".\nTransmissivity.\nTransmissivity is determined by the percentage of light transmitted per the incident light. Transmissivity is usually the same from both first and second surfaces. The combined transmitted and reflected light, subtracted from the incident light, measures the amount absorbed by both the coating and substrate. For transmissive mirrors, such as one-way mirrors, beam splitters, or laser output couplers, the transmissivity of the mirror is an important consideration. The transmissivity of metallic coatings are often determined by their thickness. For precision beam-splitters or output couplers, the thickness of the coating must be kept at very high tolerances to transmit the proper amount of light. For dielectric mirrors, the thickness of the coat must always be kept to high tolerances, but it is often more the number of individual coats that determine the transmissivity. For the substrate, the material used must also have good transmissivity to the chosen wavelengths. Glass is a suitable substrate for most visible-light applications, but other substrates such as zinc selenide or synthetic sapphire may be used for infrared or ultraviolet wavelengths.\nWedge.\nWedge errors are caused by the deviation of the surfaces from perfect parallelism. An optical wedge is the angle formed between two plane-surfaces (or between the principle planes of curved surfaces) due to manufacturing errors or limitations, causing one edge of the mirror to be slightly thicker than the other. Nearly all mirrors and optics with parallel faces have some slight degree of wedge, which is usually measured in seconds or minutes of arc. For first-surface mirrors, wedges can introduce alignment deviations in mounting hardware. For second-surface or transmissive mirrors, wedges can have a prismatic effect on the light, deviating its trajectory or, to a very slight degree, its color, causing chromatic and other forms of aberration. In some instances, a slight wedge is desirable, such as in certain laser systems where stray reflections from the uncoated surface are better dispersed than reflected back through the medium.\nSurface defects.\nSurface defects are small-scale, discontinuous imperfections in the surface smoothness. Surface defects are larger (in some cases much larger) than the surface roughness, but only affect small, localized portions of the entire surface. These are typically found as scratches, digs, pits (often from bubbles in the glass), sleeks (scratches from prior, larger grit polishing operations that were not fully removed by subsequent polishing grits), edge chips, or blemishes in the coating. These defects are often an unavoidable side-effect of manufacturing limitations, both in cost and machine precision. If kept low enough, in most applications these defects will rarely have any adverse effect, unless the surface is located at an image plane where they will show up directly. For applications that require extremely low scattering of light, extremely high reflectance, or low absorption due to high energy levels that could destroy the mirror, such as lasers or Fabry-Perot interferometers, the surface defects must be kept to a minimum.\nManufacturing.\nMirrors are usually manufactured by either polishing a naturally reflective material, such as speculum metal, or by applying a reflective coating to a suitable polished substrate.\nIn some applications, generally those that are cost-sensitive or that require great durability, such as for mounting in a prison cell, mirrors may be made from a single, bulk material such as polished metal. However, metals consist of small crystals (grains) separated by grain boundaries that may prevent the surface from attaining optical smoothness and uniform reflectivity.\nCoating.\nSilvering.\nThe coating of glass with a reflective layer of a metal is generally called \"silvering\", even though the metal may not be silver. Currently the main processes are electroplating, \"wet\" chemical deposition, and vacuum deposition. Front-coated metal mirrors achieve reflectivities of 90\u201395% when new.\nDielectric coating.\nApplications requiring higher reflectivity or greater durability, where wide bandwidth is not essential, use dielectric coatings, which can achieve reflectivities as high as 99.997% over a limited range of wavelengths. Because they are often chemically stable and do not conduct electricity, dielectric coatings are almost always applied by methods of vacuum deposition, and most commonly by evaporation deposition. Because the coatings are usually transparent, absorption losses are negligible. Unlike with metals, the reflectivity of the individual dielectric-coatings is a function of Snell's law known as the Fresnel equations, determined by the difference in refractive index between layers. Therefore, the thickness and index of the coatings can be adjusted to be centered on any wavelength. Vacuum deposition can be achieved in a number of ways, including sputtering, evaporation deposition, arc deposition, reactive-gas deposition, and ion plating, among many others.\nShaping and polishing.\nTolerances.\nMirrors can be manufactured to a wide range of engineering tolerances, including reflectivity, surface quality, surface roughness, or transmissivity, depending on the desired application. These tolerances can range from wide, such as found in a normal household-mirror, to extremely narrow, like those used in lasers or telescopes. Tightening the tolerances allows better and more precise imaging or beam transmission over longer distances. In imaging systems this can help reduce anomalies (artifacts), distortion or blur, but at a much higher cost. Where viewing distances are relatively close or high precision is not a concern, wider tolerances can be used to make effective mirrors at affordable costs.\nApplications.\nPersonal grooming.\nMirrors are commonly used as aids to personal grooming. They may range from small sizes (portable), to the size of a wall that they be affixed to. They may be handheld, mobile, fixed or adjustable. A classic example of an adjustable mirror is the cheval glass, which the user can tilt.\nSafety and easier viewing.\nConvex mirrors provide a wider field of view than flat mirrors, and are often used on vehicles, especially large trucks, to minimize blind spots. They are sometimes placed at road junctions, and at corners of sites such as parking lots to allow people to see around corners to avoid crashing into other vehicles or shopping carts. They are also sometimes used as part of security systems, so that a single video camera can show more than one angle at a time. Convex mirrors as decoration are used in interior design to provide a predominantly experiential effect.\nDentists use mouth mirrors or \"dental mirrors\" to allow indirect vision and lighting within the mouth. Their reflective surfaces may be either flat or curved. Mouth mirrors are also commonly used by mechanics to allow vision in tight spaces and around corners in equipment.\nRear-view mirrors are widely used in and on vehicles (such as automobiles, or bicycles), to allow drivers to see other vehicles coming up behind them. On rear-view sunglasses, the left end of the left glass and the right end of the right glass work as mirrors.\nOne-way mirrors (also called two-way mirrors) work by overwhelming dim transmitted light with bright reflected light. A true one-way mirror that actually allows light to be transmitted in one direction only without requiring external energy is not possible as it violates the second law of thermodynamics.\nOne-way windows can be made to work with polarized light in the laboratory without violating the second law. This is an apparent paradox that stumped some great physicists, although it does not allow a practical one-way mirror for use in the real world. Optical isolators are one-way devices that are commonly used with lasers.\nSignalling.\nWith the sun as the light source, a mirror can be used to signal by variations in the orientation of the mirror. The signal can be used over long distances, possibly up to on a clear day. Native American tribes and numerous militaries used this technique to transmit information between distant outposts.\nMirrors can also be used to attract the attention of search-and-rescue parties. Specialized types of mirrors are available and are often included in military survival kits.\nTechnology.\nTelevisions and projectors.\nMicroscopic mirrors are a core element of many of the largest high-definition televisions and video projectors. A common technology of this type is Texas Instruments' DLP. A DLP chip is a postage stamp-sized microchip whose surface is an array of millions of microscopic mirrors. The picture is created as the individual mirrors move to either reflect light toward the projection surface (pixel on), or toward a light-absorbing surface (pixel off).\nOther projection technologies involving mirrors include LCoS. Like a DLP chip, LCoS is a microchip of similar size, but rather than millions of individual mirrors, there is a single mirror that is actively shielded by a liquid crystal matrix with up to millions of pixels. The picture, formed as light, is either reflected toward the projection surface (pixel on), or absorbed by the activated LCD pixels (pixel off). LCoS-based televisions and projectors often use 3 chips, one for each primary color.\nLarge mirrors are used in rear-projection televisions. Light (for example from a DLP as discussed above) is \"folded\" by one or more mirrors so that the television set is compact.\nOptical discs.\nOptical discs are modified mirrors which encode binary data as a series of physical pits and lands on an inner layer between the metal backing and outer plastic surface. The data is read and decoded by observing distortions in a reflected laser beam caused by the physical variations in the inner layer. Optical discs typically use aluminum backing like conventional mirrors, though ones with silver and gold backings also exist.\nSolar power.\nMirrors are integral parts of a solar power plant. The one shown in the adjacent picture uses concentrated solar power from an array of parabolic troughs.\nInstruments.\nTelescopes and other precision instruments use \"front silvered\" or first surface mirrors, where the reflecting surface is placed on the front (or first) surface of the glass (this eliminates reflection from glass surface ordinary back mirrors have). Some of them use silver, but most are aluminium, which is more reflective at short wavelengths than silver.\nAll of these coatings are easily damaged and require special handling.\nThey reflect 90% to 95% of the incident light when new.\nThe coatings are typically applied by vacuum deposition.\nA protective overcoat is usually applied before the mirror is removed from the vacuum, because the coating otherwise begins to corrode as soon as it is exposed to oxygen and humidity in air. \"Front silvered\" mirrors have to be resurfaced occasionally to maintain their quality. There are optical mirrors such as mangin mirrors that are \"second surface mirrors\" (reflective coating on the rear surface) as part of their optical designs, usually to correct optical aberrations.\nThe reflectivity of the mirror coating can be measured using a reflectometer and for a particular metal it will be different for different wavelengths of light. This is exploited in some optical work to make cold mirrors and hot mirrors. A cold mirror is made by using a transparent substrate and choosing a coating material that is more reflective to visible light and more transmissive to infrared light.\nA hot mirror is the opposite, the coating preferentially reflects infrared. Mirror surfaces are sometimes given thin film overcoatings both to retard degradation of the surface and to increase their reflectivity in parts of the spectrum where they will be used. For instance, aluminium mirrors are commonly coated with silicon dioxide or magnesium fluoride. The reflectivity as a function of wavelength depends on both the thickness of the coating and on how it is applied.\nFor scientific optical work, dielectric mirrors are often used. These are glass (or sometimes other material) substrates on which one or more layers of dielectric material are deposited, to form an optical coating. By careful choice of the type and thickness of the dielectric layers, the range of wavelengths and amount of light reflected from the mirror can be specified. The best mirrors of this type can reflect &gt;99.999% of the light (in a narrow range of wavelengths) which is incident on the mirror. Such mirrors are often used in lasers.\nIn astronomy, adaptive optics is a technique to measure variable image distortions and adapt a deformable mirror accordingly on a timescale of milliseconds, to compensate for the distortions.\nAlthough most mirrors are designed to reflect visible light, surfaces reflecting other forms of electromagnetic radiation are also called \"mirrors\". The mirrors for other ranges of electromagnetic waves are used in\noptics and astronomy. Mirrors for radio waves (sometimes known as reflectors) are important elements of radio telescopes.\nSimple periscopes use mirrors.\nFace-to-face mirrors.\nTwo or more mirrors aligned exactly parallel and facing each other can give an infinite regress of reflections, called an infinity mirror effect. Some devices use this to generate multiple reflections:\nMilitary applications.\nTradition states that Archimedes used a large array of mirrors to burn Roman ships during an attack on Syracuse. This has never been proven or disproved. On the TV show \"MythBusters\", a team from MIT tried to recreate the famous \"Archimedes Death Ray\". They were unsuccessful at starting a fire on a ship. Previous attempts to set a boat on fire using only the bronze mirrors available in Archimedes' time were unsuccessful, and the time taken to ignite the craft would have made its use impractical, resulting in the \"MythBusters\" team deeming the myth \"busted\". It was however found that the mirrors made it very difficult for the passengers of the targeted boat to see; such a scenario could have impeded attackers and have provided the origin of the legend. (See solar power tower for a practical use of this technique.)\nPeriscopes were used to great effect in war, especially during the World Wars where they were used to peer over the parapet of trenches to ensure that the soldier using the periscope could see safely without the risk of incoming direct fire from other small arms.\nSeasonal lighting.\nDue to its location in a steep-sided valley, the Italian town of Viganella gets no direct sunlight for seven weeks each winter. In 2006 a \u20ac100,000 computer-controlled mirror, 8\u00d75\u00a0m, was installed to reflect sunlight into the town's piazza. In early 2007 the similarly situated village of Bondo, Switzerland, was considering applying this solution as well. In 2013, mirrors were installed to reflect sunlight into the town square in the Norwegian town of Rjukan. Mirrors can be used to produce enhanced lighting effects in greenhouses or conservatories.\nArchitecture.\nMirrors are a popular design-theme in architecture, particularly with late modern and post-modernist high-rise buildings in major cities. Early examples include the Campbell Center in Dallas, which opened in 1972, and the John Hancock Tower (completed in 1976) in Boston.\nMore recently, two skyscrapers designed by architect Rafael Vi\u00f1oly, the Vdara in Las Vegas and 20 Fenchurch Street in London, have experienced unusual problems due to their concave curved-glass exteriors acting as respectively cylindrical and spherical reflectors for sunlight. In 2010, the \"Las Vegas Review Journal\" reported that sunlight reflected off the Vdara's south-facing tower could singe swimmers in the hotel pool, as well as melting plastic cups and shopping bags; employees of the hotel referred to the phenomenon as the \"Vdara death ray\", aka the \"fryscraper.\" In 2013, sunlight reflecting off 20 Fenchurch Street melted parts of a Jaguar car parked nearby and scorching or igniting the carpet of a nearby barber-shop. This building had been nicknamed the \"walkie-talkie\" because its shape was supposedly similar to a certain model of two-way radio; but after its tendency to overheat surrounding objects became known, the nickname changed to the \"walkie-scorchie\".\nFine art.\nPaintings.\nPainters depicting someone gazing into a mirror often also show the person's reflection. This is a kind of abstraction\u2014in most cases the angle of view is such that the person's reflection should not be visible. Similarly, in movies and still photography an actor or actress is often shown ostensibly looking at him- or herself in a mirror, and yet the reflection faces the camera. In reality, the actor or actress sees only the camera and its operator in this case, not their own reflection. In the psychology of perception, this is known as the Venus effect.\nThe mirror is the central device in some of the greatest of European paintings:\nArtists have used mirrors to create works and to hone their craft:\nMirrors are sometimes necessary to fully appreciate art work:\nSculpture.\nContemporary anamorphic artist Jonty Hurwitz uses cylindrical mirrors to project distorted sculptures.\nOther artistic mediums.\nSome other contemporary artists use mirrors as the material of art:\nReligious function of the real and depicted mirror.\nIn the Middle Ages, mirrors existed in various shapes for multiple uses. Mostly they were used as an accessory for personal hygiene but also as tokens of courtly love, made from ivory in the ivory-carving centers in Paris, Cologne and the Southern Netherlands. They also had their uses in religious contexts as they were integrated in a special form of pilgrim badges or pewter/lead mirror boxes From the late 14th century. Burgundian ducal inventories show us that the dukes owned a mass of mirrors or objects with mirrors, not only with religious iconography or inscriptions, but combined with reliquaries, religious paintings or other objects that were distinctively used for personal piety. Considering mirrors in paintings and book illumination as depicted artifacts and trying to draw conclusions about their functions from their setting, one of these functions is to be an aid in personal prayer to achieve self-knowledge and knowledge of God, in accord with contemporary theological sources. For example, the famous Arnolfini Wedding by Jan van Eyck shows a constellation of objects that can be recognized as one which would allow a praying man to use them for his personal piety: the mirror surrounded by scenes of the Passion to reflect on it and on oneself, a rosary as a device in this process, the veiled and cushioned bench to use as a prie-dieu, and the abandoned shoes that point in the direction in which the praying man kneeled. The metaphorical meaning of depicted mirrors is complex and many-layered, e.g. as an attribute of Mary, the \"speculum sine macula\" (mirror without blemish), or as attributes of scholarly and theological wisdom and knowledge as they appear in book illuminations of different evangelists and authors of theological treatises. Depicted mirrors \u2013 orientated on the physical properties of a real mirror \u2013 can be seen as metaphors of knowledge and reflection and are thus able to remind beholders to reflect and get to know themselves. The mirror may function simultaneously as a symbol and as a device of a moral appeal. That is also the case if it is shown in combination with virtues and vices, a combination which also occurs more frequently in the 15th century: the moralizing layers of mirror metaphors remind the beholder to examine themself thoroughly according to their own virtuous or vicious life. This is all the more true if the mirror is combined with iconography of death. Not only is Death as a corpse or skeleton holding the mirror for the still-living personnel of paintings, illuminations and prints, but the skull appears on the convex surfaces of depicted mirrors, showing the painted and real beholders their future face.\nDecoration.\nMirrors are frequently used in interior decoration and as ornaments:\nFilm and television.\nMirrors appear in many movies and TV shows: \nLiterature.\nMirrors featured in literature:\nMirror test.\nOnly a few animal species have been shown to have the ability to recognize themselves in a mirror, most of them mammals. Experiments have found that the following animals can pass the mirror test:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "20546", "revid": "50529220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20546", "title": "Mindanao", "text": "Island in the Philippines\nMindanao ( ) is the second-largest island in the Philippines, after Luzon, and seventh-most populous island in the world. Located in the southern region of the archipelago, the island is part of an island group of the same name that also includes its adjacent islands, notably the Sulu Archipelago. According to the 2020 census, Mindanao had a population of 26,252,442, while the entire island group had an estimated population of 27,384,138 as of 2024.\nMindanao is divided into six administrative regions: the Zamboanga Peninsula, Northern Mindanao, the Caraga region, the Davao region, Soccsksargen, and the autonomous region of Bangsamoro. According to the 2020 census, Davao City is the most populous city on the island, with 1,776,949 people, followed by Zamboanga City (pop. 977,234), General Santos (pop. 722,059), Butuan (pop. 372,910), and Cotabato City (pop. 325,079). About 70% of residents identify as Christian and 24% as Muslim. Mindanao is considered the major Bread Basket of the Philippines.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Mindanao\" is derived from a compound word in the Maguindanao language: \"min\", a past tense verb prefix, and \"danao\", meaning 'lake'. Together, they translate to 'land of where the lakes are found'. This name is also associated to the Maguindanaon people, where the Sultanate of Maguindanao once held significant influence and where lakes with varying depths are also common among the provinces of Mindanao.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nArchaeological findings on the island point to evidence of human activity dating back about ten thousand years. Around 1500 BC, Austronesian people spread throughout the Philippines.\nThe Subanon are believed to have settled in the Zamboanga Peninsula during the Neolithic era c. 4500\u20132000 BC. Evidence of stone tools in Zamboanga del Norte may indicate a late Neolithic presence. Ceramic burial jars, both unglazed and glazed, Chinese celadons, gold ornaments, beads, and bracelets have been found in caves. Many of the ceramic objects are from the Yuan and Ming periods. Evidently, there was a long history of trade between the Subanon and the Chinese.\nRajahnates and Hindu-Buddhism.\nIn the classic epoch of Philippine history (900 AD onwards), the people of Mindanao were heavily exposed to Hindu and Buddhist influence and beliefs from Indonesia and Malaysia. Indianized abugida scripts such as Kawi and baybayin were introduced from Java and an extinct intermediate from Sulawesi or Borneo respectively. Cultural icons of the sarong (known as \"malong\" or \"patadyong\"), the \"pudong\" turban, silk, and batik and ikat weaving and dyeing methods were introduced. Artifacts found from this era include a golden kinnara, a golden image believed by some to be a Tara, and a Ganesha pendant. These cultural traits passed from Mindanao into the Visayas and Luzon, but were subsequently lost or heavily modified after the Spanish arrival in the 16th century.\nHindu-Buddhist cultural influence took root in the coastal settlements, syncretizing with indigenous animist beliefs and customs among the tribes of the interior. The Butuan Rajahnate, a Hinduized kingdom mentioned in Chinese records as a tributary state in the 10th century, was concentrated along the northeastern coast of Butuan Bay. The Rajahnate of Sanmalan in Zamboanga, was also in Mindanao. The \"Darangen\" epic of the Maranao people harkens back to this era as the most complete local version of the \"Ramayana\". The Maguindanao at this time also had strong Hindu beliefs, evidenced by the Ladya Lawana (Rajah Ravana) epic saga that survives to the present, albeit highly Islamized from the 17th century onward.\nSultanates and Islam.\nThe spread of Islam in the Philippines began in the 14th century, mostly through the influence of Muslim merchants from the western Malay Archipelago. The first mosque in the Philippines was built in the mid-14th century in the town of Simunul, Tawi-Tawi. Around the 16th century, the Muslim sultanates of Sulu, Lanao and Maguindanao were established from formerly Hindu-Buddhist rajahnates.\nAs Islam colonised Mindanao, the natives of the sultanates had to either convert to Islam or pay tribute to their new Muslim rulers. The largest of the Muslim polities in mainland Mindanao was the Sultanate of Maguindanao, which controlled the southern floodplains of the Rio Grande de Mindanao and most of the coastal area of Illana Bay, Moro Gulf, Sarangani Bay and Davao Gulf. The name Mindanao was derived from this sultanate. But most of Mindanao remained animist, especially the Lumad people in the interior. Most of the northern, eastern, and southern coastal regions inhabited by Visayans (Surigaonon and Butuanon) and other groups were later converted to Christianity by the Spanish. Mindanao was then embroiled between a conflict with the Boholano (Visayan) Dapitan Kingdom and the Moluccan Sultanate of Ternate. Dapitan which was originally at Bohol was destroyed by an expeditionary force from the Ternate Sultanate and Dapitenyos were forced to relocate to Northern Mindanao where they waged war against the Sultanate of Lanao and established a new Dapitan there. Mindanaoans then spread out of Mindanao across Southeast Asia, Historian William Henry Scott, quoting the Portuguese manuscript Summa Orientalis, noted that Mottama in Burma (Myanmar) had a large presence of merchants from Mindanao.\nSpanish colonization and Christianity.\nIn 1521 Antonio Pigafetta wrote an account of reaching 'Maingdano.' He was with Magellan on the first circumnavigation of the globe and sailing for the king of Spain.\nOn February 2, 1543, Ruy L\u00f3pez de Villalobos was the first Spaniard to reach Mindanao. He called the island \"Caesarea Caroli\" after Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire (and I of Spain). Shortly after Spain's colonization of Cebu, it moved on to colonize the Caraga region in northeast Mindanao and discovered significant Muslim presence on the island. Over time a number of tribes in Mindanao converted to Catholicism and built settlements and forts throughout the coastal regions. These settlements endured despite attacks from neighboring Muslim sultanates. The most heavily fortified of them, apart from a short period in 1662 when Spain sent soldiers from the city to Manila after a threat of invasion from the Chinese general Koxinga, was Zamboanga City which was settled by soldiers from Peru and Mexico. The sultanates resisted Spanish pressure and attempts to convert them to Christianity during this period. The Sultanate of Ternate of the Maluku Islands formed a close alliance with the sultanates of Mindanao, especially Maguindanao. Ternate regularly sent military reinforcements to Mindanao to assist the local sultanates in their war against Spanish-controlled Manila.\nBy the late 18th century Spain had geographic dominance over the island, having established settlements and forts in most of Mindanao, including Zamboanga City and Misamis Occidental to the northwest, Iligan City, Misamis Oriental, Bukidnon, and Camiguin Island to the north, Surigao and Agusan in the Caraga region to the east, and Davao in the island's gulf coast. Spain continued to engage in battles with Muslim sultanates until the end of the 19th century.\nAt the same time as the Philippine revolution against Spain, the Republic of Zamboanga rose as a revolutionary state in Mindanao before it was absorbed by the oncoming Americans.\nAmerican occupation and Philippine Commonwealth.\nIn the Treaty of Paris in 1898 Spain sold the entire Philippine archipelago to the United States for $20 million. The 1900 Treaty of Washington and the 1930 Convention Between the United States and Great Britain clarified the borders between Mindanao and Borneo.\nIn early 1900s the Commonwealth government (led by Americans) encouraged citizens from Luzon and Visayas to migrate to Mindanao. Consisting mostly of Ilocanos, Cebuanos, and Ilonggos. Settlers streaming into Soccsksargen led to the displacement of the Blaan and Tboli tribes.\nWorld War II.\nIn April 1942 Mindanao, along with the rest of the Philippines, officially entered World War II after Japanese soldiers invaded key cities in the islands. Many towns and cities were burned to the ground in Mindanao, most notably Davao City, Zamboanga City, Lanao, Cagayan de Oro, Iligan City, and Butuan. In the months of April and May 1942, Japanese forces defeated US troops commanded by William F. Sharp and Guy Fort, in a battle that started at Malabang (a town close to Gandamatu Macadar, Lanao) and ended close to the town of Ganassi, Lanao. Davao City was among the earliest to be occupied by the invading Japanese forces. They immediately fortified the city as a bastion of the Japanese defense system.\nDavao City was subjected by the returning forces of Gen. Douglas MacArthur to constant bombing before the American Liberation Forces landed in Leyte in October 1944. Filipino soldiers and local guerrilla fighters were actively fighting Japanese forces until liberation at the conclusion of the Battle of Mindanao.\nPostwar era and Philippine independence.\nMindanao was peaceful and increasingly progressive in the postwar period, including the 1950s and the mid-1960s. Ethnic tensions were minimal, and there was essentially no presence of secessionists groups in Mindanao.\nMarcos era (1965\u20131986).\nUnder Ferdinand Marcos's administration, Christian groups began to settle in Mindanao, displacing many locals. The population boom resulted in conflicts as the original owners sought their ancestral land domains.\nThe Marcos administration encouraged new settlers who had emigrated to Mindanao to form a militia, which was eventually called the Ilaga. Anecdotal evidence states that the Ilaga often committed human rights abuses by targeting the Moro and Lumad people, as well as attempting to seize additional territory. It resulted in a lingering animosity between Moro and Christian communities. Mistrust and a cycle of violence are still felt today due to the creation of the Ilaga.\nThe Jabidah massacre in 1968 is commonly cited as the major flashpoint that ignited the Moro insurgency, and the ensuing ethnic tensions led to the formation of secessionist movements, such as the Muslim Independence Movement and the Bangsamoro Liberation Organization. These movements were largely political in nature, but the prohibition of political parties after Marcos' 1972 declaration of Martial Law led to the founding and dominance of armed groups such as the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). Ethnic conflicts continued to escalate, leading to incidents like the 1971 Manili massacre, the Pata Island massacre, and the Palimbang massacre.\nAdditionally, an economic crisis in late 1969 led to social unrest throughout the country, and violent crackdowns on protests led to the radicalization of many students, with some joining the New People's Army, bringing the New People's Army rebellion to Mindanao for the first time.\nMarcos' declaration led to the shuttering of press outlets \u2013 television stations, national newspapers, weekly magazines, community newspapers, and radio stations \u2013 throughout the country, including in Mindanao. The remaining years of the Marcos dictatorship led to the killings of many Mindanao journalists, with prominent examples being Alex Orcullo of \"Mindanao Currents\" and \"Mindaweek\", and Jacobo Amatong of the \"Mindanao Observer\".\nFifth Republic (1986\u2013present).\nIn 1989, the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) was established, constituted by several provinces in Western Mindanao.\nIn March 2000, President Joseph Estrada declared an \"All Out War\" against the MILF after it committed a series of terrorist attacks on government buildings, civilians, and foreigners. A number of livelihood intervention projects, from organisations such as USAID and the Emergency Livelihood Assistance Program (ELAP), aided in the reconstruction of areas affected by constant battles on the island.\nIn December 2009, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo officially placed Maguindanao under a state of martial law following the Maguindanao massacre.\nOn September 9, 2013, an MNLF faction attempted to raise the flag of a self-proclaimed Bangsamoro Republik at Zamboanga City Hall in an armed incursion into parts of the city.\nOn January 25, 2015, a shootout took place during a police operation by the Special Action Force (SAF) of the Philippine National Police (PNP) in Tukanalipao, Mamasapano, Maguindanao. The operation, codenamed Oplan Exodus, was intended to capture or kill wanted Malaysian terrorist and bomb-maker Zulkifli Abdhir and other Malaysian terrorists or high-ranking members of the Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters (BIFF).\nIn May 2017, President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law on the entire island group of Mindanao following the Marawi siege by the Maute terrorist group. More than 180,000 people were forced to evacuate Marawi City. Around 165 security forces and 47 residents were confirmed killed in the battle, although Marawi residents believe the number of civilians killed was far higher. The official death toll in the five-month conflict is 1,109, most of which were members of a militant alliance which drew fighters from radical factions of domestic Islamist groups.\nIn 2019, the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao was established, replacing the former ARMM.\nIn 2024, former President Rodrigo Duterte called for Mindanao to secede from the Philippines, reviving the movement started by congressman Pantaleon Alvarez.\nEconomy.\nMindanao's economy accounts for 14% of the country's gross domestic product. The region grew 4.9% in 2016 against Luzon's 5.5% and Visayas' 9.1%.\nAgriculture, forestry and fishing make up more than 40% of Mindanao's market, being the country's largest supplier of major crops such as pineapples and bananas.\nThere is one defined growth corridor in the island, namely Metro Davao. Other growth centers are: Cagayan de Oro, General Santos, Zamboanga City, Cotabato City, and Pagadian City.\nBeing the top-performing economy in Mindanao, Davao Region has the 5th-biggest economy in the country and the second-fastest-growing economy next to Cordillera Autonomous Region. While the region's economy is predominantly agri-based, it is now developing into a center for agro-industrial business, trade and tourism. Its competitive advantage is in agri-industry as its products, papayas, mangoes, bananas, pineapples, fresh asparagus, flowers, and fish products are exported internationally. The region can be a vital link to markets in other parts of Mindanao, Brunei Darussalam and parts of Malaysia and Indonesia.\nThere is also a growing call center sector in the region, mostly centered in Davao City.\nUpcoming developments.\nSome 2,130 government-led infrastructure projects worth P547.9 billion have also been lined up for Mindanao until 2022.\nNEDA official said that 68% of that budget will be allotted for the transportation sector, while 16% will go to water resources, and 6% to social infrastructure.\nOf this amount, 18 infrastructure projects have been identified as \"flagship projects\", five of them have already been approved by President Rodrigo Duterte.\nThe projects include the \u20b135.26 billion Tagum-Davao-Digos Segment of the Mindanao Railway, the \u20b140.57 billion Davao airport, the \u20b114.62 billion Laguindingan airport, the \u20b14.86 billion Panguil Bay Bridge Project, and the \u20b15.44 billion Malitubog-Maridagao Irrigation Project, Phase II.\nProjects in the pipeline are the second and third phases of the Mindanao Railway; the Agus-Pulangi plant rehabilitation; the Davao expressway; the Zamboanga Fish Port Complex rehabilitation; the Balo-i Plains Flood Control Project; Asbang Small Reservoir Irrigation Project; the Ambal Simuay Sub-Basin of the Mindanao River Basin Flood Control and River Protection Project; as well as the Road Network Development Project in Conflict-Affected Areas in Mindanao project.\nAir transport.\nFrancisco Bangoy International Airport serves as the main gateway to Mindanao, it is the busiest airport on the island and the third busiest in the Philippines in 2022.\nLaguindingan Airport is the second-busiest airport along with Zamboanga International Airport as third-busiest in the island. \nThere are also smaller airports across Mindanao such as Bancasi Airport, General Santos International Airport, Labo Airport, Sayak Airport and Surigao Airport.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe island consists of six administrative regions, 23 provinces, and 30 cities (28 provinces and 33 cities if associated islands are included).\nSulu is not part of any region after the Supreme Court declared its inclusion in Bangsamoro unconsitutional as the majority of its residents voted against it during the 2019 plebiscite. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Toptextcells/style.css\" /&gt;\nZamboanga&lt;br&gt;del Norte \nZamboanga&lt;br&gt;del Sur \nZamboanga&lt;br&gt;Sibugay \n\"Zamboanga City\" \nBasilan \nTawi-Tawi \nSulu \nCamiguin \nMisamis&lt;br&gt;Occidental \nLanao&lt;br&gt;del Norte \nLanao&lt;br&gt;del Sur \n\"Iligan\" \n\"Cagayan de Oro\" \nMisamis&lt;br&gt;Oriental \nAgusan&lt;br&gt;del Norte \nSurigao&lt;br&gt;del Norte \nBukidnon \nDavao&lt;br&gt;del Sur \n\"Davao City\" \nDavao&lt;br&gt;del Norte \nDavao&lt;br&gt;de Oro \nDavao&lt;br&gt;Oriental \nDavao&lt;br&gt;Occidental \nSarangani \nSouth&lt;br&gt;Cotabato \n\"General&lt;br&gt;Santos\" \nSultan&lt;br&gt;Kudarat \n\"Cotabato&lt;br&gt;City\" \nCotabato \n\"Butuan\" \nAgusan&lt;br&gt;del Sur \nSurigao&lt;br&gt;del Sur \nMaguindanao \nDinagat&lt;br&gt;Islands \nSulu&lt;br&gt;Sea \nMoro Gulf \nPhilippine&lt;br&gt;Sea \n Administrative divisions\nof Mindanao\nLargest cities and municipalities in Mindanao.\nThe list of largest cities and municipalities in Mindanao in terms of population is shown in the table below.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeography.\nMindanao is the second-largest island in the Philippines at , and is the seventh-most populous island in the world. The island is mountainous, and is home to Mount Apo, the highest mountain in the country. Mindanao is surrounded by four seas: the Sulu Sea to the west, the Philippine Sea to the east, the Celebes Sea to the south, and the Mindanao Sea to the north.\nThe island itself is part of an island group of the same name, which consists of the mainland, the Sulu Archipelago and the outlying islands of Camiguin, Dinagat, Siargao, and Samal.\nMountains.\nThe mountains of Mindanao can be grouped into ten ranges, including both complex structural mountains and volcanoes. The structural mountains on the extreme eastern and western portions of the island show broad exposures of Mesozoic rock, and Ultrabasic rocks at the surface in many places along the east coast. Other parts of the island consist mainly of Cenozoic and Quaternary volcanic or sedimentary rocks.\nIn the eastern portion of the island, from Bilas Point in Surigao del Norte to Cape San Agustin in Davao Oriental, is a range of complex mountains known in their northern portion as the Diwata Mountains. This range is low and rolling in its central portion. A proposed road connecting Bislig on the east coast with the Agusan River would pass through of broad saddle across the mountains at a maximum elevation of less than ; while the existing east\u2013west road from Lianga, north of Bislig, reaches a maximum elevation of only . The Diwata Mountains, north of these low points, are considerably higher and more rugged, reaching an elevation of in Mount Hilong-Hilong, along the eastern portion of Cabadbaran. The southern portion of this range is broader and even more rugged than the northern section. In Davao Oriental, several peaks rise above and one mountain rises to .\nThe east-facing coastal regions of Davao and Surigao del Sur are marked by a series of small coastal lowlands separated from each other by rugged forelands which extend to the water's edge. Offshore are numerous coral reefs and tiny islets. This remote and forbidding coast is made doubly difficult to access during the months from October to March by the heavy surf driven before the northeast trade winds. A few miles offshore is found the Philippine Deep. This ocean trench, reaching measured depths of , is the third-deepest trench, (after the Mariana Trench and Tonga Trench) on the earth's surface.\nA second north\u2013south mountain range extends from Talisayan in the north, to Tinaca Point in the southernmost point of Mindanao. This mountain range runs along the western borders of the Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, and Davao provinces. This range is mainly structural in origin, but it also contains at least three active volcano peaks. The central and northern portions of this range contain several peaks between , and here the belt of mountains is about across.\nWest of Davao City stand two inactive volcanoes: Mount Talomo at , and Mount Apo at . Mount Apo is the highest point in the Philippines. South of Mount Apo, this central mountain belt is somewhat lower than it is to the north, with peaks averaging only .\nIn Western Mindanao, a range of complex structural mountains forms the long, hand-like Zamboanga Peninsula. These mountains, reaching heights of only , are not as high as the other structural belts in Mindanao. There are several places in the Zamboanga Mountains where small inter-mountain basins have been created, with some potential for future agricultural development. The northeastern end of this range is marked by the twin peaks of the now-extinct volcano, Mount Malindang, that towers over Ozamiz at a height of . Mount Dapia is the highest mountain in the Zamboanga Peninsula, reaching a height of . Batorampon Point is the highest mountain of the southernmost end of the peninsula, reaching a height of only ; it is located in the boundary of Zamboanga City.\nA series of volcanic mountains is located within the vicinity of Lake Lanao forming a broad arc through the Lanao del Sur, Cotabato and Bukidnon provinces. At least six of the twenty odd peaks in this area are active and several stand in semi-isolation. The Butig Peaks, with their four crater lakes, are easily seen from Cotabato. Mount Ragang, an active volcano cone reaching , is the most isolated, while the greatest height is reached by Mount Kitanglad at .\nIn South Cotabato, is another range of volcanic mountains, this time paralleling the coast. These mountains have a maximum extent of from northwest to southeast and measures some across. One of the well-known mountains here is Mount Parker, whose almost circular crater lake measures a mile-and-a-quarter in diameter and lies below its summit. Mount Matutum is a protected area and is considered one of the major landmarks in the South Cotabato province.\nPlateaus.\nAnother important physiographic division of Mindanao is the series of upland plateaus in the Bukidnon and Lanao del Sur provinces. These plateaus are rather extensive and almost surround several volcanoes in this area. The plateaus are made up of basaltic lava flows inter-bedded with volcanic ash and tuff. Near their edges, the plateaus are cut by deep canyons, and at several points waterfalls drop down to the narrow coastal plain. These falls hold considerable promise for development of hydroelectric energy. Indeed, one such site at Maria Cristina Falls has already become a major producer. The rolling plateaus lie at an elevation averaging 700 meters above sea level, and offer relief from the often oppressive heat of the coastal lowlands.\nLakes and waterfalls.\nLake Lanao occupies a large portion of one such plateau in Lanao del Sur. This lake is the largest lake in Mindanao and the second largest in the country; it is roughly triangular in shape with an base, having a surface at 780 meters above sea level, and is rimmed on the east, south, and west by a series of peaks reaching 2,300 meters. Marawi City, at the northern tip of the lake, is bisected by the Agus River, that feeds the Maria Cristina Falls.\nAnother of Mindanao's waterfall sites is located in Malabang, south of Lake Lanao. Here the Jose Abad Santos Falls present one of the nation's scenic wonders at the gateway to a 200-hectare national park development.\nThe Limunsudan Falls, with an approximate height of , is the highest waterfall in the Philippines; it is located in Iligan City.\nValleys, rivers, and plains.\nMindanao contains two large lowland areas in the valleys of the Agusan River in Agusan, and the Rio Grande de Mindanao in Cotabato City.\nThere is some indication that the Agusan Valley occupies a broad syncline between the central mountains and the east-coast mountains. This valley measures from south to north and varies from in width. north of the head of Davao Gulf lies the watershed between the Agusan and the tributaries of the Libuganon River, which flows to the gulf. The elevation of this divide is well under , indicating the almost continuous nature of the lowland from the Mindanao Sea on the north to Davao Gulf.\nThe Rio Grande de Mindanao and its main tributaries, the Catisan and the Pulangi, form a valley with a maximum length of and a width which varies from at the river mouth to about in central Cotabato. The southern extensions of this Cotabato Valley extend uninterrupted across a watershed from Illana Bay on the northwest to Sarangani Bay on the southeast.\nOther lowlands of a coastal nature are to be found in various parts of Mindanao. Many of these are tiny isolated pockets, along the northwest coast of Zamboanga. In other areas such as the Davao Plain, these coastal lowlands are wide and several times in length.\nFrom Dipolog, eastward along the northern coast of Mindanao approaching Butuan, extends a rolling coastal plain of varying width. In Misamis Occidental, the now dormant Mount Malindang has created a lowland averaging in width. Shallow Panguil Bay divides this province from Lanao del Norte, and is bordered by low-lying, poorly drained lowlands and extensive mangroves. In Misamis Oriental, the plain is narrower and in places whittle into rugged capes that reach the sea. East of Cagayan de Oro, a rugged peninsula extends into the Mindanao Sea.\nClimate change.\nClimate change is expected to have adverse effects on Mindanao's population, environment, and agriculture. Mindanao is already experiencing severe climate events attributed to changes in the Earth's temperature. These climate events include typhoons such as Typhoon Washi, Typhoon Bopha and Typhoon Rai as of December 2021. Those storms had severe impact on the island of Mindanao.\nDemographics.\nIn 2017, Mindanao had a population of over 25 million. This represented 22 percent of the entire population of the country.\nEthnicity and culture.\nAn American census conducted in the early 1900s noted that the island was inhabited by people \"greatly divided in origin, temperament and religion\". Evidence of the island's cultural diversity can be seen in the buildings and ruins of old Spanish settlements in the northwestern peninsula that span eastwards to the southern gulf coast, the site of the ancient Rajahnate of Butuan in the northeast region (Caraga), the sultanates in the southwest (Sultanate of Sulu, Sultanate of Lanao, Sultanate of Maguindanao), a number of Buddhist and Taoist temples, and the numerous indigenous tribes.\nToday around 25.8 percent of the household population in Mindanao classified themselves as Cebuanos. Other ethnic groups included Bisaya/Binisaya (18.4%), Hiligaynon/Ilonggo (8.2%), Maguindanaon (5.5%), and Maranao (5.4%). The remaining 36.6 percent belonged to other ethnic groups, including individuals from Luzon and the Lumad people (indigenous peoples of Mindanao). Cebuano registered the highest proportion of ethnic group in Northern Mindanao and Davao Region with 35.59 percent and 37.76 percent, respectively. In Soccsksargen, it was Hiligaynon/Ilonggo (31.58%), Binisaya/Bisaya (33.10%) in Zamboanga Peninsula, Maranao (26.40%) in BARMM, and Surigaonon (25.67%) in Caraga.\nLike elsewhere, assimilation from one ethnic group into another is not uncommon in Mindanao. Over the last decades, many Christian migrants from Luzon and Lumad tribes on the island integrated and assimilated into the majority Cebuano-speaking society in Mindanao (Hiligaynon-speaking in the case of Soccsksargen). They identified themselves as Visayans as a result of learning to speak Cebuano or Hiligaynon fluently from their Cebuano or Hiligaynon neighbors. Despite this, many of them still know and retain their non-Visayan roots and some speak their ancestors' language fluently as their second or third language since Mindanao is a melting pot of cultures as a result of southward migration from Luzon and Visayas since the 20th century. Descendants of these migrant Luzon ethnic groups and Lumads, especially newer generations (as Mindanao-born natives), now speak Cebuano or Hiligaynon fluently as their main language with little or no knowledge of their ancestors' native tongues at the time of their southward journey to Mindanao and Lumads developed contact with Cebuano and Hiligaynon speakers. Because the island's inhabitants converted to Christianity and assimilated into the Christian communities, it cannot be always determined whether or not the residents were of indigenous Mindanaoan heritage.\nLanguages.\nDozens of languages are spoken in Mindanao; among them, Cebuano, Hiligaynon, Maguindanaon, Maranao, Surigaonon, Tausug, and Chavacano are most widely spoken. Of the seven aforementioned regional languages, Cebuano (often referred to as \"Bisaya\") has the largest number of speakers, being spoken throughout Northern Mindanao (except the southern parts of Lanao del Norte), the Davao region, the western half of the Caraga region (as well as the city of Bislig and the municipalities surrounding it in Surigao del Sur), the entirety of the Zamboanga Peninsula (with the exception of Zamboanga City), and southern Soccsksargen.\nHiligaynon is the main language of Soccsksargen, where majority of the inhabitants are of ethnic Hiligaynon stock. Maguindanaon, Manobo, Tboli and Blaan are the indigenous languages spoken in Soccsksargen. Ilocano, a native language of the Luzon ethnic group of the same name, is also spoken in some areas in Soccsksargen, where they also share residency with Hiligaynons. Surigaonon is spoken in the eastern half of the Caraga region, mainly by the eponymous Surigaonons. Tausug is widely spoken specifically in the Sulu Archipelago, which comprises the provinces of Basilan, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi, with a sizeable community of speakers residing in Zamboanga City.\nMaranao and Maguindanaon are the dominant languages of the eastern territories of the Bangsamoro, respectively, with the former being spoken in Lanao del Sur as well as the southern areas of Lanao del Norte, and the latter in the eponymous provinces of Maguindanao del Norte and Maguindanao del Sur and also in adjacent areas which are part of Soccsksargen. Chavacano is the native language of Zamboanga City and is also the lingua franca of Basilan; it is also spoken in the southernmost fringes of Zamboanga Sibugay. It is also spoken, albeit as a minority language, in Cotabato City and Davao City, where dialects of it, respectively, exist, namely Cotabate\u00f1o and Castellano Abakay, both of which evolved from the variant of the language spoken in Zamboanga City.\nEnglish and Filipino are also widely understood and spoken, with the former being highly utilized in business and academia, and the latter being used to communicate with visitors from Luzon and other parts of Visayas. Filipino is also the main lingua franca of Cotabato City and in BARMM as a whole.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity is the dominant religious affiliation in Mindanao with 43% of the household population, the majority of which are adherents of Catholicism; Islam comprised 32.39%, and other religions were Pentecostal (5.34%), Aglipayan (2.16%), and Iglesia ni Cristo (5.2%).\nTourism.\nMajor tourist spots are scattered throughout Mindanao, consisting mostly of beach resorts, scuba diving resorts, surfing, museums, nature parks, mountain climbing, and river rafting. Siargao, best known for its surfing tower in Cloud 9, also has caves, pools, waterfalls, and lagoons. There are archaeological sites, historical ruins, and museums in Butuan. White Island is a popular tourist spot in Camiguin. The Duka Bay and the Matangale dive resorts in Misamis Oriental offer glass bottomed boat rides and scuba diving lessons. Cagayan de Oro has beach resorts, the Mapawa Nature Park, white water rafting and kayaking, museums, and historical landmarks. Ziplining is the main attraction at the Dahilayan Adventure Park and rock wall climbing at Kiokong in Bukidnon. Iligan City has the Maria Cristina Falls, Tinago Falls, nature parks, beaches, and historical landmarks. There are parks, historical buildings, the Vinta Ride at Paseo del Mar, boat villages, 11 Islands (commonly called as \"On\u00e7e Islas\"), 17th-century Fort Pilar Shrine and Museum and the world-renowned \"Pink Sand Beach\" of Sta. Cruz in Zamboanga City. There are festivals, fireworks, and the Beras Bird Sanctuary in Takurong City. Davao has Mt Apo, parks, museums, beaches, historical landmarks, and scuba diving resorts.\nEnergy.\nMany areas in Mindanao suffer rotating 12-hour blackouts due to the island's woefully inadequate power supply. The island is forecast to continue suffering from a 200-megawatt power deficit until 2015, when the private sector begins to operate new capacity. Aboitiz Equity Ventures, a publicly listed holdings company, has committed to supplying 1,200 megawatts through a coal-fired plant on the border of Davao City and Davao del Sur that is slated for operation by 2018. The Agus-Pulangui hydropower complex, which supplies more than half of Mindanao's power supply, is currently producing only 635 megawatts of its 982 megawatt capacity due to the heavy siltation of the rivers that power the complex. Zamboanga City, an urbanized center in southwest Mindanao, is expected to begin experience daily three-hour brownouts due to the National Power Corporation's decision to reduce power supply in the city by 10 megawatts.\nThe Manila Electric Company (Meralco), the largest power distributor in the Philippines, and Global Business Power Corp (GBPC), also a major provider, have announced plans to enter Mindanao for the first time to establish solutions for the power problems within the island.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20547", "revid": "69412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20547", "title": "Moveable feast", "text": "Observance in a liturgical calendar with no fixed calendar date\nA moveable feast is an observance in a Christian liturgical calendar which occurs on different dates in different years. It is the complement of a fixed feast, an annual celebration that is held on the same calendar date every year, such as Christmas.\nSpring paschal feasts.\nOften considered the most important Christian observance, Spring paschal feasts are a fixed number of days before or after Easter Sunday, which varies by 35 days since it depends partly on the phase of the moon and must be computed each year. In the Hebrew calendar, the new moon of Aviv, spring, is fixed as the Lunar New Year, and the month is called Nisan. The 14 of Nisan is the paschal full moon, the day of the Pesach seder, a ritual meal telling the story of the Exodus from Egypt. It is one of the three pilgrimage festivals incumbent on all Jewish males living in the land of Israel. For this observance of this mitzvah, commandment, Jesus and the disciples went to Jerusalem, and held a festive meal known as the Last Supper on Passover night according to the gospel of John (or the day before according to the synoptic gospels).\nQuartodeciman Christians continued to end the Lenten fast in time to observe the Passover (Christian), which occurs before the Lord's day, as the two are not mutually exclusive. However, due to intense persecution from Nicene Christianity after the Easter controversy, the practice had mostly died out by the 5th or 6th century, and only re-emerged in the 20th century.\nIn Eastern Christianity (including the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Assyrian Church of the East, and the Eastern Catholic Churches), these moveable feasts form what is called the Paschal cycle, which stands in contrast to the approach taken by Catholic and Protestant Christianity.\nMoveable solemnities.\nNot all observances are feasts, and among those that are moveable is the Lenten fast, which is held for the 40 days prior to Easter.\nRelationship to solar fixed feasts.\nMost other feast days, such as those of particular saints, are \"fixed feasts\", held on the same date every year. However, some observances are always held on the same day of the week, and thus occur on a range of days without depending on the date of Easter. For example, the start of Advent is the Sunday nearest November 30. In addition, the observance of some fixed feasts may move a few days in a particular year to not clash with that year's date for a more important moveable feast. There are rare examples of saints with genuinely moveable feast days, such as Saint Sarkis the Warrior in the calendar of the Armenian Church.\nIn other religions.\nThe Roman calendar possessed a number of moveable feasts (, \"proclaimed festivals\") like the Sementivae or Paganalia honoring Ceres and Tellus that varied to allow them to occur in the proper season and conditions. Michels has argued that such moveable feasts were probably universal before the adoption of the lunar-based nundinal cycle, the earliest Italian calendars most likely being observational and based on natural cycles like vernation and ripening.\nThe traditional Chinese calendar is lunisolar, as are others in East Asia based on it. This causes the timing of the Chinese New Year, the Mid-Autumn Festival, and several other holidays\u2014all traditionally associated with various rituals and offerings\u2014to vary within the Gregorian calendar, usually within a space of two months. \nIn Judaism, all holidays fixed to the lunisolar traditional calendar move relative to the Gregorian calendar, again usually within a space of two months. In addition, there are two observances that are moveable within both systems, being based on the Shmuelian tekufot approximations of the equinoxes and solstices established by Samuel of Nehardea. Samuel fixed them to the Julian calendar, which slowly slips out of alignment with the Gregorian over a span of several centuries. The first is the annual commencement of the \"sh'elah\" period during which diaspora Jews add a petition for rain to their daily prayers, which occurs on 23 November (Julian) in most years and on 24 November (Julian) when the following year will be a Julian leap year. The second is the Birkat Hachama (\"Blessing of the Sun\"), a ceremony performed once every 28 years, which always occurs on Wednesday, 26 March (Julian), in a Julian year of the form 28n+21.\nIn Islam, all holidays fixed to the lunar Islamic calendar vary completely within the Gregorian calendar, shifting by 10 or 11 days each year and moving through the entire Gregorian year over the course of about 33 years (making 34 Islamic years).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20548", "revid": "48212644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20548", "title": "Mark McGwire", "text": "American baseball player and coach (born 1963)\nMark David McGwire (born October 1, 1963), nicknamed \"Big Mac\", is an American former professional baseball first baseman who played 16 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) from 1986 to 2001 for the Oakland Athletics and the St. Louis Cardinals. He won two World Series championships, one with Oakland as a player in 1989 and one with St. Louis as a coach in 2011. One of the most prolific home run hitters in baseball history, McGwire hit 583 home runs during his career, which ranked 5th-most in MLB history at the time of his retirement and currently ranks 11th. He holds the major-league career record for at bats per home run ratio (10.6), and is the former record holder for both home runs in a single season (70 in 1998) and home runs hit by a rookie (49 in 1987). McGwire was one of several central figures in baseball's steroids scandal.\nMcGwire led the major leagues in home runs in five different seasons, and set the major-league record for home runs hit in a four-season period from 1996 to 1999 with 245. He demonstrated exemplary patience as a batter, producing a career .394 on-base percentage (OBP) and twice leading the major leagues in bases on balls. McGwire also led the league in runs batted in once, on-base percentage twice, and slugging percentage four times. Injuries cut short even greater potential, as he reached 140 games played in just eight of his 16 MLB seasons. Injuries particularly cut into his playing time in 2000 and 2001 and factored into his decision to retire. A right-handed batter and thrower, McGwire stood tall and weighed during his playing career.\nWith the Cardinals in 1998, McGwire joined Cubs slugger Sammy Sosa in a chase for the single-season home-run record set by Roger Maris in 1961. McGwire surpassed Maris and finished with 70 home runs, a record that Barry Bonds would break three years later with 73.\nIn 2010, McGwire publicly admitted to using performance-enhancing drugs during a large portion of his career.\nEarly life.\nMcGwire was born in the Los Angeles suburb of Pomona, California. His father was a dentist. He attended Damien High School in La Verne, California, where he played baseball, golf, and basketball. He was drafted in the 8th round by the Montreal Expos in the 1981 amateur draft, but did not sign.\nCollege career.\nMcGwire played college baseball at the University of Southern California, where he was a teammate of Randy Johnson, Jack Del Rio, and Rodney Peete under coach Rod Dedeaux. McGwire was named the college baseball player of the year by \"the Sporting News\" in 1984.\nProfessional career.\nDraft and minor leagues.\nAfter three years at USC and a stint on the 1984 U.S. Olympic team, McGwire was drafted tenth overall in the 1984 Major League Baseball draft by the Oakland Athletics. In 1984 and 1985, he played for the Single-A Modesto A's. He began the 1986 season in the minors, with the Double-A Huntsville Stars and Triple-A Tacoma Tigers.\nOakland Athletics (1986\u20131997).\nMcGwire debuted in the major leagues on August 22, 1986. He did not get a hit until his third game, on August 24. In 18 games with Oakland in 1986, he hit three home runs and had nine runs batted in (RBIs), but had a lowly .189 batting average.\nRookie home-run record and major-league leader (1987).\nRetaining his rookie status in 1987, McGwire hit four home runs in the month of April, but followed in May with 15 and another nine in June. Before the All-Star break arrived, he had totaled 33 home runs and earned a spot on the American League All-Star team. On August 11, he broke Al Rosen's AL rookie record of 37 home runs. Three days later, McGwire broke the major-league record of 38, which Frank Robinson and Wally Berger had jointly held. In September, McGwire hit nine more home runs while posting monthly personal bests of a .351 batting average, .419 on-base percentage (OBP) and 11 doubles (2B). With 49 home runs and two games remaining in the regular season for him to reach 50 home runs, he missed the games in order to attend the birth of his first child. McGwire also totaled 118 runs batted in, a .289 batting average, 97 runs scored, 28 doubles, a .618 slugging percentage and a .370 on-base percentage (OBP). McGwire's 49 home runs as a rookie stood as a major league record until Aaron Judge hit 52 for the New York Yankees in 2017.\nNot only did McGwire lead the AL in home runs in 1987, but he also tied for the major-league lead with Chicago Cubs right fielder Andre Dawson. McGwire also led the major leagues in slugging, finished second in the AL in adjusted on-base plus slugging percentage (OPS+, 164) and total bases (344) and placed third in RBI and on-base plus slugging (OPS, .987). He was unanimously chosen as the AL Rookie of the Year Award and finished sixth overall in the AL Most Valuable Player Award voting.\nMore All-Star appearances (1988\u20131991).\nFrom 1988 to 1990, McGwire followed with 32, 33, and 39 home runs, respectively, becoming the first Major Leaguer to hit 30+ home runs in each of his first four full seasons. On July 3 and 4, 1988, he hit game-winning home runs in the 16th inning of both games. Through May\u00a02009[ [update]], McGwire was tied for third all-time with Joe DiMaggio in home runs over his first two calendar years in the major leagues (71), behind Chuck Klein (83) and Ryan Braun (79).\nMcGwire's most famous home run with the A's was likely his game-winning solo shot in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 3 of the 1988 World Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers and former A's closer Jay Howell. McGwire's game-winner brought the A's their only victory in the 1988 World Series, which they lost in five games; however, McGwire and his fellow Bash Brother, Jos\u00e9 Canseco, played a large part in the 1989 championship club that defeated the San Francisco Giants in the famous \"Earthquake Series.\"\nWorking diligently on his defense at first base, McGwire bristled at the notion that he was a one-dimensional player. He was generally regarded as a good fielder in his early years, even winning a Gold Glove Award in 1990, the only one that the Yankees' Don Mattingly would not win between 1985 and 1994. In later years, his mobility decreased along with his defensive ability. His batting averages after his rookie season plummeted to .260, .231, and .235 from 1988 to 1990. In 1991, he bottomed out with a .201 average and 22 homers. Manager Tony La Russa sat him for the final game of the season to avoid causing his batting average to dip below .200. Despite the declining averages during this time of his career, McGwire's high base-on-balls totals allowed him to maintain an acceptable on-base percentage. In fact, when he hit .201, his OPS+ was 103, just over the league average.\nMcGwire stated in an interview with \"Sports Illustrated\" that 1991 was the \"worst year\" of his life, with his on-field performance and marriage difficulties, and that he \"didn't lift a weight\" that entire season. With all that behind him, McGwire rededicated himself to working out harder than ever and received visual therapy from a sports vision specialist.\nCareer resurgence (1992\u20131997).\nThe \"new look\" McGwire hit 42 homers and batted .268 in 1992, with an outstanding OPS+ of 175 (the highest of his career to that point), and put on a victorious home-run-hitting show at the Home Run Derby during the 1992 All-Star break. His performance propelled the A's to the American League West Division title in 1992, their fourth in five seasons. The A's lost in the playoffs to the eventual World Series champion Toronto Blue Jays.\nFoot injuries limited McGwire to a total of 74 games in 1993 and 1994, and just nine home runs in each of the two seasons. He played just 104 games in 1995, but his proportional totals were much improved, as he hit 39 home runs in 317 at-bats. In 1996, McGwire belted a major-league-leading 52 homers in 423 at-bats. He also hit for a career-high .312 average and led the league in both slugging and on-base percentage.\nMcGwire's total of 363 home runs with the Athletics surpassed the previous franchise record. He was selected or voted to nine American League All-Star teams while playing for the A's, including six consecutive appearances from 1987 through 1992. On April 21, 1997, McGwire became the fourth and final player to hit a home run over the left-field roof of Detroit's Tiger Stadium, joining Harmon Killebrew, Frank Howard and Cecil Fielder. The blast was estimated to have traveled 491 feet.\nSt. Louis Cardinals (1997\u20132001).\nOn July 31, having already amassed 34 home runs in the 1997 season, McGwire was traded from the Oakland Athletics to the St. Louis Cardinals for T. J. Mathews, Eric Ludwick and Blake Stein. Despite playing just two-thirds of the season in the American League, he finished ninth in home runs. In 51 games with the Cardinals to finish the 1997 season, McGwire compiled a .253 batting average, 24 home runs, and 42 RBI. Overall in 1997, McGwire led the majors with 58 home runs. He also finished third in the major leagues in slugging percentage (.646), fourth in OPS (1.039), fifth in OPS+ (170), tenth in RBI (123), and ninth in walks (101). He placed 16th in the NL MVP voting.\nIt was the last year of his contract, so there was speculation that McGwire would play for the Cardinals only for the remainder of the season, then seek a long-term deal, possibly in Southern California, where he still lived; however, McGwire signed a contract to stay in St. Louis. It is also believed that McGwire later encouraged Jim Edmonds, another Southern California resident who was traded to St. Louis, to forgo free agency and sign a contract with the Cardinals in 2000.\nSingle-season home run record chase (1998).\nAs the 1998 season progressed, it became clear that McGwire, Seattle Mariners outfielder Ken Griffey Jr., and Chicago Cubs outfielder Sammy Sosa were all on track to break Roger Maris's single-season home run record. The race to break the record first attracted media attention as the home-run leader changed often throughout the season. On August 19, Sosa hit his 48th home run to move ahead of McGwire; however, later that day McGwire hit his 48th and 49th home runs to regain the lead.\nOn September 8, 1998, McGwire hit a pitch by the Cubs' Steve Trachsel over the left-field wall for his record-breaking 62nd home run, setting off massive celebrations at Busch Stadium. The fact that the game was against the Cubs meant that Sosa was able to congratulate McGwire personally on his achievement. Members of Maris's family were also present at the game. The ball was given to McGwire in a ceremony on the field by the stadium worker who found it.\nMcGwire finished the 1998 season with 70 home runs (including five in his last three games), four ahead of Sosa's 66, a record that was broken three seasons later in 2001 by Barry Bonds with 73.\nMcGwire was honored with the inaugural Babe Ruth Home Run Award for leading Major League Baseball in home runs. Although McGwire had the prestige of the home-run record, Sammy Sosa (who had fewer home runs but more RBI and stolen bases) won the 1998 NL MVP award, as his contributions helped propel the Cubs to the playoffs (the Cardinals finished third in the NL Central). Many credited the Sosa-McGwire home run chase in 1998 with \"saving baseball\" by attracting new, younger fans and bringing back old fans soured by the 1994\u201395 Major League Baseball strike.\nLater playing career (1999\u20132001).\nMcGwire kept his high level of offensive production from 1998 going in 1999 while setting or extending several significant records. With 65 home runs, he led MLB for the fourth consecutive season. It was also his fourth consecutive season with at least 50 home runs, extending his own major league record. Sosa, who hit 63 home runs in 1999, again trailed McGwire. Thus, they became the first, and still only, players in major league history to hit 60 or more home runs in consecutive seasons. McGwire also set a record from 1998 to 1999 for home runs in a two-season period with 135. He also owned the highest four-season home-run total, with 245 from 1996 to 1999. In 1999, he drove in an NL-leading 147 runs while only having 145 hits, becoming the first player with more RBIs than hits in a season.\nFollowing the 1999 season, McGwire and the Cardinals exercised a mutual option in his contract for the 2001 season which would pay him $11 million for the 2001 season. Shortly before the 2001 season, McGwire and the Cardinals agreed to another extension through the 2004 season for $30 million which, according to Phil Rogers in the \"Chicago Tribune\", was far less than he could have made in free agency.\nHowever, in 2000 and 2001, McGwire's statistics declined relative to previous years as he struggled to avoid injury, specifically with his knee, which lessened his bat speed. McGwire missed two months of the 2000 season with patella tendinitis while noting his appreciation for coaching. In September, he was used primarily as a pinch-hitter. He played just 89 games and had 32 home runs. In the 2000 postseason, he was used a pinch hitter for six games, where he hit one home run (his fifth and final postseason home run) and walked twice as the Cardinals lost in the NLCS. He had surgery on his right knee to deal with tendinitis immediately the 2000 season ended. McGwire returned to play spring training and Opening Day in April (less than six months since the surgery), but his knee still bothered him, and after he went 2-for-21 (.095), he was moved to the disabled list on April 18. He ended missing a month. He ultimately played just 97 games that year and had 29 of his 56 hits go for home runs while batting .187. His last home run came on September 28 against Pittsburgh. In the NLDS, McGwire had just one hit in 11 at-bats and was pulled for a pinch-hitter in the 9th inning in decisive Game 5.\nOn November 11, 2001, McGwire announced his retirement, stating, \"I am unable to perform at a level equal to the salary the organization would be paying me. I believe I owe it to the Cardinals and the fans of St. Louis to step aside, so a talented free agent can be brought in as the final piece of what I expect can be a world championship-caliber team.\"\nInternational career.\nMcGwire played for the United States national team during his collegiate years. On the 1984 team, he batted .359 over 35 games. McGwire was selected to the roster for the Summer Olympics in Los Angeles that same year. That squad, which included future Hall of Famer Barry Larkin, emerged as the favorite for the competition, after Cuba joined the Soviet Union-led boycott of the games. The U.S. team won the silver medal in the tournament, with Japan winning the gold medal. McGwire finished the five-game competition batting 4-for-21 with no home runs. McGwire later said of the 1984 Olympics squad: \"People may not have recognized it at the time, but that was definitely a dream team.\"\nCoaching career (2010\u20132018).\nAfter his playing career ended, McGwire demonstrated coaching ability, personally assisting players such as Matt Holliday, Bobby Crosby and Skip Schumaker before accepting an official role as hitting coach with an MLB team. On October 26, 2009, Cardinals manager Tony La Russa confirmed that McGwire would become the club's fifth hitting coach of La Russa's tenure with the Cardinals, replacing Hal McRae. McGwire received a standing ovation prior to the Cardinals' home opener on April 12, 2010. In his three seasons as Cardinals hitting coach, the team's prolific offense led the National League in batting and on-base percentage, and the team finished second in runs scored.\nIn early November 2012, McGwire rejected a contract extension to return as Cardinals hitting coach for the 2013 season. Instead, he accepted an offer for the same position with the Los Angeles Dodgers in order to be closer to his wife and five children.\nOn June 11, 2013, McGwire was ejected for the first time as a coach during a bench-clearing brawl with the Arizona Diamondbacks. He was suspended for two games starting the next day.\nOn December 2, 2015, he was named bench coach for the San Diego Padres. He left the team after the 2018 season.\nHonors, records and achievements.\nKnown as one of the top sluggers of his era, McGwire ended his career with 583 home runs, which was fifth-most in history when he retired. When he hit his 500th career home run in 1999, he did so in 5,487 career at-bats, the fewest in major league history. He led all of MLB in home runs in five different seasons: 1987 and each season from 1996 to 1999. His total of 245 home runs from 1996 to 1999 is the highest four-season home-run output in major league history. In each of those four seasons, he exceeded 50 home runs, becoming the first player to do so. He was also the first player to hit 49 or more home runs five times, including his rookie-season record of 49 in 1987. With a career average of one home every 10.61 at-bats, he holds the MLB record for most home runs per at-bat, leading second-place Babe Ruth by more than a full at-bat (11.76).\nAs of 2025[ [update]], McGwire owned three of the four lowest single-season AB/HR ratios in MLB history, which covered his 1996, 1998 and 1999 seasons; they were actually the top three seasons in MLB history until Bonds broke his single-season home-run record in 2001. McGwire's 1997 season ranked 14th, excluding Negro Leagues statistics. Considered one of the slowest runners in the game, McGwire hit only 6 triples, the second fewest of any player with at least 7,000 plate appearances. He had 12 stolen bases while being caught stealing eight times. His 1,626 hits is the lowest for all members of the 500 home run club.\nHonors and distinctions.\nIn a 1999 list of the 100 greatest baseball players, \"The Sporting News\" ranked McGwire at number 91. The list had been compiled during the 1998 season and included statistics through the 1997 season. That year, he was elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2005, \"The Sporting News\" published an update of its list with McGwire at number 84.\nA five-mile stretch of Interstate 70 in Missouri in St. Louis and near Busch Stadium was named Mark McGwire Highway to honor his 70-home-run achievement, along with his various good works for the city. In May 2010, St. Louis politicians succeeded in passing a state bill to change the name to Mark Twain Highway.\nNational Baseball Hall of Fame consideration.\nMcGwire first became eligible for Hall of Fame voting in 2007. For election, a player needs to be listed on 75% of ballots cast; falling under 5% removes a player from future consideration. Between 2007 and 2010, McGwire's performance held steady, receiving 128 votes (23.5%) in 2007, 128 votes (23.6%) in 2008, 118 votes (21.9%) in 2009, and 128 votes (23.7%) in 2010. The 2011 ballot resulted in his first sub-20% total of 115 votes (19.8%), and McGwire's total votes continued to decline (112 votes (19.5%) in 2012, 96 votes (16.9%) in 2013, 63 votes (11.0%) in 2014 and 55 votes (10.0%) in 2015) until he was eliminated after receiving 54 votes (12.3%) in 2016.\nA second path for entering the Hall of Fame is through the Hall's \"Era Committees\" structure, formerly known as the Veterans Committee, which may consider retired players whose eligibility has fallen outside of the traditional 10-year ballot period. Entry into the Hall of Fame requires a \"yes\" vote from 12 of the 16 committee members. McGwire was not on the ballot for Contemporary Baseball Era players in 2022. The next vote is scheduled for .\nRecords.\n\u2020 \u2013 \"tied with Sammy Sosa\"\n\u2020\u2020 \u2013 \"tied with Babe Ruth and Sammy Sosa\"\nPlaying career totals.\nIn 16 seasons playing major league baseball (1986\u20132001), McGwire accumulated the following career totals:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSteroid use.\nIn a 1998 article by Associated Press writer Steve Wilstein, McGwire admitted to taking androstenedione, an over-the-counter muscle enhancement product that had already been banned by the NFL, and the IOC; however, use of the substance was not prohibited by Major League Baseball at the time, and it was not federally classified as an anabolic steroid in the United States until 2004.\nJose Canseco released a book, \"\", in 2005. In it, he wrote positively about steroids and made various claims\u2014among them, that McGwire had used performance-enhancing drugs since the 1980s and that Canseco had personally injected him with them.\nIn 2005, McGwire and Canseco were among 11 baseball players and executives subpoenaed to testify at a congressional hearing on steroids. During his testimony on March 17, 2005, McGwire declined to answer questions under oath when he appeared before the House Government Reform Committee. In a tearful opening statement, McGwire said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Asking me or any other player to answer questions about who took steroids in front of television cameras will not solve the problem. If a player answers 'No,' he simply will not be believed; if he answers 'Yes,' he risks public scorn and endless government investigations\u00a0... My lawyers have advised me that I cannot answer these questions without jeopardizing my friends, my family, and myself. I will say, however, that it remains a fact in this country that a man, any man, should be regarded as innocent unless proven guilty.\nOn January 11, 2010, in an interview with Bob Costas, McGwire admitted to using steroids on and off for a decade and said, \"I wish I had never touched steroids. It was foolish and it was a mistake. I truly apologize. Looking back, I wish I had never played during the steroid era.\" He admitted using them in the 1989/90 offseason and then after he was injured in 1993. He admitted using them on occasion throughout the 1990s, including during the 1998 season. McGwire said that he used steroids to recover from injuries.\nMcGwire's decision to admit using steroids was prompted by his decision to become hitting coach of the St. Louis Cardinals. According to McGwire, he took steroids for health reasons rather than to improve performance.\nDespite his admission of steroid use, McGwire was criticized for refusing to acknowledge that his record-setting home run output in the late 1990s was aided by steroids. Bob Costas said he was \"surprised\" that although he gave McGwire multiple opportunities to do so, McGwire was never able to make this admission. Costas said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I kept trying to gently suggest that, couldn't you see that even though you were a powerful hitter...couldn't you see that you were even better than you had been? Couldn't you see the cluster of Sammy Sosa seasons, Barry Bonds seasons, guys with 18 home runs all of a sudden hitting 45 home runs, can't you see a correlation here? And he could never acknowledge it. I don't think he's being consciously dishonest, I think he's convinced that that is the truth [that he would have hit the same number of home runs with or without steroids]. But at least he's acknowledged something [taking steroids]. Almost nobody else has acknowledged it.\nPersonal life.\nMcGwire's brother Dan McGwire was a quarterback for the Seattle Seahawks and Miami Dolphins of the NFL in the early 1990s and was a first-round draft pick out of San Diego State University. He has another brother, Jay McGwire, a bodybuilder, who wrote a book in 2010 detailing their shared steroid use.\nMcGwire married Stephanie Slemera, a former pharmaceutical sales representative from the St. Louis area, in Las Vegas on April 20, 2002. On June 1, 2010, their triplet girls were born: Monet Rose, Marlo Rose, and Monroe Rose. They join brothers Max and Mason. Mason was drafted by the Chicago Cubs in the eighth round of the 2022 MLB draft. They reside in a gated community in Shady Canyon, Irvine, California. Together they created the Mark McGwire Foundation for Children to support agencies that help children who have been sexually and physically abused come to terms with a difficult childhood. Mark has a son, Matthew (b. 1987), from a previous marriage from 1984 to 1990 that ended in divorce.\nPrior to admitting to using steroids, McGwire avoided the media and spent much of his free time playing golf. He also worked as a hitting coach for major league players Matt Holliday, Bobby Crosby, Chris Duncan, and Skip Schumaker.\nMcGwire appeared as himself in season 7, episode 13 of the TV show \"Mad About You\". McGwire provided his voice for a 1999 episode of \"The Simpsons\" titled \"Brother's Little Helper\", where he played himself.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20549", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20549", "title": "Manufacturing Consent", "text": "1988 book by Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky\nManufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media is a 1988 book by Edward S. Herman and Noam Chomsky. It argues that the mass communication media of the U.S. \"are effective and powerful ideological institutions that carry out a system-supportive propaganda function, by reliance on market forces, internalized assumptions, and self-censorship, and without overt coercion\", by means of the propaganda model of communication. The title refers to consent of the governed, and derives from the phrase \"the manufacture of consent\" used by Walter Lippmann in \"Public Opinion\" (1922). \"Manufacturing Consent\" was honored with the Orwell Award for \"outstanding contributions to the critical analysis of public discourse\" in 1989.\nA 2002 revision takes account of developments such as the fall of the Soviet Union. A 2009 interview with the authors notes the effects of the internet on the propaganda model.\nBackground.\nOrigins.\nChomsky credits the impetus of \"Manufacturing Consent\" to Alex Carey, the Australian social psychologist, to whom the book is dedicated. The book was greatly inspired by Herman's earlier financial research.\nAuthorship.\nHerman was a professor of finance at Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, and Chomsky is a linguist and activist scholar, who has written many other books, such as \"Towards a New Cold War\". Before \"Manufacturing Consent\" was published in 1988, the two authors had previously collaborated on the same subject. Their book \"\", a book about American foreign policy and the media, was published in 1973. The publisher for the book, a subsidiary of Warner Communications Incorporated, was deliberately put out of print after publishing 20,000 copies of the book, most of which were destroyed, so the book was not widely known.\nAccording to Chomsky, \"most of the book [\"Manufacturing Consent\"]\" was the work of Edward S. Herman. Herman describes a rough division of labor in preparing the book whereby he was responsible for the preface and chapters 1\u20134 while Chomsky was responsible for chapters 5\u20137. According to Herman, the propaganda model described in the book was originally his idea, tracing it back to his 1981 book \"Corporate Control, Corporate Power\". The main elements of the propaganda model (though not so-called at the time) were discussed briefly in volume 1 chapter 2 of Herman and Chomsky's 1979 book \"The Political Economy of Human Rights\", where they argued, \"Especially where the issues involve substantial U.S. economic and political interests and relationships with friendly or hostile states, the mass media usually function much in the manner of state propaganda agencies.\"\nPropaganda model of communication.\nThe book introduced the propaganda model of communication, which is still developing today.\nThe propaganda model for the manufacture of public consent describes five editorially distorting filters, which are said to affect reporting of news in mass communications media. These five filters of editorial bias are:\nThe propaganda model of communication and its influence over major media organizations.\nThe propaganda model describes the pillars of society (the public domain, business firms, media organizations, governments etc.) as first and foremost, profit-seekers. To fully consider the effects of the propaganda model, a tiered diagram can be drawn. Due to the impressionable and exploitative nature of major media organizations including broadcast media, print media, and 21st century social media, media organizations are placed at the bottom. Higher up the model, it pans to the larger organizations that are financially capable of controlling advertising licenses, lawsuits, or selling environments. The first level displays the public domain in which prominent ideologies within the masses can influence the intentions of mass media. The second level pertaining to the business firms accounts for the media\u2019s source of information as business firms are wealthy enough to supply information to media organizations while maintaining control over where advertisers can sell their advertisements and stories. The final layer, the governments of the major global powers, are the wealthiest subgroup of the pillars of society. Having the most financial wealth and organizational power, media organizations are most dependent on government structures for financial stability and political direction.\nDocumentary adaptation.\nThe 1992 documentary film \"\" directed by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick first opened at the Film Forum. This three-hour adaptation considers the propaganda model of communication and the politics of the mass-communications business, with emphasis on Chomsky's ideas and career.\nSee also.\nOther works\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20550", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20550", "title": "Maeshowe", "text": "Neolithic chambered cairn and passage grave situated on Mainland Orkney, Scotland\nMaeshowe (or Maes Howe; ) is a Neolithic chambered cairn and passage grave situated on Mainland Orkney, Scotland. It was probably built around 2800 BC. In the archaeology of Scotland, it gives its name to the Maeshowe type of chambered cairn, which is limited to Orkney.\nMaeshowe is a significant example of Neolithic craftsmanship and is, in the words of the archaeologist Stuart Piggott, \"a superlative monument that by its originality of execution is lifted out of its class into a unique position.\" Maeshowe is designated a scheduled monument and part of the \"Heart of Neolithic Orkney\", a group of sites including Skara Brae designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1999.\nDesign and construction.\nMaeshowe is one of the largest tombs in Orkney; the mound encasing the tomb is in diameter and rises to a height of . Surrounding the mound, at a distance of to is a ditch up to wide. The grass mound hides a complex of passages and chambers built of carefully crafted slabs of flagstone weighing up to 30\u00a0tons. It is aligned so that the rear wall of its central chamber is illuminated on the winter solstice. A similar display occurs in Newgrange.\nThis entrance passage is long and leads to the central almost square chamber measuring around on each side. The current height of the chamber is , this reflects the height to which the original stonework is preserved and capped by a modern corbelled roof. The original roof may have risen to a height of or more. The entrance passage is only around high, requiring visitors to stoop or crawl into the central chamber. That chamber is constructed largely of flat slabs of stone, many of which traverse nearly the entire length of the walls. In each corner lie huge angled buttresses that rise to the vaulting. At a height of around , the wall's construction changes from the use of flat to overlapping slabs creating a beehive-shaped vault.\nEstimates of the amount of effort required to build Maeshowe vary; a commonly suggested number is 39,000\u00a0man-hours, although Colin Renfrew calculated that at least 100,000\u00a0hours would be required. Dating of the construction of Maeshowe is difficult but dates derived from burials in similar tombs cluster around 3000\u00a0BC. Since Maeshowe is the largest and most sophisticated example of the Maeshowe \"type\" of tomb, archaeologists have suggested that it is the last of its class, built around 2800\u00a0BC. The people who built Maeshowe were users of grooved ware, a distinctive type of pottery that spread throughout the British Isles around 3000\u00a0BC.\nSiting.\nMaeshowe appears as a grassy mound rising from a flat plain near the southeast end of the Loch of Harray. The land around Maeshowe at its construction probably looked much as it does today: Treeless, with grasses representative of \u2018pollen assemblage zone\u2019 MNH-I, reflecting \"mixed agricultural practices, probably with a pastoral bias \u2013 there is a substantial amount of ribwort pollen, but also that of cereals.\"\nMaeshowe is aligned with some other Neolithic sites in the vicinity, for example, the entrance of \"Structure\u00a08\" of the nearby Barnhouse Settlement directly faces the mound. In addition, the so-called \"Barnhouse Stone\" in a field around 700\u00a0metres away is perfectly aligned with the entrance to Maeshowe. This entrance corridor is so placed that it lets the direct light of the setting sun into the chamber for a few days on each side of the winter solstice, illuminating the entrance to the back cell.\nA Neolithic \"low road\" connects Maeshowe with the magnificently preserved village of Skara Brae, passing near the Standing Stones of Stenness and the Ring of Brodgar. Low roads connect Neolithic ceremonial sites throughout Britain. Some archeologists believe that Maeshowe was originally surrounded by a large stone circle.\nThe complex including Maeshowe, the Ring of Brodgar, the Standing Stones of Stenness, Skara Brae, as well as other tombs and standing stones represents a concentration of Neolithic sites that is rivalled in Britain only by the complexes associated with Stonehenge and Avebury.\nVisitor Centre.\nThe Maeshowe Heart of Neolithic Orkney Visitor Centre is located in Stenness Village, and opened to the public in April 2017. The previous visitor centre for Maeshowe had been located in Tormiston Mill, which sits adjacent to the tomb. Tormiston Mill Visitor Centre closed in September 2016, for various reasons, notably the small carpark and dangerous road, along with lack of wheelchair access and asbestos.\nTours depart from the Maeshowe Heart of Neolithic Orkney Visitor Centre on a shuttle bus which takes tour groups of 16 people down to the chambered cairn itself between 4 and 7 times a day. It contains an exhibition, a gift shop and public toilets, as well as staff facilities.\nStyle.\nThe tomb gives its name to the Maeshowe type of Scottish chambered cairn, which is limited to Orkney. Maeshowe is very similar to the famous Newgrange tomb in Ireland, suggesting a linkage between the two cultures. Chambered tombs of the Maeshowe \"type\" are characterized by a long, low entrance passageway leading to a square or rectangular chamber from which there is access to a number of side cells. Although there are disagreements as to the attribution of tombs to tomb types, there are only seven definitely known Maeshowe-type tombs. On Mainland, there are, in addition to Maeshowe; the tombs of Cuween Hill, Wideford Hill, and Quanterness. The tomb of Quoyness is found on Sanday, while Vinquoy Hill is located on Eday. Finally, there is an unnamed tomb on the Holm of Papa Westray. Anna Ritchie reports that there are three more Maeshowe-type tombs in Orkney but she doesn't name or locate them.\nAccording to the description herein, a chambered tomb is normally characterized by grave goods, which were found at Cuween Hill and the tomb on Holm of Papa Westray (see the paragraph above) but were not found at Maeshowe. Further, the description of a passage grave states:\n \"Not all passage graves have been found to contain evidence of human remains. One such example is Maeshowe.\" In addition, the \"Statement of Significance\" (quoted in \u00a7 below) says, \"It is an expression of genius within a group of people whose other tombs were claustrophobic chambers in smaller mounds.\"\nA potential explanation for the extraordinary genius of Maeshowe engineering and the lack of human remains was described by Peter Tompkins in 1971, who compared the structure at \"Maes-Howe\" to the Great Pyramid suggesting the site was used as an observatory, calendar, and for May Day ceremonies rather than as a tomb.\nTompkins extensively studied numerous documents related to the measurement and exploration of the Great Pyramid of Giza. He stated the central \"observation chamber\" at Maeshowe was \"corbeled like the Great Pyramid's Grand Gallery\", was carefully leveled, plumbed\", and the jointing is of a quality that \"rivals that of the Great Pyramid\". Rather than chambers of a tomb, Tompkins suggested the structure contained small \"retiring rooms for the observers\". He suggested the entrance was very similar to Egyptian pyramids in that it had a \"54\u00a0foot observation passage aimed like a telescope at a megalithic stone [2772\u00a0feet away] to indicate the summer solstice\" (p.\u00a0130) in addition to its \"Watchstone\" to the West that indicated the equinoxes. The \"sighting passage\" points to a northern star like the pyramids of Saqqara, Dashur and Med\u00fbm. Tompkins stated that \"The similarity [of the pyramids] to the structure at Maes-Howe is indeed amazing\". He cited Professor Alexander Thom, former Chair of Engineering Science at Oxford, as writing about the geometry of construction and astronomical alignment of Maeshowe in this context in 1967.\nTompkins, citing Thom and others, described in detail how Maeshowe, Silbury Hill and other ancient mounds and Neolithic megaliths across Britain served as extremely accurate observatories, calendars, and straight-line beacons for travelers, as well as how they were used ceremonially in May Day celebrations more than 4,000\u00a0years ago.\nExcavation.\nThe \"modern\" opening of the tomb in July\u00a01861 was by James Farrer, an antiquarian and the Member of Parliament (MP) for South Durham. Farrer, like many antiquarians of the day, was not noted for his careful excavation of sites. John Hedges describes him as possessing \"a rapacious appetite for excavation matched only by his crude techniques, lack of inspiration, and general inability to publish.\" Farrer and his workmen broke through the roof of the entrance passage and found it filled with debris. He then turned his attention to the top of the mound, broke through, and over a period of a few days, emptied the main chamber of material that had filled it completely. He and his workmen discovered the famous runic inscriptions carved on the walls, proof that Norsemen had broken into the tomb at least six centuries earlier.\nAs described in the Orkneyinga saga, Maeshowe was looted by the famous Vikings Earl Harald Maddadarson and Ragnvald, Earl of M\u00f8re\naround the 12th\u00a0century. The more than 30 runic inscriptions on the walls of the chamber represent the largest single collection of such carvings in the world. More recent fieldwork has demonstrated that the application of a computational photography technique, reflectance transformation imaging (RTI),\ncan shed light onto the nature of the inscriptions and their sequencing.\nExcavations have revealed that the external wall surrounding the ditch was rebuilt in the 9th century. Some archaeologists see this as evidence that the tomb may have been reused by the Norse people and that they were the source of the \"treasure\" found by the later looters.\nToponymy.\nThe etymological genesis of the name \"Maeshowe\" is uncertain. The name may involve Gaelic , meaning 'a buttock'; in reference to a hillock.\nHowever, Celtic-derived toponyms are uncommon in the Northern Isles, and derivation from an analog of Welsh , 'an area of activity', is a doubtful proposition.\nA \"Masshowe\" on Holm suggests an etymological parallel.\nWorld Heritage status.\nThe \"Heart of Neolithic Orkney\" was listed as a World Heritage site in December\u00a01999. In addition to Maeshowe, the site includes Skara Brae, the Standing Stones of Stenness, the Ring of Brodgar and other nearby sites. It is managed by Historic Environment Scotland, whose \"Statement of Significance\" for the site begins:\nThe monuments at the heart of Neolithic Orkney and Skara Brae proclaim the triumphs of the human spirit in early ages and isolated places. They were approximately contemporary with the mastabas of the archaic period of Egypt (first and second dynasties), the brick temples of Sumeria, and the first cities of the Harappa culture in India, and a century or two earlier than the Golden Age of China. Unusually fine for their early date, and with a remarkably rich survival of evidence, these sites stand as a visible symbol of the achievements of early peoples away from the traditional centres of civilisation ... Maes Howe is a masterpiece of Neolithic engineering. It is an exceptionally early architectural accomplishment. With its almost classical strength and simplicity it is a unique survival from 5000\u00a0years ago. It is an expression of genius within a group of people whose other tombs were claustrophobic chambers in smaller mounds.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Newgrange \u2014 another winter solstice aligned passage tomb\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20551", "revid": "16498079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20551", "title": "Montevideo Convention", "text": "1933 pan-American treaty on statehood\nThe Montevideo Convention on the Rights and Duties of States is a treaty signed at Montevideo, Uruguay, on December 26, 1933, during the Seventh International Conference of American States. At the conference, United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Secretary of State Cordell Hull declared the \"Good Neighbor Policy\", which opposed U.S. armed intervention in inter-American affairs. The convention was signed by 19 states. The acceptance of Brazil, Peru and the United States as signatories was subject to minor reservations.\nThe convention became operative on December 26, 1934. It was registered in the \"League of Nations Treaty Series\" on January 8, 1936.\nThe conference is notable in U.S. history, since one of the U.S. representatives was Sophonisba Breckinridge, the first U.S. female representative at an international conference.\nBackground.\nIn most cases, the only avenue open to self-determination for colonial or national ethnic minority populations was to achieve international legal personality as a nation-state. The majority of delegations at the International Conference of American States represented independent states that had emerged from former colonies. In most cases, their own existence and independence had been disputed or opposed by one or more of the European colonial empires. They agreed among themselves to criteria that made it easier for other dependent states with limited sovereignty to gain international recognition. For example, they did not include the standard of civilisation in their criteria.\nContents of the convention.\nArticle 1 sets out the criteria for a \"state as a person of international law\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The state as a person of international law should possess the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined territory; (c) government; and (d) capacity to enter into relations with the other states.\nThe first sentence of Article 3 states that \"the political existence of the state is independent of recognition by the other states.\" This is known as the declarative theory of statehood. It stands in contrast with the constitutive theory of statehood, by which a state exists only insofar as it is recognized by other states. It should not be confused with the Estrada doctrine. \"Independence\" and \"sovereignty\" are not mentioned in article 1.\nAn important part of the convention was a prohibition of using military force to gain sovereignty. According to Article 11 of the convention,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The contracting states definitely establish the rule of their conduct the precise obligation not to recognize territorial acquisitions or advantages that have been obtained by force whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure\nParties.\nThe 17 states that have ratified this convention are limited to the Americas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA further three states signed the convention on 26 December 1933, but have not ratified it.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Argentina\nThe only state to attend the Seventh International Conference of American States, where the convention was agreed upon, which did not sign it was Bolivia. Costa Rica, which did not attend the conference, later signed the convention.\nAnalysis.\nThe Montevideo Convention codified several existing legal norms and principles, which apply to all subjects of international law.\nThe Badinter Committee, which consisted of arbitrators from several European countries, considered a state as having a territory, population, and organised political authority and that the existence of states was a question of fact, while the recognition by other states was purely declaratory.\nSwitzerland adheres to the same principle, stating that \"neither a political unit needs to be recognized to become a state, nor does a state have the obligation to recognize another one. At the same time, neither recognition is enough to create a state, nor does its absence abolish it.\"\nActual state practices do not follow the Montevideo Convention exactly. While they play an important role, fulfilling its criteria do not automatically create a state because additional requirements must be met. The status of countries such as Kosovo and Somaliland largely depends on the recognition or non-recognition by other states.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20553", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20553", "title": "Macrolide", "text": "Class of natural products\nMacrolides are a class of mostly natural products with a large macrocyclic lactone ring to which one or more deoxy sugars, usually cladinose and desosamine, may be attached. Macrolides belong to the polyketide class of natural products. Some macrolides have antibiotic or antifungal activity and are used as pharmaceutical drugs. Rapamycin is also a macrolide and was originally developed as an antifungal, but has since been used as an immunosuppressant drug and is being investigated as a potential longevity therapeutic.\nMacrolides are a diverse group with many members of very different properties:\nDefinition.\nIn general, any macrocyclic lactone having greater than 8-membered rings are candidates for this class. The macrocycle may contain amino nitrogen, amide nitrogen (but should be differentiated from cyclopeptides), an oxazole ring, or a thiazole ring. Benzene rings are excluded, in order to differentiate from tannins. Also lactams instead of lactones (as in the ansamycin family) are excluded. Included are not only 12-16 membered macrocycles but also larger rings as in tacrolimus.\nHistory.\nThe first macrolide discovered was erythromycin, which was first used in 1952. Erythromycin was widely used as a substitute to penicillin in cases where patients were allergic to penicillin or had penicillin-resistant illnesses. Later macrolides developed, including azithromycin and clarithromycin, stemmed from chemically modifying erythromycin; these compounds were designed to be more easily absorbed and have fewer side-effects (erythromycin caused gastrointestinal side-effects in a significant proportion of users).\nUses.\nAntibiotic macrolides are used to treat infections caused by Gram-positive bacteria (e.g., \"Streptococcus pneumoniae\") and limited Gram-negative bacteria (e.g., \"Bordetella pertussis\", \"Haemophilus influenzae\"), and some respiratory tract and soft-tissue infections. The antimicrobial spectrum of macrolides is slightly wider than that of penicillin, and, therefore, macrolides are a common substitute for patients with a penicillin allergy. Beta-hemolytic streptococci, pneumococci, staphylococci, and enterococci are usually susceptible to macrolides. Unlike penicillin, macrolides have been shown to be effective against \"Legionella pneumophila\", Mycoplasma, Mycobacterium, some Rickettsia, and Chlamydia.\nMacrolides are \"not\" to be used on nonruminant herbivores, such as horses and rabbits. They rapidly produce a reaction causing fatal digestive disturbance. It can be used in horses less than one year old, but care must be taken that other horses (such as a foal's mare) do not come in contact with the macrolide treatment.\nMacrolides can be administered in a variety of ways, including tablets, capsules, suspensions, injections and topically.\nMechanism of action.\nAntibacterial.\nMacrolides are protein synthesis inhibitors. The mechanism of action of macrolides is inhibition of bacterial protein biosynthesis, and they are thought to do this by preventing peptidyltransferase from adding the growing peptide attached to tRNA to the next amino acid (similarly to chloramphenicol) as well as inhibiting bacterial ribosomal translation. Another potential mechanism is premature dissociation of the peptidyl-tRNA from the ribosome.\nMacrolide antibiotics bind reversibly to the P site on the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome. This action is considered to be bacteriostatic. Macrolides are actively concentrated within leukocytes, and thus are transported into the site of infection.\nImmunomodulation.\nDiffuse panbronchiolitis.\nThe macrolide antibiotics erythromycin, clarithromycin, and roxithromycin have proven to be an effective long-term treatment for the idiopathic, Asian-prevalent lung disease diffuse panbronchiolitis (DPB). The successful results of macrolides in DPB stems from controlling symptoms through immunomodulation (adjusting the immune response), with the added benefit of low-dose requirements.\nWith macrolide therapy in DPB, great reduction in bronchiolar inflammation and damage is achieved through suppression of not only neutrophil granulocyte proliferation but also lymphocyte activity and obstructive secretions in airways. The antimicrobial and antibiotic effects of macrolides, however, are not believed to be involved in their beneficial effects toward treating DPB. This is evident, as the treatment dosage is much too low to fight infection, and in DPB cases with the occurrence of the macrolide-resistant bacterium \"Pseudomonas aeruginosa\", macrolide therapy still produces substantial anti-inflammatory results.\nExamples.\nAntibiotic macrolides.\nUS FDA-approved:\nNot approved in the US by FDA but approved in the other countries by respective national authorities:\nNot approved as a drug for medical use:\nKetolides.\nKetolides are a class of antibiotics that are structurally related to the macrolides. They are used to treat respiratory tract infections caused by macrolide-resistant bacteria. Ketolides are especially effective, as they have two ribosomal binding sites.\nKetolides include:\nFluoroketolides.\nFluoroketolides are a class of antibiotics that are structurally related to the ketolides. The fluoroketolides have three ribosomal interaction sites.\nFluoroketolides include:\nNon-antibiotic macrolides.\nThe drugs tacrolimus, pimecrolimus, and sirolimus, which are used as immunosuppressants or immunomodulators, are also macrolides. They have similar activity to ciclosporin.\nAntifungal drugs.\nPolyene antimycotics, such as amphotericin B, nystatin etc., are a subgroup of macrolides. Cruentaren is another example of an antifungal macrolide.\nToxic macrolides.\nA variety of toxic macrolides produced by bacteria have been isolated and characterized, such as the mycolactones.\nResistance.\nThe primary means of bacterial resistance to macrolides occurs by post-transcriptional methylation of the 23S bacterial ribosomal RNA. This acquired resistance can be either plasmid-mediated or chromosomal, i.e., through mutation, and results in cross-resistance to macrolides, lincosamides, and streptogramins (an MLS-resistant phenotype).\nTwo other forms of acquired resistance include the production of drug-inactivating enzymes (esterases or kinases), as well as the production of active ATP-dependent efflux proteins that transport the drug outside of the cell.\nAzithromycin has been used to treat strep throat (Group A streptococcal (GAS) infection caused by \"Streptococcus pyogenes\") in penicillin-sensitive patients; however, macrolide-resistant strains of GAS occur with moderate frequency. Cephalosporin is another option for these patients.\nSide-effects.\nA 2008 \"British Medical Journal\" article highlights that the combination of some macrolides and statins (used for lowering cholesterol) is not advisable and can lead to debilitating myopathy. This is because some macrolides (clarithromycin and erythromycin, not azithromycin) are potent inhibitors of the cytochrome P450 system, particularly of CYP3A4. Macrolides, mainly erythromycin and clarithromycin, also have a class effect of QT prolongation, which can lead to torsades de pointes. Macrolides exhibit enterohepatic recycling; that is, the drug is absorbed in the gut and sent to the liver, only to be excreted into the duodenum in bile from the liver. This can lead to a buildup of the product in the system, thereby causing nausea. In infants the use of erythromycin has been associated with pyloric stenosis.\nSome macrolides are also known to cause cholestasis, a condition where bile cannot flow from the liver to the duodenum. A study reported in 2019 found an association between erythromycin use during infancy and developing IHPS (Infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis) in infants. However, no significant association was found between macrolides use during pregnancy or breastfeeding.\nA Cochrane review showed gastrointestinal symptoms to be the most frequent adverse event reported in literature.\nInteractions.\nCYP3A4 is an enzyme that metabolizes many drugs in the liver. Macrolides inhibit CYP3A4, which means they reduce its activity and increase the blood levels of the drugs that depend on it for elimination. This can lead to adverse effects or drug-drug interactions. \nMacrolides have cyclic structure with a lactone ring and sugar moieties. They can inhibit CYP3A4 by a mechanism called mechanism-based inhibition (MBI), which involves the formation of reactive metabolites that bind covalently and irreversibly to the enzyme, rendering it inactive. MBI is more serious and long-lasting than reversible inhibition, as it requires the synthesis of new enzyme molecules to restore the activity.\nThe degree of MBI by macrolides depends on the size and structure of their lactone ring. Clarithromycin and erythromycin have a 14-membered lactone ring, which is more prone to demethylation by CYP3A4 and subsequent formation of nitrosoalkenes, the reactive metabolites that cause MBI. Azithromycin, on the other hand, has a 15-membered lactone ring, which is less susceptible to demethylation and nitrosoalkene formation. Therefore, azithromycin is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4, while clarithromycin and erythromycin are strong inhibitors which increase the area under the curve (AUC) value of co-administered drugs more than five-fold. AUC it is a measure of the drug exposure in the body over time. By inhibiting CYP3A4, macrolide antibitiotics, such as erythromycin and clarithromycin, but not azithromycin, can significantly increase the AUC of the drugs that depend on it for clearance, which can lead to higher risk of adverse effects or drug-drug interactions. Azithromycin stands apart from other macrolide antibiotics because it is a weak inhibitor of CYP3A4, and does not significantly increase AUC value of co-administered drugs.\nThe difference in CYP3A4 inhibition by macrolides has clinical implications, for example, for patients who take statins, which are cholesterol-lowering drugs that are mainly metabolized by CYP3A4. Co-administration of clarithromycin or erythromycin with statins can increase the risk of statin-induced myopathy, a condition that causes muscle pain and damage. Azithromycin, however, does not significantly affect the pharmacokinetics of statins and is considered a safer alternative. Another option is to use fluvastatin, a statin that is metabolized by CYP2C9, an enzyme that is not inhibited by clarithromycin.\nMacrolides, including azithromycin, should not be taken with colchicine as it may lead to colchicine toxicity. Symptoms of colchicine toxicity include gastrointestinal upset, fever, myalgia, pancytopenia, and organ failure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20554", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20554", "title": "Millenia", "text": ""}
{"id": "20555", "revid": "24565488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20555", "title": "Millennia", "text": ""}
{"id": "20556", "revid": "3606755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20556", "title": "Meta element", "text": "HTML Metadata\nMeta elements are tags used in HTML and XHTML documents to provide structured metadata about a Web page. They are part of a web page's codice_1 section, the term meta indicating that they are a form of self-reference. Multiple Meta elements with different attributes can be used on the same page. Meta elements can be used to specify page description, keywords and any other metadata not provided through the other codice_1 elements and attributes.\nThe meta element has two uses: either to emulate the use of an HTTP response header field, or to embed additional metadata within the HTML document.\nWith HTML up to and including HTML 4.01 and XHTML, there were four valid attributes: codice_3, codice_4, codice_5 and codice_6. Under HTML 5, codice_7 has been added and codice_6 has been removed. codice_4 is used to emulate an HTTP header, and codice_5 to embed metadata. The value of the statement, in either case, is contained in the codice_3 attribute, which is the only required attribute unless codice_7 is given. codice_7 is used to indicate the character set of the document, and is available in HTML5.\nSuch elements must be placed as tags in the codice_1 section of an HTML or XHTML document.\nExamples of the codice_15 element.\ncodice_15 elements can specify HTTP headers which should be sent before the actual content when the HTML page is served from the web server to the client. For example:\n&lt;meta charset=\"utf-8\"&gt;\nas an alternative to the response header codice_17 to indicate the media type and, more commonly needed, the UTF-8 character encoding.\nMeta tags can be used to describe the contents of the page:\n&lt;meta name=\"description\" content=\"The Federal Aviation Administration is an operating mode of the U.S. Department of Transportation.\"&gt;\nIn this example, the codice_15 element describes the contents of a web page.\nMeta element used in search engine optimization.\nMeta elements provide information about the web page, which can be used by search engines to help categorize the page correctly.\nThey have been the focus of a field of marketing research known as search engine optimization (SEO), where different methods are used to provide a user's website with a higher ranking on search engines. Prior to the rise of content-analysis by search engines in the mid-1990s (most notably Google), search engines were reliant on metadata to correctly classify a Web page and webmasters quickly learned the commercial significance of having the right meta element. The search engine community is now divided as to the value of meta tags. Some claim they have no value, others that they are central, while many simply conclude there is no clear answer but, since they do no harm, they use them just in case. Google states they do support the meta tags \"content\", \"robots\", \"google\", \"google-site-verification\", \"content-type\", \"refresh\" and \"google-bot\".\nMajor search engine robots look at many factors when determining how to rank a page of which meta tags will only form a portion. Furthermore, most search engines change their ranking rules frequently. Google have stated they update their ranking rules every 48 hours. Under such circumstances, a definitive understanding of the role of meta tags in SEO is unlikely.\nThe codice_19 attribute.\nThe codice_19 attribute was popularized by search engines such as Infoseek and AltaVista in 1995, and its popularity quickly grew until it became one of the most commonly used codice_15 elements.\nNo consensus exists whether or not the codice_19 attribute has any effect on ranking at any of the major search engines today. It is speculated that it does if the keywords used in the codice_15 can also be found in the page copy itself. With respect to Google, thirty-seven leaders in search engine optimization concluded in April 2007 that the relevance of having keywords in the codice_15-attribute codice_19 is little to none and in September 2009 Matt Cutts of Google announced that they were no longer taking keywords into account whatsoever. However, both these articles suggest that Yahoo! still makes use of the keywords meta tag in some of its rankings. Yahoo! itself claims support for the keywords meta tag in conjunction with other factors for improving search rankings. In October 2009 Search Engine Round Table announced that \"Yahoo Drops The Meta Keywords Tag Also\" but later reported that the announcement made by Yahoo!'s Senior Director of Search was incorrect. In the corrected statement Yahoo! Senior Director of Search states that \"\u2026What changed with Yahoo's ranking algorithms is that while we still index the meta keyword tag, the ranking importance given to meta keyword tags receives the lowest ranking signal in our system \u2026 it will actually have less effect than introducing those same words in the body of the document, or any other section.\" In Sept 2012, Google announced that they will consider Keyword Meta tag for news publishers. Google said that this may help worthy content to get noticed. The syntax of the news meta keyword has subtle difference from custom keyword meta tag; it is denoted by \"news_keywords\", while the custom keyword meta tag is denoted by \"keywords\". Google News no longer takes into account keywords announced by news_keywords.\nThe Title attribute.\nAccording to Moz, \"Title tags are the second most important on-page factor for SEO, after content\". They convey to the search engines what a given page is all about. It used to be standard SEO practice to include the primary and the secondary keywords in the title for better ranking. Google has gone through various iterations of showing short or longer amounts of content from within the title tags.\nRegardless, the title tags still hold importance in three different ways.\nThe codice_26 attribute.\nThe codice_26 attribute, supported by several major search engines, controls whether search engine spiders are allowed to index a page, or not, and whether they should follow links from a page, or not. The attribute can contain one or more comma-separate values. The codice_28 value prevents a page from being indexed, and codice_29 prevents links from being crawled. Other values recognized by one or more search engines can influence how the engine indexes pages, and how those pages appear on the search results. These include codice_30, which instructs a search engine not to store an archived copy of the page, and codice_31, which asks that the search engine not include a snippet from the page along with the page's listing in search results.\nMeta tags are one of the best options for preventing search engines from indexing content of a website.\nAdditional attributes for search engines.\nNOODP.\nThe search engines Google, Yahoo! and MSN used in some cases the title and abstract of the DMOZ (aka Open Directory Project) listing of a website for the title and/or description (also called snippet or abstract) in the search engine results pages (SERP). To give webmasters the option to specify that the Open Directory Project content should not be used for listings of their website, Microsoft introduced in May 2006 the new \"codice_32\" value for the \"codice_26\" element of the meta tags. Google followed in July 2006 and Yahoo! in October 2006.\nBy 2017, Google reported stopping the use of DMOZ, following its closure, hence, NOODP directive is ignored since.\nThe syntax is the same for all search engines who support the tag.\n&lt;meta name=\"robots\" content=\"noodp\" &gt;\nWebmasters can decide if they want to disallow the use of their ODP listing on a per search engine basis\nGoogle:\n&lt;meta name=\"googlebot\" content=\"noodp\" &gt;\nYahoo!\n&lt;meta name=\"Slurp\" content=\"noodp\" &gt;\nMSN and Live Search (via bingbot, previously msnbot): \n&lt;meta name=\"bingbot\" content=\"noodp\" &gt;\nNOYDIR.\nYahoo! puts content from their own Yahoo! directory next to the ODP listing. In 2007 they introduced a meta tag that lets web designers opt-out of this.\nAdding the codice_34 tag to a page will prevent Yahoo! from displaying Yahoo! Directory titles and abstracts.\n&lt;meta name=\"robots\" content=\"noydir\" &gt;\n&lt;meta name=\"Slurp\" content=\"noydir\" &gt;\nEffect on searching.\nGoogle does not use HTML keyword or meta tag elements for indexing. The Director of Research at Google, Monika Henzinger, was quoted (in 2002) as saying, \"Currently we don't trust metadata because we are afraid of being manipulated.\" Other search engines developed techniques to penalize Web sites considered to be \"cheating the system\". For example, a Web site repeating the same meta keyword several times may have its ranking \"decreased\" by a search engine trying to eliminate this practice, though that is unlikely. It is more likely that a search engine will ignore the meta keyword element completely, and most do regardless of how many words are used in the element.\nGoogle does, however, use meta tag elements for displaying site links. The title tags are used to create the link in search results:\n&lt;title&gt;Site name - Page title - Keyword description&lt;/title&gt;\nThe meta description often appears in Google search results to describe the link:\n&lt;meta name=\"description\" content=\"A blurb to describe the content of the page appears here\" &gt;\nAdditionally, enterprise search startup Swiftype considers meta tags as a mechanism for signaling relevancy for their web site search engines, even introducing their own extension called Meta Tags 2.\nRedirects.\nMeta refresh elements can be used to instruct a Web browser to automatically refresh a Web page after a given time interval. It is also possible to specify an alternative URL and use this technique in order to redirect the user to a different location.\nAuto refreshing via a META element has been deprecated for more than ten years, and recognized as problematic before that.\nThe W3C suggests that user agents should allow users to disable it, otherwise META refresh should not be used by web pages.\nFor Internet Explorer's security settings, under the miscellaneous category, meta refresh can be turned off by the user, thereby disabling its redirect ability.\nIn Mozilla Firefox it can be disabled in the configuration file under the key name \"accessibility.blockautorefresh\".\nMany web design tutorials also point out that client-side redirecting tends to interfere with the normal functioning of a Web browser's \"back\" button. After being redirected, clicking the back button will cause the user to go back to the redirect page, which redirects them again. Some modern browsers seem to overcome this problem however, including Safari, Mozilla Firefox and Opera.\nAuto-redirects via markup (versus server-side redirects) are not in compliance with the W3C's \u2013 Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 1.0 (guideline 7.5).\nHTTP message headers.\nMeta elements of the form codice_35 can be used as alternatives to HTTP headers. For example, codice_36 would tell the browser that the page \"expires\" on June 21, 2006 at 14:25:27 GMT and that it may safely cache the page until then. The HTML 4.01 specification optionally allows this tag to be parsed by HTTP servers and set as part of the HTTP response headers, but no web servers currently implement this behavior. Instead, the user agent emulates the behavior for some HTTP headers as if they had been sent in the response header itself.\nAlternative to codice_15 elements.\nSome HTML elements and attributes already handle certain pieces of meta data and may be used by authors instead of META to specify those pieces: the TITLE element, the ADDRESS element, the INS and DEL elements, the title attribute, and the cite attribute.\nAn alternative to codice_15 elements for enhanced subject access within a website is the use of a back-of-book-style index for the website. See the http:// website for an example.\nIn 1994, ALIWEB, also used an index file to provide the type of information commonly found in meta keywords attributes.\nIn cases where the content attribute's value is a URL, many authors decide to use a link element with a proper value for its rel attribute as well.\nFor a comparison on when it is best to use HTTP-headers, meta-elements, or attributes in the case of language specification: http://.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20557", "revid": "11110", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20557", "title": "MARCKS protein", "text": ""}
{"id": "20559", "revid": "44596079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20559", "title": "Mecha", "text": "Humanoid walking vehicles in science fiction\nIn science fiction, or mechs are giant robots or machines, typically depicted as piloted, humanoid walking vehicles. The term was first used in Japanese after shortening the English loanword or , but the meaning in Japanese is more inclusive, and or 'giant robot' is the narrower term.\nReal mechs vary greatly in size and shape, but are distinguished from vehicles by their biomorphic appearance, and are often much larger than human beings. Different subgenres exist, with varying connotations of realism. The concept of Super Robot and Real Robot are two such examples found in Japanese anime and manga.\nReal-world piloted robots or non-robots robotic platforms, existing or planned, may also be called \"mechs\". In Japanese, \"mechs\" may refer to mobile machinery or vehicles (not including aircraft, cars, motorcycles and HGV) in general, piloted or otherwise.\nCharacteristics.\n'Mecha' is an abbreviation, first used in Japanese, of 'mechanical'. In Japanese, mecha encompasses all mechanical objects, including cars, guns, computers, and other devices, and 'robot' or 'giant robot' is used to distinguish limbed vehicles from other mechanical devices. It has also become associated with large humanoid machines with limbs or other biological characteristics. Mecha differ from robots in that they are piloted from a cockpit, typically located in the chest or head of the mech.\nWhile the distinction is often hazy, mecha typically does not refer to form-fitting powered armor such as Iron Man's suit. They are usually much larger than the wearer, like Iron Man's enemy the Iron Monger, or the mobile suits depicted in the \"Gundam\" franchise.\nIn most cases, mecha are depicted as fighting machines, whose appeal comes from the combination of potent weaponry with a more stylish combat technique than a mere vehicle. Often, they are the primary means of combat, with conflicts sometimes being decided through gladiatorial matches. Other works represent mecha as one component of an integrated military force, supported by and fighting alongside tanks, fighter aircraft, and infantry. The applications often highlight the theoretical usefulness of such a device. Combining a tank's resilience and firepower with infantry's ability to cross unstable terrain. In some continuities, special scenarios are constructed to make mecha more viable than current-day status. For example, in Gundam the fictional Minovsky particle inhibits the use of radar, making long-range ballistic strikes impractical, thus favouring relatively close-range warfare of Mobile Suits.\nHowever, some stories, such as the manga/anime franchise \"Patlabor\" and the American wargame \"BattleTech\" universe, also encompass mecha used for civilian purposes, such as heavy construction work, police functions, or firefighting. Mecha also have roles as transporters, recreation, advanced hazmat suits, and other research and development applications.\nMecha have been used in fantasy settings, for example in the anime series \"Aura Battler Dunbine\", \"The Vision of Escaflowne\", \"Panzer World Galient\", and \"Maze\". In those cases, the mecha designs are usually based on some alternative or \"lost\" science-fiction technology from ancient times. In case of anime series \"Zoids\", the machines resemble dinosaurs and animals, and have been shown to evolve from native metallic organisms.\nA chicken walker is a fictional type of bipedal robot or mecha, distinguished by its rear-facing knee joint. This type of articulation resembles a bird's legs, hence the name. However, birds actually have forward-facing knees; they are digitigrade, and what most call the \"knee\" is actually the ankle.\nEarly history.\nThe 1868 Edward S. Ellis novel \"The Steam Man of the Prairies\" featured a steam-powered, back-piloted, mechanical man.\nThe 1880 Jules Verne novel \"The Steam House\" (\"La Maison \u00e0 Vapeur\") featured a steam-powered, piloted, mechanical elephant. One of the first appearances of such machines in modern literature was the tripod (or \"fighting-machine\", as they are known in the novel) of H. G. Wells' famous \"The War of the Worlds\" (1897). The novel does not contain a fully detailed description of the tripods' mode of locomotion, but it is hinted at: \"Can you imagine a milking stool tilted and bowled violently along the ground? That was the impression those instant flashes gave. But instead of a milking stool, imagine it a great body of machinery on a tripod stand.\"\n\"\u014cgon Bat\", a \"kamishibai\" that debuted in 1931 (later adapted into an anime in 1967), featured the first piloted humanoid giant robot, , but as an enemy rather than a protagonist. In 1934, Gajo Sakamoto launched on a metal creature that becomes a battle machine.\nThe first humanoid giant robot piloted by the protagonist appeared in the manga in 1948. The manga and anime \"Tetsujin 28-Go\", introduced in 1956, featured a robot, Tetsujin, that was controlled externally by an operator by remote control. The manga and anime \"Astro Boy\", introduced in 1952, with its humanoid robot protagonist, was a key influence on the development of the giant robot genre in Japan. The first anime featuring a giant mecha being piloted by the protagonist from within a cockpit was the Super Robot show \"Mazinger Z\", written by Go Nagai and introduced in 1972. \"Mazinger Z\" introduced the notion of mecha as pilotable war machines, rather than remote-controlled robots. Ken Ishikawa and Go Nagai, later, introduced the concept of 'combination' (), where several units slot together to form a super robot, with \"Getter Robo\" (1974 debut).\nAn early use of mech-like machines outside Japan is found in \"The Invisible Empire\", a \"Federal Men\"'s story arc by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster (serialized 1936 in New Comics #8\u201310). Other examples include the Mexican comic \"Invictus\" by Leonel Guillermo Prieto and Victaleno Le\u00f3n; the Brazilian comic \"Audaz, o demolidor\", by \u00c1lvaro \"Aruom\" Moura and Messias de Mello (1938\u20131949), inspired by \"Invictus\", created for the supplement \"A Gazetinha\" from the newspaper \"A Gazeta\"; Kimball Kinnison's battle suit in E. E. \"Doc\" Smith's \"Lensman\" novel \"Galactic Patrol\" (1950); the French animated film \"The King and the Mockingbird\" (first released 1952), and Robert Heinlein's waldo in his 1942 short story, \"Waldo\" and the Mobile Infantry battle suits in Heinlein's \"Starship Troopers\" (1958).\nA transforming mech can transform between a standard vehicle (such as a fighter plane or transport truck) and a fighting mecha robot. This concept of transforming mecha was pioneered by Japanese mecha designer Sh\u014dji Kawamori in the early 1980s, when he created the Diaclone toy line in 1980 and then the \"Macross\" anime franchise in 1982. In North America, the \"Macross\" franchise was adapted into the \"Robotech\" franchise in 1985, and then the Diaclone toy line was adapted into the \"Transformers\" franchise in 1986. Some of Kawamori's most iconic transforming mecha designs include the VF-1 Valkyrie from the \"Macross\" and \"Robotech\" franchises, and Optimus Prime (called Convoy in Japan) from the \"Transformers\" and \"Diaclone\" franchises.\nIn various media.\nAnime and manga.\nIn Japan, \"robot anime\" (known as \"mecha anime\" outside Japan) is one of the oldest genres in anime. Robot anime is often tied in with toy manufacturers. Large franchises such as \"Gundam\", \"Macross\", \"Transformers\", and \"Zoids\" have hundreds of different model kits.\nThe size of mecha can vary according to the story and concepts involved. Some of them may not be considerably taller than a tank (\"Armored Trooper Votoms\",\"Yatterman\", \"Megazone 23\", \"Code Geass\"), some may be a few stories tall (\"Gundam\", \"Escaflowne\", \"Bismark\", \"Gurren Lagann\"), others can be titan sized as tall as a skyscraper (\"Space Runaway Ideon\", \"Genesis of Aquarion\", \"Science Ninja Team Gatchaman\", \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\"), some are big enough to contain an entire city (\"Macross\"), some the size of a planet (\"Diebuster\"), galaxies (\"Getter Robo\", \"Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann\"), or even as large as universes (\"Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann: Lagann-hen\", \"Demonbane\", \"Transformers: Alternity\").\nThe first titan robots seen were in the 1948 manga and Mitsuteru Yokoyama's 1956 manga \"Tetsujin 28-go\". However, it was not until the advent of Go Nagai's \"Mazinger Z\" that the genre was established. \"Mazinger Z\" innovated by adding the inclusion of futuristic weapons, and the concept of being able to pilot from a cockpit (rather than via remote control, in the case of Tetsujin). According to Go Nagai:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I wanted to create something different, and I thought it would be interesting to have a robot that you could drive, like a car.\"\n\"Mazinger Z\" featured giant robots that were \"piloted by means of a small flying car and command center that docked inside the head.\" It was also a pioneer in die-cast metal toys such as the Chogokin series in Japan and the Shogun Warriors in the U.S., that were (and still are) very popular with children and collectors.\nRobot/mecha anime and manga differ vastly in storytelling and animation quality from title to title, and content ranges from children's shows to ones intended for an older teen or adult audience.\nSome of the first mecha featured in manga and anime were super robots. The super robot genre features superhero-like giant robots that are often one-of-a-kind and the product of an ancient civilization, aliens or a mad genius. These robots are usually piloted by Japanese teenagers via voice command or neural uplink, and are often powered by mystical or exotic energy sources.\nThe later real robot genre features robots that do not have mythical superpowers, but rather use largely conventional, albeit futuristic weapons and power sources, and are often mass-produced on a large scale for use in wars. The real robot genre also tends to feature more complex characters with moral conflicts and personal problems. The genre is therefore aimed primarily at young adults instead of children. \"Mobile Suit Gundam\" (1979) is largely considered the first series to introduce the real robot concept and, along with \"The Super Dimension Fortress Macross\" (1982), would form the basis of what people would later call real robot anime.\nSome robot mecha are capable of transformation (\"Macross\" and \"Zeta Gundam\") or combining to form even bigger ones (\"Beast King GoLion\" and \"Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann\"), the latter called 'combination'. Go Nagai and Ken Ishikawa are often credited with inventing this in 1974 with \"Getter Robo\".\nNot all mecha need to be completely mechanical. Some have biological components with which to interface with their pilots, and some are partially biological themselves, such as in \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\", \"Eureka Seven\", and \"Zoids\".\nMecha based on anime have seen extreme cultural reception across the world. The personification of this popularity can be seen as 1:1-sized \"Mazinger Z\", Tetsujin, and Gundam statues built across the world.\nVideo games.\nMecha are often featured in computer and console video games. Because of their size and fictional power, mecha are quite popular subjects for games, both tabletop and electronic. They have been featured in video games since the 1980s, particularly in vehicular combat and shooter games, including Sesame Japan's side-scrolling shooter game \"Vastar\" in 1983, various \"Gundam\" games such as ' in 1984 and ' in 1986, the run and gun shooters \"Hover Attack\" in 1984 and \"Thexder\" in 1985, and Arsys Software's 3D role-playing shooters \"WiBArm\" in 1986 and \"Star Cruiser\" in 1988. Historically mecha-based games have been more popular in Japan than in other countries.\n\"\" (1995) feature mechs known as \"Variant Armor\" which the player can customize by mixing and matching a selection of limb and weaponry options. The latter game also has the player choose a pilot for the mech from a lineup of characters, though this only impacts the game's story mode and not gameplay.\nReal mecha.\nThere are a few real prototypes of mecha-like vehicles. Currently almost all of these are highly specialized or just for concept purpose, and as such may not see mass production. Most of these experimental projects were made and first presented in East Asia.\nIn the Western world, there are few examples of mecha, however, several machines have been constructed by both companies and private figures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20560", "revid": "49599903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20560", "title": "Macro (computer science)", "text": "Rule for substituting a set input with a set output\nIn computer programming, a macro (short for \"macro instruction\"; from el \" \"\u03bc\u03b1\u03ba\u03c1\u03bf\"-\"\u00a0'long, large') is a rule or pattern that specifies how a certain input should be mapped to a replacement output. Applying a macro to an input is known as macro expansion. \nThe input and output may be a sequence of lexical tokens or characters, or a syntax tree. Character macros are supported in software applications to make it easy to invoke common command sequences. Token and tree macros are supported in some programming languages to enable code reuse or to extend the language, sometimes for domain-specific languages.\nMacros are used to make a sequence of computing instructions available to the programmer as a single program statement, making the programming task less tedious and less error-prone. Thus, they are called \"macros\" because a \"big\" block of code can be expanded from a \"small\" sequence of characters. Macros often allow positional or keyword parameters that dictate what the conditional assembler program generates and have been used to create entire programs or program suites according to such variables as operating system, platform or other factors. The term derives from \"macro instruction\", and such expansions were originally used in generating assembly language code.\nKeyboard and mouse macros.\nKeyboard macros and mouse macros allow short sequences of keystrokes and mouse actions to transform into other, usually more time-consuming, sequences of keystrokes and mouse actions. In this way, frequently used or repetitive sequences of keystrokes and mouse movements can be automated. Separate programs for creating these macros are called macro recorders.\nDuring the 1980s, macro programs\u00a0\u2013 originally SmartKey, then SuperKey, KeyWorks, Prokey\u00a0\u2013 were very popular, first as a means to automatically format screenplays, then for a variety of user-input tasks. These programs were based on the terminate-and-stay-resident mode of operation and applied to all keyboard input, no matter in which context it occurred. They have to some extent fallen into obsolescence following the advent of mouse-driven user interfaces and the availability of keyboard and mouse macros in applications, such as word processors and spreadsheets, making it possible to create application-sensitive keyboard macros.\nKeyboard macros can be used in massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) to perform repetitive, but lucrative tasks, thus accumulating resources. As this is done without human effort, it can skew the economy of the game. For this reason, use of macros is a violation of the TOS or EULA of most MMORPGs, and their administrators spend considerable effort to suppress them.\nApplication macros and scripting.\nKeyboard and mouse macros that are created using an application's built-in macro features are sometimes called application macros. They are created by carrying out the sequence once and letting the application record the actions. An underlying macro programming language, most commonly a scripting language, with direct access to the features of the application may also exist.\nThe programmers' text editor Emacs (short for \"editing macros\") follows this idea to a conclusion. In effect, most of the editor is made of macros. Emacs was originally devised as a set of macros in the editing language TECO; it was later ported to dialects of Lisp.\nAnother programmers' text editor, Vim (a descendant of vi), also has an implementation of keyboard macros. It can record into a register (macro) what a person types on the keyboard and it can be replayed or edited just like VBA macros for Microsoft Office. Vim also has a scripting language called Vimscript to create macros.\nVisual Basic for Applications (VBA) is a programming language included in Microsoft Office from Office 97 through Office 2019 (although it was available in some components of Office prior to Office 97). However, its function has evolved from and replaced the macro languages that were originally included in some of these applications.\nXEDIT, running on the Conversational Monitor System (CMS) component of VM, supports macros written in EXEC, EXEC2 and REXX, and some CMS commands were actually wrappers around XEDIT macros. The Hessling Editor (THE), a partial clone of XEDIT, supports Rexx macros using Regina and Open Object REXX (oorexx). Many common applications, and some on PCs, use Rexx as a scripting language.\nMacro virus.\nVBA has access to most Microsoft Windows system calls and executes when documents are opened. This makes it relatively easy to write computer viruses in VBA, commonly known as macro viruses. In the mid-to-late 1990s, this became one of the most common types of computer virus. However, during the late 1990s and to date, Microsoft has been patching and updating its programs. In addition, current anti-virus programs immediately counteract such attacks.\nParameterized and parameterless macro.\nA parameterized macro is a macro that is able to insert given objects into its expansion. This gives the macro some of the power of a function.\nAs a simple example, in the C programming language, this is a typical macro that is \"not\" a parameterized macro, i.e., a parameterless macro:\n #define PI 3.14159\nThis causes codice_1 to always be replaced with codice_2 wherever it occurs. An example of a parameterized macro, on the other hand, is this:\n #define pred(x) ((x)-1)\nWhat this macro expands to depends on what argument \"x\" is passed to it. Here are some possible expansions:\n pred(2) \u2192 ((2) -1)\n pred(y+2) \u2192 ((y+2) -1)\n pred(f(5)) \u2192 ((f(5))-1)\nParameterized macros are a useful source-level mechanism for performing in-line expansion, but in languages such as C where they use simple textual substitution, they have a number of severe disadvantages over other mechanisms for performing in-line expansion, such as inline functions.\nThe parameterized macros used in languages such as Lisp, PL/I and Scheme, on the other hand, are much more powerful, able to make decisions about what code to produce based on their arguments; thus, they can effectively be used to perform run-time code generation.\nText-substitution macros.\nLanguages such as C and some assembly languages have rudimentary macro systems, implemented as preprocessors to the compiler or assembler. C preprocessor macros work by simple textual substitution at the token, rather than the character level. However, the macro facilities of more sophisticated assemblers, e.g., IBM High Level Assembler (HLASM) can't be implemented with a preprocessor; the code for assembling instructions and data is interspersed with the code for assembling macro invocations.\nA classic use of macros is in the computer typesetting system TeX and its derivatives, where most functionality is based on macros.\nMacroML is an experimental system that seeks to reconcile static typing and macro systems. Nemerle has typed syntax macros, and one productive way to think of these syntax macros is as a multi-stage computation.\nOther examples:\nSome major applications have been written as text macro invoked by other applications, e.g., by XEDIT in CMS.\nEmbeddable languages.\nSome languages, such as PHP, can be embedded in free-format text, or the source code of other languages. The mechanism by which the code fragments are recognised (for instance, being bracketed by codice_3 and codice_4) is similar to a textual macro language, but they are much more powerful, fully featured languages.\nProcedural macros.\nMacros in the PL/I language are written in a subset of PL/I itself: the compiler executes \"preprocessor statements\" at compilation time, and the output of this execution forms part of the code that is compiled. The ability to use a familiar procedural language as the macro language gives power much greater than that of text substitution macros, at the expense of a larger and slower compiler. Macros in PL/I, as well as in many assemblers, may have side effects, e.g., setting variables that other macros can access.\nFrame technology's frame macros have their own command syntax but can also contain text in any language. Each frame is both a generic component in a hierarchy of nested subassemblies, and a procedure for integrating itself with its subassembly frames (a recursive process that resolves integration conflicts in favor of higher level subassemblies). The outputs are custom documents, typically compilable source modules. Frame technology can avoid the proliferation of similar but subtly different components, an issue that has plagued software development since the invention of macros and subroutines.\nMost assembly languages have less powerful procedural macro facilities, for example allowing a block of code to be repeated N times for loop unrolling; but these have a completely different syntax from the actual assembly language.\nSyntactic macros.\nMacro systems\u2014such as the C preprocessor described earlier\u2014that work at the level of lexical tokens cannot preserve the lexical structure reliably.\nSyntactic macro systems work instead at the level of abstract syntax trees, and preserve the lexical structure of the original program. The most widely used implementations of syntactic macro systems are found in Lisp-like languages. These languages are especially suited for this style of macro due to their uniform, parenthesized syntax (known as S-expressions). In particular, uniform syntax makes it easier to determine the invocations of macros. Lisp macros transform the program structure itself, with the full language available to express such transformations. While syntactic macros are often found in Lisp-like languages, they are also available in other languages such as Prolog, Erlang, Dylan, Scala, Nemerle, Rust, Elixir, Nim, Haxe, and Julia. They are also available as third-party extensions to JavaScript and C#.\nEarly Lisp macros.\nBefore Lisp had macros, it had so-called FEXPRs, function-like operators whose inputs were not the values computed by the arguments but rather the syntactic forms of the arguments, and whose output were values to be used in the computation. In other words, FEXPRs were implemented at the same level as EVAL, and provided a window into the meta-evaluation layer. This was generally found to be a difficult model to reason about effectively.\nIn 1963, Timothy Hart proposed adding macros to Lisp 1.5 in AI Memo 57: MACRO Definitions for LISP.\nAnaphoric macros.\nAn anaphoric macro is a type of programming macro that deliberately captures some form supplied to the macro which may be referred to by an anaphor (an expression referring to another). Anaphoric macros first appeared in Paul Graham's On Lisp and their name is a reference to linguistic anaphora\u2014the use of words as a substitute for preceding words.\nHygienic macros.\nIn the mid-eighties, a number of papers introduced the notion of hygienic macro expansion (codice_5), a pattern-based system where the syntactic environments of the macro definition and the macro use are distinct, allowing macro definers and users not to worry about inadvertent variable capture (cf. referential transparency). Hygienic macros have been standardized for Scheme in the R5RS, R6RS, and R7RS standards. A number of competing implementations of hygienic macros exist such as codice_6, codice_7, explicit renaming, and syntactic closures. Both codice_6 and codice_7 have been standardized in the Scheme standards.\nRecently, Racket has combined the notions of hygienic macros with a \"tower of evaluators\", so that the syntactic expansion time of one macro system is the ordinary runtime of another block of code, and showed how to apply interleaved expansion and parsing in a non-parenthesized language.\nA number of languages other than Scheme either implement hygienic macros or implement partially hygienic systems. Examples include Scala, Rust, Elixir, Julia, Dylan, Nim, and Nemerle.\nMacro systems have a range of uses. Being able to choose the order of evaluation (see lazy evaluation and non-strict functions) enables the creation of new syntactic constructs (e.g. control structures) indistinguishable from those built into the language. For instance, in a Lisp dialect that has codice_10 but lacks codice_11, it is possible to define the latter in terms of the former using macros. For example, Scheme has both continuations and hygienic macros, which enables a programmer to design their own control abstractions, such as looping and early exit constructs, without the need to build them into the language.\n Next, macros make it possible to define data languages that are immediately compiled into code, which means that constructs such as state machines can be implemented in a way that is both natural and efficient.\nMacros can also be used to introduce new binding constructs. The most well-known example is the transformation of codice_12 into the application of a function to a set of arguments.\nApplications.\nFelleisen conjectures that these three categories make up the primary legitimate uses of macros in such a system. Others have proposed alternative uses of macros, such as anaphoric macros in macro systems that are unhygienic or allow selective unhygienic transformation.\nThe interaction of macros and other language features has been a productive area of research. For example, components and modules are useful for large-scale programming, but the interaction of macros and these other constructs must be defined for their use together. Module and component-systems that can interact with macros have been proposed for Scheme and other languages with macros. For example, the Racket language extends the notion of a macro system to a syntactic tower, where macros can be written in languages including macros, using hygiene to ensure that syntactic layers are distinct and allowing modules to export macros to other modules.\nMacros for machine-independent software.\nMacros are normally used to map a short string (macro invocation) to a longer sequence of instructions. Another, less common, use of macros is to do the reverse: to map a sequence of instructions to a macro string. This was the approach taken by the STAGE2 Mobile Programming System, which used a rudimentary macro compiler (called SIMCMP) to map the specific instruction set of a given computer into \"machine-independent\" macros. Applications (notably compilers) written in these machine-independent macros can then be run without change on any computer equipped with the rudimentary macro compiler. The first application run in such a context is a more sophisticated and powerful macro compiler, written in the machine-independent macro language. This macro compiler is applied to itself, in a bootstrap fashion, to produce a compiled and much more efficient version of itself. The advantage of this approach is that complex applications can be ported from one computer to a very different computer with very little effort (for each target machine architecture, just the writing of the rudimentary macro compiler). The advent of modern programming languages, notably C, for which compilers are available on virtually all computers, has rendered such an approach superfluous. This was, however, one of the first instances (if not the first) of compiler bootstrapping.\nAssembly language.\nWhile \"macro instructions\" can be defined by a programmer for any set of native assembler program instructions, typically macros are associated with macro libraries delivered with the operating system allowing access to operating system functions such as\nIn older operating systems such as those used on IBM mainframes, full operating system functionality was only available to assembler language programs, not to high level language programs (unless assembly language subroutines were used, of course), as the standard macro instructions did not always have counterparts in routines available to high-level languages.\nHistory.\nIn the mid-1950s, when assembly language programming was the main way to program a computer, macro instruction features were developed to reduce source code (by generating multiple assembly statements from each macro instruction) and to enforce coding conventions (e.g. specifying input/output commands in standard ways). A macro instruction embedded in the otherwise assembly source code would be processed by a macro compiler, a preprocessor to the assembler, to replace the macro with one or more assembly instructions. The resulting code, pure assembly, would be translated to machine code by the assembler.\nTwo of the earliest programming installations to develop macro languages for the IBM 705 computer were at Dow Chemical Corp. in Delaware and the Air Material Command, Ballistics Missile Logistics Office in California. \nSome consider macro instructions as an intermediate step between assembly language programming and the high-level programming languages that followed, such as FORTRAN and COBOL. \nBy the late 1950s the macro language was followed by the Macro Assemblers. This was a combination of both where one program served both functions, that of a macro pre-processor and an assembler in the same package. Early examples are FORTRAN Assembly Program (FAP) and Macro Assembly Program (IBMAP) on the IBM 709, 7094, 7040 and 7044, and Autocoder on the 7070/7072/7074.\nIn 1959, Douglas E. Eastwood and Douglas McIlroy of Bell Labs introduced conditional and recursive macros into the popular SAP assembler, creating what is known as Macro SAP. McIlroy's 1960 paper was seminal in the area of extending any (including high-level) programming languages through macro processors.\nMacro Assemblers allowed assembly language programmers to implement their own macro-language and allowed limited portability of code between two machines running the same CPU but different operating systems, for example, early versions of MS-DOS and CP/M-86. The macro library would need to be written for each target machine but not the overall assembly language program. Note that more powerful macro assemblers allowed use of conditional assembly constructs in macro instructions that could generate different code on different machines or different operating systems, reducing the need for multiple libraries.\nIn the 1980s and early 1990s, desktop PCs were only running at a few MHz and assembly language routines were commonly used to speed up programs written in C, Fortran, Pascal and others. These languages, at the time, used different calling conventions. Macros could be used to interface routines written in assembly language to the front end of applications written in almost any language. Again, the basic assembly language code remained the same, only the macro libraries needed to be written for each target language.\nIn modern operating systems such as Unix and its derivatives, operating system access is provided through subroutines, usually provided by dynamic libraries. High-level languages such as C offer comprehensive access to operating system functions, obviating the need for assembler language programs for such functionality.\nMoreover, standard libraries of several newer programming languages, such as Go, actively discourage the use of syscalls in favor of platform-agnostic libraries as well if not necessary, to improve portability and security.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20561", "revid": "34327716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20561", "title": "Malleus Maleficarum", "text": "Treatise on the prosecution of witches, 1486\nThe Malleus Maleficarum, usually translated as the Hammer of Witches, is the best known treatise about witchcraft. It was written by the German Catholic clergyman Heinrich Kramer (under his Latinized name \"Henricus Institor\") and first published in the German city of Speyer in 1486. Some characterize it as the compendium of preexisting demonological literature of the 15th century.\nKramer presented his text as an official position of the Roman Catholic Church. The book was condemned by top theologians of the Inquisition at the Faculty of Cologne for recommending illegal procedures, and for being inconsistent with existing Catholic doctrines of demonology. However, Kramer received praise for his work by Pope Innocent VIII in the papal bull Summis desiderantes affectibus. Kramer was never removed and even enjoyed considerable prestige thereafter.\nThe \"Malleus\" classifies sorcery as heresy, a severe crime at the time, and recommends that secular courts prosecute it as such. The \"Malleus\" suggests torture to get confessions and death as the only certain way to end the \"evils of witchcraft.\" When it was published, heretics were often sentenced to be burned alive at the stake and the \"Malleus\" suggested the same for \"witches.\" Despite, or perhaps because of, being condemned by some members of the church, the \"Malleus\" was very popular.\nJacob Sprenger was credited as a coauthor from 1519 onward, although his role in the text and authorial relationship with Kramer is subject to debate.\nThe book was later revived by royal courts during the Renaissance, and contributed to the increasingly brutal prosecution of witchcraft during the 16th and 17th centuries.\nBackground.\nWitchcraft had long been forbidden by the Church, whose viewpoint on the subject was explained in the \"Canon Episcopi\" written in about AD 900. It stated that witchcraft and magic were delusions and that those who believed in such things \"had been seduced by the Devil in dreams and visions\". However, in the same period supernatural intervention was accepted in European Christian culture in the form of ordeals that were later also used during witch trials.\nIt is an element of doctrine that demons may be cast out by appropriate sacramental exorcisms. In the \"Malleus\", exorcism is, for example, one of the five ways to overcome the attacks of incubi. Prayer and transubstantiation are traditionally excluded from the category of magical rites.\nIn 1484 clergyman Heinrich Kramer made one of the first attempts at prosecuting alleged witches in the Tyrol region. It was not a success: he was expelled from the city of Innsbruck and dismissed by the local bishop as \"senile and crazy\". According to Diarmaid MacCulloch, writing the book was Kramer's act of self-justification and revenge. Ankarloo and Clark claim that Kramer's purpose in writing the book was to explain his own views on witchcraft, systematically refute arguments claiming that witchcraft did not exist, discredit those who expressed skepticism about its reality, claim that those who practised witchcraft were more often women than men, and to convince magistrates to use Kramer's recommended procedures for finding and convicting witches.\nSome scholars have suggested that following the failed efforts in Tyrol, Kramer requested explicit authority from the Pope to prosecute witchcraft. Kramer received a papal bull \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\" in 1484. It gave full papal approval for the Inquisition to prosecute what was deemed to be witchcraft in general and also gave individual authorizations to Kramer and Dominican Friar Jacob Sprenger specifically. Other scholars have disputed the idea that Sprenger was working with Kramer, arguing that the evidence shows that Sprenger was actually a persistent opponent of Kramer, even going so far as to ban him from Dominican convents within Sprenger's jurisdiction while also banning him from preaching. In the words of Wolfgang Behringer:\nSprenger had tried to suppress Kramer's activities in every possible way. He forbade the convents of his province to host him, he forbade Kramer to preach, and even tried to interfere directly in the affairs of Kramer's S\u00e9l\u00e9stat convent... The same day Sprenger became successor to Jacob Strubach as provincial superior (October 19, 1487), he obtained permission from his general, Joaquino Turriani, to lash out \"adversus m[agistrum] Henricum Institoris inquisitorem\" (\"English\": against Master Heinrich Kramer, inquisitor).\nThe preface also includes an alleged unanimous approbation from the University of Cologne's Faculty of Theology. Nevertheless, many historians have argued that it is well established by sources outside the \"Malleus\" that the university's theology faculty condemned the book for unethical procedures and for contradicting Catholic theology on a number of important points: \"just for good measure Institoris forged a document granting their apparently unanimous approbation.\"\nThe book became the handbook for secular courts throughout Renaissance Europe, but was not used by the Inquisition, which \"denied any authority to the \"Malleus\"\" in the words of historian Wolfgang Behringer.\nIn modern times, the book has often been viewed as a typical inquisitorial manual, a perception that many historians have refuted. According to Jenny Gibbons:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in the 1970s, when feminist and Neo-Pagan authors turned their attention to the witch trials, the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" (\"Hammer of Witches\") was the only manual readily available in translation. Authors naively assumed that the book painted an accurate picture of how the Inquisition tried witches. Heinrich Kramer, the text's demented author, was held up as a typical inquisitor. His rather stunning sexual preoccupations were presented as the Church's \"official\" position on witchcraft. Actually the Inquisition immediately rejected the legal procedures Kramer recommended and censured the inquisitor himself just a few years after the Malleus was published. Secular courts, not inquisitorial ones, resorted to the \"Malleus\".\nBefore 1400 it was rare for anyone to be prosecuted for witchcraft, but the increasingly common prosecution of heresy and failure to fully defeat these heretics paved the way for later criminal prosecution of witchcraft. By the 15th century belief in witches was widely accepted in European society. Previously, those convicted of witchcraft typically suffered penalties no more harsh than public penances such as a day in the stocks, but their prosecution became more brutal following the publication of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\", as witchcraft became widely accepted as a real and dangerous phenomenon. The most severe prosecutions took place between the years 1560 and 1630, largely ending in Europe around 1780.\nParticularly in the 16th and 17th centuries an intense debate on the nature of witches preoccupied demonologists across Europe and they published many printed sermons, books and tracts. The Catholic Church played an important role in shaping of debate on demonology, but the discourse was not much affected by the Reformation. Martin Luther was also convinced about the reality and evil of witches, and facilitated development of Protestant demonology.\nCatholic and Protestant demonologies were similar in their basic beliefs about witches and most writers agreed on the severity of the crime of witchcraft. It was accepted by both Catholic and Protestant legislatures and witch-hunting was undeniably sponsored by both Protestant and Catholic governments. Witches became heretics to Christianity and witchcraft became the greatest of crimes and sins. Within continental and Roman Law witchcraft was the \"crimen exceptum\", a crime so foul that all normal legal procedures were superseded.\nDuring the Age of Enlightenment, belief in the powers of witches to harm began to die out in the West. For the post-Enlightenment Christians, the disbelief was based on a belief in rationalism and empiricism.\nSummary of contents.\nThe \"Malleus Maleficarum\" consists of the following parts:\nJustification (\"Apologia auctoris\").\nIn this part it is briefly explained that prevalence of sorcery which is a method of Satan's final assault motivated authors to write the \"Malleus Maleficarum\":\n[...] [ Lucifer ] attacks through these heresies at that time in particular, when the evening of the world declines towards its setting and the evil of men swells up, since he knows in great anger, as John bears witness in the Book of Apocalypse [12:12], that he has little time remaining. Hence, he has also caused a certain unusual heretical perversity to grow up in the land of the Lord \u2013 a Heresy, I say, of Sorceresses, since it is to be designated by the particular sex over which he is known to have power. [...] In the midst of these evils, we Inquisitors, Jacobus Sprenger together with the very dear associate [Institoris] delegated by the Apostolic See for the extermination of so destructive a heresy [...] we will bring everything to the desired conclusion. [...] naming the treatise the \"Hammer for Sorceresses,\" we are undertaking the task of compiling the work for an associate [presumably, an ecclesiastic] [...]\nPapal bull.\nCopies of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" contain a reproduction of a papal bull known as \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\" that is addressed to Heinrich Institoris and Jakob Sprenger. According to it, Pope Innocent VIII acknowledges that sorceresses are real and harmful through their involvement in the acts of Satan.\nAccording to the date on the document, the papal bull had been issued in 1484, two years before the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" was finished. Therefore, it is not an endorsement of a specific final text of the \"Malleus\". Instead, its inclusion implicitly legitimizes the handbook by providing general confirmation of the reality of witchcraft and full authority to Sprenger and Institoris in their preachings and proceedings:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And they shall also have full and entire liberty to propound and preach to the faithful Word of God, as often as it shall seem to them fitting and proper, in each and all of the parish churches in the said provinces, and to do all things necessary and suitable under the aforesaid circumstances, and likewise freely and fully to carry them out.\u2014\u200a\nApprobation.\nThis part of the \"Malleus\" is titled \"The Approbation of The Following Treatise and The Signatures Thereunto of The Doctors of The Illustrious University of Cologne Follows in The Form of A Public Document\" and contains unanimous approval of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" by all the Doctors of the Theological Faculty of the University of Cologne signed by them personally. The proceedings are attested by notary public Arnold Kolich of Euskirchen, a sworn cleric of Cologne with inclusion of confirmatory testimony by present witnesses Johannes Vorda of Mecheln a sworn beadle, Nicholas Cuper de Venrath the sworn notary of Curia of Cologne and Christian Wintzen of Euskirchen a cleric of the Diocese of Cologne.\nText of approbation mentions that during proceedings Institoris had a letter from Maximilian, the newly crowned King of the Romans and son of Emperor Frederick III, which is summarized in the approbation: \"[... Maximilian I] takes these Inquisitors under his complete protection, ordering and commanding each and every subject of the Roman Empire to render all favor and assistance to these Inquisitors and otherwise to act in the manner that is more fully contained and included in the letter.\" Apparently, in early December 1486, Kramer actually went to Brussels, the Burgundian capital, hoping to obtain a privilege from the future Emperor (Kramer did not dare to involve Frederick III, whom he had offended previously), but the answer must have been so unfavorable that it could not be inserted into the foreword.\nThe approbation consists of a preamble and is followed by a resolution in two parts.\nPreamble.\nIt begins with a general statement about circumstances: IN THE NAME OF Our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Let all those who will read, see or hear the present public document know that in the year since the Birth of Our Lord 1487, in the fifth indiction, on Saturday, the nineteenth day of May, at five in the afternoon or thereabouts, in the third year of the Pontificate of Our Lord, the Most Holy Father in Christ, Lord Innocent VIII, by Divine Providence Pope, in the presence of my notary public and of the witnesses written below who had been specifically summoned and asked for this purpose, the venerable and religious Brother Henricus Institoris, Professor of Holy Theology and member of the Order of Preachers, who was appointed as Inquisitor into Heretical Depravity by the Holy See along with his colleague, the venerable and religious Brother Jacobus Sprenger, also a Professor of Holy Theology and Prior of the Convent of Preachers in Cologne[...]\nThen, signatories complain that \"Some curates of souls and preachers of the Word of God feel no shame at claiming and affirming in their sermons to the congregation that sorceresses do not exist\" and notice that the intention of the authors of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" is not primarily to alleviate this ignorance but rather \"toil to exterminate the sorceresses by explaining the appropriate methods of sentencing and punishing them in accordance with the text of the aforementioned Bull and the regulations of the Holy Canons, thereby achieving their extermination\"; finally, signatories explain why they are providing their expertise: It is consonant with reason that those things that are done on behalf of the common good should also be confirmed through the common approval of the Doctors, and therefore, lest the aforementioned poorly educated curates and preachers think, in their ignorance of Holy Scripture, that the aforesaid treatise, which was composed in the manner mentioned above, is poorly supported by the determinations and pronouncements of the Doctors, they offered it for examination and comparison against Scripture to the illustrious University of Cologne or rather to certain Professors of Holy Theology, in order that if any things were found to be worthy of censure or incompatible with the Catholic Truth, they should be refuted by the judgment of those Professors, and that those things found to be compatible with the Catholic Truth should be approved. This was in fact done in the ways written below.\nResolution.\nThere are two signings, sometimes also referenced as two approbations. The difference is that four signatories of the first part testify that they have examined the treatises and endorse its text while in the second signing signatories do not assert that they have read the treatises but nonetheless express approval by explicitly restating some general propositions of the treatises and endorsing them instead.\nIn the first part, the opinion of a \"temporary Dean of the Faculty of Holy Theology at Cologne\" namely Lambertus de Monte of 's-Heerenberg is expressed and then professors Jacobus Straelen of Noetlinck, Andreas Schermer of Ochsenfurt and Master Thoma de Scotia testify that they agree with his opinion. The following is an excerpt from the opinion: [I proclaim] that this three part treatise, which has been examined by me and carefully compared against Scripture with regard to its first two parts, contains nothing, in my humble judgment at least, that is contrary to the pronouncements of the non-erroneous philosophers, or against the Truth of the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Faith, or against the determinations of the Doctors approved or admitted by the Holy Church, and that the third part should certainly be upheld and approved in regard to the punishments of those heretics whom it treats, in that it does not contradict Holy Canons, and also because of the personal experiences described in this treatise, which are believed to be true because of the reputation of such great men, particularly since they are inquisitors. It should be ensured that this treatise will become known to learned and zealous men, who will then, on the basis of it, provide various healthy and appropriate advice for the extermination of sorceresses [...]\nThe second part is signed by those from the first signing and in addition by professors Ulrich Kridweiss of Esslingen, Konrad Vorn of Kampen, Cornelius Pays of Breda and Dietrich of Balveren (Bummel). Signatories attest that: 1) The Masters of Holy Theology written below commend the Inquisitors into Heretical Depravity appointed by the authority of the Apostolic See in conformity with the Canons, and urge that they think it right to carry out their office zealously.&lt;br&gt;2) The proposition that acts of sorcery can happen with God's permission through sorcerers or sorceresses when the Devil works with them is not contrary to the Catholic Faith, but consonant with the statements of Holy Scripture. Indeed, according to the pronouncements of the Holy Doctors it is necessary to admit that such acts can sometimes happen.&lt;br&gt;3) It is therefore erroneous to preach that acts of sorcery cannot happen, because in this way preachers impede, to the extent that they can, the pious work of the inquisitors, to the prejudice of the salvation of souls. Nonetheless, secrets that are heard at any time by inquisitors should not be revealed to everyone.&lt;br&gt;4) All princes and Catholics should be urged to think it right to assist such pious vows on the part of the Inquisitors in defense of the Holy Catholic Faith.\nMain text.\nThe \"Malleus Maleficarum\" asserts that three elements are necessary for witchcraft: the evil intentions of the witch, the help of the Devil, and the permission of God. The treatise is divided into three sections. The first section is aimed at clergy and tries to refute critics who deny the reality of witchcraft, thereby hindering its prosecution.\nThe second section describes the actual forms of witchcraft and its remedies. The third section is to assist judges confronting and combating witchcraft, and to aid the inquisitors by removing the burden from them. Each of the three sections has the prevailing themes of what is witchcraft and who is a witch.\nSection I.\nSection I examines the concept of witchcraft theoretically, from the point of view of natural philosophy and theology. Specifically it addresses the question of whether witchcraft is a real phenomenon or imaginary, perhaps \"deluding phantasms of the devil, or simply the fantasies of overwrought human minds\". The conclusion drawn is that witchcraft must be real because the Devil is real. Witches entered into a pact with Satan to allow them the power to perform harmful magical acts, thus establishing an essential link between witches and the Devil.\nSection II.\nMatters of practice and actual cases are discussed, and the powers of witches and their recruitment strategies. It states that it is mostly witches, as opposed to the Devil, who do the recruiting, by making something go wrong in the life of a respectable matron that makes her consult the knowledge of a witch, or by introducing young maidens to tempting young devils. It details how witches cast spells, and remedies that can be taken to prevent witchcraft, or help those who have been affected by it.\nSection III.\nSection III is the legal part of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" that describes how to prosecute a witch. The arguments are clearly laid for the lay magistrates prosecuting witches. The section offers a step-by-step guide to the conduct of a witch trial, from the method of initiating the process and assembling accusations, to the interrogation (including torture) of witnesses, and the formal charging of the accused. Women who did not cry during their trial were automatically believed to be witches.\nTheological foundations and major themes.\nJakob Sprenger was an appointed inquisitor for the Rhineland, theology professor and a dean at the University of Cologne in Germany. Heinrich Kraemer (Institoris) was an appointed inquisitor of south Germany, a professor of theology at the University of Salzburg, the leading demonologist and witch-hunter in late medieval Germany. Pope Innocent VIII in the papal bull \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\" refers to them both as \"beloved sons\" and \"professors of theology\"; also authorizes them to extirpate witchcraft.\nThis text codified the folklore and beliefs of the Alpine peasants as \u2018witchcraft\u2019 and was conceptually dedicated to the implementation of Exodus 22:18: \"You shall not permit a sorceress to live.\u201dKramer and Sprenger were the first to raise harmful sorcery to the criminal status of heresy. [...] If harmful sorcery is a crime on the order of heresy, Kramer and Sprenger argue, then the secular judges who prosecute it must do so with the same vigor as would the \"Inquisition\" in prosecuting a heretic. The \"Malleus\" urges them to adopt torture, leading questions, the admission of denunciation as valid evidence, and other Inquisitorial practices to achieve swift results. Moreover, the authors insist that the death penalty for convicted witches is the only sure remedy against witchcraft. They maintain that the lesser penalty of banishment prescribed by \"Canon Episcopi\" for those convicted of harmful sorcery does not apply to the new breed of witches, whose unprecedented evil justifies capital punishment.\nThe first section of the book's main text is written using the scholastic methodology of Thomas Aquinas characterized by a mode of \"disputed questions\" most notably used in his \"Summa Theologica\". It was a standard mode of argumentation in scholastic discourse with a long tradition. Most of the citations in the \"Malleus\" come from multiple works of Aquinas, a highly influential author in theology. Aquinas is a main source for Section I but is cited in all sections; \"Formicarius\" by Johannes Nider is the important source for Section II, and \"Directorium Inquisitorum\" by Spanish inquisitor Nicholas Eymeric is a crucial source for Section III.\nImportantly, Kramer and Sprenger were convinced that God would never permit an innocent person to be convicted of witchcraft.\nTorture and confessions.\nThe \"Malleus\" recommended not only torture but also deception in order to obtain confessions: \"And when the implements of torture have been prepared, the judge, both in person and through other good men zealous in the faith, tries to persuade the prisoner to confess the truth freely; but, if he will not confess, he bid attendants make the prisoner fast to the strappado or some other implement of torture. The attendants obey forthwith, yet with feigned agitation. Then, at the prayer of some of those present, the prisoner is loosed again and is taken aside and once more persuaded to confess, being led to believe that he will in that case not be put to death.\" \nAll confessions acquired with the use of torture had to be confirmed: \"And note that, if he confesses under the torture, he must afterward be conducted to another place, that he may confirm it and certify that it was not due alone to the force of the torture.\" \nHowever if there was no confirmation, torture could not be repeated, but it was allowed to continue at a specified day: \"But, if the prisoner will not confess the truth satisfactorily, other sorts of tortures must be placed before him, with the statement that unless he will confess the truth, he must endure these also. But, if not even thus he can be brought into terror and to the truth, then the next day or the next but one is to be set for a continuation of the tortures \u2013 not a repetition, for it must not be repeated unless new evidences produced. The judge must then address to the prisoners the following sentence: We, the judge, etc., do assign to you, such and such a day for the continuation of the tortures, that from your own mouth the truth may be heard, and that the whole may be recorded by the notary.\"\nVictims.\nThe treatise describes how women and men become inclined to practice witchcraft. The text argues that women are more susceptible to demonic temptations through the manifold weaknesses of their sex. It was believed that they were weaker in faith and more carnal than men. Michael Bailey claims that most of the women accused as witches had strong personalities and were known to defy convention by overstepping the lines of proper female decorum. After the publication of the \"Malleus\", it seems as though about three quarters of those individuals prosecuted as witches were women. \nWitches were usually female. The reasons for this is the suggestion that women are \"prone to believing and because the demon basically seeks to corrupt the faith, he assails them in particular.\" They also have a \"temperament towards flux\" and \"loose tongues\". They \"are defective in all the powers of both soul and body\" and are stated to be more lustful than men.\nThe major reason is that at the foundation of sorcery is denial of faith and \"woman, therefore, is evil as a result of nature because she doubts more quickly in the faith\". Men could be witches, but were considered rarer, and the reasons were also different. The most common form of male witch mentioned in the book is the sorcerer-archer. The book is rather unclear, but the impetus behind male witches seems to come more from desire for power than from disbelief or lust, as it claims is the case for female witches.\nIndeed, the very title of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" is feminine, alluding to the idea that it was women who were the villains. Otherwise, it would be the \"Malleus Maleficorum\" (the masculine form of the Latin noun \"maleficus\" or \"malefica,\" 'witch'). In Latin, the feminine \"maleficarum\" would only be used for women, while the masculine \"maleficorum\" could be used for men alone or for both sexes if together. The \"Malleus Maleficarum\" accuses witches of infanticide, cannibalism and casting evil spells to harm their enemies as well as having the power to steal a man's penis. It goes on to give accounts of witches committing these crimes.\nArguments favoring discrimination against women are explicit in the handbook. Those arguments are not novel but constitute a selection from the long tradition of Western misogynist writings. However, according to German literature expert Sigrid Brauner, they are combined to produce new meanings and result in a comprehensive theory. It mixes elements borrowed from \"Formicarius\" (1435), \"Praeceptorium divinae legis\" (1474) and \"Lectiones super ecclesiastes\" (1380).Kramer and Sprenger develop a powerful sex-specific theory of witchcraft based on a hierarchical and dualistic view of the world. Everything exists in pairs of opposites: God and Satan, Mary and Eve, and men (or virgins) and women. Each positive principle in a pair is delineated by its negative pole. Perfection is defined not as the integration or preservation of opposites, but rather as the extermination of the negative element in a polar pair. Because women are the negative counterpart to men, they corrupt male perfection through witchcraft and must be destroyed.\nAlthough authors give many examples of male witchery in the second part of the handbook, those witchcraft trials that are independently confirmed and that were led by Kramer himself are related to persecution of women almost exclusively. They took place in Ravensburg near Constance (1484) and Innsbruck (since 1485). According to Brauner, trial records confirm that Kramer believed that women are by nature corrupt and evil. His position was in harmony with the scholastic theory at the time.\nIn contrast, Sprenger never conducted a witch trial though he was consulted in a few cases. Kramer and Sprenger use a metaphor of a world turned upside down by women of which concubines are the most wicked, followed by midwives and then by wives who dominate their husbands. Authors warn of imminent arrival of the apocalypse foretold in the Bible and that men risk bewitchment that leads to impotence and sensation of castration. Brauner explains authors' prescription on how a woman can avoid becoming a witch: According to the \"Malleus\", the only way a woman can avoid succumbing to her passions \u2013 and becoming a witch \u2013 is to embrace a life of devout chastity in a religious retreat. But the monastic life is reserved to the spiritually gifted few. Therefore, most women are doomed to become witches, who cannot be redeemed; and the only recourse open to the authorities is to ferret out and exterminate all witches.\nElaborated concept of witchcraft.\nThe strixology of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" is characterized by a very specific conception of what a witch is, one that differs dramatically from earlier times. The terminology of carries an explicit condemnation absent in other words referring to women with supernatural powers. The conception of witches and of magic by extension is one of evil. It differs from earlier conceptions of witchcraft that were much more generalized.\nThis is the point in history where \"witchcraft constituted an independent antireligion\". The witch lost her powerful position vis-a-vis the deities; the ability to force the deities to comply with her wishes was replaced by a total subordination to the devil. In short, \"[t]he witch became Satan's puppet.\" This conception of witches was \"part of a conception of magic that is termed by scholars as 'Satanism' or 'diabolism'\". In this conception, a witch was a member of \"a malevolent society presided over by Satan himself and dedicated to the infliction of malevolent acts of sorcery (\"maleficia\") on others.\"\nAccording to Mackay, this concept of sorcery is characterized by the conviction that those guilty engage in six activities: \nDemonology.\nIn the \"Malleus\" demons are the ones who tempt humans to sorcery and are the main figures in the witches' vows. They interact with witches, usually sexually. The book claims that it is normal for all witches \"to perform filthy carnal acts with demons.\" This is a major part of human-demon interaction and demons do it \"not for the sake of pleasure, but for the sake of corrupting.\"\nIt is worth noting that not all demons do such things. The book claims that \"the nobility of their nature causes certain demons to balk at committing certain actions and filthy deeds.\" Though the work never gives a list of names or types of demons, like some demonological texts or spellbooks of the era, such as the \"Liber Juratus\", it does indicate different types of demons. For example, it devotes large sections to incubi and succubi and questions regarding their roles in pregnancies, the submission of witches to incubi, and protections against them.\nApprobation and authorship.\nIn 1519, a new author was added, Jacob Sprenger. Historians have questioned why, since this was 33 years after the book's first printing, and 24 years after Sprenger died.\nIn the 19th century, Joseph Hansen, a historian who was appalled by the witch-craze and those who carried it out, first proposed that coauthorship by Sprenger was a falsehood presented by Institoris (Kramer) and that approbation is \"partially\" a forgery.\nChristopher Mackay, author of the modern academic translation of the \"Malleus\" into English offers rebuttals to arguments of proponents of this theory and in an interview gives an accessible summary:\nThe argument was made in the nineteenth century by a scholar hostile to what the Malleus stood for that the approbation was a forgery by Institoris and that Sprenger had nothing to do with the composition. The evidence for this is in my view very tenuous (and the main argument is clearly invalid). Nonetheless, once the argument was put forward, it took on a life of its own, and people continue to advance arguments in favor of the idea that Sprenger's involvement was a falsification perpetrated by Institoris, despite the fact that this argument was vitiated from the start.\nIn addition, Mackay points out that allegations raised in support of this theory that supposedly two of the signatories had not in fact signed the approbation are unsubstantiated.\nA similar response is offered by the author of the first translation of the \"Malleus\" into English Montague Summers. In his introduction, he ignores completely the theory that joint authorship or approbation could be a mystification. Nonetheless, he mentions briefly that it was questioned whether Kramer or Sprenger contributed more to the work. He comments that \"in the case of such a close collaboration any such inquiry seems singularly superfluous and nugatory\".\nBroedel, a historian who writes that it is likely that Sprenger's contribution was minimal, nonetheless says that \"Sprenger certainly wrote the \"Apologia auctoris\" which prefaces the \"Malleus\" and agreed to be a coauthor.\n\"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" and \"The Encyclopedia of Witches, Witchcraft and Wicca\" ignore completely Hansen's theory and list Sprenger and Kramer as co-authors.\nWolfgang Behringer argues that Sprenger's name was only added as an author beginning in 1519, thirty-three years after the book was first published and decades after Sprenger's own death. One of Sprenger's friends who was still alive denounced the addition of Sprenger's name as a forgery, stating that Sprenger had nothing to do with the book.\nMany historians have also pointed out that Sprenger's actual views in his confirmed writings are often the opposite of the views in the \"Malleus\", and Sprenger was unlikely to have been a colleague of Kramer since Sprenger in fact banned Kramer from preaching and entering Dominican convents within his jurisdiction, and spoke out against him on many occasions.\nThe alleged approval from the theologians at Cologne, which Kramer included in the \"Malleus\" with a list of names of theologians who he claimed approved the book, has also been questioned by many historians, since in 1490 the clergy at Cologne condemned the book and at least two of the clergy listed by Kramer, Thomas de Scotia and Johann von W\u00f6rde, publicly denied having approved the \"Malleus\".\nJacob Sprenger's name was added as an author beginning in 1519, 33 years after the book's first publication and 24 years after Sprenger's death.\nJenny Gibbons, a Neo-Pagan and a historian, writes: \"Actually the Inquisition immediately rejected the legal procedures Kramer recommended and censured the inquisitor himself just a few years after the \"Malleus\" was published. Secular courts, not inquisitorial ones, resorted to the \"Malleus\"\".\nThe preface also includes an allegedly unanimous approbation from the University of Cologne's Faculty of Theology. Nevertheless, many historians have argued that it is well established by sources outside the \"Malleus\" that the university's theology faculty condemned the book for unethical procedures and for contradicting Catholic theology on a number of important points: \"just for good measure Institoris forged a document granting their apparently unanimous approbation.\"\nAuthors' whereabouts and circumstances.\nPreceding publication.\nIn 1484 Heinrich Kramer had made one of the first attempts at prosecuting alleged witches in the Tyrol region. It was not a success and he was asked to leave the city of Innsbruck. According to Diarmaid MacCulloch, writing the book was Kramer's act of self-justification and revenge. Ankarloo and Clark claim that Kramer's purpose in writing the book was to explain his own views on witchcraft, systematically refute arguments claiming that witchcraft does not exist, discredit those who expressed skepticism about its reality, claim that those who practiced witchcraft were more often women than men, and to convince magistrates to use Kramer's recommended procedures for finding and convicting witches.\nKramer wrote the \"Malleus\" following his expulsion from Innsbruck by the local bishop, due to charges of illegal behavior against Kramer himself, and because of Kramer's obsession with the sexual habits of one of the accused, Helena Scheuberin, which led the other tribunal members to suspend the trial.\nKramer received a papal bull, \"Summis desiderantes affectibus\", in 1484. It directed Bishop of Strasburg (then Albert of Palatinate-Mosbach) to accept the authority of Heinrich Kramer as an Inquisitor, although the motivation of the papal bull was likely political. The \"Malleus Maleficarum\" was finished in 1486 and the papal bull was included as part of its preface, implying papal approval for the work.\nPost-publication.\nKramer was intensely writing and preaching until his death in Bohemia in 1505. He was asked by Nuremberg council to provide expert consultation on the procedure of witch trial in 1491. His prestige was not fading. In 1495 he was summoned by the Master General of the Order, Joaquin de Torres, O.P. to Venice and gave very popular public lectures and disputations. They were worthy of presence and patronage of Patriarch of Venice.\nHe also wrote treatises \"Several Discourses and Various Sermons upon the Most Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist\" (Nuremberg, 1496); \"A Tract Confuting the Errors of Master Antonio degli Roselli\" (Venice, 1499); followed by \"The Shield of Defence of the Holy Roman Church Against the Picards and Waldenses\" which were quoted by many authors. He was appointed as papal nuncio and his assignment as inquisitor was changed to Bohemia and Moravia by Pope Alexander VI in 1500.\nSprenger continued his work as Inquisitor Extraordinary for the Provinces of Mainz, Tr\u00e8ves and Cologne. Later, he was elected Provincial Superior of the whole German Province (in 1488). He had enormous responsibilities. He received a letter from the pope praising his enthusiasm and energy in 1495.\nSummers observes that 17th-century \"Dominican chroniclers, such as Qu\u00e9tif and \u00c9chard, number Kramer and Sprenger among the glories and heroes of their Order\".\nPopularity and influence.\nSex-specific theory developed in the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" laid the foundations for widespread consensus in early modern Germany on the evil nature of witches as women. Later works on witchcraft have not agreed entirely with the \"Malleus\" but none of them challenged the view that women were more inclined to be witches than men. It was accepted so that very few authors saw the need to explain why witches are women. Those who did, attributed female witchery to the weakness of body and mind (the old medieval explanation) and a few to female sexuality.\nSome authors argue that the book's publication was not as influential as earlier authors believed. According to MacCulloch, the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" was one of several key factors contributing to the witch craze, along with popular superstition, and tensions created by the Reformation. However, according to \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The \"Malleus\" went through 28 editions between 1486 and 1600 and was accepted by Roman Catholics and Protestants alike as an authoritative source of information concerning Satanism and as a guide to Christian defence [against acts of Satan].\u2014\u200a\nFactors stimulating widespread use.\nThe \"Malleus Maleficarum\" was able to spread throughout Europe rapidly in the late 15th and at the beginning of the 16th century due to the innovation of the printing press in the middle of the 15th century by Johannes Gutenberg. The invention of printing some thirty years before the first publication of the \"Malleus Maleficarum\" instigated the fervor of witch hunting, and, in the words of Russell, \"the swift propagation of the witch hysteria by the press was the first evidence that Gutenberg had not liberated man from original sin.\"\nThe late 15th century was also a period of religious turmoil. The \"Malleus Maleficarum\" and the witch craze that ensued took advantage of the increasing intolerance of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation in Europe, where the Protestant and Catholic camps respectively, pitted against one another, each zealously strove to maintain what they each deemed to be the purity of faith.\nThe Catholic Counter-Reformation would eventually even out this religious turmoil, but until then both the Catholics and Protestants constantly battled for what they believed was right. \nReception.\nHeinrich Kramer was condemned by the Inquisition in 1490 for recommending unethical and illegal methods, and for not following the doctrines of the church regarding demonology.\nMoira Smith writes that the book has been seen as \"one of the most infamous and despised of books\".\nTranslations.\nThe Latin book was firstly translated by J. W. R. Schmidt into German in 1906; an expanded edition of three volumes was published in 1923. Montague Summers was responsible for the first English translation in 1928.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPrimary and Secondary Sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTertiary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nLatin text\nEnglish translation"}
{"id": "20566", "revid": "33345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20566", "title": "Mandy Patinkin", "text": "American actor and singer (born 1952)\nMandel \"Mandy\" Bruce Patinkin (; born November 30, 1952) is an American actor and singer in musical theatre, television, and film. As a Broadway performer he has collaborated with Stephen Sondheim and Andrew Lloyd Webber. \nPatinkin made his theatre debut in 1975 starring opposite Meryl Streep in the revival of the comic play \"Trelawny of the \"Wells\"\" at The Public Theatre's Shakespeare Festival. He played Che in the first Broadway production of Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Evita\" (1979) earning a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical as well as the roles of Georges Seurat/George in Stephen Sondheim's \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1984) for which he was nominated for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical. He portrayed Lord Archibald Craven in the original Broadway cast of Lucy Simon's \"The Secret Garden\" (1991). Patinkin replaced Michael Rupert as Marvin in William Finn's \"Falsettos\" (1993) on Broadway. He starred as Burrs in \"The Wild Party\" (2000) and earned a second nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical.\nPatinkin had roles in television shows, playing Dr. Jeffrey Geiger in \"Chicago Hope\" (1994\u20132000); SSA Jason Gideon in the CBS crime-drama series \"Criminal Minds\" (2005\u20132007); Saul Berenson in the Showtime drama series \"Homeland\" (2011\u20132020); and Rufus Cotesworth in the Hulu mystery series \"Death and Other Details\" (2024). For his work in television he has earned seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations, winning Outstanding Leading Actor in a Drama Series for \"Chicago Hope\" in 1995. He had recurring roles in \"Dead Like Me\" (2003\u20132004) and \"The Good Fight\" (2021).\nHe also had film roles portraying Inigo Montoya in Rob Reiner's family adventure film \"The Princess Bride\" (1987) and Avigdor in Barbra Streisand's musical epic \"Yentl\" (1983) for which he earned a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nomination. Other film credits include \"Ragtime\" (1981); \"Maxie\" (1985); \"Dick Tracy\" (1990); \"True Colors\" (1991); \"Impromptu\" (1991); \"Wonder\" (2017); and \"Life Itself\" (2018). Patinkin also voiced roles in Hayao Miyazaki's \"Castle in the Sky\" (2003) and \"The Wind Rises\" (2013).\nEarly life and education.\nMandel Bruce Patinkin, known as Mandy, was born in Chicago, Illinois, on November 30, 1952, to Doris Lee \"Doralee\" (n\u00e9e Sinton) (1925\u20132014), a homemaker, and Lester Don Patinkin (1919\u20131972), who operated two large Chicago-area metal factories, the People's Iron &amp; Metal Company and the Scrap Corporation of America. Patinkin grew up in an upper-middle-class family, descended from Jewish immigrants from Poland, and was raised in Conservative Judaism, attending religious school daily from the age of seven to 13 or 14 and singing in synagogue choirs, as well as attending Camp Sura in Michigan. His father died of pancreatic cancer in 1972. His mother wrote \"Grandma Doralee Patinkin's Jewish Family Cookbook\". Patinkin's cousins include Mark Patinkin, an author and nationally syndicated columnist for \"The Providence Journal\"; Sheldon Patinkin of Columbia College Chicago's Theater Department, a founder of The Second City; Bonnie Miller Rubin, a \"Chicago Tribune\" reporter; Laura Patinkin, a New York\u2013based actress; https://; and Stacy Oliver n\u00e9e Patinkin, a writer and performer.\nHe attended South Shore High School, Harvard St. George School, and Kenwood High School (later renamed Kenwood Academy, where his teachers included Lena McLin), and graduated in 1970. He attended the University of Kansas and the Juilliard School (Drama Division \"Group 5\": 1972\u20131976). At Juilliard, he was a classmate of Kelsey Grammer. When the producers of the sitcom \"Cheers\" were holding auditions for the role of Dr. Frasier Crane, Patinkin put Grammer's name forward.\nCareer.\n1974\u20131988: Breakthrough and stardom.\nAfter some television-commercial and radio appearances (including on \"CBS Radio Mystery Theater\" in 1974); Patinkin started his career on the New York stage in 1975, starring in \"Trelawny of the 'Wells\"' as Arthur Gower.\nPatinkin starred alongside Meryl Streep, who played Imogen Parrott, and John Lithgow, who played Ferdinand Gadd. Clive Barnes of \"The New York Times\" praised the production writing, \"The production looks beautiful and, indeed, still charms\".\nFrom 1975 through 1976, Patinkin played the Player King and Fortinbras, Prince of Norway in a Broadway revival of \"Hamlet\", with Sam Waterston in the leading role. In 1977 he starred in the play \"The Shadow Box\" written by Michael Cristofer. He had his first film role as a Pool Man in the political comedy \"The Big Fix\" (1978) starring Richard Dreyfus, John Lithgow, and F. Murray Abraham. The following year he acted in the coming of age romantic comedy \"French Postcards\" and the neo-noir \"Last Embrace\".\nPatinkin had his first success in musical theater when he starred as Che in Andrew Lloyd Webber's \"Evita\", opposite Patti LuPone, on Broadway in 1979. Walter Kerr of \"The New York Times\" described his performance as \"vigorous\". James Lardner of \"The Washington Post\" wrote, \"Patinkin gives a sympathetic, consistent and rather sweet performance\". Patinkin won the Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical for his performance. He also received a nomination for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actor in a Musical. Patinkin took film roles in Milos Forman's historical drama \"Ragtime\" (1980) playing Tateh and Sidney Lumet's drama \"Daniel\" (1983) portraying Paul Isaacson.\nPatinkin won acclaim for his role as an Orthodox Jewish man Avigdor in Barbra Streisand's romantic drama epic \"Yentl\" (1983), which earned him a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. Richard Corliss of \"Time\" praised his performance but criticized Streisand's choice to not have him sing in the film. Corliss wrote, \"For her male co-star she hired Mandy Patinkin, who has wrapped his crystalline Broadway tenor voice around Stephen Sondheim and Andrew Lloyd Webber, then gave him no songs to sing\". Veron Scott of \"United Press International\" wrote, \"When Patinkin is in a scene it is difficult to focus on anyone else, including Streisand who is at her very best in \"Yentl\". He plays profound, passionate men of action.\" Patinkin noted that both \"Ragtime\" (1981) and \"Daniel\" (1983) weren't as successful as he had hoped commercially and critically saying, \"When you care about the content of a film, you want people to see it\". He stated he had a positive experience working with Streisand saying, \"'She tried to overcome her superstardom to make me feel comfortable. She worked hard to get to know me for what I am.\" Patinkin also was able to explore his Jewish roots while making the film saying, \"I also spent a couple of weeks in Ohr Semach in Jerusalem at a yeshiva, studying the Talmud and attending lectures. The experience awakened many thoughts and feelings that had been sleeping in me for some time.\"\nPatinkin returned to Broadway to star in Stephen Sondheim and James Lapine's Pulitzer Prize-winning musical \"Sunday in the Park with George\", in which he played the pointillist artist Georges Seurat and his fictional great-grandson George. Performances began in April 1984 and he starred opposite Bernadette Peters. Patinkin earned nominations for a Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical and a Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Actor in a Musical. Frank Rich of \"The New York Times\" wrote, \"Seurat, here embodied commandingly by Mandy Patinkin, could well be a stand-in for Mr. Sondheim, who brings the same fierce, methodical intellectual precision to musical and verbal composition that the artist brought to his pictorial realm.\" Patinkin left the show on September 17 and was replaced by Robert Westenberg. He returned to the show on August 5, 1985, until the show closed two months later. His performance was captured on film and shown on television as a part of \"American Playhouse\". The following year he took the role of Buddy Plummer in \"Follies: In Concert\" at Lincoln Center.\nIn 1985 Patinkin took a leading role in the romantic fantasy comedy \"Maxie\" opposite Glenn Close. \"Variety\" gave the film a mixed review but praised Patinkin, writing, \"Much of the credit for keeping [\"Maxie\"] alive must go to Mandy Patinkin, who shows himself to be a good-looking leading man with a rare light touch for romantic comedy.\" In 1987, Patinkin played Inigo Montoya in Rob Reiner's \"The Princess Bride\", playing the role of the best swordsman in the country, looking to avenge his father's death. Patinkin acted opposite Cary Elwes, Robin Wright, Andre the Giant, and Billy Crystal. \"Variety\" praised his performance writing, \"Patinkin especially is a joy to watch and the film comes to life when his longhaired, scruffy cavalier is on screen.\" His character has earned a cult following and his memorable line \"My name is Inigo Montoya. You killed my father. Prepare to die,\" was ranked as one of \"IGN\"'s best movie moments. \nThe following year in 1988 he acted in the science fiction action film \"Alien Nation\" directed by Graham Baker and the neo-noir film \"The House on Carroll Street\" directed by Peter Yates.\n1989\u20132004: Established actor.\nOver the next decade, he continued to appear in movies, including Warren Beatty's action crime comedy \"Dick Tracy\" (1990) and Herbert Ross's political comedy \"True Colors\" (1991). He also portrayed Alfred de Musset in James Lapine's period drama \"Impromptu\" (1991) starring Hugh Grant, Judy Davis, Emma Thompson, and reunited with Bernadette Peters. Dessen Howe of \"The Washington Post\" described his performance writing \"he makes an effective comic catalyst\".\nOn Broadway, Patinkin appeared as Lord Archibald Craven opposite Rebecca Luker and Robert Westenberg in the musical \"The Secret Garden\" in 1991 and was nominated for a Drama Desk Award as Outstanding Actor in a Musical. He left the show in September of that same year and Howard McGillin took over his role. He also released two solo albums, titled \"Mandy Patinkin\" (1989) and \"Dress Casual\" (1990). In January 1993, he took over the role of Marvin from Michael Rupert in the Broadway musical \"Falsettos\" and starred opposite Barbara Walsh, Stephen Bogardus, and Chip Zien. In 1995, Patinkin sang the role of Billy Bigelow in a concert performance of Rodgers and Hammerstein's \"Carousel\" at the BBC Radio Theatre.\nIn 1994, Patinkin took the role of Dr. Jeffrey Geiger on CBS's \"Chicago Hope\" for which he won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series. However, despite the award and the ratings success of the show, Patinkin left the show during the second season because he was unhappy spending so much time away from his wife and children. He returned to the show in 1999 at the beginning of the sixth season, but it was canceled in 2000. Since \"Chicago Hope\", Patinkin has appeared in a number of films. However, he has mostly performed as a singer, releasing three more albums.\nDuring this time Patinkin guest-starred in \"The Simpsons\" in the episode \"Lisa's Wedding\" (1995) as Hugh Parkfield, Lisa's future English groom and in \"The Larry Sanders Show\" (1996) for which he received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. He also acted in numerous films such as the drama \"The Doctor\" (1991), \"The Music of Chance\" (1993), the comedy \"Life with Mikey\" (1993), the action adventure \"\" (1994), and the romantic mystery \"Lulu on the Bridge\" (1998). After turning down the role in the Walt Disney Animated film \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\" (1996), he portrayed Quasimodo in the TNT television film \"The Hunchback\" (1997) acting opposite Salma Hayek, and Richard Harris. John O'Connor from \"The New York Times\" praised his performance writing, \"[Patinkin] is surprisingly restrained...His Quasimodo is a gentle and quite moving creature, shyly hiding his facial disfigurations in the shadows\". Connor praised the production writing that its \"oddly old-fashioned, paying a kind of homage, as does Mr. Patinkin's performance, to the Laughton film.\"\n\"Mamaloshen\", Patinkin's musical production of songs sung entirely in Yiddish, premiered in 1998. He has performed the show on Broadway and in venues around the United States. The recorded version won a \"Deutscher Schallplattenpreis\" award in Germany. In 1999, Patinkin co-starred in the second \"Sesame Street\" film, \"The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland\", as Huxley, an abusive, childish, sadistic, and greedy man with abnormally large eyebrows, who steals whatever he can grab and then claims it as his own.\nPatinkin returned to Broadway in 2000 in the New York Shakespeare Festival production of Michael John LaChiusa's \"The Wild Party\", portraying Burrs opposite Toni Collette as Queenie. The vaudeville-like production is based on the 1928 Joseph Moncure March narrative poem of the same name. For his performance he earned a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical. In 2003, he dubbed a voice in the Walt Disney re-release of Hayao Miyazaki's \"Castle in the Sky\". From 2003 to 2004, he appeared in the Showtime comedy drama \"Dead Like Me\" as Rube Sofer. In 2004, he played a six-week engagement of his one-man concert at the Off-Broadway complex Dodger Stages.\n2005\u20132020: \"Criminal Minds\" and \"Homeland\".\nIn September 2005, he secured the role of Jason Gideon, an experienced profiler just coming back to work after a series of nervous breakdowns, in the new CBS crime-drama television series \"Criminal Minds\". Patinkin was absent from a table read for \"Criminal Minds\" and did not return for a third season. The departure from the show was not due to contractual or salary matters, but over creative differences. He left apologetic letters for his fellow cast members explaining his reasons and wishing them luck. Many weeks before his departure, in a videotaped interview carried in the online magazine \"Monaco Revue\", Patinkin told journalists at the Festival de T\u00e9l\u00e9vision de Monte-Carlo that he loathed violence on television and was uncomfortable with certain scenes in \"Criminal Minds\". He later called his choice to do \"Criminal Minds\" his \"biggest public mistake\" and stated that he \"thought it was something very different. I never thought they were going to kill and rape all these women every night, every day, week after week, year after year. It was very destructive to my soul and my personality. After that, I didn't think I would get to work in television again.\"\nPatinkin spoke of having planned to tour the world with a musical and wanting to inject more comedy into the entertainment business. In later episodes of \"Criminal Minds\", during the 2007\u201308 season, Jason Gideon was written out of the series and replaced by Special Agent David Rossi (played by Joe Mantegna). Gideon was later officially killed off, ending all chances of a guest appearance by Patinkin on the show. In 2008, Patinkin portrayed Prospero in an off-Broadway musical production of \"The Tempest\" opposite Elisabeth Waterston and Michael Potts. Marilyn Stasio of \"Variety\" wrote, \"Patinkin has a beautiful voice, as warm and golden as honey spooned from a jar -- the perfect voice to sing us through \"The Tempest,\" the most musical of Shakespeare's late plays.\" On October 14, 2009, it was announced that Patinkin would be a guest star on an episode of \"Three Rivers\", which aired on November 15, 2009. He played a patient with Lou Gehrig's disease injured in a car accident who asks the doctors at Three Rivers Hospital to take him off life support so his organs can be donated. He filmed an appearance on \"The Whole Truth\" that had been scheduled to air December 15, 2010, but ABC pulled the series from its schedule two weeks prior. That same year he acted in the British crime drama \"4.3.2.1.\" (2010) acting opposite Emma Roberts, Tamsin Egerton, and Helen McCrory.\nHe starred in the new musical \"Paradise Found\", co-directed by Harold Prince and Susan Stroman, at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London. The musical played a limited engagement from May 2010 through June 26, 2010. Patinkin and Patti LuPone performed their concert \"An Evening with Patti LuPone and Mandy Patinkin\" on Broadway for a limited 63-performance run starting November 21, 2011, at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre, and ending on January 13, 2012. The concert marked the first time the pair had performed together on Broadway since appearing in \"Evita\".\nHe costarred with Claire Danes on the Showtime series \"Homeland\", which aired from 2011 until 2020. He portrayed counterterrorism operative Saul Berenson, protagonist Carrie Mathison's (Danes) mentor. For his performance, Patinkin was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor \u2013 Series, Miniseries or Television Film and an Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, among other honors. Explaining what he learned from the character, he stated, \"The line between good and evil runs through each one of us.\"\nPatinkin was announced as playing the role of Pierre Bezukhov in the Broadway musical \"Natasha, Pierre &amp; The Great Comet of 1812\" starting August 15, 2017. He was to have a limited run through September 3, replacing former \"Hamilton\" star Okieriete Onaodowan, but Patinkin dropped out of the role before performing. His stint was filled in for by the show's Pierre standby Scott Stangland and creator of the musical Dave Malloy. In 2018, Patinkin returned to recorded music with the album \"Diary: January 27, 2018\" which was produced by pianist Thomas Bartlett. He voiced Papa Smurf in the live-action comedy film \"\" (2017) opposite Demi Lovato, Rainn Wilson, and Julia Roberts. During this time he also took roles in the animated film \"The Wind Rises\" (2013), the comedy-drama \"Wish I Was Here\" (2014), the family film \"Wonder\" (2017), the drama \"Life Itself\" (2018), and the comedy \"Before You Know It\" (2019).\n2021\u2013present.\nIn 2021 he was part of the main cast of the legal drama series \"The Good Fight\" on CBS. The following year he voiced Benjamin Franklin in the Ken Burns documentary series \"Benjamin Franklin\" on PBS. Also in 2022, Patinkin was the narrator of the miniseries \"Indivisible: Healing Hate\", a Paramount+ show documenting the events that led to the January 6 United States Capitol attack.\nIn 2024, Patinkin starred as Rufus Cotesworth, a renowned former detective, now heading private security for a business family, in ABC Studios' TV Series \"Death and Other Details\".\nActivism.\nIn May 2012, Patinkin delivered the opening speech at the Annual Convention of the Israeli Left, where he recounted his experiences during a visit to the West Bank with members of the Breaking the Silence organization.\nOn December 21, 2015, on \"Charlie Rose\" on PBS, Patinkin spoke about his recent trip to Greece to help refugees from war-torn Syria and his acting role in the television series \"Homeland\". He stated that he wanted to help \"create opportunity and better systems of living and existing, to give freedom, justice and dignity, quality of life to humanity all over the world.\"\nIn 2020, Grody and Patinkin partnered with Swing Left, creating viral videos with their sons to encourage people to vote for Joe Biden in the 2020 United States presidential election. Patinkin also stumped for Biden in an ad for the Jewish Democratic Council of America encouraging Jews to vote for Biden. The ad featured Patinkin channeling his \"Princess Bride\" character to encourage people to vote. \nIn a July 2025 New York Times interview with his wife Grody, Patinkin was critical of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's policies during the Gaza War, arguing that his actions are \"endangering the Jewish population all over the world\" and that \"to watch what is happening, for the Jewish people to allow this to happen to children and civilians of all ages in Gaza, for whatever reason, is unconscionable and unthinkable.\"\nIn late October 2025, Patinkin endorsed Zohran Mamdani for mayor of New York City.\nPersonal life.\nPatinkin married actress and writer Kathryn Grody on April 15, 1980. They have two sons, Isaac and Gideon. Gideon joined his father onstage in \"Dress Casual\" in 2011.\nPatinkin has described himself as \"Jewish with a dash of Buddhist\" belief. On the Canadian radio program \"Q\", Patinkin called himself a \"JewBu\" because of this mix of beliefs and \"spiritual but not religious\".\nPatinkin suffered from keratoconus, a progressive eye condition, in the mid-1990s. This led to two corneal transplants, his right cornea in 1997 and his left in 1998. He was also diagnosed with and treated for prostate cancer in 2004. He celebrated his first year of recovery in 2005 by doing a charity bike ride with his son, Isaac\u00a0\u2013 the Arava Institute Hazon Israel Ride: Cycling for Peace, Partnership &amp; Environmental Protection.\nPatinkin has been involved in a variety of Jewish causes and cultural activities. He sings in Yiddish, often in concert, and on his album \"Mamaloshen\". He also wrote introductions for two books on Jewish culture, \"The Jewish American Family Album\", by Dorothy and Thomas Hoobler, and \"Grandma Doralee Patinkin's Holiday Cookbook: A Jewish Family's Celebrations\", by his mother, Doralee Patinkin Rubin. \nPatinkin contributed to the children's book \"Dewey Doo-it Helps Owlie Fly Again: A Musical Storybook\", inspired by Christopher Reeve. The award-winning book, published in 2005, benefits the Christopher Reeve Foundation and includes an audio CD with Patinkin singing and reading the story as well as Dana Reeve and Bernadette Peters singing.\nIn 2020, Patinkin's and Grody's son, Gideon, began filming and photographing their daily lives, posting images and clips to multiple social media outlets. In 2023, they began a series of live stage events, \"A Conversation with Mandy Patinkin and Kathryn Grody,\" facilitated by their son Gideon. \nPatinkin is a model railroader.\nAwards and nominations.\nTheatre awards\nFilm and television awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20567", "revid": "50529437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20567", "title": "Mel Smith", "text": "English actor and comedian (1952\u20132013)\nMelvyn Kenneth Smith (3 December 1952 \u2013 19 July 2013) was an English actor, comedian, and filmmaker. He worked on the sketch comedy shows \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\" and \"Alas Smith and Jones\" with his comedy partner, Griff Rhys Jones. Smith and Jones founded Talkback, which grew to be one of the United Kingdom's largest producers of television comedy and light entertainment programming.\nEarly life.\nSmith's father, Kenneth, was born in Tow Law, County Durham, and worked at a coal mine during the Second World War looking after the pit ponies. After the war ended, he moved to London and married Smith's mother, whose parents owned a greengrocers in Chiswick. When the government legalised high street betting with the Betting and Gaming Act 1960, he turned the shop into the first betting shop in Chiswick.\nSmith was born and brought up in Chiswick. He was educated at Hogarth Primary School, Chiswick and passed his 11-Plus examinations. He was also a keen sportsman and played for two seasons in the Hogarth School football team. The first season he played under the captaincy of Gerry Francis, the future English international and England captain. He applied and went to Latymer Upper School, a now private school in Hammersmith. He studied Experimental Psychology at New College, Oxford.\nCareer.\nWhilst at Oxford University, Smith produced \"The Tempest\", and performed at the Edinburgh Fringe with the Oxford University Dramatic Society. One year they shared a venue with the Cambridge Footlights, directed by John Lloyd. His extra-curricular activities while at university led to him joining the Royal Court Theatre production team in London, and then Bristol Old Vic. He was also associate director of Sheffield's Crucible Theatre for two years. Later, he directed a theatre production of \"Not in Front of the Audience\".\nJohn Lloyd later had the opportunity to develop the idea that became the satirical BBC television series \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\". This was followed briefly by \"Smith and Goody\" (with Bob Goody) and then the comedy sketch series \"Alas Smith and Jones\", co-starring Griff Rhys Jones, its title being a pun on the name of the American television series \"Alias Smith and Jones\". \nIn 1982, he starred as the lead role in ITV drama \"Muck and Brass \"where he played Tom Craig, a ruthless property developer. In 1984, he appeared in the \"Minder\" episode \"A Star Is Gorn\" playing the character Cyril Ash, a ruthless and crooked record producer. He also guest-starred on \"The Goodies\" episode \"Animals\". At the end of the 1980s, he played the title role in the sitcom \"Colin's Sandwich\" (1988\u201390), playing a British Rail employee with aspirations to be a writer.\nIn 1981, Smith and Griff Rhys Jones founded TalkBack Productions, a company that produced many of the most significant British comedy shows of the following decades, including \"Smack the Pony\", \"Da Ali G Show\", \"I'm Alan Partridge\" and \"Big Train\". In 2000, the company was sold to Pearson for \u00a362 million. Dressed as bobbies, Smith and Jones introduced Queen on stage at Live Aid in July 1985, with Smith removing his helmet before shouting into the microphone, \"her majesty, Queen!\"\nSmith co-wrote and took the lead role in the space comedy \"Morons from Outer Space\" (1985), but the film failed to make much impact. His next cinema effort was better received as director of \"The Tall Guy\" (1989), giving Emma Thompson a major screen role. In America, perhaps his best-known film is \"Brain Donors\", the 1992 update of the Marx Brothers film \"A Night at the Opera\", starring Smith as a cheeky, opportunistic cab driver turned ballet promoter. Paramount Pictures considered this film the outstanding comedy of the year, but when the producers left Paramount for another studio, Paramount withdrew its support for the film.\nIn 1987, Smith recorded a single with Kim Wilde for Comic Relief: a cover of the Christmas song \"Rockin' Around the Christmas Tree\" with some additional comedy lines written by Smith and Jones. The pairing of Smith and Wilde was a comic allusion to the duo Mel and Kim. The song reached number three in the UK charts. The same year he appeared in \"The Princess Bride\" as the Albino.\nSmith and Jones were reunited in 2005 for a review/revival of their earlier television series in \"The Smith And Jones Sketchbook\". Smith joked: \"Obviously, Griff's got more money than me so he came to work in a Rolls-Royce and I came on a bicycle. But it was great fun to do and we are firmly committed to doing something new together, because you don't chuck that sort of chemistry away. Of course, I'll have to pretend I like \"Restoration\".\"\nIn August 2006, Smith returned to the theatre stage after some 20 years, appearing at the Edinburgh Fringe festival in \"Allegiance\", Irish journalist and author Mary Kenny's play about Churchill's encounter with the Irish nationalist leader Michael Collins in 1921. The play initially caused some controversy, with Smith proposing to flout the Scottish ban on smoking in public places, but the scene was quickly adapted after gaining the required amount of publicity. The play was directed by Brian Gilbert and produced by Daniel Jewel. In 2006, he also appeared in Hustle as Benjamin Frasier, a pub landlord who was scammed by the Hustle team when his on-screen son Joey tried to launch a rap career.\nIn autumn 2006, Smith starred opposite Belinda Lang in a tour of a new comedy \"An Hour and a Half Late\" by French playwright G\u00e9rald Sibleyras, which was adapted by Smith. He then directed a West End revival of \"Charley's Aunt\" starring Stephen Tompkinson. From October 2007 to January 2008, he played the role of Wilbur Turnblad in the London production of \"Hairspray\" at the Shaftesbury Theatre.\nPersonal life.\nSmith was married to Pamela (n\u00e9e Gay-Rees), a former model, who grew up in Easington and Durham. The couple had houses in St John's Wood, London, and the hamlet of Great Haseley, Oxfordshire, as well as a property in Barbados.\nHealth.\nSmith was hospitalised in 1999 with stomach ulcers, following an accidental overdose of over 50 Nurofen Plus tablets in one day, after previously admitting an addiction to sleeping pills. Smith said at the time that the pressures of film work were a contributing factor, along with a desperate need to ease the pain caused by gout. Partly as a result, he agreed to sell Talkback Productions. On 31 December 2008, Smith appeared on \"Celebrity Mastermind\" whilst suffering from severe pharyngitis.\nDeath.\nOn the morning of 19 July 2013, the London Ambulance Service was called to Smith's home in north-west London. Smith was confirmed dead by the ambulance crew, with a later post-mortem confirming death from a heart attack. He was 60 years old.\nFilmography.\nFilm.\nWriter\nDirector\nExecutive producer\nActor\nTelevision.\n Writer \nDirector\nProducer\nPerformer\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20568", "revid": "36878010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20568", "title": "Mesolithic", "text": "Prehistoric period, second part of the Stone Age\nThe Mesolithic (Greek: \u03bc\u03ad\u03c3\u03bf\u03c2, \"mesos\" 'middle' + \u03bb\u03af\u03b8\u03bf\u03c2, \"lithos\" 'stone') or Middle Stone Age is the Old World archaeological period between the Upper Paleolithic and the Neolithic. The term Epipaleolithic is often used synonymously, especially for outside northern Europe, and for the corresponding period in the Levant and Caucasus. The Mesolithic has different time spans in different parts of Eurasia. It refers to the final period of hunter-gatherer cultures in Europe and the Middle East, between the end of the Last Glacial Maximum and the Neolithic Revolution. In Europe it spans roughly 15,000 to 5,000\u00a0BP; in the Middle East (the Epipalaeolithic Near East) roughly 20,000 to 10,000\u00a0BP. The term is less used of areas farther east, and not at all of those beyond Eurasia and North Africa.\nThe type of culture associated with the Mesolithic varies between areas, but it is associated with a decline in the group hunting of large animals in favour of a broader hunter-gatherer way of life, and the development of more sophisticated and typically smaller lithic tools and weapons than the heavy-chipped equivalents typical of the Paleolithic. Depending on the region, some use of pottery and textiles may be found in sites allocated to the Mesolithic, but generally indications of agriculture are taken as marking transition into the Neolithic. The more permanent settlements tend to be close to the sea or inland waters offering a good supply of food. Mesolithic societies are not seen as very complex, and burials are fairly simple; in contrast, grandiose burial mounds are a mark of the Neolithic.\nTerminology.\nThe terms \"Paleolithic\" and \"Neolithic\" were introduced by John Lubbock in his work \"Pre-historic Times\" in 1865. The additional \"Mesolithic\" category was added as an intermediate category by Hodder Westropp in 1866. Westropp's suggestion was immediately controversial. A British school led by John Evans denied any need for an intermediate: the ages blended together like the colors of a rainbow, he said. A European school led by Gabriel de Mortillet asserted that there was a gap between the earlier and later.\nEdouard Piette claimed to have filled the gap with his naming of the Azilian Culture. Knut Stjerna offered an alternative in the \"Epipaleolithic\", suggesting a final phase of the Paleolithic rather than an intermediate age in its own right inserted between the Paleolithic and Neolithic.\nBy the time of Vere Gordon Childe's work, \"The Dawn of Europe\" (1947), which affirms the Mesolithic, sufficient data had been collected to determine that a transitional period between the Paleolithic and the Neolithic was indeed a useful concept. However, the terms \"Mesolithic\" and \"Epipalaeolithic\" remain in competition, with varying conventions of usage. In the archaeology of Northern Europe, for example for archaeological sites in Great Britain, Germany, Scandinavia, Ukraine, and Russia, the term \"Mesolithic\" is almost always used. In the archaeology of other areas, the term \"Epipaleolithic\" may be preferred by most authors, or there may be divergences between authors over which term to use or what meaning to assign to each. In the New World, neither term is used (except provisionally in the Arctic).\n\"Epipaleolithic\" is sometimes also used alongside \"Mesolithic\" for the final end of the Upper Paleolithic immediately followed by the Mesolithic. As \"Mesolithic\" suggests an intermediate period, followed by the Neolithic, some authors prefer the term \"Epipaleolithic\" for hunter-gatherer cultures who are not succeeded by agricultural traditions, reserving \"Mesolithic\" for cultures who are clearly succeeded by the Neolithic Revolution, such as the Natufian culture. Other authors use \"Mesolithic\" as a generic term for hunter-gatherer cultures after the Last Glacial Maximum, whether they are transitional towards agriculture or not. In addition, terminology appears to differ between archaeological sub-disciplines, with \"Mesolithic\" being widely used in European archaeology, while \"Epipalaeolithic\" is more common in Near Eastern archaeology.\nEurope.\nThe Balkan Mesolithic begins around 15,000 years ago. In Western Europe, the Early Mesolithic, or Azilian, begins about 14,000 years ago, in the Franco-Cantabrian region of northern Spain and Southern France. In other parts of Europe, the Mesolithic begins by 11,500 years ago (the beginning of the Holocene), and it ends with the introduction of farming, depending on the region between c.\u20098,500 and 5,500 years ago. Regions that experienced greater environmental effects as the last glacial period ended have a much more apparent Mesolithic era, lasting millennia. In northern Europe, for example, societies were able to live well on rich food supplies from the marshlands created by the warmer climate. Such conditions produced distinctive human behaviors that are preserved in the material record, such as the Maglemosian and Azilian cultures. Such conditions also delayed the coming of the Neolithic until some 5,500 BP in northern Europe.\nThe type of stone toolkit remains one of the most diagnostic features: the Mesolithic used a microlithic technology \u2013 composite devices manufactured with Mode V chipped stone tools (microliths), while the Paleolithic had utilized Modes I\u2013IV. In some areas, however, such as Ireland, parts of Portugal, the Isle of Man and the Tyrrhenian Islands, a macrolithic technology was used in the Mesolithic. In the Neolithic, the microlithic technology was replaced by a macrolithic technology, with an increased use of polished stone tools such as stone axes.\nThere is some evidence for the beginning of construction at sites with a ritual or astronomical significance, including Stonehenge, with a short row of large post holes aligned east\u2013west, and a possible \"lunar calendar\" at Warren Field in Scotland, with pits of post holes of varying sizes, thought to reflect the lunar phases. Both are dated to before c.\u20099,000 BP (the 8th millennium BC).\nAn ancient chewed gum made from the pitch of birch bark revealed that a woman enjoyed a meal of hazelnuts and duck about 5,700 years ago in southern Denmark. Mesolithic people influenced Europe's forests by bringing favored plants like hazel with them.\nAs the \"Neolithic package\" (including farming, herding, polished stone axes, timber longhouses and pottery) spread into Europe, the Mesolithic way of life was marginalized and eventually disappeared. Mesolithic adaptations such as sedentism, population size and use of plant foods are cited as evidence of the transition to agriculture. Other Mesolithic communities rejected the Neolithic package likely as a result of ideological reluctance, different worldviews and an active rejection of the sedentary-farming lifestyle. In one sample from the Bl\u00e4tterh\u00f6hle in Hagen, it seems that the descendants of Mesolithic people maintained a foraging lifestyle for more than 2000 years after the arrival of farming societies in the area; such societies may be called \"Subneolithic\". For hunter-gatherer communities, long-term close contact and integration in existing farming communities facilitated the adoption of a farming lifestyle. The integration of these hunter-gatherers in farming communities was made possible by their socially open character towards new members. In north-Eastern Europe, the hunting and fishing lifestyle continued into the Medieval period in regions less suited to agriculture, and in Scandinavia no Mesolithic period may be accepted, with the locally preferred \"Older Stone Age\" moving into the \"Younger Stone Age\".\nArt.\nCompared to the preceding Upper Paleolithic and the following Neolithic, there is rather less surviving art from the Mesolithic. The Rock art of the Iberian Mediterranean Basin, which probably spreads across from the Upper Paleolithic, is a widespread phenomenon, much less well known than the cave-paintings of the Upper Paleolithic, with which it makes an interesting contrast. The sites are now mostly cliff faces in the open air, and the subjects are now mostly human rather than animal, with large groups of small figures; there are 45 figures at Roca dels Moros. Clothing is shown, and scenes of dancing, fighting, hunting and food-gathering. The figures are much smaller than the animals of Paleolithic art, and depicted much more schematically, though often in energetic poses. A few small engraved pendants with suspension holes and simple engraved designs are known, some from northern Europe in amber, and one from Star Carr in Britain in shale. The Elk's Head of Huittinen is a rare Mesolithic animal carving in soapstone from Finland.\nThe rock art in the Urals appears to show similar changes after the Paleolithic, and the wooden Shigir Idol is a rare survival of what may well have been a very common material for sculpture. It is a plank of larch carved with geometric motifs, but topped with a human head. Now in fragments, it would have stood over five metres tall. The Ain Sakhri figurine from Palestine is a Natufian carving in calcite.\nA total of 33 antler frontlets have been discovered at Star Carr. These are red deer skulls modified to be worn by humans. Modified frontlets have also been discovered at Bedburg-K\u00f6nigshoven, Hohen Viecheln, Plau, and Berlin-Biesdorf.\nWeaving.\nWeaving techniques were deployed to create shoes and baskets, the latter being of fine construction and decorated with dyes. Examples have been found in Cueva de los Murci\u00e9lagos in Southern Spain that in 2023 were dated to 9,500 years ago.\nCeramic Mesolithic.\nIn North-Eastern Europe, Siberia, and certain southern European and North African sites, a \"ceramic Mesolithic\" can be distinguished between c.\u20099,000 to 5,850 BP. Russian archaeologists prefer to describe such pottery-making cultures as Neolithic, even though farming is absent. This pottery-making Mesolithic culture can be found peripheral to the sedentary Neolithic cultures. It created a distinctive type of pottery, with point or knob base and flared rims, manufactured by methods not used by the Neolithic farmers. Though each area of Mesolithic ceramic developed an individual style, common features suggest a single point of origin. The earliest manifestation of this type of pottery may be in the region around Lake Baikal in Siberia. It appears in the Yelshanka culture on the Volga in Russia 9,000 years ago, and from there spread via the Dnieper-Donets culture to the Narva culture of the Eastern Baltic. Spreading westward along the coastline it is found in the Erteb\u00f8lle culture of Denmark and Ellerbek of Northern Germany, and the related Swifterbant culture of the Low Countries.\nA 2012 publication in the journal \"Science\" announced that the earliest pottery yet known anywhere in the world was found in Xianrendong cave in China, dating by radiocarbon to between 20,000 and 19,000 years before present, at the end of the Last Glacial Period. The carbon-14 datation was established by carefully dating surrounding sediments. Many of the pottery fragments had scorch marks, suggesting that the pottery was used for cooking. These early pottery containers were made well before the invention of agriculture (dated to 10,000 to 8,000 BC), by mobile foragers who hunted and gathered their food during the Late Glacial Maximum.\nMesolithic outside of Europe.\nWhile Paleolithic and Neolithic have been found useful terms and concepts in the archaeology of China, and can be mostly regarded as happily naturalized, Mesolithic was introduced later, mostly after 1945, and does not appear to be a necessary or useful term in the context of China. Chinese sites that have been regarded as Mesolithic are better considered as Early Neolithic.\nIn the archaeology of India, the Mesolithic, dated roughly between 12,000 and 8,000 BP, remains a concept in use.\nIn the archaeology of the Americas, an Archaic or Meso-Indian period, following the Lithic stage, somewhat equates to the Mesolithic.\nThe Saharan rock paintings found at Tassili n'Ajjer in central Sahara, and at other locations depict vivid scenes of everyday life in central North Africa. Some of these paintings were executed by a hunting people who lived in a savanna region teeming with a water-dependent species like the hippopotamus, animals that no longer exist in the now-desert area.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20569", "revid": "37273639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20569", "title": "Metis", "text": "Metis or M\u00e9tis, meaning \"mixed\" in French, may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20571", "revid": "432544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20571", "title": "Mary Robinson", "text": "President of Ireland from 1990 to 1997\nMary Therese Winifred Robinson (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Bourke; born 21 May 1944) is an Irish politician who served as the president of Ireland from December 1990 to September 1997. She was the country's first female president. Robinson had previously served as a senator in from 1969 to 1989, and as a councillor on Dublin Corporation from 1979 to 1983. Although she had been briefly affiliated with the Labour Party during her time as a senator, she became the first independent candidate to win the presidency and the first not to have had the support of Fianna F\u00e1il. Following her time as president, Robinson became the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights from 1997 to 2002.\nDuring her tenure as High Commissioner, she visited Tibet in 1998 (the first holder of the office to do so) and criticised Ireland's immigration policy and the use of capital punishment in the United States. She extended her intended single four-year term as High Commissioner by one year to preside over the World Conference against Racism 2001 in Durban, South Africa; the conference proved controversial due to a draft document which equated Zionism with racism. Robinson resigned her post in September 2002. After leaving the United Nations, Robinson formed Realizing Rights: the Ethical Globalization Initiative, which came to a planned end at the end of 2010.\nRobinson also served as Chancellor of the University of Dublin from 1998 until 2019, and as Oxfam's honorary president from 2002 until she stepped down in 2012. She returned to live in Ireland at the end of 2010 and has since founded \"The Mary Robinson Foundation \u2013 Climate Justice\". Robinson continues to campaign globally on issues of civil rights. She has been the honorary president of the European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation (EIUC) since 2005. She is a former Chair of the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) and is also a founding member and chair of the Council of Women World Leaders. She was a member of the European members of the Trilateral Commission.\nRobinson's presidency is regarded as having a transformative effect on Ireland. Having successfully campaigned on several liberalising issues as a senator and a lawyer, Robinson was a key figure in the decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1993, the legalisation of contraception and divorce, enabling women to sit on juries and securing the right to legal aid in civil legal cases in Ireland. Regularly polling approval ratings above 90%, approval of Robinson peaked at 93% among the Irish public, the highest rating of any Irish president.\nEarly life and background (1944\u20131969).\nBorn in Ballina, County Mayo in 1944, she is the daughter of two medical doctors. Her father was Aubrey Bourke, of Ballina, while her mother was Tessa Bourke (n\u00e9e\u00a0O'Donnell) from Carndonagh in Inishowen, County Donegal. Mary was raised, along with her brothers, at Victoria House (Numbers 1 and 2 Victoria Terrace), her parents' residence in the centre of Ballina. Her family had links with many diverse political strands in Ireland. One ancestor was a leading activist in the Irish National Land League of Mayo and the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB); an uncle, Sir Paget John Bourke, was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II after a career as a judge in the Colonial Service; while another relative was a Catholic nun. Some branches of the family were members of the Anglican Church of Ireland while others were Catholics. More distant relatives included William Liath de Burgh, Tibbot MacWalter Kittagh Bourke, and Charles Bourke.\nShe attended Mount Anville Secondary School in Dublin and studied law at Trinity College Dublin (where she was elected a scholar in 1965). As the Catholic Church's ban on Catholics attending Trinity was still in place at the time of Bourke's application, her parents had to first request permission from Archbishop McQuaid to allow her to attend. She was one of three women in her class in Trinity, and graduated in 1967 with first-class honours. An outspoken critic of some Catholic church teachings, during her inaugural address as auditor of the Dublin University Law Society in 1967 she advocated removing the prohibition of divorce from the Irish Constitution, eliminating the ban on the use of contraceptives, and decriminalizing homosexuality and suicide. She furthered her studies at the King's Inns and was called to the Irish Bar in 1967. She was awarded a fellowship to attend Harvard Law School, receiving an LL.M in 1968.\nLegal career and time in (1967\u20131990).\nIn 1969, aged 25, Bourke was appointed Reid Professor of Criminal Law at Trinity College. That same year, Bourke was first elected to as an independent senator. Her goals as a senator were \"to open up Ireland and separate Catholic teaching from aspects of the criminal law and therefore reform the law on contraceptives, legalise homosexuality and change the constitutional ban on divorce.\" Her time in office is most closely associated with these issues, as well as securing the right for women to serve on juries and her involvement with the Wood Quay protests.\nIn 1970, she married Nicholas Robinson, with whom she had a relationship since they were law students and who was then practising as a solicitor. They have three children together.\nA result of Ireland joining the European Economic Community was that two of Robinson's key goals were met: Ireland was required to offer women in the public service equal pay to men, which came into effect in June 1973; and in July the marriage bar for women in the civil service was lifted.\nIn late July 1976, Robinson joined the Labour Party, though she later left the party in 1985. Whilst a member of the party, she ran for D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, including the 1981 general election for Dublin West, but failed to win a seat.\nDuring her time in office, Robinson won several landmark court cases. She first fought a gender-based case in the Labour Court on behalf of her husband. Under the pension scheme in place for politicians at the time, the widows of politicians were often entitled to pensions, but widowers were not. On 12 May 1979, the court ruled in her favour. In July 1979, she appeared in court on behalf of a couple who alleged that the Irish tax system was discriminatory as the tax allowances available to couples were less than double those available to single people. A court decision in their favour was made in October but was appealed by the Irish government. The Supreme Court eventually ruled in favour of the couple in April 1980. Robinson also lost a groundbreaking case in the European Court of Justice, the first case in which the court granted legal aid to a plaintiff.\nOn 23 May 1989, Robinson announced that she would not be seeking re-election, and on 5 July 1989, Robinson served as a senator on her last day in her career.\nPresidential campaign.\nBackground.\nRobinson won the Labour Party nomination over former Minister for Health Noel Browne by a 4:1 majority. She had the advantage of being the first candidate nominated for the election (and the first female), in that she could cover more meetings, public addresses and interviews. However, she refused to be drawn on specifics in case she would alienate possible support. She also received the backing of \"The Irish Times\" newspaper, and this proved hugely advantageous.\nCandidates from other parties.\nRobinson ran against two other candidates: Austin Currie, for Fine Gael, and Brian Lenihan for Fianna F\u00e1il. Currie was widely seen as Fine Gael's last choice as a candidate, nominated only when no one else was available. Fianna F\u00e1il's candidate, then T\u00e1naiste and Minister for Defence Brian Lenihan had become popular during his three decades in politics. Like Robinson, he had delivered liberal policy reform.\nAt the beginning of the campaign, Lenihan was seen as the favourite to win the presidency. As the campaign proceeded, however, it became apparent that Robinson was a serious contender. Crucial to her appeal was the deep unpopularity of the Taoiseach, Charles Haughey, and the rising popularity of Dick Spring.\nRobinson obtained the backing of the Workers' Party which was strong in Dublin and Cork and was considered crucial to getting working-class votes.\nA transfer pact was agreed upon between Fine Gael and Labour, as both parties were normally preferred partners for each other in general elections.\nLenihan controversy.\nDuring the campaign it emerged that what Lenihan had told friends and insiders in private flatly contradicted his public statements on a controversial effort in 1982 by the opposition Fianna F\u00e1il to pressure President Hillery into refusing a parliamentary dissolution to Garret FitzGerald, the Taoiseach at the time; Hillery had resolutely rejected the pressure.\nLenihan denied he had pressured the President but then a tape was produced of an interview he had given to a postgraduate student the previous May, in which he frankly discussed attempting to apply pressure. Lenihan claimed that \"on mature recollection\" he hadn't pressured the President and had been confused in his interview with the student. The issue, however, nearly led to the collapse of the government.\nUnder pressure from the junior coalition partner, the Progressive Democrats, Haughey sacked Lenihan as T\u00e1naiste and Minister for Defence. Lenihan's integrity was seriously questioned. Lenihan's role in the event in 1982 seemed to imply that he could be instructed by Haughey in his duties, and that electing Lenihan was in effect empowering the controversial Haughey. In an effort to weaken Robinson, a government minister and Haughey ally, P\u00e1draig Flynn, launched a controversial personal attack on Mary Robinson \"as a wife and mother\" and \"having a new-found interest in her family\". Flynn, even more controversially, also joked privately that Robinson would \"turn the \u00c1ras \"[President's residence]\" into the Red Cow Inn \"[a pub in Dublin]\"\". Flynn's tirade was itself attacked in response as \"disgraceful\" on radio by Michael McDowell, a senior member of the Progressive Democrat party which up to that point supported Lenihan's campaign. When Robinson met McDowell later in a restaurant, she quipped, \"with enemies like McDowell, who needs friends?\" Flynn's attack was a fatal blow to Lenihan's campaign, causing many female supporters of Lenihan to vote for Robinson in a gesture of support.\nLenihan's support evaporated, and Haughey concluded that the election was as good as lost. Haughey distanced himself from Lenihan and sacked him from the Cabinet. This had unintended consequences, as disquiet within the Fianna F\u00e1il organisation concerning Haughey's leadership increased dramatically. Many canvassers now restarted the campaign to get Lenihan elected. However, Lenihan's personal confidence was shattered and although he recovered somewhat in the polls towards the end of the campaign, it was insufficient. He was ahead on the first count with 44% of the first-preference votes \u2014 Robinson attaining 39%. However, transfers from Currie proved critical and the majority of these went \u2014 as expected \u2014 against Fianna F\u00e1il. Lenihan became the first Fianna F\u00e1il presidential candidate to lose a presidential election. Robinson became president, the first woman to hold the office, and the first candidate to be second on first preference votes to win the presidency.\nShe became the first Labour Party candidate, the first woman, and the first non-Fianna-F\u00e1il candidate in a contested presidential election to win the presidency. RT\u00c9 broadcast her victory speech live rather than The Angelus. Her first television interview as President-elect was on the RT\u00c9 children's television show The Den with Ray D'Arcy, puppets Zig and Zag and Dustin the Turkey, another puppet.\nPresidency (1990\u20131997).\nInauguration and early term.\nRobinson was inaugurated as the seventh President of Ireland on 3 December 1990. She proved a popular President, earning the praise of Brian Lenihan himself who, before his death five years later, said that she was a better President than he ever could have been.\nIn 1991, Robinson was prevented from leaving the country by Charles Haughey's government. The power of the government to prevent the president from leaving the country is enshrined in Article 12.9 of the Irish constitution, which states that \"the President shall not leave the State [...] save with the consent of the Government\". Robinson had been invited to deliver the BBC Dimbleby Lecture, and was to be speaking on the position of women and the family in Ireland. Wary of Robinson's position as a feminist and human rights lawyer, the government prevented her from leaving as they wished to avoid the negative publicity that they believed would arise from a speech they believed would be highly critical of the Irish state.\nInternational relations.\nIn 1992, Robinson travelled to Somalia, which at the time was struck by famine. She then travelled to the UN to make a report of her findings. The UN ultimately failed in its effort to relieve the famine, and the United States eventually intervened, ending the famine by March 1993.\nIn the summer of 1993, Robinson met and shook hands with both Queen Elizabeth II and Gerry Adams (the president of Sinn F\u00e9in), meetings which occurred on two separate occasions. On 27 May, Robinson became the first serving Irish president to visit the United Kingdom and meet Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace. She later welcomed visits by senior members of the British royal family, most notably Charles, Prince of Wales, to her official residence, \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in. In June, a few weeks after her trip to London, Robinson controversially met and shook hands with Gerry Adams in Belfast. Dick Spring, now the T\u00e1naiste and Minister for Foreign Affairs, had advised her not to meet Adams, whose party was linked with the Provisional IRA. His disapproval was well-circulated by Irish media. However, the Government refused to formally advise her not to meet with him. During her various visits to Northern Ireland, she in fact regularly met politicians of all hues, including David Trimble of the Ulster Unionist Party and John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labour Party.\nOireachtas.\nIn the previous 52 years, only two addresses to the Oireachtas (parliament) had taken place: by President John F. Kennedy of the United States on 28 June 1963 during a state visit to Ireland, and by President \u00c9amon de Valera in 1969, to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann. Robinson delivered two such addresses. She was also invited to chair a committee to review the workings of the United Nations, but declined when asked to by the Government of Ireland, who feared that her involvement might make it difficult for it to oppose the proposals that would result.\nChurch and religion.\nTo the surprise of her critics, who had seen her as embodying liberalism that the Catholic Church disapproved of, she had a close working relationship with the Church. She visited Irish nuns and priests abroad regularly, and became the first President to host an \u00c1ras reception for the Christian Brothers. In 1997, While on an official to Italy, she had an audience with Pope John Paul II.\nLegislation and popularity.\nAs President, she signed two significant bills that she had fought for throughout her political career: a bill to fully liberalise the law on the availability of contraceptives; and a bill fully decriminalising homosexuality, and which unlike legislation in much of the world at the time, provided for a fully equal age of consent. In 1996, she also signed the legalisation of divorce into law.\nRobinson was an exceptionally popular president, and halfway through her term of office her popularity rating had reached an unprecedented 93%.\nResignation as president.\nRobinson issued her resignation as president in a message to the of the , taking effect on 12 September 1997. Taoiseach Bertie Ahern said in a statement that her resignation \"was not unexpected\" and wished her \"every success\". Robinson resigned to take up the appointment as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. Upon her resignation as president, the role of President of Ireland was transferred to the Presidential Commission (which comprised the Chief Justice of Ireland, the of and the of ) from 12 September to 11 November 1997, when the new president Mary McAleese was sworn in. Despite leaving office with almost three months remaining in her presidency, Robinson later expressed regret at her early departure, indicating she could have postponed her acceptance of the High Commissioner's office.\nHigh Commissioner for Human Rights (1997\u20132002).\nRobinson became the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights on 12 September 1997, resigning the presidency a few weeks early to take up the post. Media reports suggested that she had been head-hunted for the post by Secretary-General of the United Nations Kofi Annan, to assume an advocacy as opposed to an administrative role, in other words, to become a public campaigner outlining principles rather than the previous implementational and consensus-building model. The belief was that the post had ceased to be seen as the voice of general principles and had become largely bureaucratic. Robinson's role was to set the human rights agenda within the organisation and internationally, refocusing its appeal.\nIn November 1997, she delivered the Romanes Lecture in Oxford on the topic of \"Realizing Human Rights\"; she spoke of the \"daunting challenge\" ahead of her, and how she intended to set about her task. She concluded the lecture with words from \"The Golden Bough\": \"If fate has called you, the bough will come easily, and of its own accord. Otherwise, no matter how much strength you muster, you never will manage to quell it or cut it down with the toughest of blades.\"\nRobinson was the first High Commissioner for Human Rights to visit Tibet, making her trip in 1998. During her tenure, she criticised the Irish system of permits for non-EU immigrants as similar to \"bonded labour\" and criticised the United States' use of capital punishment.\nIn 2001, she chaired the Asia Regional Preparatory Meeting for the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and related intolerances, which was held in Tehran, Iran. At this meeting, neither the representatives of the Simon Wiesenthal Centre, a Jewish group, nor the Baha'i International Community were permitted to attend. She wore a headscarf at the meeting because the Iranians enforced an edict that all women attending the conference must wear one. Women who did not wear it were criticised, and Robinson said that it \"played into the hands of religious conservatives\".\nThough she had initially announced her intention to serve a single four-year period, she extended the term by a year following an appeal from Annan, allowing her to preside over the 2001 World Conference against Racism in Durban, South Africa, as secretary-general. The conference drew widespread criticism, as did Robinson. Former US Congressman Tom Lantos said, \"To many of us present at the events at Durban, it is clear that much of the responsibility for the debacle rests on the shoulders of UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson, who, in her role as secretary-general of the conference, failed to provide the leadership needed to keep the conference on track.\"\nRobinson's period as High Commissioner ended in 2002, after sustained pressure from the United States led her to declare she was no longer able to continue her work. She had criticised the US for violating human rights in its war on terrorism and the World Conference against Racism was widely condemned in the US for its perceived antisemitism. Michael Rubin even went so far as to suggest in a tongue-in-cheek article that she be tried for war crimes for presiding over \"an intellectual pogrom against Jews and Israel.\" On 9 November 2006, in Yogyakarta, she attended the International Conference, then she became one of 29 signators of the Yogyakarta Principles, adopted for protection of rights by International Human Rights Law.\nPost-commissioner period (2002 \u2013 present).\nUniversity of Dublin.\nRobinson served as the twenty-fourth, and first female, Chancellor of the University of Dublin. She represented the university in the for over twenty years and held the Reid Chair in Law. She was succeeded as chancellor by Mary McAleese, who had also succeeded her as president of Ireland.\nMembership of \"The Elders\".\nAlong with Nelson Mandela, Gra\u00e7a Machel, and Desmond Tutu, and others, Robinson was a founding member of \"The Elders\", a group of world leaders with the goal of contributing their wisdom to tackle some of the world's toughest problems. She has travelled with Elders delegations to the Ivory Coast, the Korean Peninsula, Ethiopia, India, South Sudan and the Middle East.\nIn August 2014, she was joined by fellow Elder Jimmy Carter during the 2014 Israel\u2013Gaza conflict, to pen an article in \"Foreign Policy\" magazine, pressing for the inclusion of recognition of Hamas as a legitimate political actor, noting the recent unity deal between Hamas and Fatah when the former agreed with the Palestinian Authority to denounce violence, recognise Israel and adhere to past agreements. Robinson and Carter called on the UN Security Council to act on what they described as the inhumane conditions in Gaza, and mandate an end to the siege. On 16 October 2014, she attended the One Young World Summit in Dublin. During a session with fellow Elder, Kofi Annan, she encouraged 1,300 young leaders from 191 countries to lead on inter-generational issues such as climate change and the need for action to take place now, not tomorrow. She was also the keynote speaker at the One Young World Opening Ceremony where she highlighted the need to empower young people to participate in decision-making processes that shape their future.\nOn 1 November 2018, Robinson was appointed as the Chair of The Elders, succeeding Kofi Annan who had died earlier in the year.\nMemoirs.\nIn September 2012, Robinson's memoir \"Everybody Matters\" was published by Hodder &amp; Stoughton.\nViews on agriculture.\nIn 2016 at the One Young World summit, Robinson began to become vocal about her efforts to eat less meat and encouraged others to either do the same or adopt some type of entirely vegetarian diet in order to help fight climate change. Robinson was applauded for her suggestions but did receive condemnation from critics in her own country expressing concern that following her lead would inadvertently harm workers in the agricultural industry and meat industry; she was asked to withdraw her comments by her local council. At the 2018 summit she stood by her call for people to consume less meat despite the backlash. In 2019 Robinson announced that she believes in making tackling climate change a personal issue in our lives and for this reason she has stopped eating meat in favour of a more eco-friendly pescetarian diet.\nArchive and tax avoidance controversy.\nIn October 2016, it was revealed in the media that Robinson was planning to donate her archive to Mayo County Council, as part of the development of The Mary Robinson Centre, and had applied to have the archive designated under the Taxes Consolidation Act, 1997, potentially resulting in a personal tax credit to her worth over \u20ac2m, arising from the donation of her personal papers. The house proposed to be used for the centre was to be purchased from Robinson's brother for \u20ac665,000.\nThe website of the Mary Robinson Centre lists the contents of the proposed archive (valued at \u20ac2.5m) as including:\n\"2,000 books on law and Human Rights 3,800 periodicals; A Master File of the President's engagements from December 1990 to September 1997; The symbolic light in the window of \u00c1ras an Uachtar\u00e1in from her Presidency; Robinson's personal diaries from 1967 to 1990 and from 1998 to 2001; 325 Archive Cartons..Scrap Books, Cassette Tapes.\" These papers relate to Robinson's almost 50-year career, spanning her time as a senator and barrister in the 1970s and '80s, her personal papers relating to the presidency and significant papers from the post-presidential period of her career, most notably her time with the United Nations as High Commissioner for Human Rights.\nThe project as a whole was condemned as an \"expensive vanity project\" by historian Diarmuid Ferriter. A member of the fundraising committee for the Centre argued that \"Ballina is the same distance to Dublin as Dublin is to Ballina.\" Chief Executive of Mayo County Council, Peter Hynes (who is also on the board of the Mary Robinson Centre) stated that Robinson had a \"legacy as a politician\" and that the centre is designed to bring significant academic, tourism, education and economic opportunities to Ballina and the West. Hynes also commented that \"The west coast town (of Ballina) has considerable pride in her outstanding career and on-going global leadership and sees the proposed centre as a living institution which will focus global attention and, working in collaboration with the National University of Ireland, Galway, will continue the conversation on topics of fundamental importance.\"\nFollowing the reporting of the potential \u20ac2m windfall, Robinson announced she would abandon the plan to \"gift\" the archive to Ballina and instead she said the papers would be \"gifted to NUIG, with Mayo County Council having full access to any part of the collection which is required to support the mission of the centre in Ballina\". In addition she stated that she would now not avail of the tax credit for the donation.\nRoles in international organisations.\nIn March 2013, Robinson was chosen to oversee the implementation of a peace deal to stabilise the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Appointed as special envoy to Africa's Great Lakes region by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, she played a key role in supporting implementation of the U.N.-drafted peace deal signed by 11 African countries in late February 2013. During her tenure as special envoy, the 23 March Movement and other armed rebel groups surrendered to the Congolese government.\nIn July 2014, Ban Ki-moon appointed her special envoy for climate change to interact with global leaders ahead of the 2014 Climate Summit, in New York, at which the secretary-general said he hoped to forge political commitment to finalising an agreement in 2015. A month following her appointment, in August 2014, she stepped down as special envoy to Africa's Great Lakes region. In March 2015, she voiced support for fossil fuel divestment commenting \"it is almost a due diligence requirement to consider ending investment in dirty energy companies\".\nIn early 2016, she was appointed by Erik Solheim, the chairman of the Development Assistance Committee, to head a high-level panel on the future of the Development Assistance Committee.\nIn May 2016, Ban Ki-moon appointed Robinson and Macharia Kamau, as special envoys of the Secretary-General on El Ni\u00f1o and Climate, tasking them with calling attention to the people around the world affected by severe El Ni\u00f1o-linked drought and climate impacts, and mobilising an integrated response that takes preparedness for future climatic events into account.\nIn September 2016, she was appointed by Ban Ki-moon to serve as member of the lead group of the Scaling Up Nutrition Movement.\nIn December 2018, she was criticised by human rights organisations, Detained International and Guernica 37 International Justice Chambers, for her statements regarding Dubai's Sheikha Latifa's disappearance and escape attempt. After meeting Latifa at a family lunch on the invitation of Dubai's royal family, Robinson described Latifa to the BBC as a \"troubled young woman\" who regretted an earlier video in which she alleged being confined and tortured in Dubai. Detained International head David Haigh expressed astonishment at the former UN commissioner for repeatedly reciting a single statement from Dubai's official version of the events, \"loving care of her family\", and for dismissing Latifa's alleged attempt to escape from Dubai in February 2018. In February 2021, Robinson retracted her 2018 statement claiming on the BBC's \"Panorama\" programme that she and Latifa's stepmother, Princess Haya, were both misled over the health and stability of Latifa during that period, when she was held in enforced detention in a Dubai villa and Robinson was embroiled into the proof of life controversy to allay international concern over Latifa's disappearance from the public eye. Robinson gave an account of the incident on \"The Late Late Show\" on 26 February 2021, referring to it as the biggest mistake of her career.\nIn 2020, she led an independent probe of a report that cleared Akinwumi Adesina, the president of the African Development Bank, of wrongdoing.\nRecognition.\nOver the course of her career, Robinson has been awarded numerous honours, including the following:\nOn 29 September 2010, at a ceremony in Dublin, she received a damehood from the Military and Hospitaller Order of St. Lazarus of Jerusalem. As a former Head of State and in recognition of her significant contribution towards human rights she was awarded the honour of Dame Grand Cross of Merit.\nHonorary degrees.\nIn 1991 and in 2001, Robinson was awarded honorary doctorates by Brown University, University of Cambridge, University of Liverpool and Lisbon Nova University. On 22 January 2000, she received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Law at Uppsala University, Sweden. In 2004, she was awarded an honorary degree by McGill University. \nIn 2009, she was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Bath, at the 1100th anniversary celebration of the Diocese of Bath and Wells, where she gave a lecture entitled \"Realising rights: the role of religion in human rights in the future\".\nOn 1 July 2025, she was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Laws from the University of Strathclyde.\nU.S. Presidential Medal of Freedom.\nIn 2009, she was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honour awarded by the US. In presenting the award, President Obama said \"As a crusader for women and those without a voice in Ireland, Mary Robinson was the first woman elected President of Ireland, before being appointed U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights. [...] Today, as an advocate for the hungry and the hunted, the forgotten and the ignored, Mary Robinson has not only shone a light on human suffering, but illuminated a better future for our world.\" Amnesty International congratulated Robinson on being named recipient.\nThe award was criticised by American and European Jewish groups, while others offered support. Parties opposed included the AIPAC, Anti-Defamation League, European Jewish Congress, and John Bolton, former US Ambassador to the UN. Bolton stated that those in the administration who recommended her either ignored her anti-Israel history, or missed it entirely. On the other hand, a group of Israeli human rights organisations stated \"as leaders of a sector within Israeli civil society that monitors and often criticizes government and military policy for violating human rights, we do not see such actions as plausible reason for denying Mrs. Robinson the award.\" In response to the protests by some Jewish groups and commentators, Robinson said she was \"surprised and dismayed\" and that \"this is old, recycled, untrue stuff,\" \"I have been very critical of the Palestinian side. My conduct continues to be on the side of tackling anti-Semitism and discrimination.\" \"There's a lot of bullying by certain elements of the Jewish community. They bully people who try to address the severe situation in Gaza and the West Bank. Archbishop Desmond Tutu gets the same criticism.\" In an open letter to Robinson, Hillel Neuer, a director of UN Watch, rejected Robinson's claim of being misunderstood or bullied by those who criticise her role in Durban. He said that she failed to confront purveyors of anti-Israel rhetoric. \"You may not have been the chief culprit of the Durban debacle, but you will always be its preeminent symbol\", he added. When asked about the opposition, White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs replied \"Mary Robinson was the first female President of Ireland, and she is somebody whom we are honouring as a prominent crusader of women's rights in Ireland and throughout the world.\"\nUS Speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi, Senate Assistant Majority Leader, Dick Durbin, and other legislators welcomed the award to Robinson.\" Forty-five Republican Congressmen sent a letter to President Obama citing \"her failed, biased record as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights\". In a letter to President Obama, Nancy Rubin, a former US ambassador to the UN Human Rights Commission, praised Robinson as a \"dedicated crusader for human rights for all people\". Oxfam expressed its strong support for Robinson. The Council of Women World Leaders, the Champalimaud Foundation, and the ImagineNations Group welcomed the award to Robinson.\nThe International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission congratulated Robinson, saying she \"helped advance recognition of the human rights of LGBT people in her capacity as President of Ireland and as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. She has been unwavering in her passionate call to end torture, persecution, and discrimination against LGBT people globally.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20572", "revid": "50289174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20572", "title": "Musical theatre", "text": "Stage work that combines songs, music, spoken dialogue, acting, and dance\nMusical theatre is a form of theatrical performance that combines songs, spoken dialogue, acting and dance. The story and emotional content of a musical\u00a0\u2013 humor, pathos, love, anger\u00a0\u2013 are communicated through words, music, movement and technical aspects of the entertainment as an integrated whole. Although musical theatre overlaps with other theatrical forms like opera and dance, it may be distinguished by the equal importance given to the music as compared with the dialogue, movement and other elements. Since the early 20th century, musical theatre stage works have generally been called, simply, musicals.\nAlthough music has been a part of dramatic presentations since ancient times, modern Western musical theatre emerged during the 19th century, with many structural elements established by the light opera works of Jacques Offenbach in France, Gilbert and Sullivan in Britain and the works of Harrigan and Hart in America. These were followed by Edwardian musical comedies, which emerged in Britain, and the musical theatre works of American creators like George M. Cohan at the turn of the 20th century. The Princess Theatre musicals (1915\u20131918) were artistic steps forward beyond the revues and other frothy entertainments of the early 20th century and led to such groundbreaking works as \"Show Boat\" (1927), \"Of Thee I Sing\" (1931) and \"Oklahoma!\" (1943). Some of the best-known musicals through the decades that followed include\n\"My Fair Lady\" (1956), \"The Fantasticks\" (1960), \"Hair\" (1967), \"A Chorus Line\" (1975), \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" (1985), \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1986), \"Rent\" (1996), \"Wicked\" (2003) and \"Hamilton\" (2015).\nMusicals are performed around the world. They may be presented in large venues, such as big-budget Broadway or West End productions in New York City or London. Alternatively, musicals may be staged in smaller venues, such as off-Broadway, off-off-Broadway, regional theatre, fringe theatre, or community theatre productions, or on tour. Musicals are often presented by amateur and school groups in churches, schools and other performance spaces. In addition to the United States and Britain, there are vibrant musical theatre scenes in continental Europe, Asia, Australasia, Canada and Latin America. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinitions and scope.\nBook musicals.\nSince the 20th century, the \"book musical\" has been defined as a musical play where songs and dances are fully integrated into a well-made story with serious dramatic goals and which is able to evoke genuine emotions other than laughter. The three main components of a book musical are its \"music\", \"lyrics\" and \"book\". The book or script of a musical refers to the story, character development and dramatic structure, including the spoken dialogue and stage directions, but it can also refer to the dialogue and lyrics together, which are sometimes referred to as the \"libretto\" (Italian for \"small book\"). The music and lyrics together form the \"score\" of a musical and include songs, incidental music and musical scenes, which are \"theatrical sequence[s] set to music, often combining song with spoken dialogue.\" The interpretation of a musical is the responsibility of its creative team, which includes a director, a musical director, usually a choreographer and sometimes an orchestrator. A musical's production is also creatively characterized by technical aspects, such as set design, costumes, stage properties (props), lighting and sound. The creative team, designs and interpretations generally change from the original production to succeeding productions. Some production elements, however, may be retained from the original production, for example, Bob Fosse's choreography in \"Chicago\".\nThere is no fixed length for a musical. While it can range from a short one-act entertainment to several acts and several hours in length (or even a multi-evening presentation), most musicals range from one and a half to three hours. Musicals are usually presented in two acts, with one short intermission, and the first act is frequently longer than the second. The first act generally introduces nearly all of the characters and most of the music and often ends with the introduction of a dramatic conflict or plot complication while the second act may introduce a few new songs but usually contains reprises of important musical themes and resolves the conflict or complication. A book musical is usually built around four to six main theme tunes that are reprised later in the show, although it sometimes consists of a series of songs not directly musically related. Spoken dialogue is generally interspersed between musical numbers, although \"sung dialogue\" or recitative may be used, especially in so-called \"sung-through\" musicals such as \"Jesus Christ Superstar\", \"Falsettos\", \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", \"Evita\" and \"Hamilton\". Several shorter musicals on Broadway and in the West End in the 21st century have been presented in one act.\nMoments of greatest dramatic intensity in a book musical are often performed in song. Proverbially, \"when the emotion becomes too strong for speech, you sing; when it becomes too strong for song, you dance.\" In a book musical, a song is ideally crafted to suit the character (or characters) and their situation within the story; although there have been times in the history of the musical (e.g. from the 1890s to the 1920s) when this integration between music and story has been tenuous. As \"The New York Times\" critic Ben Brantley described the ideal of song in theatre when reviewing the 2008 revival of \"Gypsy\": \"There is no separation at all between song and character, which is what happens in those uncommon moments when musicals reach upward to achieve their ideal reasons to be.\" Typically, many fewer words are sung in a five-minute song than are spoken in a five-minute block of dialogue. Therefore, there is less time to develop drama in a musical than in a straight play of equivalent length, since a musical usually devotes more time to music than to dialogue. Within the compressed nature of a musical, the writers must develop the characters and the plot.\nThe material presented in a musical may be original, or it may be adapted from novels (\"Wicked\" and \"Man of La Mancha\"), plays (\"Hello, Dolly!\" and \"Carousel\"), classic legends (\"Camelot\"), historical events (\"Evita\" and \"Hamilton\") or films (\"The Producers\" and \"Billy Elliot\"). On the other hand, many successful musical theatre works have been adapted for musical films, such as \"West Side Story\", \"My Fair Lady\", \"The Sound of Music\", \"Oliver!\" and \"Chicago\".\nComparisons with opera.\nMusical theatre is closely related to the theatrical form of opera, but the two are usually distinguished by weighing a number of factors. First, musicals generally have a greater focus on spoken dialogue. Some musicals, however, are entirely accompanied and sung-through, while some operas, such as \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\", and most operettas, have some unaccompanied dialogue. Second, musicals usually include more dancing as an essential part of the storytelling, particularly by the principal performers as well as the chorus. Third, musicals often use various genres of popular music or at least popular singing and musical styles.\nFinally, musicals usually avoid certain operatic conventions. In particular, a musical is almost always performed in the language of its audience. Musicals produced on Broadway or in the West End, for instance, are invariably sung in English, even if they were originally written in another language. While an opera singer is primarily a singer and only secondarily an actor (and rarely needs to dance), a musical theatre performer is often an actor first but must also be a singer and dancer. Someone who is equally accomplished at all three is referred to as a \"triple threat\". Composers of music for musicals often consider the vocal demands of roles with musical theatre performers in mind. Today, large theatres that stage musicals generally use microphones and amplification of the actors' singing voices in a way that would generally be disapproved of in an operatic context.\nSome works, including those by George Gershwin, Leonard Bernstein and Stephen Sondheim, have been made into both musical theatre and operatic productions. Similarly, some older operettas or light operas (such as \"The Pirates of Penzance\" by Gilbert and Sullivan) have been produced in modern adaptations that treat them as musicals. For some works, production styles are almost as important as the work's musical or dramatic content in defining into which art form the piece falls. Sondheim said, \"I really think that when something plays Broadway it's a musical, and when it plays in an opera house it's opera. That's it. It's the terrain, the countryside, the expectations of the audience that make it one thing or another.\" There remains an overlap in form between lighter operatic forms and more musically complex or ambitious musicals. In practice, it is often difficult to distinguish among the various kinds of musical theatre, including \"musical play\", \"musical comedy\", \"operetta\" and \"light opera\".\nLike opera, the singing in musical theatre is generally accompanied by an instrumental ensemble called a pit orchestra, located in a lowered area in front of the stage. While opera typically uses a conventional symphony orchestra, musicals are generally orchestrated for ensembles ranging from 27 players down to only a few players. Rock musicals usually employ a small group of mostly rock instruments, and some musicals may call for only a piano or two instruments. The music in musicals uses a range of \"styles and influences including operetta, classical techniques, folk music, jazz [and] local or historical styles [that] are appropriate to the setting.\" Musicals may begin with an overture played by the orchestra that \"weav[es] together excerpts of the score's famous melodies.\"\nEastern traditions and other forms.\nThere are various Eastern traditions of theatre that include music, such as Chinese opera, Taiwanese opera, Japanese Noh and Indian musical theatre, including Sanskrit drama, Indian classical dance, Parsi theatre and Yakshagana. India has, since the 20th century, produced numerous musical films, referred to as \"Bollywood\" musicals, and in Japan a series of 2.5D musicals based on popular anime and manga comics has developed in recent decades.\nShorter or simplified \"junior\" versions of many musicals are available for schools and youth groups, and very short works created or adapted for performance by children are sometimes called minimusicals.\nHistory.\nEarly antecedents.\nThe antecedents of musical theatre in Europe can be traced back to the theatre of ancient Greece, where music and dance were included in stage comedies and tragedies during the 5th century BCE. The music from the ancient forms is lost, however, and they had little influence on later development of musical theatre. In the 12th and 13th centuries, religious dramas taught the liturgy. Groups of actors would use outdoor Pageant wagons (stages on wheels) to tell each part of the story. Poetic forms sometimes alternated with the prose dialogues, and liturgical chants gave way to new melodies.\nThe European Renaissance saw older forms evolve into two antecedents of musical theatre: commedia dell'arte, where raucous clowns improvised familiar stories, and later, opera buffa. In England, Elizabethan and Jacobean plays frequently included music, and short musical plays began to be included in an evenings' dramatic entertainments. Court masques developed during the Tudor period that involved music, dancing, singing and acting, often with expensive costumes and a complex stage design. These developed into sung plays that are recognizable as English operas, the first usually being thought of as \"The Siege of Rhodes\" (1656). In France, meanwhile, Moli\u00e8re turned several of his farcical comedies into musical entertainments with songs (music provided by Jean-Baptiste Lully) and dance in the late 17th century. These influenced a brief period of English opera by composers such as John Blow and Henry Purcell.\nFrom the 18th century, the most popular forms of musical theatre in Britain were ballad operas, like John Gay's \"The Beggar's Opera\", that included lyrics written to the tunes of popular songs of the day (often spoofing opera), and later pantomime, which developed from commedia dell'arte, and comic opera with mostly romantic plot lines, like Michael Balfe's \"The Bohemian Girl\" (1845). Meanwhile, on the continent, singspiel, com\u00e9die en vaudeville, op\u00e9ra comique, zarzuela and other forms of light musical entertainment were emerging. \"The Beggar's Opera\" was the first recorded long-running play of any kind, running for 62 successive performances in 1728. It would take almost a century afterwards before any play broke 100 performances, but the record soon reached 150 in the late 1820s. Other musical theatre forms developed in England by the 19th century, such as music hall, melodrama and burletta, which were popularized partly because most London theatres were licensed only as music halls and not allowed to present plays without music.\nColonial America did not have a significant theatre presence until 1752, when London entrepreneur William Hallam sent a company of actors to the colonies managed by his brother Lewis. In New York in the summer of 1753, they performed ballad-operas, such as \"The Beggar's Opera\", and ballad-farces. By the 1840s, P. T. Barnum was operating an entertainment complex in lower Manhattan. Other early musical theatre in America consisted of British forms, such as burletta and pantomime, but what a piece was called did not necessarily define what it was. The 1852 Broadway extravaganza \"The Magic Deer\" advertised itself as \"A Serio Comico Tragico Operatical Historical Extravaganzical Burletical Tale of Enchantment.\" Theatre in New York moved from downtown gradually to midtown from around 1850 and did not arrive in the Times Square area until the 1920s and 1930s. New York runs lagged far behind those in London, but Laura Keene's \"musical burletta\" \"Seven Sisters\" (1860) shattered previous New York musical theatre record, with a run of 253 performances.\n1850s to 1880s.\nAround 1850, the French composer Herv\u00e9 was experimenting with a form of comic musical theatre he called op\u00e9rette. The best known composers of operetta were Jacques Offenbach from the 1850s to the 1870s and Johann Strauss II in the 1870s and 1880s. Offenbach's fertile melodies, combined with his librettists' witty satire, formed a model for the musical theatre that followed. Adaptations of the French operettas (played in mostly bad, risqu\u00e9 translations), musical burlesques, music hall, pantomime and burletta dominated the London musical stage into the 1870s. \nIn America, mid-19th century musical theatre entertainments included crude variety revue, which eventually developed into vaudeville, minstrel shows, which soon crossed the Atlantic to Britain, and Victorian burlesque, first popularized in the US by British troupes. Kurt G\u00e4nzl considers \"The Doctor of Alcantara\" (1862), with music composed by Julius Eichberg and a book and lyrics by Benjamin E Woolf, to be the \"first American musical\", though he also points to even earlier works. A hugely successful musical entertainment that premiered in New York in 1866, \"The Black Crook\", combined dance and some original music that helped to tell the story. The spectacular production, famous for its skimpy costumes, ran for a record-breaking 474 performances. The same year, \"The Black Domino/Between You, Me and the Post\" was the first show to call itself a \"musical comedy\". In 1874, \"Evangeline or The Belle of Arcadia\", by Edward E. Rice and J. Cheever Goodwin, based loosely on Longfellow\u2019s \"Evangeline\", with an original American story and music, opened successfully in New York and was revived in Boston, New York, and in repeated tours. Comedians Edward Harrigan and Tony Hart produced and starred in musicals on Broadway between 1878 (\"The Mulligan Guard Picnic\") and 1885. These musical comedies featured characters and situations taken from the everyday life of New York's lower classes. They starred high quality singers (Lillian Russell, Vivienne Segal and Fay Templeton) instead of the ladies of questionable repute who had starred in earlier musical forms. In 1879, \"The Brook\" by Nate Salsbury was another national success with contemporary American dance styles and an American story about \"members of an acting company taking a trip down a river ... with lots of obstacles and mishaps along the way\".\nAs transportation improved, poverty in London and New York diminished, and street lighting made for safer travel at night, the number of patrons for the growing number of theatres increased enormously. Plays ran longer, leading to better profits and improved production values, and men began to bring their families to the theatre. The first musical theatre piece to exceed 500 consecutive performances was the French operetta \"The Chimes of Normandy\" in 1878 (705 performances). English comic opera adopted many of the successful ideas of European operetta, none more successfully than the series of more than a dozen long-running Gilbert and Sullivan comic operas, including \"H.M.S. Pinafore\" (1878) and \"The Mikado\" (1885). These were sensations on both sides of the Atlantic and in Australia and helped to raise the standard for what was considered a successful show. These shows were designed for family audiences, a marked contrast from the risqu\u00e9 burlesques, bawdy music hall shows and French operettas that sometimes drew a crowd seeking less wholesome entertainment. Only a few 19th-century musical pieces exceeded the run of \"The Mikado\", such as \"Dorothy\", which opened in 1886 and set a new record with a run of 931 performances. Gilbert and Sullivan's influence on later musical theatre was profound, creating examples of how to \"integrate\" musicals so that the lyrics and dialogue advanced a coherent story. Their works were admired and copied by early authors and composers of musicals in Britain and America.\n1890s to the new century.\n\"A Trip to Chinatown\" (1891) was Broadway's long-run champion (until \"Irene\" in 1919), running for 657 performances, but New York runs continued to be relatively short, with a few exceptions, compared with London runs, until the 1920s. Gilbert and Sullivan were widely pirated and also were imitated in New York by productions such as Reginald De Koven's \"Robin Hood\" (1891) and John Philip Sousa's \"El Capitan\" (1896). \"A Trip to Coontown\" (1898) was the first musical comedy entirely produced and performed by African Americans on Broadway (largely inspired by the routines of the minstrel shows), followed by ragtime-tinged shows. Hundreds of musical comedies were staged on Broadway in the 1890s and early 20th century, composed of songs written in New York's Tin Pan Alley, including those by George M. Cohan, who worked to create an American style distinct from the Gilbert and Sullivan works. The most successful New York shows were often followed by extensive national tours.\nMeanwhile, musicals took over the London stage in the Gay Nineties, led by producer George Edwardes, who perceived that audiences wanted a new alternative to the Savoy-style comic operas and their intellectual, political, absurdist satire. He experimented with a modern-dress, family-friendly musical theatre style, with breezy, popular songs, snappy, romantic banter, and stylish spectacle at the Gaiety and his other theatres. These drew on the traditions of comic opera and used elements of burlesque and of the Harrigan and Hart pieces. He replaced the bawdy women of burlesque with his \"respectable\" corps of Gaiety Girls to complete the musical and visual fun. The success of the first of these, \"In Town\" (1892) and \"A Gaiety Girl\" (1893) set the style for the next three decades. The plots were generally light, romantic \"poor maiden loves aristocrat and wins him against all odds\" shows, with music by Ivan Caryll, Sidney Jones and Lionel Monckton. These shows were immediately widely copied in America, and Edwardian musical comedy swept away the earlier musical forms of comic opera and operetta. \"The Geisha\" (1896) was one of the most successful in the 1890s, running for more than two years and achieving great international success.\n\"The Belle of New York\" (1898) became the first American musical to run for over a year in London. The British musical comedy \"Florodora\" (1899) was a popular success on both sides of the Atlantic, as was \"A Chinese Honeymoon\" (1901), which ran for a record-setting 1,074 performances in London and 376 in New York. After the turn of the 20th century, Seymour Hicks joined forces with Edwardes and American producer Charles Frohman to create another decade of popular shows. Other enduring Edwardian musical comedy hits included \"The Arcadians\" (1909) and \"The Quaker Girl\" (1910).\nEarly 20th century.\nVirtually eliminated from the English-speaking stage by competition from the ubiquitous Edwardian musical comedies, operettas returned to London and Broadway in 1907 with \"The Merry Widow\", and adaptations of continental operettas became direct competitors with musicals. Franz Leh\u00e1r and Oscar Straus composed new operettas that were popular in English until World War I. In America, Victor Herbert produced a string of enduring operettas including \"The Fortune Teller\" (1898), \"Babes in Toyland\" (1903), \"Mlle. Modiste\" (1905), \"The Red Mill\" (1906) and \"Naughty Marietta\" (1910).\nIn the 1910s, the team of P. G. Wodehouse, Guy Bolton and Jerome Kern, following in the footsteps of Gilbert and Sullivan, created the \"Princess Theatre shows\" and paved the way for Kern's later work by showing that a musical could combine light, popular entertainment with continuity between its story and songs. Historian Gerald Bordman wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These shows built and polished the mold from which almost all later major musical comedies evolved. ... The characters and situations were, within the limitations of musical comedy license, believable and the humor came from the situations or the nature of the characters. Kern's exquisitely flowing melodies were employed to further the action or develop characterization. ... [Edwardian] musical comedy was often guilty of inserting songs in a hit-or-miss fashion. The Princess Theatre musicals brought about a change in approach. P. G. Wodehouse, the most observant, literate and witty lyricist of his day, and the team of Bolton, Wodehouse and Kern had an influence felt to this day.\nThe theatre-going public needed escapist entertainment during the dark times of World War I, and they flocked to the theatre. The 1919 hit musical \"Irene\" ran for 670 performances, a Broadway record that held until 1938. The British theatre public supported far longer runs like that of \"The Maid of the Mountains\" (1,352 performances) and especially \"Chu Chin Chow\". Its run of 2,238 performances was more than twice as long as any previous musical, setting a record that stood for nearly forty years. Even a revival of \"The Beggar's Opera\" held the stage for 1,463 performances. Revues like \"The Bing Boys Are Here\" in Britain, and those of Florenz Ziegfeld and his imitators in America, were also extraordinarily popular.\nThe musicals of the Roaring Twenties, borrowing from vaudeville, music hall and other light entertainments, tended to emphasize big dance routines and popular songs at the expense of plot. Typical of the decade were lighthearted productions like \"Sally\"; \"Lady, Be Good\"; \"No, No, Nanette\"; \"Oh, Kay!\"; and \"Funny Face\". Despite forgettable stories, these musicals featured stars such as Marilyn Miller and Fred Astaire and produced dozens of enduring popular songs by Kern, George and Ira Gershwin, Irving Berlin, Cole Porter and Rodgers and Hart. Popular music was dominated by musical theatre standards, such as \"Fascinating Rhythm\", \"Tea for Two\" and \"Someone to Watch Over Me\". Many shows were revues, series of sketches and songs with little or no connection between them. The best-known of these were the annual \"Ziegfeld Follies\", spectacular song-and-dance revues on Broadway featuring extravagant sets, elaborate costumes and beautiful chorus girls. These spectacles also raised production values, and mounting a musical generally became more expensive. \"Shuffle Along\" (1921), an all-African American show, was a hit on Broadway. A new generation of composers of operettas also emerged in the 1920s, such as Rudolf Friml and Sigmund Romberg, to create a series of popular Broadway hits.\nIn London, writer-stars such as Ivor Novello and No\u00ebl Coward became popular, but the primacy of British musical theatre from the 19th century through 1920 was gradually replaced by American innovation, especially after World War I, as Kern and other Tin Pan Alley composers began to bring new musical styles such as ragtime and jazz to the theatres, and the Shubert Brothers took control of the Broadway theatres. Musical theatre writer Andrew Lamb notes, \"The operatic and theatrical styles of nineteenth-century social structures were replaced by a musical style more aptly suited to twentieth-century society and its vernacular idiom. It was from America that the more direct style emerged, and in America that it was able to flourish in a developing society less hidebound by nineteenth-century tradition.\" In France, \"com\u00e9die musicale\" was written between in the early decades of the century for such stars as Yvonne Printemps.\n\"Show Boat\" and the Great Depression.\nProgressing far beyond the comparatively frivolous musicals and sentimental operettas of the decade, Broadway's \"Show Boat\" (1927) represented an even more complete integration of book and score than the Princess Theatre musicals, with dramatic themes told through the music, dialogue, setting and movement. This was accomplished by combining the lyricism of Kern's music with the skillful libretto of Oscar Hammerstein II. One historian wrote, \"Here we come to a completely new genre \u2013 the musical play as distinguished from musical comedy. Now ... everything else was subservient to that play. Now ... came complete integration of song, humor and production numbers into a single and inextricable artistic entity.\"\nAs the Great Depression set in during the post-Broadway national tour of \"Show Boat\", the public turned back to mostly light, escapist song-and-dance entertainment. Audiences on both sides of the Atlantic had little money to spend on entertainment, and only a few stage shows anywhere exceeded a run of 500 performances during the decade. The revue \"The Band Wagon\" (1931) starred dancing partners Fred Astaire and his sister Adele, while Porter's \"Anything Goes\" (1934) confirmed Ethel Merman's position as the First Lady of musical theatre, a title she maintained for many years. Coward and Novello continued to deliver old fashioned, sentimental musicals, such as \"The Dancing Years\", while Rodgers and Hart returned from Hollywood to create a series of successful Broadway shows, including \"On Your Toes\" (1936, with Ray Bolger, the first Broadway musical to make dramatic use of classical dance), \"Babes in Arms\" (1937) and \"The Boys from Syracuse\" (1938). Porter added \"Du Barry Was a Lady\" (1939). The longest-running piece of musical theatre of the 1930s in the US was \"Hellzapoppin\" (1938), a revue with audience participation, which played for 1,404 performances, setting a new Broadway record. In Britain, \"Me and My Girl\" ran for 1,646 performances.\nStill, a few creative teams began to build on \"Show Boat\"'s innovations. \"Of Thee I Sing\" (1931), a political satire by the Gershwins, was the first musical awarded the Pulitzer Prize. \"As Thousands Cheer\" (1933), a revue by Irving Berlin and Moss Hart in which each song or sketch was based on a newspaper headline, marked the first Broadway show in which an African-American, Ethel Waters, starred alongside white actors. Waters' numbers included \"Supper Time\", a woman's lament for her husband who has been lynched. The Gershwins' \"Porgy and Bess\" (1935) featured an all African-American cast and blended operatic, folk and jazz idioms. \"The Cradle Will Rock\" (1937), directed by Orson Welles, was a highly political pro-union piece that, despite the controversy surrounding it, ran for 108 performances. Rodgers and Hart's \"I'd Rather Be Right\" (1937) was a political satire with George M. Cohan as President Franklin D. Roosevelt, and Kurt Weill's \"Knickerbocker Holiday\" depicted New York City's early history while good-naturedly satirizing Roosevelt's good intentions.\nThe motion picture mounted a challenge to the stage. Silent films had presented only limited competition, but by the end of the 1920s, films like \"The Jazz Singer\" could be presented with synchronized sound. \"Talkie\" films at low prices effectively killed off vaudeville by the early 1930s. Despite the economic woes of the 1930s and the competition from film, the musical survived. In fact, it continued to evolve thematically beyond the gags and showgirls musicals of the \"Gay Nineties\" and \"Roaring Twenties\" and the sentimental romance of operetta, adding technical expertise and the fast-paced staging and naturalistic dialogue style led by director George Abbott.\nThe Golden Age (1940s to 1960s).\n1940s.\nThe 1940s began with more hits from Porter, Irving Berlin, Rodgers and Hart, Weill and Gershwin, some with runs over 500 performances as the economy rebounded, but artistic change was in the air. Rodgers and Hammerstein's \"Oklahoma!\" (1943) completed the revolution begun by \"Show Boat\", by tightly integrating all the aspects of musical theatre, with a cohesive plot, songs that furthered the action of the story, and featured dream ballets and other dances that advanced the plot and developed the characters, rather than using dance as an excuse to parade scantily clad women across the stage. Rodgers and Hammerstein hired ballet choreographer Agnes de Mille, who used everyday motions to help the characters express their ideas. It defied musical conventions by raising its first act curtain not on a bevy of chorus girls, but rather on a woman churning butter, with an off-stage voice singing the opening lines of \"Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin'\" unaccompanied. It drew rave reviews, set off a box-office frenzy and received a Pulitzer Prize. Brooks Atkinson wrote in \"The New York Times\" that the show's opening number changed the history of musical theatre: \"After a verse like that, sung to a buoyant melody, the banalities of the old musical stage became intolerable.\" It was the first \"blockbuster\" Broadway show, running a total of 2,212 performances, and was made into a hit film. It remains one of the most frequently produced of the team's projects. William A. Everett and Paul R. Laird wrote that this was a \"show, that, like \"Show Boat\", became a milestone, so that later historians writing about important moments in twentieth-century theatre would begin to identify eras according to their relationship to \"Oklahoma!\"\".\n\"After \"Oklahoma!\", Rodgers and Hammerstein were the most important contributors to the musical-play form... The examples they set in creating vital plays, often rich with social thought, provided the necessary encouragement for other gifted writers to create musical plays of their own\". The two collaborators created an extraordinary collection of some of musical theatre's best loved and most enduring classics, including \"Carousel\" (1945), \"South Pacific\" (1949), \"The King and I\" (1951) and \"The Sound of Music\" (1959). Some of these musicals treat more serious subject matter than most earlier shows: the villain in \"Oklahoma!\" is a suspected murderer and psychopath; \"Carousel\" deals with spousal abuse, thievery, suicide and the afterlife; \"South Pacific\" explores miscegenation even more thoroughly than \"Show Boat\"; the hero of \"The King and I\" dies onstage; and the backdrop of \"The Sound of Music\" is the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany in 1938.\nThe show's creativity stimulated Rodgers and Hammerstein's contemporaries and ushered in the \"Golden Age\" of American musical theatre. Americana was displayed on Broadway during the \"Golden Age\", as the wartime cycle of shows began to arrive. An example of this is \"On the Town\" (1944), written by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, composed by Leonard Bernstein and choreographed by Jerome Robbins. The story is set during wartime and concerns three sailors who are on a 24-hour shore leave in New York City, during which each falls in love. The show also gives the impression of a country with an uncertain future, as the sailors and their women also have. Irving Berlin used sharpshooter Annie Oakley's career as a basis for his \"Annie Get Your Gun\" (1946, 1,147 performances); Burton Lane, E. Y. Harburg and Fred Saidy combined political satire with Irish whimsy for their fantasy \"Finian's Rainbow\" (1947, 725 performances); and Cole Porter found inspiration in William Shakespeare's \"The Taming of the Shrew\" for \"Kiss Me, Kate\" (1948, 1,077 performances). The American musicals overwhelmed the old-fashioned British Coward/Novello-style shows, one of the last big successes of which was Novello's \"Perchance to Dream\" (1945, 1,021 performances). The formula for the Golden Age musicals reflected one or more of four widely held perceptions of the \"American dream\": That stability and worth derives from a love relationship sanctioned and restricted by Protestant ideals of marriage; that a married couple should make a moral home with children away from the city in a suburb or small town; that the woman's function was as homemaker and mother; and that Americans incorporate an independent and pioneering spirit or that their success is self-made.\n1950s.\nThe 1950s were crucial to the development of the American musical. Damon Runyon's eclectic characters were at the core of Frank Loesser's and Abe Burrows' \"Guys and Dolls\", (1950, 1,200 performances); and the Gold Rush was the setting for Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe's \"Paint Your Wagon\" (1951). The relatively brief seven-month run of that show did not discourage Lerner and Loewe from collaborating again, this time on \"My Fair Lady\" (1956), an adaptation of George Bernard Shaw's \"Pygmalion\" starring Rex Harrison and Julie Andrews, which at 2,717 performances held the long-run record for many years. Popular Hollywood films were made of all of these musicals. Two hits by British creators in this decade were \"The Boy Friend\" (1954), which ran for 2,078 performances in London and marked Andrews' American debut, and \"Salad Days\" (1954), which broke the British long-run record with a run of 2,283 performances.\nAnother record was set by \"The Threepenny Opera\", which ran for 2,707 performances, becoming the longest-running off-Broadway musical until \"The Fantasticks\". The production also broke ground by showing that musicals could be profitable off-Broadway in a small-scale, small orchestra format. This was confirmed in 1959 when a revival of Jerome Kern and P. G. Wodehouse's \"Leave It to Jane\" ran for more than two years. The 1959\u20131960 off-Broadway season included a dozen musicals and revues including \"Little Mary Sunshine\", \"The Fantasticks\" and \"Ernest in Love\", a musical adaptation of Oscar Wilde's 1895 hit \"The Importance of Being Earnest\".\n\"West Side Story\" (1957) transported \"Romeo and Juliet\" to modern day New York City and converted the feuding Montague and Capulet families into opposing ethnic gangs, the Jets and the Sharks. The book was adapted by Arthur Laurents, with music by Leonard Bernstein and lyrics by newcomer Stephen Sondheim. It was praised by critics for its innovations in music and choreography but was less commercially successful than the same year's \"The Music Man\", written and composed by Meredith Willson, which won the Tony Award for Best Musical that year. \"West Side Story\" would get a film adaptation in 1961, which proved successful both critically and commercially. Laurents and Sondheim teamed up again for \"Gypsy\" (1959), with Jule Styne providing the music for a story about Rose Thompson Hovick, the mother of the titular stripper Gypsy Rose Lee. \nAlthough directors and choreographers have had a major influence on musical theatre style since at least the 19th century, George Abbott and his collaborators and successors took a central role in integrating movement and dance fully into musical theatre productions in the Golden Age. Abbott introduced ballet as a story-telling device in \"On Your Toes\" in 1936, which was followed by Agnes de Mille's ballet and choreography in \"Oklahoma!\". After Abbott collaborated with Jerome Robbins in \"On the Town\" and other shows, Robbins combined the roles of director and choreographer, emphasizing the story-telling power of dance in \"West Side Story\", \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" (1962) and \"Fiddler on the Roof\" (1964). Bob Fosse choreographed for Abbott in \"The Pajama Game\" (1956) and \"Damn Yankees\" (1957), injecting playful sexuality into those hits. He was later the director-choreographer for \"Sweet Charity\" (1968), \"Pippin\" (1972) and \"Chicago\" (1975). Other notable director-choreographers have included Gower Champion, Tommy Tune, Michael Bennett, Gillian Lynne and Susan Stroman. Prominent directors have included Hal Prince, who also got his start with Abbott, and Trevor Nunn.\nDuring the Golden Age, automotive companies and other large corporations began to hire Broadway talent to write corporate musicals, private shows only seen by their employees or customers. The 1950s ended with Rodgers and Hammerstein's last hit, \"The Sound of Music\", which also became another hit for Mary Martin. It ran for 1,443 performances and shared the Tony Award for Best Musical. Together with its extremely successful 1965 film version, it has become one of the most popular musicals in history.\n1960s.\nIn 1960, \"The Fantasticks\" was first produced off-Broadway. This intimate allegorical show would quietly run for over 40 years at the Sullivan Street Theatre in Greenwich Village, becoming by far the longest-running musical in history. Its authors produced other innovative works in the 1960s, such as \"Celebration\" and \"I Do! I Do!\", the first two-character Broadway musical. The 1960s would see a number of blockbusters, like \"Fiddler on the Roof\" (1964; 3,242 performances), \"Hello, Dolly!\" (1964; 2,844 performances), \"Funny Girl\" (1964; 1,348 performances) and \"Man of La Mancha\" (1965; 2,328 performances), and some more risqu\u00e9 pieces like \"Cabaret\", before ending with the emergence of the rock musical. In Britain, \"Oliver!\" (1960) ran for 2,618 performances, but the long-run champion of the decade was \"The Black and White Minstrel Show\" (1962), which played for 4,344 performances. Two men had considerable impact on musical theatre history beginning in this decade: Stephen Sondheim and Jerry Herman.\nThe first project for which Sondheim wrote both music and lyrics was \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" (1962, 964 performances), with a book based on the works of Plautus by Burt Shevelove and Larry Gelbart, starring Zero Mostel. Sondheim moved the musical beyond its concentration on the romantic plots typical of earlier eras; his work tended to be darker, exploring the grittier sides of life both present and past. Other early Sondheim works include \"Anyone Can Whistle\" (1964, which ran only nine performances, despite having stars Lee Remick and Angela Lansbury), and the successful \"Company\" (1970), \"Follies\" (1971) and \"A Little Night Music\" (1973). Later, Sondheim found inspiration in unlikely sources: the opening of Japan to Western trade for \"Pacific Overtures\" (1976), a legendary murderous barber seeking revenge in the Industrial Age of London for \"Sweeney Todd\" (1979), the paintings of Georges Seurat for \"Sunday in the Park with George\" (1984), fairy tales for \"Into the Woods\" (1987), and a collection of presidential assassins in \"Assassins\" (1990).\nWhile some critics have argued that some of Sondheim's musicals lack commercial appeal, others have praised their lyrical sophistication and musical complexity, as well as the interplay of lyrics and music in his shows. Some of Sondheim's notable innovations include a show presented in reverse (\"Merrily We Roll Along\") and the above-mentioned \"Anyone Can Whistle\", in which the first act ends with the cast informing the audience that they are mad.\nJerry Herman played a significant role in American musical theatre, beginning with his first Broadway production, \"Milk and Honey\" (1961, 563 performances), about the founding of the state of Israel, and continuing with the blockbuster hits \"Hello, Dolly!\" (1964, 2,844 performances), \"Mame\" (1966, 1,508 performances), and \"La Cage aux Folles\" (1983, 1,761 performances). Even his less successful shows like \"Dear World\" (1969) and \"Mack and Mabel\" (1974) have had memorable scores (\"Mack and Mabel\" was later reworked into a London hit). Writing both words and music, many of Herman's show tunes have become popular standards, including \"Hello, Dolly!\", \"We Need a Little Christmas\", \"I Am What I Am\", \"Mame\", \"The Best of Times\", \"Before the Parade Passes By\", \"Put On Your Sunday Clothes\", \"It Only Takes a Moment\", \"Bosom Buddies\" and \"I Won't Send Roses\", recorded by such artists as Louis Armstrong, Eydie Gorm\u00e9, Barbra Streisand, Petula Clark and Bernadette Peters. Herman's songbook has been the subject of two popular musical revues, \"Jerry's Girls\" (Broadway, 1985) and \"Showtune\" (off-Broadway, 2003).\nThe musical started to diverge from the relatively narrow confines of the 1950s. Rock music would be used in several Broadway musicals, beginning with \"Hair\", which featured not only rock music but also nudity and controversial opinions about the Vietnam War, race relations and other social issues.\nSocial themes.\nAfter \"Show Boat\" and \"Porgy and Bess\", and as the struggle in America and elsewhere for minorities' civil rights progressed, Hammerstein, Harold Arlen, Yip Harburg and others were emboldened to write more musicals and operas that aimed to normalize societal toleration of minorities and urged racial harmony. Early Golden Age works that focused on racial tolerance included \"Finian's Rainbow\" and \"South Pacific\". Towards the end of the Golden Age, several shows tackled Jewish subjects and issues, such as \"Fiddler on the Roof\", \"Milk and Honey\", \"Blitz!\" and later \"Rags\". The original concept that became \"West Side Story\" was set on the Lower East Side during Easter-Passover celebrations; the rival gangs were to be Jewish and Italian Catholic. The creative team later decided that the Polish (white) vs. Puerto Rican conflict was fresher.\nTolerance as an important theme in musicals has continued in recent decades. The final expression of \"West Side Story\" left a message of racial tolerance. By the end of the 1960s, musicals became racially integrated, with black and white cast members even covering each other's roles, as they did in \"Hair\". Homosexuality has also been explored in musicals, starting with \"Hair\", and even more overtly in \"La Cage aux Folles\", \"Falsettos\", \"Rent\", \"Hedwig and the Angry Inch\" and other shows in recent decades. \"Parade\" is a sensitive exploration of both anti-Semitism and historical American racism, and \"Ragtime\" similarly explores the experience of immigrants and minorities in America.\n1970s to present.\n1970s.\nAfter the success of \"Hair\", rock musicals flourished in the 1970s, with \"Jesus Christ Superstar\", \"Godspell\", \"The Rocky Horror Show\", \"Evita\" and \"Two Gentlemen of Verona\". Some of those began as \"concept albums\" which were then adapted to the stage, most notably \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" and \"Evita\". Others had no dialogue or were otherwise reminiscent of opera, with dramatic, emotional themes; these sometimes started as concept albums and were referred to as rock operas. Shows like \"Raisin\", \"Dreamgirls\", \"Purlie\" and \"The Wiz\" brought a significant African-American influence to Broadway. More varied musical genres and styles were incorporated into musicals both on and especially off-Broadway. At the same time, Stephen Sondheim found success with some of his musicals, as mentioned above.\nIn 1975, the dance musical \"A Chorus Line\" emerged from recorded group therapy-style sessions Michael Bennett conducted with \"gypsies\"\u00a0\u2013 those who sing and dance in support of the leading players\u00a0\u2013 from the Broadway community. From hundreds of hours of tapes, James Kirkwood Jr. and Nick Dante fashioned a book about an audition for a musical, incorporating many real-life stories from the sessions; some who attended the sessions eventually played variations of themselves or each other in the show. With music by Marvin Hamlisch and lyrics by Edward Kleban, \"A Chorus Line\" first opened at Joseph Papp's Public Theater in lower Manhattan. What initially had been planned as a limited engagement eventually moved to the Shubert Theatre on Broadway for a run of 6,137 performances, becoming the longest-running production in Broadway history up to that time. The show swept the Tony Awards and won the Pulitzer Prize, and its hit song, \"What I Did for Love\", became a standard.\nBroadway audiences welcomed musicals that varied from the golden age style and substance. John Kander and Fred Ebb explored the rise of Nazism in Germany in \"Cabaret\", and murder and the media in Prohibition-era \"Chicago\", which relied on old vaudeville techniques. \"Pippin\", by Stephen Schwartz, was set in the days of Charlemagne. Federico Fellini's autobiographical film \"8\u00bd\" became Maury Yeston's \"Nine\". At the end of the decade, \"Evita\" and \"Sweeney Todd\" were precursors of the darker, big budget musicals of the 1980s that depended on dramatic stories, sweeping scores and spectacular effects. At the same time, old-fashioned values were still embraced in such hits as \"Annie\", \"42nd Street\", \"My One and Only\", and popular revivals of \"No, No, Nanette\" and \"Irene\". Although many film versions of musicals were made in the 1970s, few were critical or box office successes, with the notable exceptions of \"Fiddler on the Roof\", \"Cabaret\" and \"Grease\".\n1980s.\nThe 1980s saw the influence of European \"megamusicals\" on Broadway, in the West End and elsewhere. These typically feature a pop-influenced score, large casts and spectacular sets and special effects \u2013 a falling chandelier (in \"The Phantom of the Opera\"); a helicopter landing on stage (in \"Miss Saigon\") \u2013 and big budgets. Some were based on novels or other works of literature. The British team of composer Andrew Lloyd Webber and producer Cameron Mackintosh started the megamusical phenomenon with their 1981 musical \"Cats\", based on the poems of T. S. Eliot, which overtook \"A Chorus Line\" to become the longest-running Broadway show. Lloyd Webber followed up with \"Starlight Express\" (1984), performed on roller skates; \"The Phantom of the Opera\" (1986; also with Mackintosh), derived from the novel of the same name; and \"Sunset Boulevard\" (1993), from the 1950 film of the same name. \"Phantom\" would surpass \"Cats\" to become the longest-running show in Broadway history, a record it still holds. The French team of Claude-Michel Sch\u00f6nberg and Alain Boublil wrote \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", based on the novel of the same name, whose 1985 London production was produced by Mackintosh and became, and still is, the longest-running musical in West End and Broadway history. The team produced another hit with \"Miss Saigon\" (1989), which was inspired by the Puccini opera \"Madama Butterfly\".\nThe megamusicals' huge budgets redefined expectations for financial success on Broadway and in the West End. In earlier years, it was possible for a show to be considered a hit after a run of several hundred performances, but with multimillion-dollar production costs, a show must run for years simply to turn a profit. Megamusicals were also reproduced in productions around the world, multiplying their profit potential while expanding the global audience for musical theatre.\n1990s.\nIn the 1990s, a new generation of theatrical composers emerged, including Jason Robert Brown and Michael John LaChiusa, who began with productions off-Broadway. The most conspicuous success of these artists was Jonathan Larson's show \"Rent\" (1996), a rock musical (based on the opera \"La boh\u00e8me\") about a struggling community of artists in Manhattan. While the cost of tickets to Broadway and West End musicals was escalating beyond the budget of many theatregoers, \"Rent\" was marketed to increase the popularity of musicals among a younger audience. It featured a young cast and a heavily rock-influenced score; the musical became a hit. Its young fans, many of them students, calling themselves RENTheads, camped out at the Nederlander Theatre in hopes of winning the lottery for $20 front row tickets, and some saw the show dozens of times. Other shows on Broadway followed \"Rent\"'s lead by offering heavily discounted day-of-performance or standing-room tickets, although often the discounts are offered only to students.\nThe 1990s also saw the influence of large corporations on the production of musicals. The most important has been Disney Theatrical Productions, which began adapting some of Disney's animated film musicals for the stage, starting with \"Beauty and the Beast\" (1994), \"The Lion King\" (1997) and \"Aida\" (2000), the latter two with music by Elton John. \"The Lion King\" is the highest-grossing musical in Broadway history. \"The Who's Tommy\" (1993), a theatrical adaptation of the rock opera \"Tommy\", achieved a healthy run of 899 performances but was criticized for sanitizing the story and \"musical theatre-izing\" the rock music.\nDespite the growing number of large-scale musicals in the 1980s and 1990s, a number of lower-budget, smaller-scale musicals managed to find critical and financial success, such as \"Falsettoland\", \"Little Shop of Horrors\", \"\" and \"Blood Brothers\", which ran for 10,013 performances. The topics of these pieces vary widely, and the music ranges from rock to pop, but they often are produced off-Broadway, or for smaller London theatres, and some of these stagings have been regarded as imaginative and innovative.\n2000s\u2013present.\nTrends.\nIn the new century, familiarity has been embraced by producers and investors anxious to guarantee that they recoup their considerable investments. Some took (usually modest-budget) chances on new and creative material, such as \"Urinetown\" (2001), \"Avenue Q\" (2003), \"The Light in the Piazza\" (2005), \"Spring Awakening\" (2006), \"In the Heights\" (2008), \"Next to Normal\" (2009), \"American Idiot\" (2010) and \"The Book of Mormon\" (2011). \"Hamilton\" (2015), transformed \"under-dramatized American history\" into an unusual hip-hop inflected hit. In 2011, Sondheim argued that of all forms of \"contemporary pop music\", rap was \"the closest to traditional musical theatre\" and was \"one pathway to the future.\"\nHowever, most major-market 21st-century productions have taken a safe route, with revivals of familiar fare, such as \"Fiddler on the Roof\", \"A Chorus Line\", \"South Pacific\", \"Gypsy\", \"Hair\", \"West Side Story\" and \"Grease\", or with adaptations of other proven material, such as literature (\"The Scarlet Pimpernel\", \"Wicked\" and \"Fun Home\"), hoping that the shows would have a built-in audience as a result. This trend is especially persistent with film adaptations, including \"The Producers\", \"Spamalot\", \"Hairspray\", \"Legally Blonde\", \"The Color Purple\", \"Xanadu\", \"Billy Elliot\", \"Shrek\", \"Waitress\" and \"Groundhog Day\". Some critics have argued that the reuse of film plots, especially those from Disney (such as \"Mary Poppins\" and \"The Little Mermaid\"), equate the Broadway and West End musical to a tourist attraction, rather than a creative outlet.\nToday, it is less likely that a sole producer, such as David Merrick or Cameron Mackintosh, backs a production. Corporate sponsors dominate Broadway, and often alliances are formed to stage musicals, which require an investment of $10\u00a0million or more. In 2002, the credits for \"Thoroughly Modern Millie\" listed ten producers, and among those names were entities composed of several individuals. Typically, off-Broadway and regional theatres tend to produce smaller and therefore less expensive musicals, and development of new musicals has increasingly taken place outside of New York and London or in smaller venues. For example, \"Spring Awakening\", \"Fun Home\" and \"Hamilton\" were developed off-Broadway before being launched on Broadway.\nSeveral musicals returned to the spectacle format that was so successful in the 1980s, recalling extravaganzas that have been presented at times, throughout theatre history, since the ancient Romans staged mock sea battles. Examples include the musical adaptations of \"Lord of the Rings\" (2007), \"Gone with the Wind\" (2008) and \"\" (2011). These musicals involved songwriters with little theatrical experience, and the expensive productions generally lost money. Conversely, \"The Drowsy Chaperone\", \"Avenue Q\", \"The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee\", \"Xanadu\" and \"Fun Home\", among others, have been presented in smaller-scale productions, mostly uninterrupted by an intermission, with short running times, and enjoyed financial success. In 2013, \"Time\" magazine reported that a trend off-Broadway has been \"immersive\" theatre, citing shows such as \"Natasha, Pierre &amp; The Great Comet of 1812\" (2012) and \"Here Lies Love\" (2013) in which the staging takes place around and within the audience. The shows set a joint record, each receiving 11 nominations for Lucille Lortel Awards, and feature contemporary scores.\nIn 2013, Cyndi Lauper was the \"first female composer to win the [Tony for] Best Score without a male collaborator\" for writing the music and lyrics for \"Kinky Boots\". In 2015, for the first time, an all-female writing team, Lisa Kron and Jeanine Tesori, won the Tony Award for Best Original Score (and Best Book for Kron) for \"Fun Home\", although work by male songwriters continues to be produced more often.\nJukebox musicals.\nAnother trend has been to create a minimal plot to fit a collection of songs that have already been hits. Following the earlier success of \"Buddy \u2013 The Buddy Holly Story\", these have included \"Movin' Out\" (2002, based on the tunes of Billy Joel), \"Jersey Boys\" (2006, The Four Seasons), \"Rock of Ages\" (2009, featuring classic rock of the 1980s), \"Thriller \u2013 Live\" (2009, Michael Jackson), and many others. This style is often referred to as the \"jukebox musical\". Similar but more plot-driven musicals have been built around the canon of a particular pop group including \"Mamma Mia!\" (1999, based on the songs of ABBA), \"Our House\" (2002, based on the songs of Madness) and \"We Will Rock You\" (2002, based on the songs of Queen).\nFilm and TV musicals.\nLive-action film musicals were nearly dead in the 1980s and early 1990s, with exceptions of \"Victor/Victoria\", \"Little Shop of Horrors\" and the 1996 film of \"Evita\". In the new century, Baz Luhrmann began a revival of the film musical with \"Moulin Rouge!\" (2001). This was followed by \"Chicago\" (2002); \"Phantom of the Opera\" (2004); \"Rent\" (2005); \"Dreamgirls\" (2006); \"Hairspray\", \"Enchanted\" and ' (all in 2007); \"Mamma Mia!\" (2008); \"Nine\" (2009); \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\" and \"Pitch Perfect\" (both in 2012), \"Into The Woods\", \"The Last Five Years\" (2014), \"La La Land\" (2016), \"The Greatest Showman\" (2017), \"A Star Is Born\" and \"Mary Poppins Returns\" (both 2018), \"Rocketman\" (2019) and \"In the Heights\" and Steven Spielberg's version of \"West Side Story\" (both in 2021), among others. Dr. Seuss's \"How the Grinch Stole Christmas!\" (2000) and \"The Cat in the Hat\" (2003), turned children's books into live-action film musicals. After the immense success of Disney and other houses with animated film musicals beginning with \"The Little Mermaid\" in 1989 and running throughout the 1990s (including some more adult-themed films, like ' (1999)), fewer animated film musicals were released in the first decade of the 21st century. The genre made a comeback beginning in 2010 with \"Tangled\" (2010), \"Rio\" (2011) and \"Frozen\" (2013). In Asia, India continues to produce numerous \"Bollywood\" film musicals, and Japan produces anime and manga film musicals.\nMade for TV musical films were popular in the 1990s, such as \"Gypsy\" (1993), \"Cinderella\" (1997) and \"Annie\" (1999). Several made for TV musicals in the first decade of the 21st century were adaptations of the stage version, such as \"South Pacific\" (2001), \"The Music Man\" (2003) and \"Once Upon a Mattress\" (2005), and a televised version of the stage musical \"Legally Blonde\" in 2007. Additionally, several musicals were filmed on stage and broadcast on Public Television, for example \"Contact\" in 2002 and \"Kiss Me, Kate\" and \"Oklahoma!\" in 2003. The made-for-TV musical \"High School Musical\" (2006), and its several sequels, enjoyed particular success and were adapted for stage musicals and other media.\nIn 2013, NBC began a series of live television broadcasts of musicals with \"The Sound of Music Live!\" Although the production received mixed reviews, it was a ratings success. Further broadcasts have included \"Peter Pan Live!\" (NBC 2014), \"The Wiz Live!\" (NBC 2015), a UK broadcast, \"The Sound of Music Live\" (ITV 2015) ' (Fox 2016), \"Hairspray Live!\" (NBC, 2016), \"A Christmas Story Live!\" (Fox, 2017), and ' (Fox 2019).\nSome television shows have set episodes as a musical. Examples include episodes of \"Ally McBeal\", ' (\"The Bitter Suite\" and \"Lyre, Lyre, Heart's On Fire\"), \"Psych\" (\"\"), \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" (\"Once More, with Feeling\"), \"That's So Raven\", \"Daria\", \"Dexter's Laboratory\", \"The Powerpuff Girls\", \"The Flash\", \"Once Upon a Time\", \"Oz\", \"Scrubs\" (one episode was written by the creators of \"Avenue Q\"), ' () and \"That '70s Show\" (the 100th episode, \"That '70s Musical\"). Others have included scenes where characters suddenly begin singing and dancing in a musical-theatre style during an episode, such as in several episodes of \"The Simpsons\", \"30 Rock\", \"Hannah Montana\", \"South Park\", \"Bob's Burgers\" and \"Family Guy\". Television series that have extensively used the musical format have included \"Cop Rock\", \"Flight of the Conchords\", \"Glee\", \"Smash\" and \"Crazy Ex-Girlfriend\".\nThere have also been musicals made for the internet, including \"Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog,\" about a low-rent super-villain played by Neil Patrick Harris. It was written during the WGA writer's strike. Since 2006, reality TV shows have been used to help market musical revivals by holding a talent competition to cast (usually female) leads. Examples of these are \"How Do You Solve a Problem like Maria?\", \",\" \"Any Dream Will Do,\" \",\" \"I'd Do Anything\" and \"Over the Rainbow.\" In 2021, \"Schmigadoon!\" was a parody of, and homage to, Golden Age musicals of the 1940s and 1950s.\n2020\u20132021 theatre shutdown.\nThe COVID-19 pandemic caused the closure of theatres and theatre festivals around the world in early 2020, including all Broadway and West End theatres. Many performing arts institutions attempted to adapt, or reduce their losses, by offering new (or expanded) digital services. In particular this resulted in the online streaming of previously recorded performances of many companies, as well as bespoke crowdsourcing projects. For example, The Sydney Theatre Company commissioned actors to film themselves at home discussing, then performing, a monologue from one of the characters they had previously played on stage. The casts of musicals, such as \"Hamilton\" and \"Mamma Mia!\" united on Zoom calls to entertain individuals and the public. Some performances were streamed live, or presented outdoors or in other \"socially distanced\" ways, sometimes allowing audience members to interact with the cast. Radio theatre festivals were broadcast. Virtual, and even crowd-sourced musicals were created, such as \"Ratatouille the Musical\". Filmed versions of major musicals, like \"Hamilton\", were released on streaming platforms. Andrew Lloyd Webber released recordings of his musicals on YouTube.\nDue to the closures and loss of ticket sales, many theatre companies were placed in financial peril. Some governments offered emergency aid to the arts. Some musical theatre markets began to reopen in fits and starts by early 2021, with West End theatres postponing their reopening from June to July, and Broadway starting in September. Throughout 2021, however, spikes in the pandemic caused some closures even after markets reopened.\nInternational musicals.\nThe U.S. and Britain were the most active sources of book musicals from the 19th century through much of the 20th century (although Europe produced various forms of popular light opera and operetta, for example Spanish Zarzuela, during that period and even earlier). However, the light musical stage in other countries has become more active in recent decades.\nMusicals from other English-speaking countries (notably Australia and Canada) often do well locally and occasionally even reach Broadway or the West End (e.g., \"The Boy from Oz\" and \"The Drowsy Chaperone\"). South Africa has an active musical theatre scene, with revues like \"African Footprint\" and \"Umoja\" and book musicals, such as \"Kat and the Kings\" and \"Sarafina!\" touring internationally. Locally, musicals like \"Vere\", \"Love and Green Onions\", \"Over the Rainbow: the all-new all-gay... extravaganza\" and \"Bangbroek Mountain\" and \"In Briefs \u2013 a queer little Musical\" have been produced successfully.\nSuccessful musicals from continental Europe include shows from (among other countries) Germany (\"Elixier\" and \"Ludwig II\"), Austria (\"Tanz der Vampire\", \"Elisabeth\", \"Mozart!\" and \"Rebecca\"), Czech Republic (\"Dracula\"), France (\"Starmania\", \"Notre-Dame de Paris\", \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" and \"Mozart, l'op\u00e9ra rock\") and Spain (\"Hoy no me puedo levantar\" and \"The Musical Sancho Panza\").\nJapan has recently seen the growth of an indigenous form of musical theatre, both animated and live action, mostly based on Anime and Manga, such as \"Kiki's Delivery Service\" and \"Tenimyu\". The popular \"Sailor Moon\" metaseries has had twenty-nine Sailor Moon musicals, spanning thirteen years. Beginning in 1914, a series of popular revues have been performed by the all-female Takarazuka Revue, which currently fields five performing troupes. Elsewhere in Asia, the Indian Bollywood musical, mostly in the form of motion pictures, is tremendously successful.\nBeginning with a 2002 tour of \"Les Mis\u00e9rables\", various Western musicals have been imported to mainland China and staged in English. Attempts at localizing Western productions in China began in 2008 when \"Fame\" was produced in Mandarin with a full Chinese cast at the Central Academy of Drama in Beijing. Since then, other western productions have been staged in China in Mandarin with a Chinese cast. The first Chinese production in the style of Western musical theatre was \"The Gold Sand\" in 2005. In addition, Li Dun, a well-known Chinese producer, produced \"Butterflies\", based on a classic Chinese love tragedy, in 2007 as well as \"Love U Teresa\" in 2011.\nAmateur and school productions.\nMusicals are often presented by amateur and school groups in churches, schools and other performance spaces. Although amateur theatre has existed for centuries, even in the New World, Fran\u00e7ois Cellier and Cunningham Bridgeman wrote, in 1914, that prior to the late 19th century, amateur actors were treated with contempt by professionals. After the formation of amateur Gilbert and Sullivan companies licensed to perform the Savoy operas, professionals recognized that the amateur societies \"support the culture of music and the drama. They are now accepted as useful training schools for the legitimate stage, and from the volunteer ranks have sprung many present-day favourites.\" The National Operatic and Dramatic Association was founded in the UK in 1899. It reported, in 1914, that nearly 200 amateur dramatic societies were producing Gilbert and Sullivan works in Britain that year. Similarly, more than 100 amateur theatres were founded in the US in the early 20th century. This number has grown to an estimated 18,000 in the US. The Educational Theater Association in the US has nearly 5,000 member schools.\nRelevance.\nThe Broadway League announced that in the 2007\u201308 season, 12.27\u00a0million tickets were purchased for Broadway shows for a gross sale amount of almost a billion dollars. The League further reported that during the 2006\u201307 season, approximately 65% of Broadway tickets were purchased by tourists, and that foreign tourists were 16% of attendees. The Society of London Theatre reported that 2007 set a record for attendance in London. Total attendees in the major commercial and grant-aided theatres in Central London were 13.6\u00a0million, and total ticket revenues were \u00a3469.7\u00a0million. The international musicals scene has been increasingly active in recent decades. Nevertheless, Stephen Sondheim commented in the year 2000:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You have two kinds of shows on Broadway\u00a0\u2013 revivals and the same kind of musicals over and over again, all spectacles. You get your tickets for \"The Lion King\" a year in advance, and essentially a family ... pass on to their children the idea that that's what the theater is\u00a0\u2013 a spectacular musical you see once a year, a stage version of a movie. It has nothing to do with theater at all. It has to do with seeing what is familiar. ... I don't think the theatre will die \"per se\", but it's never going to be what it was. ... It's a tourist attraction.\"\nHowever, noting the success in recent decades of original material, and creative re-imaginings of film, plays and literature, theatre historian John Kenrick countered:\nIs the Musical dead? ... Absolutely not! Changing? Always! The musical has been changing ever since Offenbach did his first rewrite in the 1850s. And change is the clearest sign that the musical is still a living, growing genre. Will we ever return to the so-called 'golden age', with musicals at the center of popular culture? Probably not. Public taste has undergone fundamental changes, and the commercial arts can only flow where the paying public allows.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20574", "revid": "1124248888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20574", "title": "Meta-Wikipedia", "text": ""}
{"id": "20575", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20575", "title": "Micron (disambiguation)", "text": "A micron is a non-SI name for micrometre (\u03bcm).\nMicron may also refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20576", "revid": "42325789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20576", "title": "Magic lantern (disambiguation)", "text": "A magic lantern is an early type of image projector, an ancestor of the modern slide projector.\nMagic lantern may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "20578", "revid": "5849026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20578", "title": "Meiji-era leaders", "text": ""}
{"id": "20580", "revid": "48087836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20580", "title": "Motion", "text": "Change in the position of an object\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn physics, motion is when an object changes its position with respect to a reference point in a given time. Motion is mathematically described in terms of displacement, distance, velocity, acceleration, speed, and frame of reference to an observer, measuring the change in position of the body relative to that frame with a change in time. The branch of physics describing the motion of objects without reference to their cause is called \"kinematics\", while the branch studying forces and their effect on motion is called \"dynamics\".\nIf an object is not in motion relative to a given frame of reference, it is said to be \"at rest\", \"motionless\", \"immobile\", \"stationary\", or to have a constant or time-invariant position with reference to its surroundings. Modern physics holds that, as there is no absolute frame of reference, Isaac Newton's concept of \"absolute motion\" cannot be determined. Everything in the universe can be considered to be in motion.\nMotion applies to various physical systems: objects, bodies, matter particles, matter fields, radiation, radiation fields, radiation particles, curvature, and space-time. One can also speak of the motion of images, shapes, and boundaries. In general, the term motion signifies a continuous change in the position or configuration of a physical system in space. For example, one can talk about the motion of a wave or the motion of a quantum particle, where the configuration consists of the probabilities of the wave or particle occupying specific positions.\nLaws of motion.\nIn physics, the motion of bodies is described through two related sets of laws of mechanics. Classical mechanics for super atomic (larger than an atom) objects (such as cars, projectiles, planets, cells, and humans) and quantum mechanics for atomic and sub-atomic objects (such as helium, protons, and electrons). Historically, Newton and Euler formulated three laws of classical mechanics:\nClassical mechanics.\nClassical mechanics is used for describing the motion of macroscopic objects moving at speeds significantly slower than the speed of light, from projectiles to parts of machinery, as well as astronomical objects, such as spacecraft, planets, stars, and galaxies. It produces very accurate results within these domains and is one of the oldest and largest scientific descriptions in science, engineering, and technology.\nClassical mechanics is fundamentally based on Newton's laws of motion. These laws describe the relationship between the forces acting on a body and the motion of that body. They were first compiled by Sir Isaac Newton in his work \"Philosophi\u00e6 Naturalis Principia Mathematica\", which was first published on July 5, 1687. Newton's three laws are:\nNewton's three laws of motion were the first to accurately provide a mathematical model for understanding orbiting bodies in outer space. This explanation unified the motion of celestial bodies and the motion of objects on Earth.\nRelativistic mechanics.\nModern kinematics developed with study of electromagnetism and refers all velocities formula_9 to their ratio to speed of light formula_10. Velocity is then interpreted as rapidity, the hyperbolic angle formula_11 for which the hyperbolic tangent function formula_12. Acceleration, the change of velocity over time, then changes rapidity according to Lorentz transformations. This part of mechanics is special relativity. Efforts to incorporate gravity into relativistic mechanics were made by W. K. Clifford and Albert Einstein. The development used differential geometry to describe a curved universe with gravity; the study is called general relativity.\nQuantum mechanics.\nQuantum mechanics is a set of principles describing physical reality at the atomic level of matter (molecules and atoms) and the subatomic particles (electrons, protons, neutrons, and even smaller elementary particles such as quarks). These descriptions include the simultaneous wave-like and particle-like behavior of both matter and radiation energy as described in the wave\u2013particle duality.\nIn classical mechanics, accurate measurements and predictions of the state of objects can be calculated, such as location and velocity. In quantum mechanics, due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, the complete state of a subatomic particle, such as its location and velocity, cannot be simultaneously determined.\nIn addition to describing the motion of atomic level phenomena, quantum mechanics is useful in understanding some large-scale phenomena such as superfluidity, superconductivity, and biological systems, including the function of smell receptors and the structures of protein.\nOrders of magnitude.\nHumans, like all known things in the universe, are in constant motion; however, aside from obvious movements of the various external body parts and locomotion, humans are in motion in a variety of ways that are more difficult to perceive. Many of these \"imperceptible motions\" are only perceivable with the help of special tools and careful observation. The larger scales of imperceptible motions are difficult for humans to perceive for two reasons: Newton's laws of motion (particularly the third), which prevents the feeling of motion on a mass to which the observer is connected, and the lack of an obvious frame of reference that would allow individuals to easily see that they are moving. The smaller scales of these motions are too small to be detected conventionally with human senses.\nUniverse.\nSpacetime (the fabric of the universe) is expanding, meaning everything in the universe is stretching, like a rubber band. This motion is the most obscure, not involving physical movement but a fundamental change in the universe's nature. The primary source of verification of this expansion was provided by Edwin Hubble who demonstrated that all galaxies and distant astronomical objects were moving away from Earth, known as Hubble's law, predicted by a universal expansion.\nGalaxy.\nThe Milky Way Galaxy is moving through space and many astronomers believe the velocity of this motion to be approximately relative to the observed locations of other nearby galaxies. Another reference frame is provided by the Cosmic microwave background. This frame of reference indicates that the Milky Way is moving at around .\nSun and Solar System.\nThe Milky Way is rotating around its dense Galactic Center, thus the Sun is moving in a circle within the galaxy's gravity. Away from the central bulge, or outer rim, the typical stellar velocity is between . All planets and their moons move with the Sun. Thus, the Solar System is in motion.\nEarth.\nThe Earth is rotating or spinning around its axis. This is evidenced by day and night, at the equator the earth has an eastward velocity of . The Earth is also orbiting around the Sun in an orbital revolution. A complete orbit around the Sun takes one year, or about 365\u00a0days; it averages a speed of about .\nContinents.\nThe Theory of Plate tectonics tells us that the continents are drifting on convection currents within the mantle, causing them to move across the surface of the planet at the slow speed of approximately per year. However, the velocities of plates range widely. The fastest-moving plates are the oceanic plates, with the Cocos Plate advancing at a rate of per year and the Pacific Plate moving per year. At the other extreme, the slowest-moving plate is the Eurasian Plate, progressing at a typical rate of about per year.\nInternal body.\nThe human heart is regularly contracting to move blood throughout the body. Through larger veins and arteries in the body, blood has been found to travel at approximately 0.33\u00a0m/s. Though considerable variation exists, and peak flows in the venae cavae have been found between . additionally, the smooth muscles of hollow internal organs are moving. The most familiar would be the occurrence of peristalsis, which is where digested food is forced throughout the digestive tract. Though different foods travel through the body at different rates, an average speed through the human small intestine is . The human lymphatic system is also constantly causing movements of excess fluids, lipids, and immune system related products around the body. The lymph fluid has been found to move through a lymph capillary of the skin at approximately 0.0000097\u00a0m/s.\nCells.\nThe cells of the human body have many structures and organelles that move throughout them. Cytoplasmic streaming is a way in which cells move molecular substances throughout the cytoplasm, various motor proteins work as molecular motors within a cell and move along the surface of various cellular substrates such as microtubules, and motor proteins are typically powered by the hydrolysis of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and convert chemical energy into mechanical work. Vesicles propelled by motor proteins have been found to have a velocity of approximately 0.00000152\u00a0m/s.\nParticles.\nAccording to the laws of thermodynamics, all particles of matter are in constant random motion as long as the temperature is above absolute zero. Thus the molecules and atoms that make up the human body are vibrating, colliding, and moving. This motion can be detected as temperature; higher temperatures, which represent greater kinetic energy in the particles, feel warm to humans who sense the thermal energy transferring from the object being touched to their nerves. Similarly, when lower temperature objects are touched, the senses perceive the transfer of heat away from the body as a feeling of cold.\nSubatomic particles.\nWithin the standard atomic orbital model, electrons exist in a region around the nucleus of each atom. This region is called the electron cloud. According to Bohr's model of the atom, electrons have a high velocity, and the larger the nucleus they are orbiting the faster they would need to move. If electrons were to move about the electron cloud in strict paths the same way planets orbit the Sun, then electrons would be required to do so at speeds that would far exceed the speed of light. However, there is no reason that one must confine oneself to this strict conceptualization (that electrons move in paths the same way macroscopic objects do), rather one can conceptualize electrons to be 'particles' that capriciously exist within the bounds of the electron cloud. Inside the atomic nucleus, the protons and neutrons are also probably moving around due to the electrical repulsion of the protons and the presence of angular momentum of both particles.\nLight.\nLight moves at a speed of 299,792,458\u00a0m/s, or , in a vacuum. The speed of light in vacuum (or formula_10) is also the speed of all massless particles and associated fields in a vacuum, and it is the upper limit on the speed at which energy, matter, information or causation can travel. The speed of light in vacuum is thus the upper limit for speed for all physical systems.\nIn addition, the speed of light is an invariant quantity: it has the same value, irrespective of the position or speed of the observer. This property makes the speed of light \"c\" a natural measurement unit for speed and a fundamental constant of nature.\nIn 2019, the speed of light was redefined alongside all seven SI base units using what it calls \"the explicit-constant formulation\", where each \"unit is defined indirectly by specifying explicitly an exact value for a well-recognized fundamental constant\", as was done for the speed of light. A new, but completely equivalent, wording of the metre's definition was proposed: \"The metre, symbol m, is the unit of length; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum to be equal to exactly when it is expressed in the SI unit m s\u22121.\" This implicit change to the speed of light was one of the changes that was incorporated in the 2019 revision of the SI, also termed the \"New SI\".\nSuperluminal motion.\nSome motion appears to an observer to exceed the speed of light. Bursts of energy moving out along the relativistic jets emitted from these objects can have a proper motion that appears greater than the speed of light. All of these sources are thought to contain a black hole, responsible for the ejection of mass at high velocities. Light echoes can also produce apparent superluminal motion. This occurs owing to how motion is often calculated at long distances; oftentimes calculations fail to account for the fact that the speed of light is finite. When measuring the movement of distant objects across the sky, there is a large time delay between what has been observed and what has occurred, due to the large distance the light from the distant object has to travel to reach us. The error in the above naive calculation comes from the fact that when an object has a component of velocity directed towards the Earth, as the object moves closer to the Earth that time delay becomes smaller. This means that the apparent speed as calculated above is \"greater\" than the actual speed. Correspondingly, if the object is moving away from the Earth, the above calculation underestimates the actual speed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "20581", "revid": "19349497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20581", "title": "Malpractice", "text": "Area of law concerning negligence by professionals\nIn the law of torts, malpractice, also known as professional negligence, is an \"instance of negligence or incompetence on the part of a professional\".\nProfessionals who may become the subject of malpractice actions include:\nProof of malpractice.\nProfessional negligence actions require a professional relationship between the professional and the person claiming to have been injured by malpractice. For example, to sue a lawyer for malpractice the person bringing the claim must have had an attorney-client relationship with the lawyer.\nTo succeed in a malpractice action under typical malpractice law, the person making a malpractice claim must prove that the professional committed an act of culpable negligence and that the person suffered an injury due to the professional's error.\nMedical malpractice.\nMedical malpractice is a highly complex area of law, with laws that differ significantly between jurisdictions.\nIn Australia, medical malpractice and the rise in claims against individual and institutional providers have led to the evolution of patient advocates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
