{"id": "29135", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29135", "title": "Super Bowl IX", "text": "1975 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl IX was an American football game played between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Pittsburgh Steelers and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Minnesota Vikings to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1974 season. The game was played on January 12, 1975, at Tulane Stadium in New Orleans, Louisiana. The Steelers defeated the Vikings by the score of 16\u20136 to win their first Super Bowl championship.\nThis game matched two of the NFL's best defenses and two future Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterbacks. Led by quarterback Terry Bradshaw and the \"Steel Curtain\" defense, the Steelers advanced to their first Super Bowl after posting a 10\u20133\u20131 regular-season record and playoff victories over the Buffalo Bills and the Oakland Raiders. The Vikings were led by quarterback Fran Tarkenton and the \"Purple People Eaters\" defense; they advanced to their second consecutive Super Bowl and third overall after finishing the regular season with a 10\u20134 record and defeating the St. Louis Cardinals and the Los Angeles Rams in the playoffs.\nThe first half of Super Bowl IX was a defensive struggle, with the lone score being the first safety in Super Bowl history when Tarkenton was downed in his own end zone. The Steelers then recovered a fumble on the second-half kickoff and scored on fullback Franco Harris's 9-yard run. The Vikings cut the score, 9\u20136, early in the fourth quarter by recovering a blocked punt in Pittsburgh's end zone for a touchdown, but the Steelers then drove 66 yards on their ensuing possession to score on Larry Brown's 4-yard touchdown reception to put the game out of reach.\nIn total, the Steelers limited the Vikings to Super Bowl record lows of nine first downs, 119 total offensive yards, 17 rushing yards, and no offensive scores (Minnesota's only score came on a blocked punt, and they did not even score on the extra point attempt). The Steelers accomplished this despite losing starting linebackers Andy Russell and Jack Lambert, who were injured and replaced by Ed Bradley and Loren Toews for most of the second half. On the other hand, Pittsburgh had 333 yards of total offense. Harris, who ran for a Super Bowl record 158 yards (more than the entire Minnesota offense) and a touchdown, was named the Super Bowl's Most Valuable Player.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl IX to New Orleans on April 3, 1973, at the owners' meetings held in Scottsdale, Arizona. This was the third time that the Super Bowl was played in New Orleans, after IV and VI. Super Bowl IX was originally planned to be held at the Louisiana Superdome, which was under construction at the time of the vote. However, construction delays at the Superdome (which pushed its opening to August 1975) forced the league to move the game to Tulane Stadium, where the city's previous two Super Bowls were held. This ended up being the last professional American football game played at Tulane Stadium.\nFor the second time, the owners selected two consecutive Super Bowl host cities at the same meeting. Only three cities submitted bids for the two games. Representatives from New Orleans, Miami, and Los Angeles each made presentations; all three cities had already hosted the Super Bowl. New Orleans impressed owners with their Superdome plans, and won a unanimous vote to host the game, while Miami was given Super Bowl X.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nPittsburgh advanced to their first Super Bowl and was playing for a league championship for the first time in team history. Their 73-year-old owner Art Rooney founded the Steelers as a 1933 NFL expansion team, but suffered through losing seasons for most of its 42-year history and had never made it to an NFL championship game or a Super Bowl. But in 1969, Rooney hired Chuck Noll to be the team's head coach and its fortunes started to turn following a disastrous 1\u201313 first year under the future Hall of Fame coach.\nNoll rebuilt the Steelers through the NFL draft, selecting defensive tackle Joe Greene and defensive end L. C. Greenwood in his first season as head coach. In 1970, Noll drafted quarterback Terry Bradshaw and cornerback Mel Blount. In 1971, linebacker Jack Ham, defensive tackle Ernie Holmes, defensive end Dwight White, and safety Mike Wagner were selected by the team. Fullback Franco Harris was drafted in 1972. And in 1974, the Steelers picked linebacker Jack Lambert, center Mike Webster and wide receivers Lynn Swann and John Stallworth, and signed safety Donnie Shell as a free agent. Bradshaw, Webster, Swann, Stallworth, and Harris ended up being Hall of Fame players on offense, while the others formed the core nucleus of their \"Steel Curtain\" defense, including future Hall of Famers Greene, Ham, Blount, Lambert and Shell.\nBut en route to Super Bowl IX, the Steelers had started the regular season slowly, as Bradshaw and Joe Gilliam fought to be the team's starting quarterback. Gilliam had started for the first four games of the season, but Noll eventually made Bradshaw the starter. Although Bradshaw ended up completing only 67 out of 148 passes for 785\u00a0yards, 7 touchdowns, and 8 interceptions, he helped lead the team to a 10\u20133\u20131 regular-season record. The Steelers' main offensive weapon, however, was running the ball. Harris rushed for 1,006\u00a0yards and five touchdowns, while also catching 23 passes for 200 yards and another touchdown. Running backs Rocky Bleier, Preston Pearson, and Steve Davis also made important contributions, gaining a combined total of 936\u00a0yards and eight touchdowns. Receiver Lynn Swann returned 41 punts for a league-leading 577 yards and a touchdown.\nBut the Steelers' main strength during the season was their staunch \"Steel Curtain\" defense, which led the league with the fewest total yards allowed (3,074) and the fewest passing yards allowed (1,466). Greene won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award for the second time in the previous three seasons, and he and L. C. Greenwood were named to the Pro Bowl. Both of the team's outside linebackers, Ham and Andy Russell, had been also selected to play in the Pro Bowl, while Lambert already had two interceptions for 19 yards in his rookie year. In the defensive backfield, Blount, Wagner, and Glen Edwards made a strong impact against opposing passing plays.\nMinnesota Vikings.\nThe Vikings came into the season trying to redeem themselves after a one sided Super Bowl VIII loss after which they became the first team to lose two Super Bowls (the other loss was in Super Bowl IV).\nMinnesota's powerful offense was still led by veteran quarterback Fran Tarkenton, who passed for 2,598 yards and 17 touchdowns. The Vikings' primary offensive weapon was running back Chuck Foreman, who led the team in receptions with 53 for 586 yards and six touchdowns. He was also their leading rusher with 777 rushing yards and nine touchdowns. Wide receivers Jim Lash and John Gilliam were major deep threats, having 32 receptions for 631 yards (a 19.7\u00a0yards per catch average) and 26 receptions for 578 yards (a 22.5 ypc average), respectively. Fullback Dave Osborn contributed with 514 rushing yards, and 29 receptions for 196 yards. And the Vikings' offensive line, led by future Hall of Famers right tackle Ron Yary and center Mick Tingelhoff, allowed only 17 sacks.\nAided by the \"Purple People Eaters\" defense, led by future Hall of Fame defensive linemen Carl Eller and Alan Page, and future Hall of Fame safety Paul Krause, the Vikings won the NFC Central for the sixth time in the previous seven seasons. Linebacker Jeff Siemon had 2 interceptions and 3 fumble recoveries. Minnesota's defense also featured cornerback Nate Wright, who led the team with 6 interceptions, and safety Jeff Wright, who had 4.\nPlayoffs.\nFor the first time in four years, the Miami Dolphins were not able to advance to the Super Bowl. While the Steelers defeated the Buffalo Bills 32\u201314 in the first round, the favored Dolphins lost to the Oakland Raiders 28\u201326, giving up Raiders running back Clarence Davis' 8-yard touchdown reception with 26 seconds remaining in the game with a play now known as \"The Sea of Hands\". The key play in the game occurred when the Dolphins were in control and were leading the Raiders 19\u201314 midway through the fourth quarter. Cliff Branch hauled in a 72-yard touchdown pass from Raiders quarterback Ken Stabler when third-year Dolphin defensive back Henry Stuckey, the man assigned to cover Branch on the play, fell down, and the resultant wide open Branch caught the bomb and sprinted to the end zone. After George Blanda kicked the PAT, the Raiders led 21\u201319. Dolphin fans were furious because fan favorite Lloyd Mumphord was replaced with Stuckey. Mumphord and head coach Don Shula were involved in a feud at the time, and it is thought that Stuckey was given the starting job for this game because of Shula's and Mumphord's differences of opinion. Afterwards, Stuckey was released in the offseason. Many believed that had Mumphord been in the game, there would have been no \"Sea of Hands\" play.\nMeanwhile, Minnesota allowed only a combined 24 points in their playoff wins against the St. Louis Cardinals, 30\u201314, and their narrow defeat of the Los Angeles Rams, 14\u201310, after their defense stopped an attempted comeback touchdown drive from the Rams on the Vikings' own 2-yard line.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nSports writers and fans predicted that Super Bowl IX would be a low scoring game because of the two teams' defenses. The Steelers' \"Steel Curtain\" had led the AFC in fewest points allowed (189) and the Vikings' \"Purple People Eaters\" had only given up 195.\nAs the NFC was the designated \"home team\" for the game, by NFL rules at the time the Vikings were required to wear their purple jerseys. Although the league later relaxed the rule from Super Bowl XIII onwards, the Vikings would've likely worn their purple jerseys anyway, given that they've worn their purple jerseys at home for much of their history aside from a few games in the 1960s, when the NFL was encouraging (but not requiring) teams to wear white at home. This was the only one of the four Super Bowls the Steelers of the 1970s played in that the team wore their white jerseys, and the only Super Bowl the team would wear white at all until Super Bowl XL 31\u00a0years later.\nThis was the first post-merger Super Bowl to not feature an East Division team from either conference. The previous season's Vikings were the only non-East Division team to appear in any of the previous four Super Bowls.\nThis would be the final Super Bowl to feature the flag style pylons.\nGame conditions.\nWhen the NFL awarded Super Bowl IX to New Orleans on April 3, 1973, the game was originally scheduled to be played at the Louisiana Superdome. By July 1974, construction on the dome was not yet finished, and so the league reverted to Tulane Stadium, home field for Tulane University and the New Orleans Saints, and site of Super Bowls IV and VI. Dolphins owner Joe Robbie lobbied the NFL to move Super Bowl IX to the Orange Bowl, already scheduled to host Super Bowl X, and give New Orleans the January 1976 game, but the proposal was rejected.\nThis proved to be quite pivotal, because of the inclement conditions (low temperature and the field was slick from overnight rain). This was the last Super Bowl to be played in inclement weather for over thirty years, until Super Bowl XLI (and that game's weather issues in Miami were based on a driving rain, not the temperature). The game still holds the mark as the second-coldest outdoor temperature for an outdoor game, at a game-time temperature of (only Super Bowl VI, also played at Tulane Stadium, had a colder game-time temperature, ) and expectations that Super Bowl XLVIII would break these records due to its winter location in outdoor New Jersey did not come to pass. (Seven Super Bowls - XVI in Pontiac, XXVI and LII in Minneapolis, XXVIII and XXXIV in Atlanta, XL in Detroit and XLVI in Indianapolis - have had colder outdoor temperatures but were played in fixed-roof stadiums, except XLVI at the retractable-roofed Lucas Oil Stadium.)\nThe change of venue meant this was not only the last of three Super Bowls played at Tulane Stadium, but the last professional game played in the stadium, which was demolished five years later and replaced for the 1975 NFL season by the Louisiana Superdome, which has hosted every Super Bowl held in New Orleans since.\nThe circumstances surrounding Super Bowl IX prompted the NFL to adopt a rule prohibiting a new stadium from hosting the Super Bowl following its first regular season. The rule was first invoked in 2018 when construction on SoFi Stadium for the Rams and Chargers in Ingelwood, California fell behind schedule by a year, forcing the NFL to move Super Bowl LV to Tampa's Raymond James Stadium and instead playing Super Bowl LVI at SoFi, which opened for the 2020 season. (The first facility to host a Super Bowl in its second season was Miami's Joe Robbie Stadium, which opened in 1987 and hosted Super Bowl XXIII following the 1988 season.)\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC with play-by-play announcer Curt Gowdy and color commentators Al DeRogatis and Don Meredith. Charlie Jones served as the event's field reporter and covered the trophy presentation; while hosting the coverage was NBC News reporter Jack Perkins and Jeannie Morris (Morris, then the wife of former Chicago Bears wide receiver and WMAQ-TV sports anchor Johnny Morris, became the first woman to participate in Super Bowl coverage). Prior to the 1975 NFL season, NBC did not have a regular pregame show.\nIn popular culture.\n\"The Mary Tyler Moore Show\" on CBS (which was set in Minneapolis) used this game as a plot line on the episode aired the night before the game. Lou Grant taught Ted Baxter how to bet on football games; yet over the course of the football season, Ted was the one who developed a winning strategy. They pooled their money and finished the regular season in the black. Since Ted's strategy would not work on the Super Bowl game's spread, it was agreed they would not place a bet on the Super Bowl. However Ted was crushed when it was revealed that Lou actually did place a (losing) bet. Lou bet all the season's winnings on the Steelers. At the end of the show, Mary Tyler Moore announced the following over the credits: \"If the Pittsburgh Steelers win the actual Super Bowl tomorrow, we want to apologize to the Pittsburgh team and their fans for this purely fictional story. If on the other hand, they lose, remember, you heard it here first.\" And, as it turned out, her apology did go into effect.\nEntertainment.\nThe Grambling State University Band from north Louisiana performed during both the pregame festivities and the national anthem. Coincidentally, Tulane Stadium hosted the first Bayou Classic football game between Southwestern Athletic Conference archrivals Grambling and Southern seven weeks before the Super Bowl.\nDuring the national anthem, the GSU band was backed by the Mardi Gras Barbershop Chorus under the direction of Dr. Saul Schneider. The halftime show was a tribute to American jazz composer, pianist and bandleader Duke Ellington, also featuring the Grambling State University Band along with Ellington's son Mercer. Ellington had died the previous May.\nGame summary.\nAs many predicted, the game was low scoring; both teams failed to score a touchdown or a field goal until the third quarter and ended up with the third lowest total of combined points in Super Bowl history.\nFirst quarter.\nThe first quarter of the game was completely dominated by both teams' defenses. After both teams punted on their opening possessions, the Steelers started their second possession on their own 42-yard line. After a false start penalty on Pittsburgh offensive tackle Gordon Gravelle pushed the team back to their own 37, they advanced into Minnesota territory on an 18-yard run by running back Rocky Bleier. Two plays later, however, a 10-yard clipping penalty on Pittsburgh pushed the team back to their own 44-yard line, but they got those yards back with a 12-yard pass by quarterback Terry Bradshaw to wide receiver Frank Lewis to bring up 3rd-and-9. On the next play, however, defensive tackle Alan Page sacked Bradshaw for a 7-yard loss, forcing Pittsburgh to punt the ball back to Minnesota. After forcing the Vikings to punt again, this time from their own end zone, the Steelers started their next possession at the Minnesota 44. On 3rd-and-7, Bradshaw completed a 15-yard pass to tight end Larry Brown to put Pittsburgh in scoring position. The drive stalled at the Vikings' 21-yard line, so kicker Roy Gerela attempted to kick a 37-yard field goal, but he missed it wide left. After another Minnesota punt, which put Pittsburgh on their own 47, the Steelers drove to the Vikings' 16-yard line, aided by a 14-yard run by running back Franco Harris and an 11-yard run by Bradshaw, but during Gerela's second field goal attempt, a 33-yarder, holder/punter Bobby Walden fumbled the snap and attempted to run the ball himself before getting tackled by linebacker Jeff Siemon, turning the ball back over to the Vikings and keeping the game scoreless.\nIn the first quarter, the Vikings were limited to 20 passing yards, no rushing yards, and one first down which occurred on their opening play with a Fran Tarkenton 16-yard completion to John Gilliam. The Steelers did slightly better with 18 passing yards, 61 rushing yards, and four first downs.\nSecond quarter.\nThe Steelers forced another Vikings punt to start the second quarter and got the ball back on their own 14. On 3rd-and-4, Bradshaw completed a 21-yard pass to wide receiver Lynn Swann, but this was nullified by an offensive pass interference penalty on Swann, who would not have a pass reception in the game. On the next play, safety Jeff Wright stripped the ball from Bleier, and safety Randy Poltl recovered the fumble at the Steelers' 24-yard line. The Vikings failed to capitalize on the turnover, as they could only move the ball 2 yards in their next three plays, and kicker Fred Cox missed a 39-yard field goal attempt wide right. On their next possession, the Steelers converted a 3rd-and-8 with the longest gain so far in the game, a 22-yard pass from Bradshaw to wide receiver John Stallworth. Pittsburgh could not get past the Minnesota 45 and were forced to punt, but Walden booted a 39-yarder, and wide receiver Sam McCullum did not allow the ball to reach the end zone, then failed to make a return and was downed at the Viking 7-yard line by Pittsburgh safety Donnie Shell. The first score of the game occurred two plays later, when running back Dave Osborn fumbled a handoff from quarterback Fran Tarkenton at the 10, and the ball rolled backward into the end zone. Tarkenton recovered the ball in the end zone to prevent a Steelers touchdown, but he was downed by defensive end Dwight White for a safety, giving Pittsburgh a 2\u20130 lead. It was the first safety scored in Super Bowl history. The Vikings forced a three-and-out, then got a chance to take their first lead of the game when Tarkenton led them on a 55-yard drive to the Steelers' 25-yard line from their own 20, aided by a pass interference penalty on cornerback Mel Blount and a 17-yard pass by Tarkenton that was bobbled and caught by running back Chuck Foreman on 3rd-and-8. With 1:17 left in the half, Tarkenton threw a pass to wide receiver John Gilliam at the 5-yard line, but Steelers safety Glen Edwards broke up the pass as Gilliam caught it, batting the ball high into the air and into the arms of Blount for an interception.\nThe half ended with the Steelers leading 2\u20130, the lowest halftime score in Super Bowl history and lowest possible, barring a scoreless tie.\nThird quarter.\nOn the opening kickoff of the second half, Vikings fullback Bill Brown fumbled the ball on an unintentional squib kick after Gerela slipped on the wet field and only extended his leg halfway for the kick. Steelers linebacker Marv Kellum recovered the fumble at the Minnesota 30-yard line. On the first play of the drive, Harris moved the ball to the 6-yard line with a 24-yard run. After being tackled by Vikings linebacker Wally Hilgenberg for a 3-yard loss, Harris scored on a 9-yard touchdown run, giving Pittsburgh a 9\u20130 lead.\nAfter an exchange of punts, Minnesota got the ball back on their own 20-yard line. On the second play of drive, Tarkenton's pass was deflected behind the line of scrimmage by Pittsburgh defensive end L. C. Greenwood, and bounced back right into the arms of Tarkenton, who then threw a 41-yard completion to Gilliam. Officials ruled Tarkenton's first pass attempt as a completion to himself, and thus his second attempt was an illegal forward pass. After the penalty, facing 3rd-and-11, Minnesota got the first down with Foreman's 12-yard run. Three plays later, Tarkenton completed a 28-yard pass to tight end Stu Voigt at the Steelers' 45-yard line. But two plays later, White deflected Tarkenton's next pass attempt, and defensive tackle Joe Greene intercepted the ball, ending the Vikings' best offensive scoring opportunity.\nFourth quarter.\nAfter an exchange of punts to start the fourth quarter, the Vikings got another scoring opportunity when safety Paul Krause recovered a fumble by Harris on the Steelers' 47-yard line. On the next play, a deep pass attempt from Tarkenton to Gilliam drew a 42-yard pass interference penalty on Pittsburgh safety Mike Wagner that moved the ball up to the 5-yard line, but once again, the Steelers stopped them from scoring when Foreman lost a fumble that was recovered by Greene. The Steelers failed to get a first down on their next possession and were forced to punt from deep in their own territory. The next play finally got Minnesota on the board. Vikings linebacker Matt Blair burst through the line to block Walden's punt, and safety Terry Brown recovered the ball in the end zone for a touchdown. Cox's extra point attempt hit the left upright, but the Vikings had cut their deficit to 9\u20136 and were just a field goal away from a tie.\nHowever, on the ensuing drive, the Steelers responded with a 66-yard, 11-play scoring drive that took 6:47 off the clock and featured three successful third down conversions. The first third down conversion was a key 30-yard pass completion from Bradshaw to Larry Brown, who fumbled the ball as he was being tackled by safety Jackie Wallace, and two officials (back judge Ray Douglas and field judge Dick Dolack) initially ruled the ball recovered for the Vikings by Siemon, but head linesman Ed Marion overruled their call, stating that Brown was downed at the contact before the ball came out of his hands. Faced with 2nd-and-15 after an illegal formation penalty, the Steelers then fooled the Vikings' defense with a misdirection play. Harris ran left past Bradshaw after the snap, drawing in the defense with him, while Bleier took a handoff and ran right through a gaping hole in the line for a 17-yard gain to the Vikings 16-yard line. A few plays later, Bradshaw converted a 3rd-and-5 situation with a 6-yard pass to Bleier that put the ball on the Vikings' 5-yard line. The Steelers gained just one yard with their next two plays, setting up 3rd-and-goal from the 4-yard line. On the next play, Bradshaw threw a 4-yard touchdown pass to Brown, giving the Steelers a 16\u20136 lead with 3:31 remaining and essentially putting the game away.\nVikings running back Brent McClanahan returned the ensuing kickoff 22 yards to the Minnesota 39-yard line, but on the first play of the drive, Tarkenton's pass to Gilliam was intercepted by Wagner. The Steelers then executed 7 consecutive running plays (including a 15-yard run by Harris totaling up to 158 rushing yards for him, which broke Larry Csonka's rushing record of 145 yards in Super Bowl VIII), taking the game clock all the way down to 38 seconds remaining before turning the ball over on downs. The Vikings ran two more plays before the game ended.\nHarris finished the game with 34 carries for a Super Bowl record 158 yards and a touchdown; Harris' record stood until the Washington Redskins' John Riggins rushed for 166 yards in Super Bowl XVII. Bleier had 65 rushing yards, and two receptions for 11 yards. Pittsburgh finished with a total of 57 rushing attempts, which remains the Super Bowl record through Super Bowl LVII. Bradshaw completed nine out of 14 passes for 96 yards and a touchdown. Tarkenton completed 11 of 26 passes for 102 yards with 3 interceptions, for a passer rating of only 14.1. Foreman was the Vikings' top offensive contributor, finishing the game as the team's leading rusher and receiver with 18 rushing yards and 50 receiving yards.\nThe loss was the Vikings' record-setting third in Super Bowl play. Bud Grant vented frustration by saying, \"There were three bad teams out there - us, Pittsburgh and the officials.\u201d Minnesota, among many negatives to this point in its Super Bowl history of three games, had only two scoring drives on offense, and only three turnovers forced on defense, none of which resulted in any points. The win made the Steelers' Chuck Noll the youngest head coach to win the Super Bowl at the time (He was 42 years, 7 days).\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl IX: Pittsburgh Steelers 16, Minnesota Vikings 6\n\"at Tulane Stadium, New Orleans, Louisiana\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set or tied in Super Bowl IX, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nBruce Alford was the first official to be honored with three Super Bowl assignments.\nBernie Ulman was the first official to be the referee for a Super Bowl after working a previous Super Bowl at another position. This would not happen again until Dick Hantak was the referee for Super Bowl XXVII after serving as back judge for Super Bowl XVII.\n\"Note: A seven-official system was not used until the 1978 season\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29136", "revid": "50716802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29136", "title": "Super Bowl X", "text": "1976 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl X was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Pittsburgh Steelers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1975 season. The Steelers defeated the Cowboys 21\u201317 to become the third franchise to win consecutive Super Bowls, joining the Miami Dolphins (VII, VIII) and Green Bay Packers (I, II). It\u00a0was also the first Super Bowl in which both teams had previous Super Bowl titles, as the Steelers were the defending champions and the Cowboys had won four years earlier.\nPlayed at the Orange Bowl in Miami, Florida, on January 18, 1976, this was one of the first major national events of the United States Bicentennial year. Both the pre-game and halftime show celebrated the Bicentennial, while players on both teams wore special patches on their jerseys with the Bicentennial logo.\nSuper Bowl X featured a contrast of playing styles between the Steelers and the Cowboys, which were the two most popular teams in the league. The Steelers, dominating teams with their \"Steel Curtain\" defense and running game, finished the regular season with a league best 12\u20132 record to gain home field advantage in the playoffs, then defeated the Baltimore Colts and Oakland Raiders. With their balanced offense and \"flex\" defense, the Cowboys became the first NFC wild-card team to advance to the Super Bowl after a 10\u20134 regular season and postseason victories on the road over the Minnesota Vikings and Los Angeles Rams.\nThe Steelers trailed 7\u201310 after a scoreless third quarter, in the second Super Bowl where the winning team was behind at halftime (V: the Colts trailed the Cowboys 6\u201313 at the half and won 16\u201313), but rallied to score 14 unanswered points, including a 64-yard touchdown reception by Pittsburgh wide receiver Lynn Swann. Dallas wide receiver Percy Howard's 34-yard touchdown reception late in the game pulled them within four points at 21\u201317, but Pittsburgh safety Glen Edwards halted Dallas' rally with an end zone interception as time expired. Swann, who caught four passes for a Super Bowl record 161 yards and one touchdown, became the first wide receiver to be named Super Bowl MVP.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl X to Miami on April 3, 1973, at the owners' meetings held in Scottsdale, Arizona. This was the fourth time that the Super Bowl was to be played at the Miami Orange Bowl. For the second time, the owners selected two consecutive Super Bowl host cities at the same meeting. Only three cities submitted bids for the two games. Representatives from New Orleans, Miami, and Los Angeles each made presentations; all three cities had already hosted the Super Bowl. New Orleans was awarded Super Bowl IX, while Miami was given X.\nAs part of their pitch, the representatives from Miami specifically requested the 1976 game over the 1975 game. Miami had initially been selected as one of the United States Bicentennial celebration cities, so Joe Robbie and Don Shula lobbied in favor of tying the game to the Bicentennial.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Cowboys, considered a Cinderella team entering the Super Bowl, advanced to their third Super Bowl in team history with their rather high-tech offense and \"flex\" defense. Quarterback Roger Staubach had a solid season, passing for 2,666 yards and 17 touchdowns (but he also threw 16 interceptions), while also rushing for 310 yards. Staubach's favorite target was wide receiver Drew Pearson who led the team with 46 receptions for 822 yards and 8 touchdowns. Wide receiver Golden Richards and tight end Jean Fugett were also reliable targets in the Cowboys' passing game, combining for 59 receptions and 939 receiving yards.\nBut despite their solid passing game, Dallas was a run-based team. Fullback Robert Newhouse was their leading rusher with\n930 yards, and also caught 34 passes for 274 yards. Halfback Doug Dennison contributed 388 yards. Perhaps the most talented player in the backfield was halfback Preston Pearson (no relation to receiver Drew Pearson), who signed on the team as a free agent after being cut by the Steelers in the preseason. Preston rushed for 509 yards, caught 27 passes for 351 yards, and added another 391 yards returning kickoffs. Preston had been especially effective in the playoffs, where he caught 12 passes for 200 yards and three touchdowns, and was extremely eager to increase his numbers in the Super Bowl against the team that let him go. Up front, the offensive line was led by All-Pro right tackle Rayfield Wright.\nThe Cowboys' \"Flex\" defense was anchored by linemen Harvey Martin and Ed \"Too Tall\" Jones. Linebacker Lee Roy Jordan led the team with six interceptions, while linebacker D.D. Lewis was an effective weapon pass rushing. The starting players in Dallas' defensive secondary, future Hall of Fame cornerback Mel Renfro, cornerback Mark Washington, and safeties Charlie Waters and future Hall of Famer Cliff Harris, combined for 12 interceptions.\nEven though the Cowboys finished in second place in the NFC East with a 10\u20134 record, they qualified for the playoffs as the NFC's wild-card team (during that time, only one wild card team from each conference entered the playoffs). The Dallas Cowboys became the first NFC wild card team to reach the Super Bowl.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Steelers became the first official #1 seed to reach the Super Bowl. Playoff seeds were instituted in 1975. The Steelers finished the regular season with a league-best 12\u20132 record, dominating opponents with their \"Steel Curtain\" defense and powerful running game. The team finished the season ranked 5th in most points scored (373) and 2nd in fewest points allowed (162). Fullback Franco Harris had the best season of his career and ranked second in the league with 1,246 rushing yards and 10 touchdowns, while also catching 28 passes for 214 yards and another touchdown. Halfback Rocky Bleier had 528 rushing yards, and fullback John \"Frenchy\" Fuqua added 285 yards and 18 receptions. Still, the Steelers had a fine passing attack led by quarterback Terry Bradshaw. Bradshaw threw for 2,055 yards, 18 touchdowns, and nine interceptions while rushing for 210 yards and three touchdowns. One reason why Bradshaw's numbers were much improved from the previous season was the emergence of wide receivers Lynn Swann and John Stallworth. Both saw limited playing time in the previous season, but became significant contributors in 1975. Swann caught a team-leading 49 passes for 781 yards and 11 touchdowns. Stallworth only had 20 receptions, but he had an average of 21.2 yards per catch, recording a total of 423 reception yards.\nThe Steelers' \"Steel Curtain\" defense dominated the league, ranking third in fewest yards allowed (4,019) and sending 8 of their 11 starters to the Pro Bowl: defensive linemen Joe Greene (future Pro Football Hall of Fame player) and L. C. Greenwood; future Hall of Fame linebackers Jack Ham and Jack Lambert; Andy Russell, the team's third starting linebacker; future Hall of Fame defensive back Mel Blount; and safeties Glen Edwards and Mike Wagner.\nGreene made the Pro Bowl despite missing six games with injuries. Linebackers Ham and Lambert and cornerback Blount, who led the league with 11 interceptions and was named the NFL's Defensive Player of the Year, had the best seasons of their careers. Wagner had 4 interceptions and 3 fumble recoveries, while Edwards had 3 interceptions, while also returning 25 punts for 267 yards.\nPlayoffs.\nDallas qualified for the NFC playoffs as the wild card team in part to a loss to the St. Louis Cardinals in Week 12 with the Cardinals finishing with an 11-3 record. In the playoffs, Dallas defeated the Minnesota Vikings, 17\u201314, with a 50-yard touchdown pass from Staubach to Drew Pearson with less than a minute to play in what was called the \"Hail Mary pass\". They went on to crush the Los Angeles Rams, 37\u20137, in the NFC Championship Game. As a result, the Cowboys became the first wild card team to advance to the Super Bowl.\nIn the AFC Playoffs, Pittsburgh's offense was uncharacteristically bad committing a total of 12 turnovers in their two playoff games. Despite the bad offensive play, the Steelers only gave up a combined total of 20 points in their victories over the Baltimore Colts in the AFC Divisional playoff game 28\u201310, and the Oakland Raiders in the AFC Championship Game 16\u201310.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nComing into Super Bowl X, most sports writers and fans expected that Swann would not play. He had suffered a severe concussion in the AFC Championship Game against the Raiders that forced him to spend two days in a hospital. If he did play, many assumed he would just be used as a decoy to draw coverage away from the other receivers.\nThroughout the week leading up to the Super Bowl, Swann was unable to participate in several team practices or was limited to only a minor workout in them. However, a few days before the game, he received a verbal challenge from Dallas safety Cliff Harris, who stated, \"I'm not going to hurt anyone intentionally. But getting hit again while he's running a pass route must be in the back of Swann's mind. I know it would be in the back of my mind.\"\nSwann responded \"I'm still not 100 percent. I value my health, but I've had no dizzy spells. I read what Harris said. He was trying to intimidate me. He said I'd be afraid out there. He needn't worry. He doesn't know Lynn Swann. He can't scare me or the team. I said to myself, 'The hell with it, I'm gonna play.' Sure, I thought about the possibility of being reinjured. But it's like being thrown by a horse. You have to get up and ride again immediately or you may be scared the rest of your life.\"\nSuper Bowl X was the final NFL officiating assignment for veteran referee Norm Schachter, who also served as the referee for Super Bowl I and Super Bowl V. Schachter, one of six men to serve as referee for at least three Super Bowls, worked as an officiating supervisor and instant replay official following his on-field retirement. This was the first Super Bowl where penalties and other information were announced by the referee over a wireless microphone, an innovation of Cowboys general manager Tex Schramm which went into effect at the start of the 1975 season.\nSuper Bowl X was also the first Super Bowl where the starting placekickers were both soccer-style kickers: Roy Gerela for Pittsburgh and Toni Fritsch for Dallas.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to have the game's respective edition denoted on the field. It was located at the 35-yard line but only the roman numeral. Beginning the next year, the entire name of that years Super Bowl would be on the 35 yard line. The NFL would do this up until Super Bowl XXXI where they placed the team's helmets at the 30-yard line and the Super Bowl logo at the 50 yard line, this practice would continue until Super Bowl XXXVII where it was retired immediately following that game. The NFL shield would return to the 50 yard line (in addition to placing that games logo at the 25 yard line) the next year where it has remained ever since.\nBroadcasting.\nCBS televised the game in the United States with play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall (calling his first Super Bowl in that role) and color commentator Tom Brookshier. Toward the end of the game, Hank Stram took over for Brookshier, who had left the booth to head down to the locker room area to conduct the postgame interviews with the winning team. Two days after the Super Bowl, Stram was hired as coach of the New Orleans Saints, interrupting his broadcasting career for two seasons. Pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage were provided by \"The NFL Today\" crew of Brent Musburger, Irv Cross and Phyllis George. During this game, CBS began using Jack Trombey's \"Horizontal Hold\" as the theme music. That would be used the following season for the \"NFL Today\" pregame show between 1976 and 1980 in its original form, with a remake for 1981 followed by updates for 1984 and 1989 (which would also be used from 1998 to 2002). The 1981 remake was used again in 2025 for the show's 50th anniversary celebration.\nOn radio, Ed Ingles and Jim Kelly called the game nationally for CBS Radio. Verne Lundquist and Al Wisk announced the game for the Dallas Cowboys Radio Network. Jack Fleming and Myron Cope called the game for the Pittsburgh Steelers Radio Network.\nCBS's Super Bowl lead-out program was coverage of the final round of the Phoenix Open, joined in progress.\nEntertainment.\nThe overall theme of the Super Bowl entertainment was to celebrate the United States Bicentennial. Each Cowboys and Steelers player wore a special patch with the Bicentennial logo on their jerseys.\nThis was the first Super Bowl where somebody other than the game's referee tossed the coin, in this case, John Warner who was the United States Secretary of the Navy from 1972 to 1974. Prior to 1976, the coin toss was held a half-hour before kick-off.\nThe performance event group Up with People performed during both the pregame festivities and the halftime show titled \"200 Years and Just a Baby: A Tribute to America's Bicentennial\". Up with People dancers portrayed various American historical figures along with a rendition of Steve Goodman's \"City of New Orleans\". Singer Tom Sullivan sang the national anthem.\nScenes for the 1977 suspense film \"Black Sunday,\" about a fictional terrorist attack on the Super Bowl via the Goodyear Blimp, were filmed during the game.\nThis was the last Super Bowl to kick off as early as 2:00\u00a0p.m. (EST), thereby allowing a finish time before the commencement of many of the nation's evening church services.\nThis was the first Super Bowl where the play clock was visible to teams and spectators. Visible play clocks were mandated by NFL rules beginning with the 1976 season.\nThis was the last Super Bowl where the coin toss was conducted 30 minutes prior to kickoff. Beginning with the next season, the official coin toss was moved to three minutes before kickoff in the center of the field, leaving coaches to scramble to put the proper specialty unit on the field. From 1947 to 1975, a \"mock toss\" was held three minutes prior to kickoff at midfield to inform fans and media of the result.\nGame summary.\nThe Steelers won their second straight Super Bowl, largely through the plays by Swann and by stopping a rally by the Cowboys late in the fourth quarter. Officials did not call a single penalty on the Steelers during the game, while the Cowboys were called for only 2 penalties for 20 yards.\nFirst quarter.\nOn the opening kickoff, the Cowboys ran a reverse play where linebacker Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson took a handoff from running back/kick returner Preston Pearson and returned the ball a Super Bowl-record 48 yards before Steelers kicker Roy Gerela forced him out of bounds at the Steelers' 44-yard line. Gerela suffered badly bruised ribs that appeared to affect his kicking performance all afternoon. On the first play of the game, Steelers defensive end L. C. Greenwood strip-sacked Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach. Although Dallas center John Fitzgerald recovered the fumble, they eventually were forced to punt. The sack was a foreshadow of things to come for Staubach, who was sacked seven times during the game. The Steelers managed to get one first down and advanced to their own 40-yard line, but then they too were forced to punt. Steelers punter Bobby Walden fumbled the snap and managed to recover it, but Dallas took over on the Steelers' 29-yard line. On the very next play, Staubach threw a 29-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Drew Pearson, taking a 7\u20130 lead. The score was the first touchdown allowed in the first quarter by the Steelers' defense in 1975.\nInstead of trying to immediately tie the game on a long passing play, the Steelers ran the ball on the first four plays of their ensuing possession, and then quarterback Terry Bradshaw completed a 32-yard pass to wide receiver Lynn Swann to reach the Cowboys' 16-yard line. Swann soared over the outstretched reach of cornerback Mark Washington before tightroping the sideline to make the reception. Two running plays further advanced the ball to the 7-yard line. Then on 3rd-and-1, the Steelers ran a trick play to score. Pittsburgh brought in three tight ends, which usually signals a running play (Steelers guard Gerry Mullins was also an eligible receiver on the play as he moved to the tight end position). After the snap, tight end Randy Grossman faked a block to the inside as if it were a running play, but then ran a pass route into the end zone, and Bradshaw threw the ball to him for a 7-yard touchdown, tying the game, 7\u20137. This marked the first Super Bowl where both teams scored in the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nDallas responded on their next drive, advancing the ball 51 yards, all rushing, (30 of them on five carries from fullback Robert Newhouse) before incurring a third down false start penalty on offensive tackle Ralph Neely, and scoring on kicker Toni Fritsch's 36-yard field goal to take a 10\u20137 lead early in the second quarter. The 51 rushing yards the Cowboys amassed on the drive tripled what the Minnesota Vikings gained against Pittsburgh for all of Super Bowl IX. The Steelers subsequently advanced to the Cowboys' 36-yard line on their next possession, during which Bradshaw completed a 12-yard pass to wide receiver John Stallworth, who then appeared to fumble the ball while getting tackled by safety Cliff Harris, but the officials ruled him down before the ball came loose. Two plays later, however, on 4th-and-1, Bradshaw's pass to running back Franco Harris was broken up by Cliff Harris, turning the ball over on downs.\nAfter an exchange of punts, Dallas drove to the Pittsburgh 20-yard line from their own 48, aided by a 14-yard reception by running back Charley Young. However, in three plays, they lost 25 yards. On first down, Newhouse was tackled for a 3-yard loss by linebacker Andy Russell. Then Greenwood sacked Staubach for a 12-yard loss. And on third down, Staubach was sacked again, this time for a 10-yard loss, by defensive end Dwight White. The sacks pushed Dallas out of field goal range, forcing them to punt. The Steelers' offense got the ball back on their own 6-yard line with 3:47 left in the half. On the drive, Bradshaw completed a 53-yard pass to Swann to advance the ball to the Cowboys' 37-yard line; Swann's catch has become one of the most memorable acrobatic catches in Super Bowl history. On the very next play, Bradshaw just missed a connection with Swann at the Dallas 6 (although CBS's Pat Summerall thought the incomplete pass was intended for Stallworth). Pittsburgh drove to the 19-yard line after the two-minute warning, but the drive stalled there and ended with no points after Gerela missed a game-tying 36-yard field goal attempt wide left with 22 seconds remaining in the period.\nThird quarter.\nAfter Pittsburgh punted to start the second half, they got a great scoring opportunity when cornerback J. T. Thomas intercepted a pass from Staubach intended for Cowboys wide receiver Golden Richards and returned it 35 yards to the Dallas 25-yard line. However, once again the Steelers failed to score as the Dallas defense kept Pittsburgh out of the end zone and Gerela missed his second field goal attempt, a 33-yarder, wide left. After the miss, Cliff Harris mockingly patted Gerela on his helmet and thanked him for \"helping Dallas out\". Gerela grabbed Harris and began engaging him verbally, but Steelers linebacker Jack Lambert, who blocked on field goals and was standing nearby, grabbed Harris and threw him to the ground in defense of Gerela. Lambert could have been ejected from the game for defending his teammate, but the officials decided to allow him to remain. The third quarter was completely scoreless and the Cowboys maintained their 10\u20137 lead going into the final period.\nFourth quarter.\nEarly in the fourth quarter, Dallas punter Mitch Hoopes was forced to punt from inside his own 5-yard line. As Hoopes stepped up to make the kick, Pittsburgh running back Reggie Harrison broke through the line and blocked the punt. The ball went through the back of the end zone for a safety, cutting the Dallas lead to 10\u20139. It was the second safety recorded in Super Bowl history, the first occurring in Super Bowl IX the year before, which was also scored by the Steelers when White downed Minnesota Vikings quarterback Fran Tarkenton on a fumble recovery in the end zone. Then Steelers running back Mike Collier returned the free kick 25 yards to the Cowboys' 45-yard line. Dallas halted the ensuing drive at the 20-yard line, but this time Gerela successfully kicked a 36-yard field goal to give Pittsburgh their first lead of the game, 12\u201310. Then on the first play of the Cowboys' next drive, Steelers safety Mike Wagner intercepted a pass from Staubach and returned it 19 yards to the Dallas 7-yard line before getting tackled by Neely. Wagner's interception came off the same play Dallas used to score their opening touchdown. Instead of surveying the middle of the field, Wagner watched Pearson and recognized the pattern. Staubach later said: \"It was our bread and butter play all season long. It was the first time it didn't work.\" The Cowboys' defense again managed to prevent a touchdown, but Gerela kicked an 18-yard field goal to increase the Steelers' lead to 15\u201310.\nThe Steelers forced a punt and regained possession of the ball on their own 30-yard line with 4:25 left in the game, giving them a chance to either increase their lead or run out the clock to win the game. But after two plays, the Steelers found themselves facing 3rd-and-4 on their own 36-yard line. Assuming that the Cowboys would be expecting a short pass or a run, Bradshaw decided to try a long pass and told Swann in the huddle to run a deep post pattern. As Bradshaw dropped back to pass, Cliff Harris and linebacker D. D. Lewis both blitzed in an attempt to sack him, but Bradshaw managed to dodge Lewis and throw the ball just before being leveled by Harris and defensive tackle Larry Cole, who landed a helmet-to-helmet hit on Bradshaw. Swann then caught the ball at the 5-yard line and ran into the end zone for a 64-yard touchdown reception. Bradshaw never did see Swann's catch or the touchdown since Cole's hit to Bradshaw's helmet knocked him out of the game with a head injury. It was only after he was assisted to the locker room that he was told what happened.\nAfter play resumed, Gerela's extra point attempt hit the left upright, but the Steelers now had a 21\u201310 lead with 3:02 left in the game. Despite the two-score margin with that amount of time remaining, the game was not quite over in favor of the Steelers yet.\nStaubach then led the Cowboys with 80 yards in 5 plays on their ensuing drive, which featured key receptions by both Pearsons: a 31-yarder at the Pittsburgh 43 by Drew and a 9-yarder at the 34 by Preston. The drive ended with Staubach's 34-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Percy Howard (who had replaced injured starter Golden Richards earlier in the quarter), cutting the Cowboys' deficit to 21\u201317 with 1:48 remaining (Howard's touchdown reception was the only catch of his NFL career; he was not mentioned by name by John Facenda in the highlight package produced by NFL Films). After Mullins recovered Dallas' onside kick attempt, the Steelers, now led by backup quarterback Terry Hanratty, then tried to run out the clock on the next drive with four straight running plays, but the Cowboys' defense stopped them on fourth down at the Dallas 39. In the process of doing so, Dallas used up all of their timeouts and got one more chance to mount a game-winning drive with 1:22 remaining. Some questioned why Noll would elect to go for it on fourth down but as later explained by NFL Films, his entire kicking game had been suspect all game long with Gerela missing an extra point and two field goals while Walden fumbled a snap on a punt, and nearly had two punts blocked. (Gerela's problems may have begun on the opening kickoff when he was forced to make a touchdown saving tackle on Henderson.)\nStaubach started out the drive with an 11-yard scramble to midfield, and then followed it up with a 12-yard completion to Preston Pearson at the Steelers' 38-yard line. Pearson inexplicably ran towards the middle rather than running out of bounds to stop the clock. On the next play, Staubach could not handle a low snap, but managed to recover the ball and throw it downfield for an incompletion. On second down with 12 seconds left, he threw a pass intended for Howard in the end zone, but the ball bounced off Howard's helmet and a Hail Mary replay was not to be. Had Howard positioned himself inches back from his position in the end zone as the ball came down, he would have had a better opportunity to catch the ball and write himself into Cowboy folklore. Then on third down with three seconds left, Staubach once again tried to complete a Hail Mary pass to Howard in the end zone, but the ball was tipped by Wagner into the arms of safety Glen Edwards for an interception, sealing Pittsburgh's second consecutive Super Bowl victory.\nBradshaw finished the game with 9 out of 19 pass completions for 209 yards and two touchdowns, with no interceptions. He also added another 16 yards rushing the ball. Staubach completed 15 out of 24 passes for 204 yards and two touchdowns with three interceptions. He also rushed for 22 yards on five carries but was sacked seven times. It was the first Super Bowl where every touchdown was scored on a pass play. Since then, only three other Super Bowls, XV, LVI, and LVIII have had all their touchdowns scored on passes. Steelers fullback Franco Harris was the leading rusher of the game with 82 rushing yards, and also caught a pass for 26 yards. Newhouse was the Cowboys top rusher with 56 yards and caught two passes for 12 yards. Greenwood recorded a Super Bowl record four sacks, but it has gone unrecognized since the NFL didn't officially record sacks until 1982.\nAftermath.\nThe game was remembered for being the most exciting of the first 10 Super Bowl games. Swann's heroics and Lambert's 14 tackles and throw-down of Cliff Harris are the indelible images from the game. After being benched to start the 1974 campaign and being booed for most of his first four seasons in Pittsburgh, Bradshaw became the first quarterback to throw two game-winning touchdown passes in Super Bowl competition. The Steelers' bid for three-consecutive championships ended in a 24\u20137 loss to the Oakland Raiders in the 1976 AFC Championship game after a season that saw Pittsburgh's defense shut out five opponents and allow only 28 points in a 9-game span. The loss to Pittsburgh coupled with an early playoff exit in 1976 largely influenced the Cowboys to draft Tony Dorsett in the 1977 Draft to help infuse life into Dallas' offense. Dorsett helped lead Dallas to a Super Bowl XII victory over the Denver Broncos, who defeated the Steelers in the first round of the playoffs that year.\nPittsburgh and Dallas would battle in another thriller in Super Bowl XIII (also played in Miami). The result was the same, as the Steelers prevailed 35\u201331. But Super Bowl X was the game that began the rivalry between the two storied franchises. The Cowboys gained a measure of revenge by defeating the Steelers 27\u201317 in Super Bowl XXX following the 1995 season.\nThis was the final football game to be played on artificial turf (specifically, Poly-Turf) at the Orange Bowl. The surface in 1976 reverted to natural grass, and remained so until the stadium's closure in 2007. Poly-Turf was first installed at the Orange Bowl in 1970 and replaced in 1972, but players complained often of the slickness, and it discolored due to the intense sunshine of south Florida. This was the last Super Bowl played outdoors on artificial turf for 38 years, until Super Bowl XLVIII at MetLife Stadium (infilled FieldTurf) in February 2014.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl X: Pittsburgh Steelers 21, Dallas Cowboys 17\n\"at Orange Bowl, Miami, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl X, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Source:\nStarting lineups.\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nThis was the first Super Bowl in which the referee wore a wireless microphone to announce penalties and other rulings to the audience in the stadium, those listening on radio and those watching on television. The idea was pioneered by Cowboys GM Tex Schramm.\nNorm Schachter retired following this game and became an officiating supervisor. He became the first official to serve as referee for three Super Bowls, a mark later equaled by Jim Tunney, Pat Haggerty, Bob McElwee, Terry McAulay, Carl Cheffers and Bill Vinovich, and surpassed by Jerry Markbreit with four.\n\"Note: A seven-official system was not used until 1978\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29137", "revid": "323612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29137", "title": "Super Bowl XI", "text": "1977 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XI was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Oakland Raiders and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Minnesota Vikings to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for its 1976 season. The Raiders defeated the Vikings by the score of 32\u201314 to win their first Super Bowl. The game was played on January 9, 1977, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California. This remains the earliest scheduled calendar date for a Super Bowl; and the most recent Super Bowl to begin before 4:00 P.M. ET.\nThis was the Raiders' second Super Bowl appearance after losing Super Bowl II. They posted a 13\u20131 regular season record before defeating the New England Patriots and the Pittsburgh Steelers in the playoffs. The Vikings and their Purple People Eaters defense were making their fourth Super Bowl appearance after posting an 11\u20132\u20131 regular season record and playoff victories over the Washington Redskins and the Los Angeles Rams. The Vikings became the first team to lose four Super Bowls, a record they held until the Denver Broncos lost their fifth Super Bowl to the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII. The Vikings had not won in their previous three attempts, losing Super Bowl IV to the Kansas City Chiefs in the final Super Bowl before the AFL\u2013NFL merger and following that up with losses in Super Bowls VIII and IX to the Miami Dolphins and Pittsburgh Steelers respectively. \nSuper Bowl XI was dominated by the Raiders. Oakland gained a Super Bowl record 429 yards, including a Super Bowl record 288 yards in the first half, en route to winning Super Bowl XI. After a scoreless first quarter, Oakland scored on three consecutive possessions to take a 16\u20130 lead at halftime. The Raiders also had two fourth quarter interceptions, including cornerback Willie Brown's 75-yard return for a touchdown. Oakland wide receiver Fred Biletnikoff, who had 4 catches for 79 yards that set up three Raider touchdowns, was named the game's Most Valuable Player (MVP). Among the wide receivers who have won the Super Bowl MVP, Biletnikoff was the only one to not have gained 100 yards in his performance until Cooper Kupp in Super Bowl LVI. This was the first Super Bowl since Super Bowl V in which neither team had appeared in the previous Super Bowl.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XI to Pasadena, California on March 19, 1975, at the owners' meetings held in Honolulu. After awarding two consecutive Super Bowl host sites during both the 1972 and 1973 owners' meetings, respectively, the league went back to awarding only one host site at this meeting. However, the winner was still provided with nearly two years of preparation time. A total of six cities submitted bids: Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Dallas, Houston, New Orleans, and Montreal. Pasadena won on the sixth ballot, with the stadium's capacity (104,701) the leading factor.\nThe selection of Pasadena was mildly controversial. For the first time, the Super Bowl would be played in a stadium that never housed an NFL franchise. The city of Pasadena entered the bidding last-minute, in an effort to address rising maintenance costs of the stadium. At the time, the Rose Bowl had no permanent major football tenant (UCLA did not move in until 1982) outside of single neutral site games such as the Rose Bowl Game and Pasadena Bowl. Super Bowl XI would take place only eight days after the 1977 Rose Bowl on the same field. Stadium officials expressed confidence that the turf would be in good condition. Pac-8 executive director Wiles Hallock, along with some individual members of the Tournament of Roses Committee opposed the city's bid. However, former Pasadena mayor Don Yokaitis, who made the presentation, successfully touted the stadium's prestige, tradition, and capacity. It would be the first of five Super Bowls played at the Rose Bowl.\nOakland Raiders.\nThis game marked the second Super Bowl appearance for the Oakland Raiders, who lost Super Bowl II. Two years after their Super Bowl loss, former head coach John Rauch left for Buffalo and the Raiders made Rauch's assistant, linebackers coach John Madden a first time head coach. In Madden's first 8 seasons the Raiders had posted an 83\u201322\u20137 record (for a .772 winning percentage counting ties, second only to the Vikings' .781 in the NFL). Super Bowl XI was Oakland's first NFL championship, culminating seven playoff appearances since 1968, including six losses in the AFL/AFC Championship Game. With the exception of the 1972 Steelers, all of the Raiders' opponents would end up winning the Super Bowl.\nThe Raiders offense was led by quarterback Ken Stabler, who finished as the top rated passer in the AFC, passing for 2,737 yards, 27 touchdowns, and 17 interceptions. His 66.7 completion percentage (194 completions out of 291 attempts) was the second highest in the league. Stabler's main passing weapon was wide receiver Cliff Branch, who caught 46 passes for 1,111 yards (24.2 yards per catch average) and 12 touchdowns. Fred Biletnikoff was also a reliable deep threat, with 43 receptions for 551 yards and 7 touchdowns, while tight end Dave Casper recorded 53 receptions for 691 yards and 10 touchdowns.\nIn addition to their great passing attack the Raiders also had a powerful running game, led by fullback Mark van Eeghen (1,012 rushing yards, 17 receptions) and halfback Clarence Davis (516 rushing yards, 27 receptions). Another reason for the Raiders' success on offense was their offensive line, led by left tackle Art Shell and left guard Gene Upshaw. \nInjuries early in the season forced the Raiders to switch from a 4\u20133 to a 3\u20134 defense. The switch benefited the team, as they won their last 10 games and finished the regular season with the best record in the league, 13\u20131. The Raiders' defense was anchored by great linebackers, such as Phil Villapiano and Ted Hendricks, while defensive end Otis Sistrunk anchored the defensive line. Their defensive secondary was extremely hard-hitting and talented, led by safeties Jack Tatum and George Atkinson, and cornerbacks Skip Thomas and Willie Brown.\nBrown, Upshaw, Biletnikoff and running back Pete Banaszak were the only holdovers from the Oakland team that was defeated nine years earlier in Super Bowl II.\nMany accused the Raiders defense of being overly aggressive, especially Atkinson, who inflicted a severe concussion on Pittsburgh Steelers wide receiver Lynn Swann in the previous season's AFC Championship Game. Atkinson added to that reputation as the Raiders advanced through the playoffs to Super Bowl XI, as Atkinson inflicted another concussion to Swann in the Raiders' 1976 season opener. In the Raiders' 24\u201321 playoff win over the New England Patriots, Atkinson broke the nose of Patriots tight end Russ Francis. In reaction, Pittsburgh head coach Chuck Noll complained of a \"criminal element\" in Atkinson's play. Atkinson himself denied deliberately trying to injure anyone and pointed out that at 6\u20320\u2033 and 185 pounds, he was one of the smallest players on the field. The Raiders and their fans were often known to counter these accusations against Atkinson and Jack Tatum by pointing out the physical way that Pittsburgh cornerback Mel Blount covered Oakland's speedy split end Cliff Branch.\nTwo of the Raiders' players (whose names were not revealed) bought marijuana from Red Hot Chili Peppers singer Anthony Kiedis' father, Blackie Dammett, smoked it before the game, and played the game under the effects of the drug. This was revealed on Kiedis' biography from 2004, \"Scar Tissue\".\nMinnesota Vikings.\nThe Vikings, coached by Bud Grant, won the NFC Central for the eighth time in the last nine seasons with an 11\u20132\u20131 record, and advanced to their fourth Super Bowl in eight years. They were the only team who had lost three Super Bowls (they had previously lost Super Bowls IV, VIII and IX), and did not want to be the first one to lose four. They were the first team to appear in a fourth Super Bowl.\nOnce again, the Vikings had a powerful offense led by 36-year-old quarterback Fran Tarkenton and running back Chuck Foreman. In his 16th NFL season, Tarkenton was already the league's all-time leader in pass completions (3,186), passing yards (41,802), and touchdown passes (308). He had another fine season in 1976, completing 61.9 percent of his passes for 2,961 yards, 17 touchdowns, and only 8 interceptions. Foreman had the best season of his career, rushing for 1,155 yards and 13 touchdowns, while also catching 55 passes for 567 yards and another touchdown. Fullback Brent McClanahan also contributed 634 combined rushing and receiving yards. The Vikings also added two new weapons to their offense: veteran wide receiver Ahmad Rashad and rookie wide receiver Sammy White combined for 104 receptions, 1,577 receiving yards, and 13 touchdowns, while tackle Ron Yary once again anchored the offensive line.\nThe Vikings' \"Purple People Eaters\" defense, anchored by Carl Eller, Jim Marshall, and Alan Page, were also dominating teams again. During this regular season, they led the NFC in fewest points allowed (176). Also, defensive back Nate Wright led the team with 7 interceptions for 47 yards, while safety Paul Krause had 2 interceptions for 21 yards. Pro Bowl linebacker Matt Blair intercepted two passes and recovered five fumbles.\nTarkenton became the second quarterback to start three Super Bowls, following his Super Bowl VIII counterpart Bob Griese. Eleven players were on the roster for Super Bowl IV, VIII, IX, and XI for the Vikings: Bobby Bryant, Fred Cox, Carl Eller, Wally Hilgenberg, Paul Krause, Jim Marshall, Alan Page, Mick Tingelhoff, Ed White, Roy Winston and Ron Yary.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Vikings went on to dominate the Washington Redskins, 35\u201320, and then defeated the Los Angeles Rams, 24\u201313, in the playoffs. Ten of the Vikings' points in the NFC Championship Game came from blocked kicks.\nThe Raiders overcame an 11-point fourth-quarter deficit to defeat the New England Patriots, the only team to beat the Raiders all season, 24\u201321, with the aid of a penalty call against the Patriots. New England's Ray Hamilton was tagged for roughing the passer in the fourth quarter, turning an incomplete pass on 3rd and 18 into a first down, and the Raiders went on to score on Stabler's 1-yard touchdown run with 14 seconds left in the contest.\nIn the AFC Championship Game Oakland then faced the Pittsburgh Steelers, a team that had won the two previous Super Bowls and defeated the Raiders in the playoffs in three out of the last four seasons. However, coming into this game without injured starting running backs Franco Harris and Rocky Bleier, the Steelers were soundly thrashed this time around, losing to Oakland, 24\u20137.\nThis was the first Super Bowl game to match both conferences' No. 1 seeds, the first one held in the Rose Bowl, the last Super Bowl to finish under daylight and the last where both teams' placekickers (Minnesota's Fred Cox and Oakland's Errol Mann) used the straight-on style.\nScheduled on the 9th day of January, the game marks the earliest Super Bowl played during the calendar year. The regular season started one week earlier than usual in order to avoid having playoff games on Christmas Day, which fell on a Saturday in 1976. By moving the season up, the divisional playoffs were held December 18 and 19, and the conference championship games Sunday, December 26. The local starting time for this Super Bowl, 12:47 pm Pacific Time, also was the earliest in history, two minutes earlier than Super Bowl VII at the nearby Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in 1973.\nThe Raiders became the first West Division team from either conference to reach a post-merger Super Bowl. They also became the first team to play in a Super Bowl in their home state; the Raiders later played another in-state Super Bowl, Super Bowl XXXVII in San Diego, during the 2002 season.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was televised in the United States by NBC, with play-by-play announcer Curt Gowdy and color commentator Don Meredith. This was Meredith's last broadcast with NBC, as he returned to ABC to rejoin the \"Monday Night Football\" crew for the 1977 season, where he had been a commentator from 1970 through 1973. Bryant Gumbel, Lee Leonard, and analyst John Brodie anchored NBC's pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage. With kickoff at 12:30\u00a0p.m. PST, this remains the most recent Super Bowl completed in daylight.\nEntertainment.\nPregame festivities.\nThe pregame festivities featured the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) All-City Band and frisbee dog Ashley Whippet. Later, singer Vikki Carr sang \"America the Beautiful\". To date, this is the only game in Super Bowl history that the national anthem was not sung. This was only the second time in the game's history that \"America the Beautiful\" was sung before a game, as Charley Pride sang the song at Super Bowl VIII three years prior.\nThis was the first Super Bowl where the official coin toss was held at midfield three minutes prior to kickoff. Prior to 1976, the official toss was held 30 minutes prior to kickoff, with captains called to midfield three minutes prior to kickoff so the referee could inform fans and media of the results of the toss. Jim Tunney became the last referee to conduct the Super Bowl coin toss ceremony by himself. The year before, former United States Secretary of the Navy John Warner became the first non-official to toss the coin. The next year, Chicago Bears great Red Grange (with Tunney as referee) began the tradition of celebrities or other special guests participating in the coin toss ceremony. This tradition then was slightly altered in Super Bowl LIV in February 2020, when Retired Colonel Charles E. McGee let referee Bill Vinovich toss the coin instead.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was produced by Disney and was based on \"It's a Small World\", an attraction at Disneyland and the Magic Kingdom. The show featured the cast members of The New Mickey Mouse Club. It was the first Super Bowl halftime show to include crowd participation as people in the stadium performed a mass card stunt on cue. The LAUSD All-City Band also played during the show.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe Raiders took the opening kickoff and advanced all the way to the Vikings' 12-yard line on quarterback Ken Stabler's 25-yard pass to tight end Dave Casper and a 20-yard run by running back Clarence Davis, but came up empty after kicker Errol Mann hit the left upright on his 29-yard field goal attempt. Later in the quarter, after Minnesota had punted twice and Oakland once, the Vikings had a great opportunity to score when Minnesota linebacker Fred McNeill blocked Ray Guy's second punt and recovered the ball on the Raiders' 3-yard line. The Vikings' special teams' unit was known for blocking punts, but this was the first time it had happened to Guy, who only had three blocked in his 14-year Pro Football Hall of Fame career. However, two plays later, Minnesota running back Brent McClanahan fumbled the ball while being tackled by linebacker Phil Villapiano, and linebacker Willie Hall recovered the ball for Oakland on the Raider's 3 yard line. A 35-yard run by Davis around left end from the Oakland 5 ignited a Raider's drive. On its sixth play Stabler completed another 25-yard pass to Casper, who broke through what Stabler called \"10 tackles\" en route to the Vikings 7 yard-line. Minnesota's defense proved stout, and kept Oakland out of the end zone as time expired in the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nStalled by Minnesota deep in Vikings territory to start the second quarter, Oakland was forced to kick a field goal. Mann connected from 24-yards out 48 seconds into the period, giving the Raiders a 3-0 lead.\nAfter forcing Minnesota to punt following a three-and-out, the Raiders took possession at their own 36. Stabler completed a 19-yard pass to Casper to reach the Minnesota 26. Running back Carl Garrett carried the ball on three consecutive plays and gained 20 yards, then Stabler hit wide receiver Fred Biletnikoff along the right sideline for 5 yards to the 1-yard line. A 1-yard touchdown pass from Stabler to Casper, his fourth and final reception of the game, completed the 64-yard 10-play drive and increased the Raiders' lead to 10\u20130. On the Vikings' next possession, running back Chuck Foreman gained 7 yards on first down and 6 yards on second down, but a holding penalty on offensive tackle Ron Yary made it 2nd-and-13. Tarkenton threw an incomplete pass to wide receiver Sammy White, then a long pass to wide receiver Ahmad Rashad was broken up by cornerback Willie Brown, resulting in another three-and-out. Oakland got the ball back in excellent field position, after cornerback/punt returner Neal Colzie returned Minnesota's punt 25 yards to the Vikings' 35-yard line. After three running plays, Stabler completed an 18-yard pass to Biletnikoff at the 1-yard line, and running back Pete Banaszak scored on a 1-yard touchdown run on the next play. Mann missed the extra point attempt wide right, leaving the Raiders up 16\u20130 with 3:33 left in the half. To this point, Minnesota had picked up only one first down. They added three more before halftime, including a meaningless 26-yard completion from quarterback Fran Tarkenton to Foreman before time expired, which ended up being their longest gain of the entire game. The score at halftime marked the fourth time in as many Super Bowl games that the Vikings failed to score in the first half.\nThird quarter.\nThe second half began with Minnesota taking the kick. After punts by both teams, Oakland's Colzie returned another Vikings' punt 12 yards to the Raiders' 46. An 18-yard run by Davis and a 10-yard reception by wide receiver Cliff Branch set up a 40-yard Mann field goal, increasing the Raiders' lead to 19\u20130. With ten minutes gone in the third period, the Vikings had gone 40 minutes without scoring, same as in all their previous Super Bowls; Oakland also had enough points to win, the same as in Minnesota Super Bowl losses to Kansas City in 1969, Miami in 1973, and Pittsburgh in 1974.\nTarkenton threw three consecutive incomplete passes on the Vikings' ensuing drive, setting up a Minnesota punt. However, instead of another three-and-out, Oakland linebacker Ted Hendricks received a roughing the kicker penalty for a late hit on Minnesota punter Neil Clabo. The five yard penalty and a new set of downs set the Vikings up for a 12-play, 68-yard drive, with Tarkenton completing passes to tight end Stu Voigt, wide receiver Ahmad Rashad, and Foreman for gains of 15, 21, and 10 yards, respectively. Tarkenton then hit White for an 8-yard touchdown pass, cutting their deficit to 19\u20137 with 47 seconds remaining in the period.\nFourth quarter.\nVikings defensive tackle Alan Page sacked Stabler for an 11-yard loss to start the fourth quarter, leading to an Oakland punt. The Vikings then advanced to the Oakland 37-yard line behind Tarkenton completions to White of 14 and 18 yards, with the second featuring a combined hit from safeties Jack Tatum and Skip Thomas that sent White's helmet and mouthguard flying (and left him momentarily knocked out). On 3rd-and-3, Hall intercepted a pass from Tarkenton and returned it 16 yards to the Minnesota 46. Three plays later, Biletnikoff's 48-yard reception from Stabler moved the ball to the Vikings' 2-yard line. Banaszak rushed in for another touchdown, increasing the Raiders' lead to 26\u20137. All three Raiders offensive touchdowns had been preceded on the previous play by key receptions by Biletnikoff.\nWhite returned the ensuing kickoff 19 yards to the Minnesota 32-yard line. Four plays later Tarkenton completed a 25-yard pass to Rashad to the Oakland 28. On the next play, cornerback Willie Brown put the game completely out of reach by intercepting a pass intended for White and returned it 75 yards for an Oakland touchdown. Mann's extra point attempt again went wide right, but Oakland's lead was now 32\u20137.\nAfter both teams turned the ball over on downs, a four-score Minnesota comeback was considered impossible and the Vikings brought in backup quarterback Bob Lee. He then led Minnesota 86 yards in 9 plays, scoring on a 14-yard touchdown pass to Voigt with only 25 seconds remaining. Oakland wide receiver Mike Siani recovered Minnesota's ensuing onside kick to end the game and secure the Raiders' first Super Bowl title.\nPost-game.\nStabler finished the game with 12 out of 19 pass completions for 180 yards and 1 touchdown. Davis, who was the top rusher in the game, gained 137 yards on just 16 rushing attempts, an average of 8.5 yards per carry. Of Davis' 16 carries, 11 were runs to the left side, which is where the blocking of guard Gene Upshaw, tackle Art Shell and Casper dominated defensive end Jim Marshall and linebacker Wally Hilgenberg. Marshall made no tackles in the game and Hilgenberg made only two. Oakland set a new rushing record for the Super Bowl with 266 yards gained. As of Super Bowl LVI, only the Washington Redskins have rushed for more yards, doing so in both Super Bowls XVII and XXII. The Raiders had 52 rushing carries, becoming the third consecutive Viking S. B. opponent to rush more than 50 times.\nFred Biletnikoff earned MVP honors after his 4 receptions for 79 yards; his selection has been widely praised historically because the voters recognized that while his overall numbers weren't overwhelming (until Cooper Kupp was the MVP of Super Bowl LVI, Biletnikoff was the only wide receiver to earn such an honor despite not having at least 100 yards of catches), it was recognized that his plays both produced the majority of Oakland's points and were the key to making the game a rout for the Raiders. Casper finished the game with 4 receptions for 70 yards and 1 touchdown. Colzie returned 4 punts for a Super Bowl record 43 yards. Foreman had a solid performance for Minnesota, contributing 44 rushing yards and 62 receiving yards. Tarkenton completed 17 out of 35 pass attempts for 205 yards, 1 touchdown, and 2 interceptions. White recorded 163 total yards, catching 5 passes for 77 yards and 1 touchdown, rushing once for 7 yards, and returning 4 kickoffs for 79 yards. The Raiders won their first Super Bowl and according to Brown, winning Super Bowl XI \"made up for the other Raiders who came before and didn't have a chance to participate on a winning Super Bowl team. This victory meant not only a lot to me, it meant a lot to the entire Raider organization.\" The win was particularly satisfying for Brown, who scored a Super Bowl touchdown and earned his first championship ring after 14 years of professional football.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XI: Oakland Raiders 32, Minnesota Vikings 14\n\"at Rose Bowl, Pasadena, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http:// , https://, https://\nIndividual leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XI, according to the official NFL.com box score and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. \nSome records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\n\"Note: A seven-official system was not used until 1978\"\nAftermath.\nThe NFL Films highlight film was the first Super Bowl recap to feature radio clips to narrate key plays throughout the game. The play-by-play announcers were Bill King (Raiders) and Joe McConnell (Vikings).\nThe Vikings' loss in Super Bowl XI meant the franchise finished with a 0\u20134 Super Bowl record under head coach Bud Grant, even though in the same eight-season span their regular season record was 87\u201324\u20131, which was the best in the NFL. In 2015, on the occasion of Super Bowl 50, \"Slate\" webpage writer Justin Peters watched all of the first 49 games over a two-month period. He called the Vikings \"the worst franchise in Super Bowl history. Minnesota went to the Super Bowl four separate times from 1970 to 1977 and didn't score a single first-half point in any of those games. The Vikings had a really, really good defense, and their offense just kept on letting the defense down, game after game after game.\"\nGrant coached Minnesota eight more seasons, but never managed to guide the team back to a Super Bowl. In fact, as of the 2024 season, this remains the Vikings' most recent appearance in a Super Bowl, although they have qualified for the postseason a further 24 times and have reached the NFC Championship six times in 1977, 1987, 1998, 2000, 2009 and 2017. Grant was the last surviving coach from the first 14 Super Bowls until his death on 11 March 2023.\nDespite a few mediocre seasons, the Raiders would remain an NFL power until 1985 and win two more Super Bowls in their 1980 and 1983 seasons \u2013 the second after moving to Los Angeles in 1982. In contrast to their 13\u20131 1976 regular season, both of these would be won in major upsets. The Raiders would fall to mediocrity in the latter part of the 1980s and most of the 1990s when they were affected by stadium problems that saw them again playing in Oakland in 1995 \u2013 although they did reach the AFC Championship in 1991 and be demolished 51\u20133 by the Bills \u2013 before a 33\u201315 three-season record between 2000 and 2002 saw them return to the Super Bowl for the first time in 19 seasons, losing out to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Since then, the Raiders have been mainly NFL cellar-dwellers, with only two postseason appearances; one in 2016 and again in 2021, along with a record of seven straight seasons with no more than five victories between 2003 and 2009. Principal owner Al Davis died on 8 October 2011 and John Madden died on 28 December 2021. The picture of Madden celebrating this victory was on the cover of the next gen version of \"Madden NFL 23\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29138", "revid": "6082273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29138", "title": "Super Bowl XII", "text": "1978 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XII was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1977 season. The Cowboys defeated the Broncos 27\u201310 to win their second Super Bowl. The game was played on January 15, 1978, at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans. This was the first Super Bowl in a domed stadium, and the first time that the game was played in prime time in the Eastern United States.\nThe game pitted Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach against their former quarterback, Craig Morton. Led by Staubach and the Doomsday Defense, Dallas advanced to its fourth Super Bowl after posting a 12\u20132 record in the regular season and home playoff victories over the Chicago Bears and Minnesota Vikings. The Broncos, led by Morton and the Orange Crush Defense, made their first-ever postseason appearance after a franchise-best 12\u20132 regular season record. Also with home-field advantage, Denver posted playoff wins over the Pittsburgh Steelers and Oakland Raiders.\nThe Cowboys defense dominated Super Bowl XII, forcing eight turnovers and allowing only eight pass completions by the Broncos for 61 yards. Two interceptions led to 10 first-quarter points. Denver's longest play of the game was 21 yards, which occurred on their opening drive. Dallas extended its lead to 20\u20133 in the third quarter after wide receiver Butch Johnson made a diving catch in the end zone for a 45-yard touchdown reception. An ineffective Morton was replaced by Norris Weese late in the third quarter. He drove the Broncos downfield to score a touchdown to close the gap on the lead to 20\u201310, capped by a Rob Lytle one-yard touchdown run. However, the Cowboys put the game out of reach in the fourth quarter when fullback Robert Newhouse threw a 29-yard touchdown pass on a halfback option play to receiver Golden Richards.\nFor the first and only time, two players won Super Bowl MVP honors: defensive tackle Randy White and defensive end Harvey Martin. This was also the first time that a defensive lineman was named Super Bowl MVP.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XII to New Orleans on March 16, 1976, at the owners' meetings held in San Diego. It was the first of seven Super Bowls (as of 2023) to be played at the Louisiana Superdome. However, it was not the first one scheduled for the Superdome; Super Bowl IX was scheduled to be played there, but construction delays forced it to be played at Tulane Stadium.\nA total of six cities submitted bids: New Orleans, Miami, Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Dallas, and Houston. However, Dallas dropped out of the running due to a date conflict with a convention. A favorite going into the vote, New Orleans won on the fourth ballot after representatives promised they would prevent price gouging by the local hotels. In selecting the Superdome, owners rejected maintaining an AFC/NFC host site rotation, an unofficial, and mostly coincidental pattern that had been in place for several seasons.\nStaubach v. Morton.\nThe main storyline surrounding Super Bowl XII was Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach versus Broncos quarterback Craig Morton. Morton began his career playing for Dallas in 1965. Staubach joined the Cowboys in 1969 after four years of service in the U.S. Navy, and soon both quarterbacks competed for the starting job. During the 1970 season, both Morton and Staubach started for about half of the regular season games. Morton was ultimately selected to lead the team through the playoffs and eventually to their Super Bowl V loss to the Baltimore Colts, 16\u201313. The next year, Staubach won the starting job and eventually led Dallas to defeat the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl VI, 24\u20133. Staubach was also named Super Bowl MVP during that game. In 1972, Morton started most of the Cowboys' games as Staubach was out with a separated shoulder. However, in the division playoffs against San Francisco, Staubach relieved Morton and rallied the team to victory, which assured Staubach of the starting job going forward. Morton was relegated to backup status until he left the team in 1974 to join the New York Giants.\nMorton and the Broncos' Orange Crush Defense.\nAfter spending three years with the Giants, Morton became the starting quarterback for the Broncos, a franchise with a dismal history. It had taken them 14 years (1960\u20131973) to record their first winning season and they had never once made the playoffs. But under the leadership of the newly arrived Morton and their new coach Red Miller, Denver finished 1977 with a 12\u20132 record and earned the #1 seed in the AFC.\nMorton did not put up a large number of passing yards (1,929) during the regular season, but he threw 14 touchdown passes and only 8 interceptions, while also rushing for 125 yards and 4 touchdowns, earning him the NFL Comeback Player of the Year Award. Denver tight end Riley Odoms was his main target, with 37 receptions for 429 yards. Wide receiver Haven Moses was also a major deep threat, catching 27 passes for 539 yards, an average of 20 yards per catch. However, the Broncos main offensive strength was their rushing game. Denver had 3 running backs, Otis Armstrong, Lonnie Perrin, and Rob Lytle, who carried the ball equally, combining for 1,353 rushing yards and 10 touchdowns. On special teams, multi-talented wide receiver Rick Upchurch led the NFL with 653 punt return yards, while also catching 12 passes for 245 yards and recording 456 yards returning kickoffs.\nThe backbone of the Broncos was their defense, a unit known as the \"Orange Crush\", which used a 3\u20134 formation anchored by four superb linebackers, including Randy Gradishar (3 interceptions, 4 fumble recoveries) and Tom Jackson (4 interceptions, 93 return yards, 1 touchdown). Defensive End Lyle Alzado anchored the line, while their secondary was led by defensive backs Bill Thompson (who recorded 5 interceptions) and Louis Wright (who had 3 interceptions). The Broncos defense had given up just 148 points during the season, an average of just 10.6 per game and the 3rd-fewest in the NFL.\nStaubach and the Cowboys' Doomsday Defense.\nWith Staubach and his team's Doomsday Defense, the Cowboys won the NFC East with a 12\u20132 regular season record.\nStaubach threw for 2,620 yards and 18 touchdowns with only 8 interceptions, while also gaining 171 rushing yards and 3 touchdowns on the ground. Wide receiver Drew Pearson was the leading receiver on the team with 48 receptions for 870 yards, while Pro Bowl tight end Billy Joe DuPree recorded 28 receptions for 347 yards and provided blocking support on running plays.\nThe Cowboys also had a new weapon on offense: rookie running back Tony Dorsett, the previous year's Heisman Trophy winner. Despite not becoming a full-time starter until the tenth game of the regular season, Dorsett led the team in rushing with 1,007 yards, scored 13 total touchdowns, and was the team's third leading receiver with 29 receptions for another 273 yards. Veteran fullback Robert Newhouse provided Dorsett with blocking, and was the team's second leading rusher with 721 yards, while also catching 16 passes for another 106 yards. Running back Preston Pearson contributed 341 yards rushing, caught 46 passes for 535 yards, and scored 5 touchdowns. The Cowboys' offensive line was led by All-Pro tackle Rayfield Wright.\nMeanwhile, the Cowboys' Doomsday Defense remained in the superb form that helped lead the Cowboys' Super Bowl X appearance. Their defensive line consisted of Harvey Martin (who recorded 20 sacks and earned the National Football League Defensive Player of the Year Award), Jethro Pugh, Ed \"Too Tall\" Jones and Randy White. Behind them, the Cowboys had a trio of linebackers, Thomas Henderson (3 interceptions), D.D. Lewis, and Bob Breunig, who provided pass coverage and run stoppage. Dallas also had a secondary led by future Hall of Famers cornerback Mel Renfro and safety Cliff Harris and Pro Bowl safety Charlie Waters.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Cowboys earned their second trip to the Super Bowl in three years by defeating the Chicago Bears, 37\u20137, and the Minnesota Vikings, 23\u20136, in the playoffs. Their \"Doomsday Defense\" proved as dominant as ever in those two games, forcing 7 turnovers against Chicago and 4 against the Vikings.\nMeanwhile, the Broncos earned their first ever trip to the Super Bowl in team history by defeating the two previous league champions: the Pittsburgh Steelers, 34\u201321, and the Oakland Raiders, 20\u201317, in the playoffs. This made Morton the first quarterback to start a Super Bowl game for two different franchises, and he remains the only quarterback to have started two different franchises' \"first\" Super Bowl appearances.\nThis was the final Super Bowl in the 14-game schedule era. The following season, the NFL went to a 16-game schedule, which remained in place through the 2020 NFL season, before being replaced by a 17-game regular season in 2021.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nSuper Bowl XII provided an opportunity for Morton to not only beat his former team, but also to redeem himself for his Super Bowl V loss and the loss of his starting job to Staubach. For Staubach, he had a chance to win his second Super Bowl and defeat his old rival, showing that he truly was the better quarterback of the two.\nTony Dorsett became the first football player in history to win a college football national championship one year (with the Pittsburgh Panthers) and a Super Bowl the next. Dorsett won both championships in the same building; Pitt clinched the 1976 national championship by defeating the Georgia Bulldogs in the Sugar Bowl on January 1, 1977.\nDallas was the only NFC team to win the Super Bowl during the 1970s (although both Baltimore and Pittsburgh were pre-merger NFL teams). Both Cowboy victories in the decade came in New Orleans against teams making their first Super Bowl appearance.\nThis was the first Super Bowl between two teams who had met in regular season play. The Cowboys defeated the Broncos 14\u20136 on the final Sunday of the regular season at Texas Stadium. Both teams' starters saw limited action in that contest, since both squads had already clinched their respective division championships and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs. Denver was 12\u20131 and Dallas 11\u20132 prior to the Dec 18 matchup. It was the first of only two times that two teams have played each other in the Super Bowl after playing on the final weekend of the regular season (the New York Giants and New England Patriots played in the final week of the 2007 regular season and met again in Super Bowl XLII). Under NFL scheduling rules put in place by Commissioner Roger Goodell prior to the 2010 season, the Super Bowl participants will no longer be able to play each other on the final weekend of the regular season, since all games on the final weekend now match division opponents.\nThe Broncos were the first team to wear a face mask color other than gray. Denver debuted white face masks in 1975 and wore them through 1996, prior to a complete redesign for 1997. \nThis was the first Super Bowl to feature arrow markers every ten yards, beginning at the 10 yard line, to indicate the direction of the nearest goal line, which were first used at Kansas City's Arrowhead Stadium in 1973. They became mandatory league-wide the following season in 1978.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS. It was the first Super Bowl played in prime time, with a kickoff time of 6:17\u00a0p.m. Eastern\u00a0/ 5:17\u00a0p.m. Central. Play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator Tom Brookshier were in the broadcast booth. Hosting the coverage was \"The NFL Today\" hosts Brent Musburger; Irv Cross; Phyllis George (in the last game of her first stint on \"The NFL Today\" before leaving to host the short-lived \"People\" the following season). Also contributing were Hank Stram (who would be fired by the New Orleans Saints 13 days after the game); Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder; Sonny Jurgensen (working on CBS Radio coverage); Gary Bender; Paul Hornung; Nick Buoniconti and Jack Whitaker. Buoniconti and Hornung served as sideline reporters; with Hornung doing postgame interviews in the Broncos' locker room; while Bender covered the trophy presentation in the Cowboy locker room.\nLocal radio broadcasters were KRLD-AM in Dallas with Verne Lundquist and Brad Sham, and KOA-AM in Denver with Bob Martin and Larry Zimmer. Both broadcasts could be picked up in distant areas since KRLD and KOA are 50,000-watt Class A clear channel stations. \nThe broadcast used what was called the Electronic Palette graphics system (created by CBS and Ampex) for a painting-like aspect to several visual graphics; such as the game intro, starting lineups and bumpers going into or coming out of a commercial break. These graphics were done by sports artist LeRoy Neiman. CBS would also unveil what was known as the \"Action Track\"; showing the trail of a football that had been kicked during replays. Also, when the planned lead-in (the Phoenix Open golf tournament) was halted due to poor weather, CBS Sports president Robert Wussler (in New York) and producer Barry Frank (at the Superdome) ended up filling the time period with an impromptu look at how the game would be produced. As in their previous Super Bowl; CBS used the Frank Sinatra song \"Winners\" to play over the closing montage.\nIn popular culture.\nThis game was featured in the \"All in the Family\" episode \"Superbowl Sunday\". Archie Bunker rented a big screen TV at his bar \"Archie's Place\" and sold ham sandwiches for $2.00. Later, two crooks (who were incognito throughout the episode) steal from and humiliate the patrons, by having them all pull down their pants, following the end of the game. Also, clips of some of the Cowboys' scoring plays were used to accompany the opening credits of the 1979 TV movie \"Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders\". Additional clips of this game also appeared in the \"NFL's Greatest Games\" episode \"Doomsday at the Dome\".\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities featured the Southern University Band along with the cheerleaders of both teams. Later, Phyllis Kelly of Northeast Louisiana University sang the national anthem.\nPro Football Hall of Fame running back Red Grange participated in the coin toss ceremony. Prior to 1976, the official coin toss was held 30 minutes prior to kickoff and was re-enacted three minutes prior to kickoff to inform the television audience and spectators in the stadium of the outcome.\nThe halftime show was \"From Paris to Paris of America\" featuring performances by the Apache Band and Apache Belles Drill team from Tyler Junior College, clarinetist Pete Fountain, and trumpeter Al Hirt.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe opening stages of the game were nearly disastrous for the Cowboys, who fumbled three times on their first two possessions, but did not turn the ball over on any of those fumbles. On their first play from scrimmage, Dallas attempted a double reverse, but wide receiver Butch Johnson fumbled the handoff. Johnson recovered his own fumble, but was sacked for a 9-yard loss by Denver linebacker Tom Jackson on the play, forcing the Cowboys to punt two plays later. The Broncos then advanced to the Dallas 33-yard line on their first drive of the game, aided by a fair catch interference penalty on Cowboys linebacker Thomas Henderson during the punt, enabling Denver to start on their own 47-yard line. Broncos quarterback Craig Morton completed a 16-yard pass to wide receiver Haven Moses, but was sacked for an 11-yard loss on third down by defensive tackle Randy White, which pushed the Broncos out of field goal range. On the ensuing Denver punt, Cowboys wide receiver Tony Hill muffed the ball at his own 1-yard line. In the scramble to recover, Broncos wide receiver John Schultz placed both of his hands on the ball and appeared to recover it for a touchdown, but the Cowboys emerged from the pile with the ball, still at their own 1-yard line. However, quarterback Roger Staubach managed to escape a sack for a safety and completed a 14-yard pass to running back Tony Dorsett. Two plays later, from the 19-yard line, Dorsett fumbled the ball forward into heavy traffic, but center John Fitzgerald made the recovery to keep possession for the Cowboys, who then punted.\nOn the Broncos' second possession, following an illegal use of hands penalty on Denver guard Tom Glassic, Randy White and defensive end Harvey Martin simultaneously hit Morton as he attempted to throw, which resulted in a wobbly pass that failed to cross the line of scrimmage and was intercepted by safety Randy Hughes on the Denver 25-yard line. The Cowboys capitalized on the turnover in five plays, which started with a 13-yard reception by tight end Billy Joe DuPree and ended with a 3-yard touchdown run by Dorsett, converting on a 4th-and-inches attempt and giving Dallas a 7\u20130 lead. On the Broncos' next possession, Schultz returned the kick 38 yards to the Denver 40, again giving them excellent field position. Two plays later, however, Morton was intercepted for a second time after his pass was tipped by linebacker Bob Breunig into the arms of cornerback Aaron Kyle, who returned the ball 20 yards to the Denver 35. Dallas then advanced to the Denver 8 on a 9-yard run by fullback Robert Newhouse and an 18-yard run by Dorsett, but Staubach was sacked by defensive end Lyle Alzado for a 10-yard loss on third down, forcing the Cowboys to settle for a 35-yard field goal by kicker Efr\u00e9n Herrera to increase their lead to 10\u20130.\nSecond quarter.\nThe Broncos were forced to punt to start the second quarter, and the Cowboys then advanced to the Denver 19 from their own 42, which featured a 19-yard pass by Staubach to DuPree. On third down, Staubach appeared to unleash a pass that was intercepted in the end zone by Broncos safety Bill Thompson; however, the officials ruled that Staubach had stepped out of bounds before he threw the ball. Herrera then kicked a 43-yard field goal to increase the Cowboys' lead to 13\u20130. The rest of the half was a seesaw of sloppy plays, turnovers, and missed opportunities. On the second play of the next Denver drive, Morton unleashed an errant pass intended for Moses for his third interception, this time by cornerback Benny Barnes at the Cowboys' 40-yard line. The Cowboys could not get points off of this turnover, as offensive tackle Ralph Neely was called for holding, which was followed by defensive tackle Rubin Carter sacking Staubach for a 5-yard loss, the fourth sack of the game for Denver, forcing a three-and-out and a punt. However, the punt struck an unsuspecting Schultz on his helmet as he attempted to throw a block during the return, and the ball was quickly recovered by Dallas linebacker Bruce Huther.\nThe Cowboys then advanced to the Broncos' 26 on a 14-yard run by Dorsett, but Herrera missed a 43-yard field goal attempt wide left, keeping the score 13\u20130. On their following drive, the Broncos committed their fifth turnover as wide receiver Jack Dolbin fumbled a 13-yard reception, while being tackled by safety Charlie Waters, with Hughes returning the ball 18 yards to the Denver 27-yard line. However, Dallas failed to score again as Herrera missed another field goal attempt wide right, this time from only 32 yards out. On the first play after that missed attempt, Denver yet again turned the ball over to Dallas when Kyle stripped the ball from tight end Riley Odoms, with Hughes recovering it again and returning it to the 28-yard line. However, on the next play, Dallas gave the ball right back to Denver as DuPree caught a 20-yard pass at the 8-yard line but fumbled after taking a hit from cornerback Steve Foley, with Tom Jackson making the recovery. Five plays later, with the Broncos desperate to get on the board before the end of the half, Morton uncorked yet another errant pass that was intercepted by cornerback Mark Washington who returned the ball 27 yards to Denver's 35-yard line. There were 6 seconds remaining on the clock after the interception, but Dallas yet again could not capitalize as Herrera missed yet another field goal attempt wide left, his third miss of the half, this time from 44 yards out, as time expired.\nBy halftime, the Cowboys had fumbled five times (losing one), had missed three field goals, and had allowed four sacks, but still led 13\u20130. Meanwhile, the Broncos had committed a halftime record 7 turnovers. Morton, who had thrown only 8 interceptions during the entire 1977 season, was picked off 4 times in the half in addition to 3 fumbles lost, finishing with a passer rating of 0.0. Incredibly, after punting on their very first drive of the game, six of the next seven Broncos possessions resulted in a turnover, and there also was a fumble on a punt return.\nThird quarter.\nOn the opening drive of the second half, the Broncos moved the ball deep into Cowboys territory. First, Schultz returned the second half kickoff 25 yards to the Denver 35, and then running back Otis Armstrong took off for an 18-yard gain. Seven plays later, kicker Jim Turner put the Broncos on the board with a 47-yard field goal, cutting their deficit to 13\u20133. But after an exchange of punts, the Cowboys mounted a 59-yard scoring drive in six plays with Staubach completing a 13-yard pass to wide receiver Drew Pearson, followed by a 45-yard touchdown pass to Johnson, who made a fingertip catch as he fell into the end zone, increasing the Dallas lead to 20\u20133. Johnson dropped the ball when he hit the ground, but officials ruled it a touchdown before the ball came out of his hands.\nDenver wide receiver Rick Upchurch returned the ensuing kickoff a Super Bowl-record 67 yards to the Cowboys 26-yard line. On the next play, Morton nearly threw his fifth interception to Cowboys defensive end Ed \"Too Tall\" Jones, and was then immediately replaced by backup quarterback Norris Weese. Two plays later, on 4th-and-1, running back Jim Jensen's 16-yard run moved the ball to the 1-yard line, and then running back Rob Lytle scored on a 1-yard touchdown run to cut Denver's deficit to 20\u201310.\nFourth quarter.\nDallas drove to the Denver 35 on their next possession, but Staubach was strip-sacked by Tom Jackson, and Carter recovered the fumble at the Broncos' 45 on the second play of the quarter. However, Weese was incomplete on his next three attempts, one on a pass to Upchurch in the end zone, and Denver punted.\nThe Broncos forced a Cowboys punt, but Martin stripped the ball from Weese on third down, and Kyle recovered it on the Denver 29-yard line. On the next play, the Cowboys scored on a 29-yard halfback option play: Staubach pitched the ball to Newhouse, who ran left and then threw a pass to wide receiver Golden Richards for a touchdown, putting the game away for Dallas with a 27\u201310 lead. Newhouse became the first running back in Super Bowl history to throw a touchdown pass. Most notable about the trick play was that Denver's defense was not fooled by it, as Richards was properly covered by Foley. Incidentally, Newhouse had practiced with the play for weeks, but had not managed to complete the pass once in practice (which unlike the play in the game was done with Newhouse rolling to his right). Loaded up with stickum (legal at the time), Newhouse accomplished a tight spiral to Richards that he caught in stride for the score.\nDenver, now playing for pride, reached the Dallas 25-yard line on their next possession, but turned the ball over on downs after a sack on Weese by linebacker D. D. Lewis, a delay of game penalty, and back-to-back incomplete passes. The Broncos then forced the Cowboys to punt, but a roughing the kicker penalty on Denver linebacker Rob Nairne gave Dallas a new set of downs, enabling them to run out the clock and end the game.\nStaubach finished the game with 17 out of 25 pass completions for 183 yards and a touchdown, with no interceptions. Dorsett was the leading rusher of the game, with 66 rushing yards and a touchdown. He also caught 2 passes for 11 receiving yards. In addition to his 29-yard touchdown pass, Newhouse also contributed with 55 rushing yards. DuPree was the leading receiver of the game with 4 receptions for 66 yards. Hughes had an interception and a Super Bowl record two fumble recoveries.\nBefore being taken out of the game, Denver's starting quarterback Craig Morton completed just 4 out of 15 passes for 39 yards and was intercepted 4 times. His 21-yard completion to Haven Moses on the Broncos' opening drive was the only pass he completed that both resulted in positive yardage and did not end in a turnover. Morton's passer rating for the game was 0.0, the lowest in Super Bowl history. Upchurch recorded 125 total offensive yards (94 on kickoff returns, 22 on punt returns, and 9 receiving yards).\nThe Cowboys' superb defense played a critical role in the game. White and Martin were named co-Most Valuable Players; this award is usually bestowed on an offensive player. The voters actually wanted to name the entire 11-man starting defensive lineup as co-MVPs, and asked the NFL if this was acceptable. The league said no, and so two players were picked for the award. The unheralded Hughes and Kyle of the Cowboy secondary each had superb games to play an important role in the victory. The two men came up with five turnovers between them, leading directly to 17 of Dallas' points.\nThe game was the 8th Super Bowl in 10 years (following the first two won by Green Bay) in which the winning team scored enough to win before the losing team put up any points on the board (the exceptions were the two lost by the Cowboys to this point, Super Bowl V and Super Bowl X). Conversely, this feat has only occurred five times since (XV, XVIII, XXXV, XLVIII, and LIX).\nIn 2015, on the occasion of Super Bowl 50, \"Slate\" webpage writer Justin Peters watched all the games over a two-month period. He considered Super Bowl XII to be the worst Super Bowl ever. Morton was a large part of the reason for Peters, who felt the Broncos' quarterback was lucky to have only been intercepted four times in the first half, and a total output that amounted to only one completion for positive yardage that was not followed by an immediate turnover. Nor had the Cowboys impressed him, in large part due to Herrera's missed field goals in the second quarter. \"Blowouts can at least be fun to watch sometimes\", he concluded. \"This game was nothing but pain.\"\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XII: Dallas Cowboys 27, Denver Broncos 10\n\"at Louisiana Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\n\"Note: A seven-official system was not used until the following season\"\nJim Tunney was the only referee to work consecutive Super Bowls. The NFL now prohibits referees from working Super Bowls in consecutive seasons (a referee can be an alternate the season following an on-field assignment), although officials at other positions can do so.\nThis was the first Super Bowl in which all officials had previously called one.\nFive of the six officials\u2014all except Veteri\u2014previously worked a Super Bowl in New Orleans. Of those five, only Douglas was not on the crew for Super Bowl VI at Tulane Stadium.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29139", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29139", "title": "Super Bowl XIII", "text": "1979 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XIII was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Pittsburgh Steelers and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1978 season. The Steelers defeated the Cowboys by the score of 35\u201331. The game was played on January 21, 1979, at the Miami Orange Bowl in Miami, Florida, the fifth and last time that the Super Bowl was played in that stadium.\nThis was the first Super Bowl that featured a rematch of a previous one (the Steelers had previously beaten the Cowboys, 21\u201317, in Super Bowl X), and both teams were attempting to be the first club to win a third Super Bowl. Dallas was also the defending Super Bowl XII champion, and finished the 1978 regular season with a 12\u20134 record, and posted playoff victories over the Atlanta Falcons and the Los Angeles Rams. Pittsburgh entered the game after posting a 14\u20132 regular season record and playoff wins over the Denver Broncos and the Houston Oilers. Super Bowl XIII is also the only Super Bowl to date that featured two teams (and quarterbacks) that had previously won two Super Bowls in the same decade. The Dallas Cowboys (quarterbacked by Roger Staubach) won Super Bowl VI during the 1971 season and Super Bowl XII during the 1977 season. The Pittsburgh Steelers (quarterbacked by Terry Bradshaw) won Super Bowl IX during the 1974 season, and Super Bowl X during the 1975 season.\nSteelers quarterback Terry Bradshaw was named Super Bowl MVP for completing 17 of 30 passes for 318 yards and 4 touchdowns (both of which were Super Bowl records at the time) with 1 interception. He was the first quarterback since Staubach in Super Bowl VI to win the award. Bradshaw eclipsed Bart Starr's Super Bowl record for passing yards in the first half with 253 yards in the air as the Steelers led 21\u201314 at intermission. His 75-yard touchdown pass in the second quarter also tied Johnny Unitas in Super Bowl V for the longest pass in a Super Bowl. The Cowboys were able to stay close, only trailing 21\u201317 at the end of the third quarter, but Pittsburgh scored two touchdowns in a span of 19 seconds in the fourth period. Dallas also could not overcome turnovers, drops, and a controversial penalty during the second half. The Cowboys were able to score two touchdowns in the final minutes of the game, but still ended up being the first defending champion to lose in the Super Bowl and the first losing Super Bowl team to score 30 points or more.\nDue to its thrilling nature and the performances by both teams leading to a close game, it is considered one of the greatest Super Bowls.\nThe game featured a combined 26 Hall of Famers (15 from the Steelers and 11 from the Cowboys).\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XIII to Miami on June 14, 1977, at the owners' meetings held in New York City. For the first time since 1973, multiple Super Bowl host sites were selected at the same meeting. It marked the fifth and final time the Orange Bowl was chosen to host a Super Bowl. A total of eight cities submitted bids: Miami, Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Houston (Astrodome), New Orleans, Dallas (Cotton Bowl), Seattle (Kingdome), and Detroit (Pontiac Silverdome). Seattle and Detroit were attempting to become the first cold-weather city to host a Super Bowl, albeit inside a domed stadium. Though neither were selected, Detroit was invited to bid for a future game at the next meeting.\nThe selection of Miami was seen by some as a surprise, due to the aging condition of the Miami Orange Bowl. Representatives from Miami touted a proposed $8\u201315 million stadium improvement project, a plan to erect temporary bleachers to increase capacity to nearly 80,000 spectators, and offered the facility for low rent. Observers noted that the owners stuck with familiar venues this time around, choosing Miami for XIII and Pasadena for XIV. Early favorite Houston (Rice Stadium) reportedly fell out of favor with owners when it was revealed that birds were found in the showers of the Vikings training facility during Super Bowl VIII. Likewise New Orleans was passed over since the Superdome was already set to host Super Bowl XII.\nThis was the first Super Bowl held on January 21 or later. For the 1978\u201379 season, the NFL extended its schedule from 14 regular season games to 16 and increased the playoffs from an 8-team tournament to 10, creating two extra playoff games. The three division winners from each conference would be ranked first through third and be given a week off, and two wild card teams from each conference, seeded fourth and fifth, would play a playoff game with the winner going on to play the first seeded team (or, if they were in the same division, the second seed).\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Steelers joined the Cowboys in their attempt to be the first team to win a third Super Bowl, after wins in Super Bowl IX and Super Bowl X. Pittsburgh quarterback Terry Bradshaw had the best season of his career, completing 207 of 368 passes for 2,915 yards and 28 touchdowns, with 20 interceptions. He ranked as the second highest rated passer in the league (84.8), his 28 touchdown passes led the league, and he won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award. Wide receivers Lynn Swann and John Stallworth provided the team with a great deep threat. Swann, who had the best season of his career, recorded 61 receptions for 880 yards and 11 touchdowns, while Stallworth had 41 receptions for 798 yards and 9 touchdowns. Tight end Randy Grossman, who replaced injured starter Bennie Cunningham for most of the season, also was a big factor, recording 37 receptions for 448 yards and a touchdown.\nIn the Steelers' rushing game, fullback Franco Harris was the team's leading rusher for the 7th consecutive season, recording 1,082 yards and 8 touchdowns, while also catching 22 passes for another 144 yards. Halfback Rocky Bleier had 633 rushing yards and 5 touchdowns, while also catching 17 passes for 168 yards. The Steelers' success on offense was due in large measure to their stellar offensive line, anchored by future Hall of Fame center Mike Webster.\nAlthough Pittsburgh's \"Steel Curtain\" defense had some new starters this season, such as linemen John Banaszak and Steve Furness, and defensive back Tony Dungy, they finished first in fewest points allowed (195), second in the league against the run (allowing 107.8 yards per game), and ranked third in fewest total yards allowed (4,529). Once again, defensive tackles Joe Greene and L. C. Greenwood anchored the line, while Pro Bowl linebackers Jack Ham and Jack Lambert combined for 7 interceptions. Dungy led the team with 6 interceptions, while the rest of the secondary, defensive backs Mel Blount, Donnie Shell, and Ron Johnson, combined for 11. On special teams, rookie defensive back Larry Anderson ranked second in the NFL with 37 kickoff returns for 930 yards and a touchdown.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Cowboys became the first team to appear in five Super Bowls (after playing in Super Bowls V, VI, X and XII). Dallas led the league in scoring (384) and was No. 2 in total yards (5,959). The defending Super Bowl champions were once again led by quarterback Roger Staubach. Staubach finished the season as the top rated passer in the NFL (84.9) by throwing 231 out of 413 completions for 3,190 yards and 25 touchdowns, with 16 interceptions. He also rushed for 182 yards and another touchdown. Wide receivers Drew Pearson and Tony Hill provided the deep passing threats, combining for 90 receptions, 1,537 yards, and 7 touchdowns. Tight end Billy Joe DuPree contributed 34 receptions for 509 yards and 9 touchdowns. Running back Tony Dorsett had another fine season, recording a total of 1,703 combined rushing and receiving yards, and scoring a total of 9 touchdowns. Fullback Robert Newhouse and halfback Preston Pearson also contributed from the offensive backfield, combining for 1,326 rushing and receiving yards, while Newhouse also scored 10 touchdowns. The Cowboys also had a superb offensive line, led by Herbert Scott and 12-time Pro Bowler Rayfield Wright.\nThe Cowboys' \"Doomsday Defense\" finished the season as the top-ranked defense in the league against the run by only allowing 107.6 yards per game, 2nd in total yards allowed (4,009), and 3rd in points allowed (208). Pro Bowl linemen Ed \"Too Tall\" Jones, Harvey Martin, and Randy White anchored the line, leading the league with 58 sacks, while linebackers Bob Breunig, D. D. Lewis and Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson provided solid support. Their secondary, led by safeties Cliff Harris and Charlie Waters, along with cornerbacks Benny Barnes and Aaron Kyle, combined for 16 interceptions.\nThe Cowboys started the regular season slowly, winning only six of their first ten games. But Dallas finished strong, winning their last six regular season games to post a 12\u20134 record.\nPlayoffs.\nDallas\u2019s first opponent was the Atlanta Falcons, a scrappy 9\u20137 squad making the first playoff appearance in their 13-year history. Despite being 14-point favorites, the Cowboys found themselves trailing 20\u201313 at the end of the first half, having lost three fumbles and Roger Staubach to a concussion. But under backup quarterback Danny White, Dallas rallied back in the second half with two touchdowns, while their defense intercepted two passes from Steve Bartkowski and forced a turnover on downs on their own 35-yard line late in the fourth quarter as Atlanta was driving for a potential tying score, and the team went on to win 27\u201320. In the following week, any doubts about the Cowboys due to their struggle to win against the Falcons were quickly put to rest as they shut out the 12\u20134 Los Angeles Rams 28\u20130, holding them to just 277 total yards and forcing 7 turnovers.\nMeanwhile, the Steelers easily demolished the defending AFC champion Denver Broncos, 33\u201310, and the Houston Oilers, 34\u20135. In the AFC championship game, the \"Steel Curtain\" defense held the Oilers to just 142 yards and forced 9 turnovers.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nAlthough the Super Bowl had grown into America's biggest one-day sporting event by this point, many believe the 13th edition began the game's evolution to unofficial national holiday and cross-cultural phenomenon. It was the first Super Bowl with a true heavyweight title-fight feel, given the Steelers' and Cowboys' unquestioned status as the two best teams in the NFL, as well as the honor of the first three-time Super Bowl champion (and likely team of the 1970s designation) that would go to the winner.\nSuper Bowl XIII can arguably be called the greatest collection of NFL talent for a game. In addition to coaches Noll and Landry, 17 players would end up being voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame. Of the 17 Hall of Fame players to play in this game, ten were Pittsburgh players (Bradshaw, Harris, Shell, Swann, Stallworth, Webster, Greene, Lambert, Ham, and Blount), and seven were Dallas players (Staubach, Dorsett, Harris, Drew Pearson, White, Wright, and Jackie Smith). The Cowboys had lured Smith out of retirement from the St. Louis Cardinals, due to injuries to Cowboys tight ends; most notably, Jay Saldi. Other Hall of Famers who participated in the game representing the Cowboys were general manager/team president Tex Schramm, assistant coach Mike Ditka, who was elected as a tight end with the Chicago Bears, and defensive coordinator Ernie Stautner, who actually was a Hall of Fame defensive tackle for the Steelers. Additional Hall of Famers representing the Steelers included owner Art Rooney Sr., his son Dan Rooney, and scout Bill Nunn. Tony Dungy also played in the game as a safety for the Steelers, and is in the Hall of Fame as a head coach.\nThis was the first Super Bowl in which the designated \"home\" team was allowed to select between their primary team colored jersey or their white jersey, a rule similar to that of home games in the regular season and playoffs. Previously, the designated \"home\" team was required to wear their team colored jersey, the NFC champion in odd years and the AFC champion in the even years. The Cowboys, who traditionally wear their white jerseys in home games and often only wear their blue jerseys against teams that have similar policies for themselves (most notably against the Washington Redskins and occasionally the Philadelphia Eagles), were forced to wear their blue jerseys as the \"home\" team in Super Bowl V, which the team lost to the Baltimore Colts and is widely believed where the \"blue jersey jinx\" started with America's Team. Not wanting a repeat of that being the designated \"home\" team in Super Bowl XIII, the Cowboys were able to persuade the NFL to change the rule to allow the \"home\" team to choose so that they could wear their white jerseys, and thus force the Steelers to wear their black jerseys. The Cowboys would later repeat the option of wearing white jerseys as the \"home\" team in Super Bowl XXVII, while the Redskins would do so in Super Bowl XVII and, ironically, the Steelers (who always wear their black jerseys in home games) did in Super Bowl XL due to the team's success on the road that season. The only other teams to wear white jerseys as the designated home team in a Super Bowl were the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl 50, the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LII and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in Super Bowl LV.\nThis was the first Super Bowl played on grass to match two teams which played their home games on artificial turf.\nThe Cowboys were playing their third Super Bowl at the Orange Bowl, the first team to play three different Super Bowls in the same stadium. The New England Patriots have since done the same playing three Super Bowls at the Mercedes-Benz Superdome, as have the San Francisco 49ers who have played three Super Bowls at Hard Rock Stadium, including the next Super Bowl to be played in Miami. The Cowboys were 0\u20133 in Orange Bowl games and 5\u20130 in their other Super Bowls. Dallas finished 0\u20135 all-time at the Orange Bowl (not counting a 1\u20132 record in the Playoff Bowl), losing to the Dolphins in the 1978 and 1984 regular seasons.\nMuch of the pregame hype surrounding Super Bowl XIII centered around Cowboys linebacker Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson. Henderson caused quite a stir before the NFC Championship Game by claiming that the Rams had \"no class\" and the Cowboys would shut them out. His prediction came true as the Cowboys did shut them out, aided by Henderson's 68-yard interception return for a touchdown. In the days leading up the Super Bowl, Henderson began talking about the Steelers in the same manner. He predicted another shutout and then made unflattering comments about several Pittsburgh players. He put down the talent and the intelligence of Bradshaw, proclaiming \"Bradshaw couldn't spell 'cat' if you spotted him the 'c' and the 'a'.\" But the Steelers refused to get into a war of words with Henderson. Greene responded by saying the Steelers didn't need to say they were the best, they would just go out on the field and \"get the job done.\"\nThe matchup of quarterbacks Terry Bradshaw and Roger Staubach is still the only one in Super Bowl history to feature two quarterbacks with two Super Bowl victories. With this start, Staubach became the first quarterback to start four Super Bowls. Bradshaw joined Fran Tarkenton, Bob Griese as well as Staubach as the only quarterbacks to start at least three Super Bowls. The only quarterbacks to start more Super Bowls than Staubach and Bradshaw are John Elway, who guided the Broncos to five Super Bowls, Patrick Mahomes, who took the Chiefs to five Super Bowls, and Tom Brady, who started in ten Super Bowls (nine with the Patriots, one with the Buccaneers). 49ers quarterback Joe Montana, Bills quarterback Jim Kelly, and Peyton Manning (two with the Colts, two with the Broncos) have since each guided their teams to four Super Bowls.\nBetting line.\nThe point spread for the game opened at Pittsburgh -3.5 points. As the Steelers backers placed bets on them the sportsbooks adjusted the line. It eventually hit Pittsburgh -4.5 and then the Dallas money poured in on the Cowboys. It eventually settled at Pittsburgh at -4. The Steelers' four-point eventual margin of victory meant the Las Vegas sportsbooks lost the vast majority of wagers on the game. The game thus came to be known as \"Black Sunday\" in Las Vegas.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was televised in the United States by NBC, with Curt Gowdy handling play-by-play and sharing the booth with color commentators John Brodie and Merlin Olsen. Dick Enberg served as the pregame host for the broadcast. Also taking part in NBC's coverage were Bryant Gumbel, Mike Adamle (who also covered the Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremony), Donna De Varona, and recently retired former Minnesota Vikings quarterback Fran Tarkenton. For this game and Super Bowl XV, NBC used a custom, synthesizer-heavy theme in place of their regular music.\nThis was Gowdy's seventh and final Super Bowl telecast, and his last major event for NBC before moving to CBS later in 1979. Enberg had essentially succeeded Gowdy as NBC's lead NFL play-by-play announcer in the 1978 regular season, and network producers didn't decide until nearly the last minute which man would get the Super Bowl call. As of 2023[ [update]], Brodie is the last living television announcer, either play-by-play or color, from any of the first 18 Super Bowls.\nThe national radio broadcast of Super Bowl XIII was carried by the CBS Radio Network, with Jack Buck and Hank Stram calling the action and Pat Summerall hosting. Locally, Verne Lundquist and Brad Sham called the game for the Cowboys on KRLD-AM in Dallas, while Jack Fleming and Myron Cope called it for the Steelers on WTAE-AM in Pittsburgh. A technical glitch led to Fleming and Cope's commentary going out over NBC's television broadcast in place of the network's own audio during the coin toss ceremony.\nIn a sign of the game's growing cultural importance, NBC was the first network to make strategic use of the Super Bowl lead-out program, heavily promoting the series premiere of \"Brothers and Sisters\".\nThe game was later featured on NFL's Greatest Games as Battle of Champions.\nThis was the last Super Bowl to air on CBC Television in Canada before Global Television Network took over the rights later that year.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities featured the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders and several military bands. The Colgate Thirteen performed the national anthem, while the Stetson University Army ROTC Color Guard presented the Colors. The coin toss ceremony featured Pro Football Hall of Famer and longtime Chicago Bears owner/head coach George Halas, who was driven onto the field in a 1920 automobile to commemorate the 1920 founding of the NFL.\nThe halftime show was \"Carnival: A Salute to the Caribbean\" with various Caribbean bands.\nGame summary.\nBoth teams entered the game with the best defenses in the league (the Cowboys only allowed 107.6 rushing yards per game while the Steelers only allowed 107.8), and each side took advantage of the other team's mistakes throughout the game. But Dallas could not overcome their miscues in the second half.\nFirst quarter.\nOn their opening drive, the Cowboys advanced to the Pittsburgh 38-yard line, with running back Tony Dorsett gaining 38 yards off three running plays. But while attempting to fool the Pittsburgh defense with a reverse-pass play, wide receiver Drew Pearson fumbled a handoff from Dorsett, and Steelers defensive end John Banaszak recovered the loose ball on the Pittsburgh 47-yard line. Pearson later explained, \"We practiced that play for three weeks. It is designed for me to hit Billy Joe 15 to 17 yards downfield. We practiced the play so much it was unbelievable we could fumble it. I expected the handoff a bit lower, but I should have had it. Billy Joe was in the process of breaking into the clear when the fumble occurred.\" The play was similar to the near-turnover by Butch Johnson in the previous Super Bowl.\nThe Steelers then attempted two running plays with running back Franco Harris carrying the ball, but only gained 1 yard. Then on 3rd-and-9, wide receiver John Stallworth caught a 12-yard pass from quarterback Terry Bradshaw to advance to the Dallas 40-yard line. Then, after Bradshaw converted another third down, this time with a 10-yard pass to tight end Randy Grossman on 3rd-and-8, he threw a 28-yard touchdown pass to Stallworth to give the Steelers an early 7\u20130 lead.\nOn their next drive, the Cowboys responded by advancing to the Steelers' 39-yard line, with quarterback Roger Staubach completing a 27-yard pass to wide receiver Butch Johnson. However, Dallas was forced to punt from their own 39 after Staubach was sacked twice, first for a 12-yard loss by defensive tackle Steve Furness, then for a 10-yard loss by defensive end Dwight White. On the Steelers' ensuing drive, Bradshaw threw a 22-yard pass to Harris on 3rd-and-5 and followed it up with a 13-yard pass to wide receiver Lynn Swann to move the ball to the Dallas 30-yard line. But on the next play, Cowboys linebacker D. D. Lewis ended the drive by intercepting a pass intended for Stallworth. It was the first interception thrown by Bradshaw during a Super Bowl. However, Dallas could do nothing with the turnover and punted after a three-and-out.\nWith just over a minute to go in the period, defensive end Harvey Martin stripped the ball from Bradshaw, and defensive end Ed \"Too Tall\" Jones recovered it on the Pittsburgh 41. The Cowboys capitalized on the turnover three plays later with Staubach completing a 39-yard scoring strike to wide receiver Tony Hill, tying the game, 7\u20137, as the first quarter ended. Pittsburgh sent eight men on an all-out blitz, but Staubach got the pass away just before he was hit by Steelers' safety Mike Wagner. Hill beat safety Donnie Shell in single-coverage and scored the only first-quarter touchdown surrendered by Pittsburgh all season (In Super Bowl X, the Cowboys also scored a first-quarter touchdown against a Steeler team that had not permitted one all year). Drew Pearson ensured the play's success by distracting Steelers cornerback Mel Blount, who was oblivious of Hill as he raced past Blount and Pearson en route to the end zone.\nSecond quarter.\nThe Steelers took possession at the start of the second quarter and advanced to their own 48-yard line. On 3rd-and-10, Dallas linebackers Mike Hegman and Thomas \"Hollywood\" Henderson went after Bradshaw on a blitz. After taking the snap, Bradshaw ran into Franco Harris and the ball popped loose. Bradshaw scooped it up and rolled to his right, looking to pass, but Henderson wrapped him up before he could throw, while Hegman ripped the ball out of Bradshaw's hands and returned the fumble 37 yards for a touchdown, giving the Cowboys their first lead of the game, 14\u20137.\nThe Steelers had now turned the ball over on three consecutive possessions, but the Cowboys' lead lasted for less than two minutes, as the Steelers delivered an immediate response. On the third play of Pittsburgh's ensuing possession, Stallworth caught a pass from Bradshaw at the Steelers 35-yard line. He then broke a tackle from cornerback Aaron Kyle, waited for Swann and blockers to cross in front of him, turned toward the inside and outraced every other defender to the end zone, turning a simple 10-yard pass into a 75-yard touchdown completion to tie the score, 14\u201314. Bradshaw later explained that Stallworth was not even the intended receiver on the play: \"I was going to Lynn Swann on the post\", he said, \"but the Cowboys covered Swann and left Stallworth open. I laid the ball out there and it should have gone for about 15 yards, but Stallworth broke the tackle and went all the way.\"\nPittsburgh's \"Steel Curtain\" defense then dominated the Dallas offense on their ensuing drive. First, Banaszak tackled fullback Robert Newhouse for a 4-yard loss. Next, linebacker Jack Ham tackled Dorsett for a 3-yard loss on an attempted sweep. On third down, defensive tackle Joe Greene sacked Staubach, forcing a fumble that bounced through the hands of Furness, and was recovered by Cowboys guard Tom Rafferty at the Dallas 13-yard line. Wide receiver/punt returner Theo Bell then returned punter/backup quarterback Danny White's ensuing 38-yard punt 3 yards to the Dallas 48.\nThe Steelers began their ensuing drive with Bradshaw's 26-yard pass to Swann. Jones sacked Harris for an 8-yard loss on the next play, but a subsequent holding penalty on Henderson gave Pittsburgh a first down at the Dallas 25-yard line. However, after an incomplete pass and a 2-yard run by Harris, Hegman sacked Bradshaw for an 11-yard loss on third down, pushing the ball back to the 34-yard line. The Steelers then came up empty after kicker Roy Gerela's 51-yard field goal attempt hit the crossbar.\nWith less than two minutes remaining in the half, Dallas advanced to the Pittsburgh 32-yard line, after starting from their own 34. But Blount exacted revenge from the first quarter by intercepting a pass from Staubach and returning it 13 yards to the 29, with a personal foul called on Dallas tight end Billy Joe DuPree adding another 15 yards and giving the Steelers the ball at their own 44-yard line (note: the interception happened on exactly the same play that Drew Pearson scored on in the first quarter of Super Bowl X; Mike Wagner intercepted Staubach on exactly the same play call in the 4th quarter of the same game). Following an illegal use of hands penalty on Steelers guard Gerry Mullins, Bradshaw completed two passes to Swann for a total gain of 50 yards, moving the ball to the 16-yard line with 40 seconds left in the half. Next, after dropping a pass intended for him, Harris ran the ball 9 yards to the 7-yard line. Then with just 26 seconds left, Bradshaw completed a 7-yard touchdown pass to running back Rocky Bleier, giving the Steelers a 21\u201314 lead at halftime and would not trail again for the rest of the game.\nThird quarter.\nThe torrid scoring pace slowed during much of the third quarter, as both teams began to assert themselves on the game's defensive side. After the first three possessions of the half ended in punts, a 12-yard punt return by Johnson gave Dallas good field position on Pittsburgh's 42-yard line. The Cowboys subsequently drove down to the 10, aided by a 13-yard reception by running back Preston Pearson on 3rd-and-11 and two 8-yard runs by fullback Scott Laidlaw and Dorsett. Then on 3rd-and-3 at the 10 with less than three minutes remaining in the period, Staubach spotted tight end Jackie Smith wide open in the end zone and threw him the ball. Head coach Tom Landry said Staubach tried to throw the ball soft when he saw how wide open Smith was and that it came in low, and that when Smith tried to stop, his feet seemed to come out from under him. Smith stated that it was still a catchable ball and that he should have made the play. Instead, Smith dropped the pass, and the Cowboys had to settle for kicker Rafael Septi\u00e9n's 27-yard field goal, cutting their deficit to 21\u201317. Though Smith played 16 years in the league and is now enshrined in the Pro Football Hall of Fame, he is perhaps best known for this dropped touchdown, particularly in a championship game that was ultimately decided by four points. Pittsburgh punted on their next possession, and Dallas got the ball on their own 30 to end the quarter.\nFourth quarter.\nTwo controversial penalties early in the fourth quarter paved the way for the Steelers to score two unanswered touchdowns.\nAfter forcing the Cowboys to punt to start the quarter, the Steelers advanced to their own 44 after a crucial 10-yard pass from Bradshaw to Grossman on 3rd-and-8, a 13-yard pass to Swann, and a 5-yard run by Harris. Bradshaw then attempted a deep pass to Swann, who collided with cornerback Benny Barnes and fell to the ground as the ball rolled incomplete. However, official Fred Swearingen (the referee of the Immaculate Reception game of 1972) called Barnes for pass interference. Replays showed that it could have been incidental contact, as Swann seemed to run into Barnes, but the penalty nonetheless gave Pittsburgh a new set of downs at Dallas' 23-yard line.\nTwo plays later, the Steelers faced 3rd-and-4 from the Dallas 17. Henderson sacked Bradshaw for a 12-yard loss, but the play was nullified by a delay of game penalty on Pittsburgh, bringing up 3rd-and-9 instead of 4th-and-16. Replays clearly showed the whistle blew before the play's onset, plus most of the players pulled up and stopped playing after a whistle sounded, but Henderson claimed, \"I didn't hear a whistle until after I had knocked Bradshaw down. The same guy (Swearingen) made that call too. Who is that guy?\" Franco Harris confronted Henderson for taunting Bradshaw after the whistle, and on the next play, Bradshaw handed the ball off to Harris, who raced untouched, with help from umpire Art Demmas impeding Cowboys safety Charlie Waters' attempt to tackle him, up the middle for a 22-yard touchdown run. The next day, Waters was quoted as saying, \"I don't know what I could do \u2013 maybe knock him [Demmas] flat and maybe he'd knock Franco flat? Our safeties play a vital role in the run. That official gets in the way a lot. He screened me off.\" The score increased Pittsburgh's lead to 28\u201317 and would be the Steelers' longest touchdown run in a Super Bowl until Willie Parker scampered 75 yards for a score against the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XL.\nOn the ensuing kickoff, video showed that Gerela slipped when trying to plant his foot, causing him to squib the ball, which bounced to Cowboys defensive tackle Randy White at the Dallas 24-yard line. White, who was playing the game with a cast on his broken left hand, fumbled the ball before being hit by safety Tony Dungy, and linebacker Dennis Winston recovered the ball at the 18 for Pittsburgh. Remarkably, Winston was not even in the middle of the scrum when the fumble first occurred; he was standing by several teammates and decided to join the battle for the ball before the officials intervened. On the very next play, Bradshaw threw an 18-yard touchdown pass to Swann, increasing the Steelers' lead to 35\u201317 with less than 7 minutes left in the game. The touchdown was Bradshaw's final pass of the game.\nSome of the Steelers were already celebrating victory on the sidelines, but the Cowboys were not quite done yet. On their next drive, Dallas drove 89 yards in 8 plays, including an 18-yard run by Staubach on 3rd-and-11 and a 29-yard run by Dorsett, to score on Staubach's 7-yard touchdown pass to DuPree. Then after Cowboys defensive back Dennis Thurman recovered an onside kick with 2:19 remaining, Drew Pearson caught two passes for gains of 22 and 25 yards (the second catch on 4th-and-18), as the Cowboys drove 52 yards in 9 plays to score on Staubach's 4-yard touchdown pass to Johnson, cutting the Steelers' lead to 35\u201331 with just 22 seconds left in the game.\nBut the Cowboys' second onside kick attempt was unsuccessful, as Bleier recovered the ball to end the game.\nSwann was the leading receiver in the game with 7 receptions for 124 yards and a touchdown. Stallworth recorded 115 yards and two touchdowns off just 3 receptions. Stallworth and Swann became the first pair of teammates to each have 100 yards receiving in a Super Bowl and first time two receivers did it in the same game. Dorsett was the top rusher of the game with 96 rushing yards, and also caught 5 passes for 44 yards. Harris was Pittsburgh's leading rusher with 68 yards, and he caught a pass for 22 yards. Staubach finished the game with exactly as many passing attempts (30) and completions (17) as Bradshaw, good for 228 passing yards, 3 touchdowns, and 1 interception. Butch Johnson caught 2 passes for 30 yards and a touchdown, returned 3 kickoffs for 63 yards, and gained 33 yards on 2 punt returns, giving him 126 total yards. Drew Pearson hauled in 4 passes for 73 yards, all in the fourth quarter.\nAftermath.\nAfter the game, Terry Bradshaw mocked Dallas linebacker Thomas Henderson's previous insult about him not being able to spell the word \"cat\", stating \"Ask if he can spell M.V.P\".\nThe two teams would face off in yet another re-match in Three Rivers Stadium during Week 9 of the 1979 regular season, with the Steelers prevailing in a defensive slug fest, 14\u20133. Unlike Super Bowl XIII, Harris was able to break free of Doomsday, gaining 48 of his 102 yards on the game-clinching touchdown. The game was mostly remembered for L. C. Greenwood's hit of a sliding Staubach, causing a head injury that later influenced the quarterback to retire following the season.\nPittsburgh would cement their legacy as \"The Team of the 70's\" by winning Super Bowl XIV over the Los Angeles Rams, 31\u201319. The Cowboys would fall to the Rams in the Divisional Round in 1979 in Staubach's final game. Led by Danny White, Dallas would appear in three straight NFC Championship games from 1980 to 1982 but wouldn't reach another Super Bowl until their 52\u201317 victory over the Buffalo Bills in Super Bowl XXVII. Super Bowl XIII is still widely regarded as one of the greatest Super Bowl games played. According to the NFL.com article \"Ranking the Super Bowls\" by media analyst Elliot Harrison, featuring Dallas personnel man Gil Brandt, Super Bowl XIII was the greatest of the first 49 played. According to Brandt, \"Super Bowl XIII, in my mind, was the most memorable of the Super Bowls. Those were two great football teams. We (the Cowboys) made mistakes. We had Randy White on the return team with a cast on, and then he fumbled the kickoff ... which really hurt us. Even though we lost, I would say Super Bowl XIII was the greatest Super Bowl.\"\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XIII: Pittsburgh Steelers 35, Dallas Cowboys 31\n\"at Orange Bowl, Miami, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Longest gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XIII, according to the official NFL.com box score and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame \u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to use a seven-man officiating crew. The side judge was added by a vote of NFL owners at their March 1978 meeting.\nJack Fette became the first official to work four Super Bowls. He added a fifth nine years later, which turned out to be his final game as an on-field official.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29140", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29140", "title": "Super Bowl XIV", "text": "1980 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XIV was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Los Angeles Rams and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Pittsburgh Steelers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1979 season. The Steelers defeated the Rams by the score of 31\u201319, becoming the first team to win four Super Bowls. The game was played on January 20, 1980, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, and was attended by a Super Bowl record 103,985 spectators. It was also the first Super Bowl where the game was played in the home market of one of the participants, as Pasadena is northeast of Downtown Los Angeles (the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, the Rams' home at the time, is from the Rose Bowl). \nThe Rams became the first team to reach the Super Bowl after posting nine wins or fewer during the regular season since the NFL season expanded to 16 games in 1978. Their 9\u20137 regular season record was followed by postseason wins over the Dallas Cowboys and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. The Steelers were the defending Super Bowl XIII champions, and finished the 1979 regular season with a 12\u20134 record, and posted playoff victories over the Miami Dolphins and the Houston Oilers.\nDespite the final score, Super Bowl XIV was a seesaw battle for the majority of the contest. The lead changed seven times, which remains a Super Bowl record as of 2023. It was the third Super Bowl where the winning team was behind at halftime (Super Bowl V and Super Bowl X were the others; the Colts trailed the Cowboys 13\u20136 at the half in V en route to win 16\u201313, while the Steelers trailed the Cowboys 10\u20137 in X and won 21\u201317) and the first where they were behind by the fourth quarter. Los Angeles took the lead three times while Pittsburgh took it four times, including the game clincher. The Rams led 13\u201310 at halftime before Steelers quarterback Terry Bradshaw connected with wide receiver Lynn Swann on a 47-yard touchdown pass. Los Angeles regained the lead on a halfback option play with running back Lawrence McCutcheon's 24-yard touchdown pass to Ron Smith. But Pittsburgh controlled the fourth quarter, scoring 14 unanswered points with Bradshaw's 73-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver John Stallworth, and running back Franco Harris' 1-yard touchdown run. Despite throwing three interceptions, Bradshaw was named Super Bowl MVP by completing 14 of 21 passes for 309 yards and two touchdowns.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XIV to Pasadena on June 14, 1977, at the owners' meetings held in New York City. For the first time since 1973, multiple Super Bowl host sites were selected at the same meeting. A total of eight cities submitted bids: Miami, Pasadena, (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Houston, New Orleans, Dallas (Cotton Bowl), Seattle (Kingdome), and Detroit (Pontiac Silverdome). Seattle and Detroit were attempting to become the first cold-weather city to host a Super Bowl, albeit inside a domed stadium. Though neither were selected, Detroit was invited to bid for a future game at the next meeting.\nThe selection of Pasadena came just six months after the Rose Bowl hosted its first Super Bowl (XI). Observers noted that the owners stuck with familiar venues this time around, choosing Miami for XIII and Pasadena for XIV. Early favorite Houston (Rice Stadium) reportedly fell out of favor with owners when it was revealed that birds were found in the showers of the Vikings training facility during Super Bowl VIII. Likewise New Orleans was passed over since the Superdome was already set to host Super Bowl XII.\nLos Angeles Rams.\nTeam owner Carroll Rosenbloom drowned during an off-season accident, resulting in a power struggle between his second wife, Georgia Frontiere, and his son, Steve Rosenbloom. Frontiere eventually gained control of the team and fired her stepson after the pre-season (who was hired by the New Orleans Saints to become their general manager). Prior to Carroll Rosenbloom's death, the Rams had already announced their intentions to leave the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and move to Anaheim Stadium in Orange County for the 1980 season.\nThe Rams barely outscored their opponents, 323\u2013309, and finished the regular season with a 9\u20137 record, the worst ever by a team who advanced to the Super Bowl (that record was later tied by the Arizona Cardinals in Super Bowl XLIII and the New York Giants in Super Bowl XLVI). The team was plagued with injuries during the regular season, including the loss of their starting quarterback Pat Haden. His replacement, Vince Ferragamo, completed less than 50 percent of his passes and threw twice as many interceptions (10) as touchdowns (5). But he still led the Rams to victory in 6 of their last 7 games.\nThe Rams gained 6,060 total yards of offense during the regular season, ranking second in the league. The team's main offensive weapon was halfback Wendell Tyler, who despite not becoming the starter until week 5, rushed for a team leading 1,109 yards, caught 32 passes for 308 yards, and scored 10 touchdowns. Tyler's rushing yards came off just 218 rushing attempts, giving him a league-leading 5.1 yards per carry average. Fullback Cullen Bryant provided Tyler with excellent blocking while also gaining 846 total yards and scoring 5 touchdowns. Wide receiver Preston Dennard was the team's main deep threat, catching 43 passes for 766 yards and 4 touchdowns. The offensive line, led by tackles Doug France and Jackie Slater, guard Dennis Harrah, and Pro Bowl center Rich Saul, paved the Rams' running attack to 4th in the NFC during the season despite injuries. They also gave up only 29 sacks.\nBut the Rams' main strength was their defense, which featured defensive end Jack Youngblood, who made the Pro Bowl for the 7th year in a row and was playing with a broken leg, and lightning-quick Fred Dryer on the opposite end. Behind them, the Rams had two outstanding linebackers: Jack \"Hacksaw\" Reynolds, and Jim Youngblood (no relation to Jack), who had recorded 5 interceptions and returned 2 of them for touchdowns. The Rams also had a solid secondary, led by free safety Nolan Cromwell, who also grabbed 5 interceptions. On November 4, 1979, the Rams' defense established a still-current NFL record by holding the Seattle Seahawks' offense to a total of minus 7 yards for the game; the Seahawks finished the 1979 season 4th in the league in points scored.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nThe Steelers won the AFC Central with a 12\u20134 regular season record (including 8\u20130 at home), and advanced to their second consecutive Super Bowl and their fourth appearance in the last six seasons. Pittsburgh appeared to be even better than what they were in their three previous Super Bowl victories. They led the league with 6,258 yards in total offense, an average of 391 yards per game and just 31 yards short of an NFL record. The team also led the league in scoring with 416 points.\nPittsburgh quarterback Terry Bradshaw had another fine season as the leader of the Steelers offense, throwing for 3,724 yards and 26 touchdowns during the regular season (but he did throw 25 interceptions). Wide receiver John Stallworth was his top target with 70 receptions for 1,183 yards and 8 touchdowns, while wide receiver Lynn Swann caught 41 passes for 808 yards, an average of 19.7 yards per catch. Steelers starting tight end Bennie Cunningham, who missed most of the previous season due to injuries, was also a big contributor with 36 receptions for 512 yards. \nFullback Franco Harris was the Steelers' leading rusher for the 8th consecutive season with 1,186 yards and 11 touchdowns. He also recorded his 7th consecutive season with more than 1,000 yards, tying an NFL record set by Jim Brown. Harris also had his best year as a receiver out of the backfield, recording career-highs of 36 receptions for 291 yards and another touchdown. Halfback Rocky Bleier also had another superb season, providing Harris with excellent blocking while also contributing 711 combined rushing and receiving yards. And running back Sidney Thornton also emerged as a big threat with 816 total yards and averaging 5 yards per carry. Pittsburgh also had a solid offensive line, led by center Mike Webster. The Steelers' offense did lead the NFL with a staggering 52 turnovers in the regular season, a trend that would continue in Super Bowl XIV.\nThe Steelers' \"Steel Curtain\" defense finished the regular season as the top rated defense in the AFC, limiting opponents to only 4,621 offensive yards. Up front, linemen Joe Greene and L. C. Greenwood terrorized opposing quarterbacks and rushers. And linebackers Jack Lambert and Jack Ham excelled at run stopping and pass coverage, combining for 8 interceptions. The Steelers also had a fine secondary, led by defensive backs Mel Blount, who recorded 3 interceptions, and Donnie Shell, who had 5.\nPlayoffs.\nIn the playoffs, the Rams avenged the previous year's NFC Championship Game shutout loss to the Dallas Cowboys by beating them 21\u201319. Later, they beat the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in the NFC Championship Game, 9\u20130, scoring only three field goals.\nMeanwhile, the Steelers went on to defeat the Miami Dolphins, 34\u201314, and the Houston Oilers, 27\u201313, in the playoffs. During those two playoff games, the Pittsburgh defense limited running backs Larry Csonka and Earl Campbell, respectively, to a combined total of only 35 rushing yards. Campbell was the league's rushing leader during the regular season with 1,697 yards, but could only gain 15 yards against the Steelers in the AFC Championship Game.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nPittsburgh was heavily favored to win Super Bowl XIV and become the first team to win 4 Super Bowls. Most people did not think that the Rams even belonged on the same field with the Steelers. In fact, Sports Illustrated had called the NFC Championship Game \"a game for losers, played by losers\". One sports writer sarcastically suggested that Bradshaw throw left-handed and the Rams should be allowed to play with 12 men on the field to make the Super Bowl more competitive.\nHowever, the Steelers were not taking their opponents lightly. In their previous meetings, the Rams held a 12\u20131\u20132 all-time record over the Steelers, including wins in 1971, 1975, and 1978. The wins in 1975 (by a score of 10\u20133) and 1978 (by a score of 10\u20137) were over Steeler teams that eventually won the Super Bowl those seasons. Also, the Steelers had shown clear signs of weakness when playing away from their home stadium during the season. Their first loss of the year was on the road in a 4-turnover performance against the Philadelphia Eagles. Two weeks later at 5\u20131, Pittsburgh was blown out 34\u201310 in Cincinnati against an 0\u20136 Bengals team. In week 12, the team lost 8 turnovers (which included Bradshaw's 5 interceptions) in a 35\u20137 loss on the road against the San Diego Chargers.\nBradshaw became the second quarterback to start four Super Bowls, joining his counterpart from Super Bowls X and XIII Roger Staubach. Joe Montana became the third to start four Super Bowls, but all were passed by John Elway and Tom Brady, and also matched by Jim Kelly, Peyton Manning, and Patrick Mahomes.\nThe Rams became the first NFC West team to reach the Super Bowl. The NFC West was the last of the six post-merger divisions to reach the Super Bowl.\nSuper Bowl XIV holds the record for attendance with 103,985 spectators.\nBroadcasting.\nCBS televised the game in the United States with play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator Tom Brookshier. Brent Musburger hosted CBS's pregame coverage with the \"NFL Today\" crew of Irv Cross (who joined Musburger in the Pittsburgh Steelers locker room), Jayne Kennedy (the only Super Bowl she would be part of covering for CBS), Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder and Jack Whitaker. One of the guest analysts for the network's pregame show was former Oakland Raiders coach John Madden; he impressed CBS executives so much that he eventually replaced Brookshier (who was promoted to play by play) as lead game analyst in 1981. George Allen also served as a second guest analyst. Filing remote reports from bars in the respect team's home markets were Paul Hornung in The Ginger Man in Beverly Hills (briefly joined by Jayne Kennedy's \"NFL Today\" predecessor Phyllis George and her then-husband, newly inaugurated Kentucky Governor John Y. Brown Jr. along with Houston Oilers quarterback Dan Pastorini) and Tim Ryan at the LeMont Restaurant in Pittsburgh (which included a brief shot of the newly redesigned Pittsburgh Penguins logo and uniform). Dick Stockton handled the Los Angeles Rams locker room interviews.\nThe national CBS Radio coverage featured Jack Buck and Hank Stram, with Musburger also working its pregame coverage. On local radio, Bob Starr and Al Wisk called the game for the Rams over KMPC in Los Angeles, while WTAE-AM in Pittsburgh featured the Steelers' play-by-play team of Jack Fleming and Myron Cope. The KMPC broadcast, thanks to an agreement with the Iranian militants, Iran's Ministry of National Guidance and KMPC reporter Alex Paen, would be recorded and played for the Americans held hostage in Iran.\nThe famous Coca-Cola commercial (titled \"Hey Kid, Catch!\") in which \"Mean\" Joe Greene gives a boy his game jersey aired during CBS' telecast of the game. However, it is technically not viewed as a Super Bowl ad since it actually debuted on October 1, 1979, not during the day of the game.\n\"60 Minutes\" was CBS's Super Bowl lead-out program.\nEntertainment.\nThe Los Angeles Unified School District All-City Band played during the pregame ceremonies. Later, actress and singer Cheryl Ladd performed the national anthem. The coin toss ceremony featured longtime Steelers owner Art Rooney.\nThe performance event group Up with People performed during the halftime show titled \"A Salute to the Big Band Era\".\nThis was the first of 9 consecutive Super Bowls to feature the football-style logo at the 35-yard line.\nGame summary.\nDespite being the underdogs, the Rams managed to hang onto a 13\u201310 lead at halftime, and a 19\u201317 lead at the beginning of the fourth quarter. But the Steelers held the Rams scoreless in the fourth quarter and scored two unanswered touchdowns for the win. Despite the game's uneven matchup and the final score, this game is regarded by some as one of the most competitive games in Super Bowl history. Overall, the lead changed seven times between both teams, a Super Bowl record (Pittsburgh took the lead 4 times, while Los Angeles took it 3 times).\nFirst quarter.\nThe Rams won the coin toss and took the opening kickoff, but the Steel Curtain defense forced a three-and-out. Then on the Steelers' seventh play of their first possession, quarterback Terry Bradshaw completed a 32-yard pass to running back Franco Harris to reach the Los Angeles 26-yard line. But a deep third down pass intended for wide receiver Lynn Swann fell incomplete, forcing Pittsburgh to settle for a 41-yard field goal by kicker Matt Bahr, giving them an early 3\u20130 lead.\nBahr's ensuing kickoff was very short, giving Los Angeles great field position at their own 41-yard line. On the first play of the drive, running back Wendell Tyler caught a 6-yard pass from quarterback Vince Ferragamo. Then on the next play, Tyler took a handoff, ran left, broke several tackles, and ran 39 yards to the Steelers 14 before he was finally taken down by safety Donnie Shell. This was the longest run against the Steelers all season. Shell saved the touchdown by making the tackle after previously being knocked to the turf 5 yards past the line of scrimmage. Six plays later, however, running back Cullen Bryant scored on a 1-yard touchdown run to give the Rams their first lead of the game, 7\u20133. The score was the first time the Steelers allowed a rushing touchdown during a Super Bowl in franchise history.\nBut the lead did not last long. Pittsburgh cornerback/kick returner Larry Anderson returned the ensuing kickoff 45 yards to his own 47, and then the Steelers marched 53 yards in 9 plays using every offensive weapon in their arsenal. First, Harris ran for 12 yards, running back Rocky Bleier ran for 1, then tight end Bennie Cunningham caught a pass for 8. Bleier ran again for 2, followed by Bradshaw's 12-yard completion to Swann to end the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nThe second period opened with Bradshaw's 13-yard completion to Cunningham to reach the Los Angeles 5-yard line, and then Harris ran through the middle to the 4. Wide receiver John Stallworth was then stopped at the 1-yard line, but then Harris ran to the right untouched and scored a touchdown on the next play, putting the Steelers back in front with a 10\u20137 lead. Harris' touchdown run, his third in Super Bowl play, broke the previous record of two set by Elijah Pitts in Super Bowl I and by the Butch and Sundance Duo of Jim Kiick and Larry Csonka in Super Bowls VII and VIII (Kiick rushed for a touchdown in both games while Csonka scored twice in VIII en route to winning that game's MVP award).\nHowever, like the Rams' previous lead, the Steelers' lead also turned out to be short-lived. Aided by Ferragamo's 12-yard pass to running back Lawrence McCutcheon and a 20-yard pass interference penalty against Shell, Los Angeles advanced 67 yards in 10 plays to score a 31-yard field goal by kicker Frank Corral to tie the game at 10. Anderson gave the Steelers great field position after returning the ensuing kickoff 38 yards to the Pittsburgh 46-yard line, but the Steelers could not move the ball and had to punt. The Rams were also forced to punt on their next possession after only gaining 6 yards. On third down, Ferragamo completed a pass to tight end Terry Nelson, who then appeared to fumble the ball while getting tackled by Shell, but the officials ruled Nelson down before the ball came out of his hands. On the first play of the Steelers' next drive, Los Angeles safety Dave Elmendorf intercepted a pass from Bradshaw and returned it 10 yards to the Pittsburgh 39.\nOn the first two plays after the turnover, Ferragamo was sacked for a 10-yard loss by linebacker Robin Cole and threw an incomplete pass. But he managed to overcome the situation with a 12-yard completion to Bryant on third down and a 10-yard completion to wide receiver Billy Waddy on 4th-and-8. Ferragamo's next pass was a 14-yard completion to Nelson for a first down at the 13, but after throwing two incompletions, Pittsburgh defensive end John Banaszak sacked Ferragamo on third down for a 12-yard loss. However, Corral kicked a 45-yard field goal to give the Rams a 13\u201310 halftime lead.\nThird quarter.\nThe heavily favored Steelers trailed at the end of the half. \"How can you mess up this way?\" Steelers assistant coach Woody Widenhofer asked his team at halftime. \"Didn't we go over these things a dozen times? You guys are standing out there like statues.\"\nAnderson once again gave the Steelers great starting field position, returning the opening kickoff of the second half 37 yards to the Pittsburgh 39-yard line. The Steelers lulled the Rams defense by running the ball on three consecutive plays of the drive, and then Bradshaw burned them with a 47-yard touchdown completion to Swann, who made a leaping catch at the Los Angeles 2 and tumbled into the end zone to give Pittsburgh a 17\u201313 lead.\nAgain, the Steelers' lead did not last long. After the first two plays of the Rams' ensuing drive, Ferragamo completed a 51-yard pass to Waddy. Then on the next play, Ferragamo handed the ball off to McCutcheon, who started to run to the right. The Steelers' defense came up to tackle him behind the line of scrimmage, only to watch him throw a 24-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Ron Smith. Corral missed the extra point attempt wide left, but the Rams had retaken the lead, 19\u201317.\nThe Steelers had some success advancing into Rams territory on their next two possessions, only to see the Rams intercept the ball both times. On Pittsburgh's next drive, Bradshaw completed a 14-yard pass to Harris, but then threw a deep pass that was intercepted at the Los Angeles 27 by safety Eddie Brown, who then lateraled to cornerback Pat Thomas to gain an additional 7 yards and give the Rams a first down at their own 38. Then after forcing Los Angeles to punt, the Steelers drove all the way to the Rams 16-yard line on a 19-yard reception by Harris and a 23-yard reception by wide receiver Sidney Thornton, but then after two running plays ended with no gain, Elmendorf deflected a pass intended for Stallworth that was intercepted by cornerback Rod Perry, giving the ball back to the Rams at their own 4-yard line. On the first play of the drive, Los Angeles managed to escape a game-tying safety with a 12-yard run by Tyler to end the third quarter with the Rams still in the lead, 19\u201317, seemingly in control of the game. To make matters worse for the Steelers, prior to Brown's interception, Pittsburgh lost Swann to injury, when he was knocked out of the game by Thomas.\nFourth quarter.\nAfter being forced to punt to start the final period, with 12:59 left in the game, Rams punter Ken Clark's 59-yard punt planted Pittsburgh back to their own 25-yard line. Then faced with 3rd-and-8, Steelers head coach Chuck Noll called for \"60 prevent slot hook and go\", a play that the team had practiced all week and couldn't complete it. Before Bradshaw went back on the field, Noll told him to \"go deep and get the big play, because they're going to take away high percentage passing\". Bradshaw took the snap, dropped back, and then threw a pass to Stallworth, who was running a streak pattern down the middle of the field. Stallworth caught the ball barely beyond the outstretched hand of Perry and took it all the way to the end zone for a 73-yard touchdown to make the score 24\u201319 in favor of the Steelers. When being interviewed for the documentary series \"\", Stallworth said that Bradshaw had overthrown him and departed his planned route and simply ran towards the goal line. The NFL Films highlight film notes that Brown was supposed to help Perry in covering Stallworth, but for some reason, Brown ignored the Steeler receiver. On the ensuing kickoff, the Rams tried a reverse, with running back Eddie Hill handing the ball off to fullback Jim Jodat, which resulted in poor field position for the Rams at their own 14.\nAfter an exchange of punts, the Rams were given one more chance for a spirited game-winning drive. Ferragamo smartly moved the Rams down the field, completing 3 out of 4 passes around runs by Tyler, including a 24-yard pass to wide receiver Preston Dennard. His 14-yard completion to Waddy on 3rd-and-13 moved the Rams to the Pittsburgh 32-yard line with just under 6 minutes remaining. However, on the following play, Ferragamo made his first and only mistake of the game; despite the fact that Waddy had broken free down the right side of the field, Ferragamo had zeroed in on Ron Smith down the middle of the field but did not notice Steelers linebacker Jack Lambert playing behind Smith. As Ferragamo released the ball, Lambert jumped in front of Smith and intercepted the pass with 5:24 remaining.\nWhen faced with 3rd-and-7 on Pittsburgh's ensuing drive, Bradshaw once again made a crucial long pass completion to Stallworth, this time a 44-yard completion to the Los Angeles 22-yard line, barely beyond the outstretched hand of Perry. Stallworth's clutch catch, his third and final reception of the game, came off the same play that he scored the touchdown on and just like before Bradshaw misjudged Stallworth and instead underthrew him. During the same \"America's Game\" interview, Stallworth said if Bradshaw threw it out a little more, they could have scored again. Two plays later, a pass interference penalty on Thomas in the end zone gave the Steelers a first down at the 1-yard line. The Rams managed to keep Bleier and Harris out of the end zone for the first two plays, but Harris then scored on a third-down, 1-yard touchdown run to give the Steelers a 31\u201319 lead and cement their fourth Super Bowl title. The Rams responded by driving to Pittsburgh's 37-yard line, but ended up turning over the ball on downs with 39 seconds remaining, and the Steelers ran out the clock to end the game.\nAftermath.\nThe city of Pittsburgh celebrated its third major pro championship in 13 months. The Steelers had also won the previous year's Super Bowl, and the city's Major League Baseball team, the Pirates, had won the World Series three months before this Super Bowl game. Ten days after the Steelers' Super Bowl victory, the city's National Hockey League team, the Pittsburgh Penguins, changed its uniform colors to match the black and gold scheme of the Pirates and Steelers, as well as that of the Pittsburgh city flag.\nThis was the third time in Super Bowl history that a team overcame a deficit entering the fourth quarter to win the game. The Baltimore Colts entered the final quarter down 13\u20136 against Dallas in Super Bowl V and won the game 16\u201313. The Pittsburgh Steelers started the final period against Dallas in Super Bowl X down 10\u20137 and eventually won the game 21\u201317. The lead had changed hands seven times, a Super Bowl record to this day. Pittsburgh took the lead four times, while Los Angeles took it three times. Franco Harris, Lynn Swann, and John Stallworth became the fourth, fifth and sixth players to score touchdowns in back-to-back Super Bowls, respectively. They had to celebrate when Swann returned from the hospital after being injured.\nFerragamo finished the game with 15 out of 25 completions for 212 yards, with 1 interception. Tyler was the top rusher of the game with 60 yards, and caught 2 passes for 20 yards. Waddy was the Rams leading receiver with 3 catches for 75 yards. Harris led the Steelers in rushing with 44 yards and 2 touchdowns, while also catching 3 passes for 66 yards. Stallworth was the top receiver of the game with 3 receptions for 121 yards and a touchdown, an average of 40.3 yards per catch. Swann had 5 catches for 79 yards and a touchdown. Larry Anderson set a Super Bowl record with 162 yards from his 5 kickoff returns.\nThe Rams would remain competitive in the 1980s but wouldn't reach another Super Bowl until their victory in Super Bowl XXXIV in January 2000, after the team had moved to St. Louis before the 1995 season. The closest the Los Angeles Rams would get to getting back to another Super Bowl in the 1980s, was in 1985, when they advanced to the NFC title game before falling to the eventual Super Bowl champion Chicago Bears, and in 1989; reaching the NFC Championship before losing to division rival and defending Super Bowl champion San Francisco. Following the loss in the 1989 NFC championship game, the Rams suffered through nine consecutive losing seasons and had the NFL's worst record of the 1990s until the 1999 championship season. They would make 2 Super Bowl appearances with the first being 2 years following their return to Los Angeles in 2016 in Super Bowl LIII, but fell to the New England Patriots by a score of 13\u20133, and their second being in Super Bowl LVI (which was also played in the Los Angeles area, albeit at their actual home stadium SoFi Stadium) where they defeated the Cincinnati Bengals by a score of 23\u201320.\nWendell Tyler eventually won a Super Bowl as a featured back for the San Francisco 49ers in 1984. 1984 was also Jack Youngblood's 14th and final season in the NFL. The last link of the 1979 team was Jackie Slater, who remained on the team until 1995, the club's first season in St. Louis. He set an NFL record by playing 20 seasons with one team, yet Super Bowl XIV remained his lone trip to the Big Game. Slater was the last Ram to have been a teammate of legendary defensive tackle Merlin Olsen, who anchored the Rams' Fearsome Foursome for 15 seasons (1962\u201376).\nPittsburgh would go 9\u20137 the following season and miss the playoffs. They would go 8\u20138 in 1981 before making the playoffs the next three seasons. Many of the links that powered the Steelers to their Super Bowl wins began to retire shortly after Super Bowl XIV, starting with Rocky Bleier in 1980 and Joe Greene in 1981. Ham spent all of 1982 on injured reserve before retiring. Bradshaw sat out all but one half of the 1983 season before retiring due to recurring elbow injuries, and Blount retired after that season as well. The Steelers were also haunted by their decision to pass on Dan Marino, the standout quarterback for the University of Pittsburgh, in the 1983 NFL draft. The Steelers' first-round selection of 1983, Texas Tech defensive tackle Gabriel Rivera, was paralyzed in an automobile accident after seven weeks of his rookie season. Terry Bradshaw would miss the first 14 games of the 1983 season due to an elbow injury. His final game was against the New York Jets which he started and led two touchdown drives before being forced out due to another elbow injury following a 10-yard TD pass to Calvin Sweeney.\nLambert was slowed throughout 1984 by a painful turf toe, retiring after that campaign. Stallworth, Webster, and Shell would play well into the 1980s and helped lead Pittsburgh to the 1984 AFC Championship game, where they lost to Marino's Miami Dolphins. But they would not reach a Super Bowl until the 1995 season, losing to the Dallas Cowboys 27\u201317 in Super Bowl XXX. Kicker Matt Bahr would win another Super Bowl with the New York Giants during the 1990 season. He kicked the game-winning field goal in Super Bowl XXV, and a week earlier booted the game-winning field goal against the San Francisco 49ers in the NFC Championship Game, thus denying the 49ers a chance at three straight Super Bowl victories and surpassing the Steelers' total of four Super Bowl titles. Chuck Noll, the last link to Pittsburgh's dynasty, retired from coaching following the 1991 season. Only Bill Belichick matched (and later surpassed) Noll's four Vince Lombardi Trophies as a head coach. The Steelers' record of four Super Bowls in six seasons has yet to be matched.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XIV: Pittsburgh Steelers 31, Los Angeles Rams 19\n\"at Rose Bowl, Pasadena, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http:// , https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XIV, according to the official NFL.com box score and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^Note * Terry Bradshaw threw 3 interceptions in this game, increasing his career interception percentage in Super Bowls to 4.8%. This meant that Bart Starr once again held the record for \"Lowest percentage, passes had intercepted, career, (40 attempts)\" with 2.1% (1\u201347). Jim Plunkett would surpass this record in Super Bowl XVIII with 0.0% (0\u201346).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame \u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nNOTE: Officials were numbered separately by position from 1979 to 1981. In 1982, the league reverted to the pre-1979 practice of assigning each official a different number.\nThis was the first Super Bowl officiating crew with two African-Americans (Toler and Beeks).\nStan Javie became the second man to officiate four Super Bowls, joining Jack Fette, whose fourth assignment was Super Bowl XIII.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29141", "revid": "44273096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29141", "title": "Super Bowl XV", "text": "1981 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XV was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Oakland Raiders and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Philadelphia Eagles to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1980 season. The Raiders defeated the Eagles by the score of 27\u201310, becoming the first wild card playoff team to win a Super Bowl.\nThe game was played at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana, on January 25, 1981, five days after the Iran hostage crisis ended. The game was thus held under patriotic fervor, as the pregame ceremonies honored the end of the crisis.\nThe Raiders were making their third Super Bowl appearance after posting an 11\u20135 regular season record, but losing a tiebreaker to the AFC West division winner San Diego Chargers. Oakland then advanced to the Super Bowl with playoff victories over the Houston Oilers, Cleveland Browns, and San Diego. The Eagles were making their first Super Bowl appearance after posting a 12\u20134 regular season record and postseason victories over the Minnesota Vikings and Dallas Cowboys.\nAided by two touchdown passes from quarterback Jim Plunkett, the Raiders jumped out to a 14\u20130 lead in the first quarter and the Eagles never recovered. Oakland linebacker Rod Martin also intercepted Philadelphia quarterback Ron Jaworski three times for a Super Bowl record. Plunkett was named the Super Bowl MVP after completing 13 of 21 passes for 261 yards and three touchdowns; he was the second Heisman Trophy winner to be named Super Bowl MVP, after Roger Staubach in Super Bowl VI.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XV to New Orleans on March 13, 1979, at the owners' meetings in Honolulu. For the first time, three Super Bowl host cities were deliberated and selected at the same meeting (XV, XVI, and XVII). A total of eight cities submitted bids: New Orleans, Detroit (Silverdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Miami, Seattle (Kingdome), Dallas (Cotton Bowl), and Houston (Rice Stadium). New Orleans was selected for their fifth Super Bowl overall, and second at the Louisiana Superdome, cementing their status in the regular host rotation. Detroit (XVI) and Pasadena (XVII) were other cities chosen at the meeting.\nAfter hosting five previous Super Bowls, Miami was noticeably left out, largely due the aging condition of the Orange Bowl, and for a hotel room mix-up at Super Bowl XIII two years earlier. Dolphins owner Joe Robbie, locked in an ongoing feud with the city of Miami and Dade County over stadium improvements or construction of a new stadium, actually lobbied against Miami hosting the game. Robbie convinced the other owners to vote down Miami, in an effort to gain leverage towards building a new stadium. South Florida would not be selected to host another Super Bowl until Joe Robbie Stadium was built, and it hosted XXIII.\nOakland Raiders.\nSuper Bowl XV was the climax of Jim Plunkett's revival as an NFL starting quarterback. The 1970 Heisman Trophy winner was selected with the first pick of the 1971 NFL draft by the New England Patriots and was later named the 1971 NFL Rookie of the Year. But Plunkett suffered through five losing seasons with the Patriots and two uneven seasons with the San Francisco 49ers before being released as a free agent before the 1978 season.\nPlunkett was signed by Oakland to be their backup quarterback, and thus he did not see much playing time, throwing no passes in 1978 and just 15 passes in 1979. Meanwhile, Oakland traded long time starting quarterback Ken Stabler in the 1979 off-season to replace him with Dan Pastorini, a former high school rival of Plunkett who had been selected two spots below him in the 1971 draft. After the Raiders started the 1980 season with a 2\u20133 record, Pastorini broke his leg and suddenly Plunkett was thrust into the starting role. The 33-year-old Plunkett got off to a bad start, throwing 5 interceptions in a 31\u201317 loss to the Kansas City Chiefs after relieving Pastorini. However, he recovered and led the Raiders to victory in 9 of their last 11 games in the season, qualifying for the playoffs as a wild card team. Plunkett made 165 out of 320 pass completions for 2,299 yards, 18 touchdown passes and 15 interceptions. He also contributed 141 rushing yards and 2 touchdowns on the ground.\nThe Raiders' main offensive deep threat was wide receiver Cliff Branch (44 receptions, 858 yards, 7 touchdowns), while wide receiver Bob Chandler contributed 49 receptions for 786 yards and 10 touchdowns. Running back Mark van Eeghen was the team's top rusher with 838 yards and 5 touchdowns, while also catching 29 passes for 259 yards. Six games into the season, the Raiders made a surprise trade, sending future Hall of Fame tight end Dave Casper to the Houston Oilers for one first round and two second round draft picks. Veteran tight end Raymond Chester proved to be a capable starter for the rest of the year, catching 28 passes for 366 yards and 4 touchdowns. Halfback Kenny King rushed for 761 yards and catching 22 passes for 145 yards. The Raiders also had an outstanding offensive line led by two future Hall of Famers, tackle Art Shell and guard Gene Upshaw. Upshaw became the first player to play in three Super Bowls with the same team in three different decades. He also played in Super Bowls II (1967) and XI (1976).\nOakland's defense, anchored by defensive linemen John Matuszak (8 sacks), Cedrick Hardman (9.5 sacks), and Dave Browning (6.5 sacks), led the league in forced turnovers (52) and interceptions (35). Defensive back Lester Hayes led the league in interceptions (13) and interception return yards (273), and was the league's Defensive Player of the Year. Safety Burgess Owens added three interceptions, returning them for 59 yards and a touchdown. The Raiders also had a trio of great linebackers: future Hall of Famer Ted Hendricks (3 interceptions, 4 fumble recoveries, 8.5 sacks) Pro Bowler Rod Martin (3 Interceptions), and standout rookie Matt Millen.\nThe Raiders were led by head coach Tom Flores, the first Hispanic coach to win a Super Bowl.\nPhiladelphia Eagles.\nIn 1980, under head coach Dick Vermeil, the Philadelphia Eagles, who had not played in a league championship since their 1960 NFL championship, advanced to their first Super Bowl. Philadelphia's offense ranked 6th in the league in scoring (384 points) and 8th in yards gained (5,519). The Eagles were led by quarterback Ron Jaworski, who completed 257 out of 451 passes for 3,529 yards during the regular season, including 27 touchdowns and only 12 interceptions. Another key player on the Eagles offense was halfback Wilbert Montgomery, who was widely considered one of the top running backs in the NFL after rushing for more than 1,200 yards in each of the previous two seasons. Injuries during the 1980 regular season had limited him to just 778 yards, but he proved he was fully recovered in the postseason by rushing for 194 yards in the NFC title game. Montgomery was also a superb receiver out of the backfield, recording 50 receptions for 407 yards. The other main deep threats on offense, wide receivers Harold Carmichael and Charlie Smith, along with tight end Keith Krepfle, combined for 125 receptions, 2,090 yards, and 16 touchdowns.\nThe Eagles' defense allowed the fewest points in the league during the regular season (222) while ranking second in fewest yards (4,443). Nose tackle Charlie Johnson anchored the line, and even managed to record 3 interceptions. Defensive end Claude Humphrey led the team in sacks with 14.5, while fellow defensive end Carl Hairston added 9 sacks and defensive tackle Ken Clarke had 7. Linebackers Jerry Robinson (4 fumble recoveries and 2 interceptions) and Bill Bergey excelled at both stopping the run and pass coverage. Philadelphia also had a fine secondary, led by veteran defensive backs Herman Edwards (3 interceptions) and Brenard Wilson (6 interceptions), along with rookie Roynell Young (4 interceptions). The Eagles' defense was a major factor in their hard-fought 10\u20137 victory over the Raiders in the regular season; they sacked Plunkett 8 times.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Eagles advanced through the playoffs, defeating the Minnesota Vikings, 31\u201316, and the Dallas Cowboys, 20\u20137.\nMeanwhile, Plunkett and the Raiders defeated the Houston Oilers 27\u20137, the Cleveland Browns 14\u201312 (on a play known as Red Right 88), and the San Diego Chargers 34\u201327. In doing so, Oakland became the second wild card team to advance to the Super Bowl since the 1970 merger, the first from the AFC, and the first wild card team to win three postseason rounds since the NFL expanded to a 10-team playoff format in 1978. Hayes had a spectacular performance in the playoffs, adding 5 more interceptions to give him a total of 18 picks in 19 games.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nIn the days before the game, most sports writers were speculating over whether, if the Raiders won, NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle would present the Vince Lombardi Trophy to the team's owner Al Davis. Prior to the season, the league declined to approve the Raiders' proposal to move from the Oakland\u2013Alameda County Coliseum in Oakland, California to the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum in Los Angeles. In response, Davis sued the NFL for violating antitrust laws. The conflict caused much friction between Rozelle and Davis. (The Raiders would eventually win the lawsuit, allowing the team to move to Los Angeles before the 1982 season.)\nOakland became the first team to avenge a regular-season loss in the Super Bowl. The Eagles defeated the Raiders 10\u20137 on November 23 at Veterans Stadium.\nThis game marked the first Super Bowl where both teams used the 3\u20134 defensive formation as their base defense. The Raiders were the first team to use the 3\u20134 in the Super Bowl in Super Bowl XI against the Minnesota Vikings, although the Miami Dolphins used a version of the 3\u20134 (\"53 defense\") in Super Bowl VI, Super Bowl VII and Super Bowl VIII. The 3\u20134 would be used by at least one team in every Super Bowl between Super Bowl XV and game XXVIII.\nThe Raiders became the first team to appear in a Super Bowl in three different decades (1960s, 1970s and 1980s), having previously played in Super Bowls II and XI.\nAs of Super Bowl LVIII, this is the earliest Super Bowl from which both coaches are still living, and the earliest from which \"either\" coach is still living following the death of Bud Grant in March 2023.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC, with Dick Enberg in his first Super Bowl as a play-by-play announcer. There were three color commentators: Merlin Olsen sat next to Enberg, while John Brodie and Len Dawson worked in a separate broadcast booth. Bryant Gumbel and Mike Adamle of \"NFL '80\" anchored the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage. Bob Trumpy served as a studio analyst. Pete Axthelm reported on the issue of gambling addiction, via interviews with members of Gamblers Anonymous, in addition to his usual role making picks as to who he felt would win a particular game. NBC News correspondent John Dancy also had a report on the issue of ticket scalping. Also included were video performances from the Broadway production \"Ain't Misbehavin'\", with the cast performing Fats Waller's \"The Joint is Jumpin'\" and NBC following members of the New Orleans Police Department's vice squad as they sought to combat prostitution in the city.\nLike the game two years before, NBC used the same custom, synthesizer-heavy theme in place of their regular music. This game would also be the first Super Bowl to air with closed captioning for the deaf and hard of hearing. Toward the end of NBC's coverage, a montage of the game, the arrival of the hostages following their release, and the inauguration of Ronald Reagan as the 40th President of the United States aired to the tune of \"Celebration\" by Kool &amp; the Gang.\nA repeat episode of \"CHiPs\", \"11-99: Officer Needs Help\", served as NBC's Super Bowl lead-out program.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities honored the end of the Iran hostage crisis (which was announced 5 days before the game), and featured a performance by the Southern University band. A large yellow bow long and wide was attached to the outside of the Superdome, while miniature bows were given to fans and every player wore a yellow stripe on the back of their helmets. (Yellow bows had been used in the US throughout the hostages' time in captivity as a sign of support.)\nSinger, actress, and dancer Helen O'Connell later sang the national anthem. The coin toss ceremony featured Marie Lombardi, the widow of Pro Football Hall of Fame Green Bay Packers head coach Vince Lombardi.\nThe halftime show, featuring singers and dancers, was a \"Mardi Gras Festival\", with a performance from \"Up With People\".\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nRaiders linebacker Rod Martin intercepted Eagles quarterback Ron Jaworski's first pass of the game and returned it 17 yards to the Philadelphia 30-yard line, setting up quarterback Jim Plunkett's 2-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Cliff Branch eight plays later, giving Oakland an early 7\u20130 lead. After the teams exchanged punts, Jaworski appeared to complete a 40-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Rodney Parker on 3rd-and-10 that would have tied the game, but the score was nullified by an illegal motion penalty on wide receiver Harold Carmichael, and the Eagles ended up being forced to punt. On the Raiders' next possession, on third down from their own 20, Plunkett threw the ball to running back Kenny King at the 39-yard line as he was scrambling around in the backfield to avoid being sacked. Cornerback Herm Edwards appeared poised to intercept the ball, but it brushed off his fingertips and was deflected to King, who caught the pass and took off to the end zone for a Super Bowl-record 80-yard touchdown reception, giving the Raiders a 14\u20130 lead and tying the Miami Dolphins' record (which still stands) for the largest Super Bowl lead (14 points) at the end of the first quarter, set in Super Bowl VIII.\nSecond quarter.\nThe Eagles got on the board on their next drive, with Jaworski completing passes to tight end John Spagnola and running back Wilbert Montgomery for gains of 22 and 25 yards, respectively, on a 61-yard drive that ended with a 30-yard field goal by kicker Tony Franklin, cutting their deficit to 14\u20133 five minutes into the second quarter. After another exchange of punts, with just over four minutes left in the half, the Raiders reached the Eagles 27-yard line, which included an 18-yard reception by Branch, only to have kicker Chris Bahr miss a 45-yard field goal. The Eagles then drove 62 yards to Oakland's 11-yard line, aided by two receptions by Carmichael for a total of 43 yards and a 16-yard reception by Montgomery. On third down, Parker got ahead of safety Odis McKinney and was open on a route into the end zone, but Jaworski overthrew him and the pass was incomplete. Then with just 54 seconds left in the half, Franklin attempted a 28-yard field goal, but Raiders linebacker Ted Hendricks extended his 6'7\" frame at the line and blocked the kick, maintaining Oakland's 14\u20133 lead at halftime.\nThird quarter.\nThe Raiders then took the opening kickoff of the second half and scored in six plays. Despite a holding penalty on offensive tackle Henry Lawrence, Plunkett completed a 13-yard pass to King and a 32-yard completion to wide receiver Bob Chandler to move the ball to the Eagles 33-yard line. Then after a 4-yard run by running back Mark van Eeghen, Plunkett threw a 29-yard touchdown pass to Branch, increasing Oakland's lead to 21\u20133. On the play, the ball was briefly intercepted by Eagles rookie cornerback Roynell Young but Branch immediately ripped the ball out of Young's grasp and held on as the cornerback made a feeble attempt to tackle the wide receiver. The Eagles responded by driving 56 yards to the Raiders 34, aided by two receptions by Carmichael for a total of 37 yards, but on 3rd-and-3, Jaworski threw his second interception of the game to Martin. The Raiders subsequently drove 40 yards on Plunkett's passes to tight end Raymond Chester and Chandler for gains of 16 and 17 yards, respectively. The drive stalled at the Philadelphia 28, forcing Oakland to settle for Bahr's 46-yard field goal, increasing their lead to 24\u20133.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Eagles finally managed to score a touchdown that counted early in the fourth quarter to cut their deficit to 24\u201310. Starting from their own 12-yard line, a 43-yard reception by wide receiver Charlie Smith and a 19-yard catch by Parker sparked an 88-yard, 14-play drive that was capped by Jaworski's 8-yard touchdown pass to tight end Keith Krepfle. But on their ensuing drive, Oakland marched 72 yards in 12 plays, the longest a 23-yard completion from Plunkett to Chandler. The Eagles kept the Raiders out of the end zone, but Bahr kicked a 35-yard field goal, increasing Oakland's lead to 27\u201310 and capping off the scoring.\nThe Raiders' defense then dominated the rest the game, forcing two turnovers on the Eagles' last two possessions of the game to prevent any chance of a comeback. On the Eagles' next drive, Jaworski fumbled a snap and defensive end Willie Jones recovered it. Following a Raiders punt, Martin recorded a Super Bowl record third interception, and the Raiders reached the Eagles 19 to run out the clock and win the game.\nCliff Branch's two touchdowns tied a Super Bowl record. Only Max McGee in Super Bowl I and John Stallworth in Super Bowl XIII caught two touchdowns prior to Branch. Jaworski finished the game with more completions (18) and yards (291) than Plunkett but completed just 18 of 38 attempts and was intercepted 3 times. Van Eeghen was the top rusher of the game with 75 yards. King was the top receiver with 93 yards and a touchdown off of just 2 receptions. Eagles running back Wilbert Montgomery led Philadelphia in rushing and receiving with 44 rushing yards and 6 receptions for 91 yards. The Eagles' loss came hours after former head coach Joe Kuharich had died.\nAfter the game, the expected heated confrontation between Rozelle and Davis was actually very civil. As Rozelle presented the Lombardi Trophy to Davis, he praised Plunkett, head coach Tom Flores, the players, and the entire Raiders organization for being the first wild card team to win the Super Bowl. Davis thanked Rozelle, then proceeded to also praise the team.\nOakland became only the second wild card team to make it to the Super Bowl and the first to come away victorious. The Super Bowl IV champion Kansas City Chiefs are often thought of as a \"wild-card team,\" but they were not; during 1969, the season before the 1970 AFL-NFL Merger, the second-place finishers in both divisions of the American Football League qualified for the playoffs. Flores became the first person to be a member of a Super Bowl winning team as a player and head coach. He was a member of the Chiefs in Super Bowl IV but did not play in the game.\nFollowing the March 11, 2023 death of Bud Grant, this is the earliest Super Bowl where both teams' head coaches are still living.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XV: Oakland Raiders 27, Philadelphia Eagles 10\n\"at Louisiana Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://, http://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XV, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nDooley, Graf, Kelleher and Veteri wore #7 at their respective officiating positions during 1979-81 (except Dooley was promoted to Referee for 1981, wearing #19), but Kelleher had priority on the number for the Super Bowl, due to his seniority. Kelleher and Veteri became the third and fourth officials to work four Super Bowls, joining Jack Fette and Stan Javie.\nAftermath.\nThe Raiders became the first team since the 1968 Green Bay Packers to post a losing record the year after winning the Super Bowl, going 7\u20139 in 1981. Davis won a lawsuit against the NFL in May 1982 and immediately moved the team to Los Angeles, where they remained for 13 seasons before returning to Oakland in 1995. The Raiders left Oakland again in 2020, relocating to Las Vegas.\nThe Eagles returned to the playoffs in 1981, but lost 27\u201321 to the archrival New York Giants in the NFC wild card game. Philadelphia fell to 3-6 during the strike-shortened 1982 season, the first of six consecutive losing seasons for the club, and Vermeil resigned eight days later, citing burnout. Vermeil returned to coaching in 1997 with the St. Louis Rams and led the club to victory in Super Bowl XXXIV. \nThe Eagles won the next three meetings with the Raiders, prevailing in 1986 in overtime at Los Angeles, and 1989 and 1992 at Philadelphia. The Raiders ended their drought in the series in 1995 at Oakland.\nReferences.\nSpecific\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29142", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29142", "title": "Super Bowl XVI", "text": "1982 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XVI was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion San Francisco 49ers and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Cincinnati Bengals to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1981 season. The 49ers defeated the Bengals by the score of 26\u201321 to win their first Super Bowl.\nThe game was played on January 24, 1982, at the Pontiac Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan, a suburb northwest of downtown Detroit. It\u00a0was the first Super Bowl to be held in a cold-weather city. The domed stadium saved the crowd at the game from the cold and snowy weather, but the weather did affect traffic and other logistical issues related to the game. Super Bowl XVI also became one of the most watched broadcasts in American television history, with more than 85 million viewers, and a final national Nielsen rating of 49.1 (a 73 share).\nFor the first time since Super Bowl III, both teams were making their first Super Bowl appearance. The 49ers posted a 13\u20133 regular season record, and playoff wins over the New York Giants and Dallas Cowboys. The Bengals finished the regular season with a 12\u20134 record, and had postseason victories over the Buffalo Bills and San Diego Chargers.\nCincinnati's 356 yards of offense to San Francisco's 275 marked the first time in Super Bowl history that the losing team outgained the winning team in total yards. However, the Bengals committed four turnovers to San Francisco's one, and this was a major factor in the outcome. The 49ers scored 20 of their 26 points off of Bengals turnovers.\nSuper Bowl XVI was initially dominated by the 49ers. Three Cincinnati turnovers helped San Francisco build a then-Super Bowl record 20\u20130 halftime lead on a touchdown pass and a rushing touchdown from quarterback Joe Montana and two field goals by Ray Wersching. The Bengals rallied in the second half with quarterback Ken Anderson's 5-yard touchdown run and 4-yard touchdown pass, but a third-quarter goal-line stand by the 49ers defense and two more Wersching field goals ultimately decided the game. The Bengals managed to draw within less than a touchdown with 16 seconds remaining but could not recover the ensuing onside kick. Montana was named the Super Bowl MVP, completing 14 of 22 passes for 157 yards and one touchdown, while also rushing for 18 yards and a touchdown on the ground. Cincinnati tight end Dan Ross recorded a then-Super Bowl record 11 receptions (still the most ever by a tight end in a Super Bowl) for 104 yards and two touchdowns.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XVI to Detroit on March 13, 1979, at the owners' meetings in Honolulu. For the first time, three Super Bowl host cities were deliberated and selected at the same meeting (XV, XVI and XVII). A total of eight cities submitted bids: New Orleans (Louisiana Superdome), Detroit (Silverdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Miami (Orange Bowl), Seattle (Kingdome), Dallas (Cotton Bowl) and Houston (Rice Stadium). For the first time, a northern, cold-weather city was picked to host a Super Bowl. The game would be played inside the Pontiac Silverdome, in the Detroit suburb of Pontiac. Former NFL executive director Don Weiss wrote in his book \"The Making of the Super Bowl\" that the game had been awarded to the Silverdome by the league as a \"reward\" to the locally headquartered automobile companies Ford Motor Company and Chrysler for their \"many years of sponsoring pro football\". Automotive executives Tom Murphy (GM), Henry Ford II (Ford), John J. Riccardo (Chrysler), and Gerald C. Meyers (AMC) were all members of the Detroit host committee.\nMichigan governor William Milliken, Detroit mayor Coleman Young, and Pontiac mayor Wallace E. Holland were part of the delegation, and notably offered the Silverdome rent-free. Detroit received rousing support from several NFL owners, including George Halas, Art Rooney, and Paul Brown. New Orleans (XV) and Pasadena (XVII) were other cities chosen at the meeting.\nAfter hosting five previous Super Bowls, Miami was noticeably left out, largely due to the deteriorating condition of the Orange Bowl and a hotel room mix-up at Super Bowl XIII two months earlier. Dolphins owner Joe Robbie, locked in an ongoing feud with the city of Miami and Dade County over stadium improvements or construction of a new stadium, actually lobbied against Miami hosting the game. Robbie convinced the other owners to vote down Miami in an effort to gain leverage towards building a new stadium. South Florida would not be selected to host another Super Bowl until Joe Robbie Stadium was built, and it hosted XXIII.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nSan Francisco finished the regular season with a league-best 13\u20133 record. The 49ers' success surprised many because they finished with a 6\u201310 record during the previous season and a 2\u201314 record in 1979 (they even still had home blackouts early on in the 1981 season, the last blackouts for the 49ers to date). A major reason for the team's improvement was the emergence of their young quarterback, Joe Montana. In his third professional season, Montana completed 311 out of 488 passes (a league-leading 63.7 completion percentage) for 3,565 yards and 19 touchdowns (he also threw 12 interceptions). His favorite target was third-year wide receiver Dwight Clark, who had the best season of his career with 85 receptions for 1,104 yards and four touchdowns. Fellow wide receiver Freddie Solomon was also a reliable target with 59 receptions, 969 yards, and eight touchdowns, while tight end Charle Young caught 37 passes for 400 yards and five touchdowns. Running back Ricky Patton was the top rusher on the team with 543 yards and four touchdowns, while also catching 27 passes for 195 yards. Multi-talented running back Earl Cooper also provided the team with a rushing and receiving threat, going for 330 yards on the ground and 477 receiving yards on 51 catches. Much of San Francisco's success was aided by its offensive line of Dan Audick (LT), John Ayers (LG), Fred Quillan (C), Randy Cross (RG), and Keith Fahnhorst (RT).\nAlthough the 49ers had three rookies starting as defensive backs, all three were major threats to opposing offsenses. Carlton Williamson recorded four interceptions, Eric Wright had three and Ronnie Lott, who had the best statistical season of his career, recorded seven interceptions and tied an NFL record by returning three of them for touchdowns. Three-year veteran defensive back Dwight Hicks led the team with nine interceptions, which he returned for 239 yards and a touchdown, giving the secondary a total of 23 picks. Defensive end Fred Dean and linebacker Jack \"Hacksaw\" Reynolds made it difficult for opposing teams to rush the ball; Dean became a 49er after an in-season trade with the San Diego Chargers and piled up 12 sacks for San Francisco.\nThe 49ers' defense ranked second in the NFL with 250 points allowed for the season (up from their 27th ranking in 1980). Only the Eagles had a better defense in the league that year, allowing just 221 points.\nCincinnati Bengals.\nThe Bengals finished with the best regular-season record in the AFC at 12\u20134. Cincinnati was also a surprise team because, like the 49ers, they had recorded a 6\u201310 record the previous season. Entering the 1981 season, the Bengals had never won a playoff game in their entire history.\nQuarterback Ken Anderson (who had the best season of his career) was the top rated passer in the league and won both the NFL Most Valuable Player Award and the NFL Comeback Player of the Year Award. He completed 300 of 479 passes (62.6%) for 3,754 yards, 29 touchdowns and ten interceptions. Anderson was also an outstanding scrambler, rushing for 320 yards and one touchdown, leading all NFL quarterbacks in rushing yards.\nThe Bengals' main deep threat was rookie wide receiver Cris Collinsworth, who caught 67 passes for 1,009 yards and eight touchdowns. Tight end Dan Ross had 71 receptions for 910 yards and five touchdowns, while wide receivers Isaac Curtis and Steve Kreider each recorded 37 receptions, combining for a total of 1,129 yards and nine touchdowns. Fullback Pete Johnson was the leading rusher on the team with 1,077 yards and 12 touchdowns. He was also a good receiver out of the backfield, catching 46 passes for 320 yards and four touchdowns. Halfback Charles Alexander contributed 554 all-purpose yards and 28 receptions. A big reason for Cincinnati's production on offense was their line, led by future Hall of Fame tackle Anthony Mu\u00f1oz and guard Max Montoya. On special teams, punter Pat McInally made the Pro Bowl with a 45.4 yards-per-punt average.\nThe Bengals also had a good defense that had not given up more than 30 points in any game that season. Their line was anchored by defensive ends Ross Browner and Eddie Edwards, who did a great job stopping the run. Cincinnati's defense was also led by defensive backs Louis Breeden and Ken Riley, and linebackers Bo Harris, Jim LeClair and Reggie Williams, who intercepted four passes and recovered three fumbles.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Bengals earned their first playoff victory in team history by defeating the Buffalo Bills 28\u201321, then beating the San Diego Chargers 27\u20137 in a game known as the Freezer Bowl because of the wind chill conditions at Riverfront Stadium. Meanwhile, the 49ers defeated the New York Giants 38\u201324, then narrowly beat the Dallas Cowboys 28\u201327 on a last-minute touchdown pass known as The Catch.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nThe 49ers had handily beaten the Bengals in a December game played in Cincinnati and consequently were installed as a one-point favorite. Most experts agreed that both teams were very evenly matched, but many thought Pete Johnson's rushing ability could prove to be the difference. Some observers also pointed out that Ken Anderson was an established 11-year veteran who had just had the best season of his career, while Montana was only just starting to emerge as a top-notch quarterback. Furthermore, Anderson had advanced through the playoffs without throwing a single interception, while Montana had been intercepted four times, three of them in the NFC title game.\nDuring the season, both teams had shown impressive ball security. Cincinnati had the fewest turnovers of any NFL team with 24, while San Francisco ranked second with 25.\nCincinnati head coach Forrest Gregg became the first to play in a Super Bowl and then be a head coach in a Super Bowl. Gregg played in Super Bowls I and II as an offensive tackle for the Green Bay Packers. (He\u00a0was also on the roster for the Dallas Cowboys for Super Bowl VI, but did not play.) Tom Flores, the winning head coach in Super Bowl XV, was a back-up quarterback for the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl IV, but did not play.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to feature two first-time participants since Super Bowl III, and there has been only one since: (Super Bowl XX between the Chicago Bears and New England Patriots). If there is another Super Bowl with both conferences featuring first time participants, it would have to match the Detroit Lions vs the Cleveland Browns, Jacksonville Jaguars, or Houston Texans. This was also the only Super Bowl to date between two teams that had losing records the previous season, although Super Bowl XXXIV matched a team that had a losing record in 1998 (the St. Louis Rams) against a team that went 8\u20138 that year (the Tennessee Titans). This is the most recent Super Bowl in which both teams had never appeared in \"any\" AFL or NFL title game before the merger (the 49ers had played in the final championship game of the All-America Football Conference before joining the NFL in 1950).\nThis was the only Super Bowl to be played at the Pontiac Silverdome. The Super Bowl did return to Michigan for Super Bowl XL, but that game was played at Ford Field in Detroit, which in 2002 had replaced the Silverdome as the home of the Detroit Lions. This was also only the second Super Bowl to not take place in one of the three so-called 'big Super Bowl Cities' (the other was Houston in January 1974). Fourteen of the previous 15 Super Bowls took place in either Miami, Florida, New Orleans, Louisiana or in the Greater Los Angeles Area. The next nine Super Bowls would take place in New Orleans, California, or Florida with Tampa, Florida joining the rotation with Super Bowl XVIII. The next time the Super Bowl would be held in a cold weather city would be a decade from now with Super Bowl XXVI being held in Minneapolis, Minnesota on January 26, 1992.\nAs the designated home team, the Bengals wore their black home uniforms with white pants, while the 49ers donned their road white uniforms with gold pants. This was the only Super Bowl where the 49ers away jerseys featured screen printed numbers. The next Super Bowl where the 49ers were the designated away team, their jerseys featured stitched on numbers. All subsequent Super Bowls where the 49ers have been the away team have featured this ever since.\nOn the day of the game, a 49ers bus which had Bill Walsh and Montana on board was stuck in traffic due to bad weather and a motorcade carrying then-Vice President George H. W. Bush. As a result, they did not arrive at the stadium until 90 minutes before kickoff time. \"Coach Walsh was pretty loose on the bus,\" Montana told \"Sports Illustrated\" after the game. \"He said, \u2018I\u2019ve got the radio on and we\u2019re leading 7\u20130. The trainer\u2019s calling the plays.\u2019\"\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was televised in the United States by CBS, featuring the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden. This was Madden's Super Bowl debut as a broadcaster. The broadcast also featured the introduction of the telestrator to a national audience, that was named CBS Chalkboard. Still in use today, it enables players and areas of play to be highlighted by the superimposing of lines and rings drawn by a freehand operator.\nHosting coverage for \"The Super Bowl Today\" pregame (90 minutes), halftime, and postgame shows was the \"NFL Today\" crew of Brent Musburger, Irv Cross, Phyllis George, and Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder, with studio analysis from then-Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Terry Bradshaw (who had faced these very same 49ers during the regular season and lost 17\u201314) and Roger Staubach, along with reports by Pat O'Brien reporting from San Francisco, Sandy Hill reporting from Cincinnati, and CBS News correspondent Charles Osgood. CBS, for this game, used the theme for the \"CBS Sports Saturday/Sunday\" for the intro (CBS had aired a special CBS Sports Sunday prior to the beginning of Super Bowl XVI coverage). At the end of CBS' telecast, they played ABBA's \"The Winner Takes It All\" over a montage of game and the city of San Francisco.\nThis Super Bowl was simulcast in Canada on the CTV Television Network, which was airing the Super Bowl for the first time.\nThe game was broadcast on nationwide radio by CBS and featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Jack Buck and color commentator Hank Stram. Hosting coverage for CBS was done by Dick Stockton. Locally, Super Bowl XVI was broadcast by KCBS-AM in San Francisco with Don Klein and Wayne Walker and by WLW-AM in Cincinnati with Phil Samp and Andy MacWilliams.\nThe game was one of the most watched broadcasts in American television history, with more than 85 million viewers. The final national Nielsen rating was 49.1 (a 73 share), which is still a Super Bowl record, and ranks second to the final episode of \"M*A*S*H\" in 1983 among television broadcasts in general. (Super Bowl LIX holds the record for total U.S. viewership, with an average audience of 128 million, but only earned a rating of 41.7, it did however break the record for audience share with 83). As of 2025[ [update]], Super Bowl XVI remains the highest rated championship game in the history of the National Football League.\n\"60 Minutes\" was CBS's Super Bowl lead-out program.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities featured the University of Michigan Band. The band later performed the Canadian National Anthem, which was not televised. Singer Diana Ross (a Detroit native) then performed the U.S. national anthem, which followed a moment of silence in support of the Polish trade union Solidarity following the crackdown by the communist government of Poland on the pro-democracy union. Ross would later perform at the halftime show for Super Bowl XXX. This was the first of two Super Bowls, both held in Michigan, in which two national anthems were performed, and to have a joint Canadian-American armed forces color guard, which consisted of members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and Camp Grayling color guards. The coin toss ceremony featured Hall of Fame quarterback Bobby Layne, a star with the Lions from 1950 to 1958.\nUp with People provided the halftime entertainment featuring a salute to the 1960s and Motown. This was the first Super Bowl to be played in the Midwest.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nCincinnati had the first opportunity to score early in the game. After returning the opening kickoff 17 yards, 49ers running back/returner Amos Lawrence was hit by Bengals linebacker Guy Frazier and fumbled at his own 26-yard line (the first time in a Super Bowl that a turnover took place on the opening kick), where cornerback John Simmons recovered the ball for Cincinnati. Quarterback Ken Anderson then started the drive off with a completion to wide receiver Isaac Curtis for 8 yards, and fullback Pete Johnson's 2-yard run then picked up a first down. Anderson followed with an 11-yard pass to tight end Dan Ross, moving the ball to the 5-yard line. However, running back Charles Alexander was unable to move the ball forward on first down, and then Anderson was sacked by defensive end Jim Stuckey on second down for a 6-yard loss. Facing 3rd-and-goal from the 11, Anderson tried to connect with Curtis in the end zone, but 49ers safety Dwight Hicks intercepted the pass at the 5-yard line and returned it 27 yards to the 32.\nFrom there, quarterback Joe Montana led the 49ers offense to the Cincinnati 47-yard line with three consecutive completions. Then, the 49ers ran a fake reverse/flea flicker play that involved running back Ricky Patton handing the ball off to wide receiver Freddie Solomon, who then handed it off to Montana, who then completed a 14-yard pass to tight end Charle Young at the 33. Three running plays and Montana's 14-yard completion to Solomon moved the ball to the 1-yard line. Montana finished the drive himself with a 1-yard touchdown run, giving San Francisco a 7\u20130 lead. After forcing the Bengals to punt, the 49ers got the ball back at their own 10-yard line and nearly committed a turnover when Montana's pass intended for wide receiver Dwight Clark was nearly intercepted by cornerback Ken Riley. Had Riley intercepted the pass, he could have walked into the end zone for a game-tying pick-six. On the next play, Patton was tackled for a 7-yard loss by defensive end Ross Browner, backing the 49ers up to their own 3, but a penalty on Cincinnati for too many players on the field on the next play cut the loss to 2 yards. Unlike the previous drive, the 49ers could get nothing going here and they, too, were forced to punt.\nSecond quarter.\nCincinnati threatened to tie the game early in the second quarter when they got the ball back at their own 49 and advanced across the San Francisco 30-yard line on an 18-yard reception by wide receiver Cris Collinsworth. But after catching a 19-yard pass from Anderson at the 5-yard line, Collinsworth was stripped of the ball by 49ers cornerback Eric Wright, and cornerback Lynn Thomas recovered the fumble. San Francisco then drove for a Super Bowl record 92 yards on Montana's passes to Solomon and Clark for 20 and 12 yards, respectively, as well as a 14-yard run by running back Earl Cooper (playing in what would be his final game as a running back, Cooper would be converted to a tight end before the 1982 season, a position he would play for the rest of his career). The drive ended with Montana's 10-yard touchdown pass to Cooper, increasing the 49ers' lead to 14\u20130. The play Cooper scored on had not been called by Bill Walsh for two years. Cooper's leaping, celebratory spike of the football after the touchdown became the photo \"Sports Illustrated\" used for its post-game cover.\nFollowing Cooper's touchdown came a squib kick by kicker Ray Wersching that was finally recovered by Bengals wide receiver David Verser, who was quickly tackled at the 2-yard line. According to the NFL's highlight film for the game, the 49ers had discovered Wersching's ability to effectively use the squib during their 1981 season opener when a leg injury kept him from fully powering into the football; because that game was also played at the Silverdome, Walsh felt that Wersching would be able to recreate the crazy bounces of a squib on the hard AstroTurf by shortening his stride and seeing what happened. The Bengals managed to escape a safety when Anderson completed a 10-yard pass to Ross from his own end zone, but they could only advance to their 25 before having Pat McInally boot a 47-yard punt, and with just over 4 minutes left in the half, Montana led the 49ers on another scoring drive. First, he completed a 17-yard pass to Clark at the Cincinnati 49. Then Patton ran twice for a total of 10 yards, advancing the ball to the 39-yard line. Montana's next two completions to Clark (his fourth and final reception of the game) and Solomon moved the ball to the 5-yard line. But then Montana threw two straight incompletions, forcing the 49ers to settle for Wersching's 22-yard field goal to increase their lead to 17\u20130.\nWith just 15 seconds left in the half, Wersching kicked another squib kick that was muffed by Bengals running back Archie Griffin, and 49ers linebacker Milt McColl recovered the ball on the Cincinnati 4-yard line. As they lined up for a field goal attempt, a false start penalty against San Francisco's offensive line pushed them back 5 yards, but Wersching connected from 26 yards, increasing the 49ers' lead to 20\u20130, which was the largest halftime lead in Super Bowl history to that date, breaking the previous record of 17 points set by Miami in Super Bowl VIII. The 49ers' 20\u20130 halftime is the 3rd the largest shutout lead at halftime in Super Bowl history. Since then, five Super Bowls have had teams with leads of at least 20 points at halftime: Super Bowl XX (Chicago led New England 23\u20133), Super Bowl XXII (Washington led Denver 35\u201310), Super Bowl XXIV (San Francisco led Denver 27\u20133), Super Bowl XLVIII (Seattle led Denver 22\u20130), and Super Bowl LIX (Philadelphia led Kansas City 24-0, now the largest shutout at halftime in Super Bowl history).\nThird quarter.\nAfter receiving the opening kickoff of the second half, the Bengals drove 83 yards in 9 plays. Alexander started off the drive with a 13-yard carry, with a facemask penalty on Hicks giving an additional 5 yards. Three plays later, Anderson converted a 3rd-and-4 on a 19-yard pass to wide receiver Steve Kreider, followed by a 13-yard pass to Curtis, and eventually finished the drive himself with a 5-yard touchdown run to cut Cincinnati's deficit to 20\u20137. This seemed to fire up their defense, which limited the 49ers to only 8 plays and 4 offensive yards for the entire third quarter.\nAfter the next three possessions ended in punts, Bengals safety Mike Fuller's 17-yard punt return gave Cincinnati the ball at midfield. Two penalties and a 4-yard sack by 49ers defensive end Fred Dean pushed the Bengals back to their own 37, but on 3rd-and-23, Anderson's 49-yard pass to Collinsworth (the longest play of the game) moved the ball to the San Francisco 14. Johnson then later successfully converted on a fourth down run, giving the Bengals a first down on the 3-yard line. On that play, the 49ers only had 10 players on the field because linebacker Keena Turner, who was seriously ill with chicken pox during Super Bowl week, missed a call to enter the game.\nHowever, the San Francisco defense stiffened to keep Cincinnati out of the end zone. On first down, Johnson drove into the line and gained 2 yards down to the 49ers' 1-yard line. The Bengals then tried to run Johnson into the line on second down, but lost a yard when a charging rush prevented the Bengals from executing their blocking assignments. Cincinnati receiver David Verser also missed a blocking audible by Anderson. On third down, 49ers linebacker Dan Bunz made essentially the key defensive play of the game. Anderson faked to Johnson and threw a swing pass out to Alexander, who was isolated on Bunz. Bunz, however, corralled Alexander at the line of scrimmage on an open-field tackle and kept him from reaching the end zone. Highlights showed that Alexander was supposed to have entered the end zone before making his cut, and his early turn prevented a touchdown pass.\nAfter calling a timeout, rather than attempting a field goal on fourth down, the Bengals sent Johnson into the middle of the line one last time. But cornerback Ronnie Lott and linebackers Bunz and Jack \"Hacksaw\" Reynolds tackled him for no gain, giving the ball back to the 49ers.\nFourth quarter.\nThe 49ers only gained 8 yards on their ensuing drive, and the Bengals got the ball back after receiving Jim Miller's 44-yard punt at their own 47-yard line. Taking advantage of their great starting field position, the Bengals marched 53 yards in 8 plays, which included a 12-yard reception by Collinsworth, two 9-yard receptions by Ross, and a 14-yard pass interference penalty on Lott. The drive ended with Anderson's 4-yard touchdown pass to Ross, cutting the Bengals' deficit to one score at 20\u201314 with 10:06 left in regulation.\nHowever, the 49ers responded with a 50-yard, 12-play drive that took 4:41 off the clock and included Montana's 22-yard pass to wide receiver Mike Wilson (his longest and final pass of the game) and seven consecutive running plays. Wilson's reception was a play Walsh specifically designed for the Super Bowl that capitalized on the Bengals doing a long-run coverage on Wilson anytime he ran a pass route over 20 yards; Wilson simply ran 25 yards straight out and then cut back to receive Montana's precision pass. Wersching ended the drive with a 40-yard field goal to put San Francisco back up by two scores, 23\u201314, with just 5 minutes left in the game.\nOn the Bengals' first play after receiving the ensuing kickoff, Wright intercepted a pass intended for Collinsworth. After returning the interception 25 yards, Wright fumbled while being tackled by Bengals guard Max Montoya, but 49ers linebacker Willie Harper recovered the ball at the Bengals' 22.\nThe 49ers then ran the ball on five consecutive plays, taking 3 minutes off the clock, to advance to the Cincinnati 6-yard line. Wersching then kicked his fourth field goal to increase the 49ers' lead to 26\u201314 with less than 2 minutes left in the game. Wersching's 4 field goals tied a Super Bowl record set by Green Bay Packers kicker Don Chandler in Super Bowl II. Because of his 4 field goals and the close score, this is the only Super Bowl in which the losing team scored more touchdowns than the winning team (Cincinnati 3, San Francisco 2).\nAnderson completed six consecutive passes on the Bengals' ensuing drive, the last one a 3-yard touchdown pass to Ross to make the score 26\u201321. However, none of the receivers on Anderson's completions were able to get out of bounds to stop the clock. By the time Ross scored, only 16 seconds remained in the game. The Bengals tried an onside kick, but Clark recovered the ball for the 49ers, allowing San Francisco to run out the clock and claim their first Super Bowl title.\nNotable performances.\nMontana threw for 157 yards and a touchdown while rushing for 18 yards and another touchdown. The victory made Montana the second-youngest quarterback to win a Super Bowl at the time (just behind his idol Joe Namath; Namath was 25 years, 7 months, and 12 days old when he won Super Bowl III, while Montana was a day older).\nPatton was the game's leading rusher, with 55 yards on 17 carries. Wersching scored 14 points on four field goals and two PATs, while his squib kickoffs caused two Cincinnati fumbles. The 49ers recovered one of these fumbles, leading to a field goal. Wright had an interception and forced a fumble. 49ers linebacker Jack Reynolds and Bengals defensive lineman Ross Browner each made eight tackles.\nAnderson completed 25 of 34 pass attempts for 300 yards, two touchdowns and two interceptions. He also gained 14 rushing yards and a touchdown on six carries. Anderson's 25 completions and 73.5% completion percentage were both Super Bowl records.\nCris Collinsworth (the game's leading receiver) caught 5 passes for 107 yards. Dan Ross had 11 receptions for 104 yards and two touchdowns. The 11 catches were a Super Bowl record, later tied by several players but only surpassed by Demaryius Thomas in Super Bowl XLVIII with 13 receptions. Ross still holds the record for most catches by a tight end in a Super Bowl game.\nCollinsworth and Ross became the second pair of teammates to each have 100 yards receiving in a Super Bowl. John Stallworth and Lynn Swann were the first to do so in Super Bowl XIII.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XVI: San Francisco 49ers 26, Cincinnati Bengals 21\n\"at Pontiac Silverdome, Pontiac, Michigan\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XVI, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nNOTE: Officials were numbered separately by position from 1979 to 1981. In 1982, the league reverted to the pre-1979 practice of assigning each official a different number.\nBergman, Beeks, Swanson and Hakes all worked together on the same crew during the regular season, a rarity.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29143", "revid": "44273096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29143", "title": "Super Bowl XVII", "text": "1983 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XVII was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Miami Dolphins and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Washington Redskins to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the strike-shortened 1982 season. The Redskins defeated the Dolphins, 27\u201317, to win their first Super Bowl championship and first NFL championship since 1942. The game was played on January 30, 1983, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California.\nThis Super Bowl came at the end of a season that was significantly shortened by a players' strike. Teams ended up only playing nine regular season games, and the league conducted a special 16-team, four-round playoff tournament where divisions were ignored in the seeding. The Redskins had an NFC-best 8\u20131 regular season record, while the Dolphins finished at 7\u20132. Both teams advanced through the first three postseason rounds to Super Bowl XVII. The game then became a rematch of Super Bowl VII, also played in the Los Angeles area at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum ten years before, where the Dolphins completed their 17\u20130 perfect season at the Redskins\u2019 expense by a 14\u20137 score. This was also the second Super Bowl to rematch teams, the first being Super Bowl XIII, and the first one where the previous losing team won.\nThe first half was competitive and ended with the Dolphins leading, 17\u201310. This was the third Super Bowl where the losing team was ahead at halftime and the second where they were ahead at the start of the fourth quarter. However, the Redskins scored 17 unanswered points in the second half and gained a Super Bowl record 276 yards on the ground while holding the Dolphins to just 47 offensive plays for 176 total yards, 76 of which came on a single play.\nNevertheless, Miami built a 17\u201310 halftime lead with Jimmy Cefalo's 76-yard touchdown catch and Fulton Walker's 98-yard kickoff return. The turning point in the game came with 10:10 remaining: trailing, 17\u201313, and facing fourth down and one yard to go at the Dolphins' 43-yard line, Washington running back John Riggins broke through the Miami defense and ran into the end zone for a touchdown to take the lead. Wide receiver Charlie Brown then added an insurance touchdown with a 6-yard scoring reception.\nRiggins was named Super Bowl MVP,\nfinishing the game with two new Super Bowl records: the most rushing yards (166) and the most rushing attempts (38) in a Super Bowl game. He was the first player from an NFC team to rush for 100 yards in a Super Bowl. Riggins also recorded a reception for 15 yards, giving him more total yards from scrimmage (181) than the entire Miami team.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XVII to Pasadena on March 13, 1979, at the owners' meetings in Honolulu. For the first time, three Super Bowl host cities were deliberated and selected at the same meeting (XV, XVI, and XVII). A total of eight cities submitted bids: New Orleans, Detroit (Silverdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Los Angeles (Coliseum), Miami, Seattle (Kingdome), Dallas (Cotton Bowl), and Houston (Rice Stadium). Pasadena was selected for their third Super Bowl overall. New Orleans (XV) and Detroit (XVI) were other cities chosen at the meeting.\nAfter hosting five previous Super Bowls, Miami was noticeably left out of the bidding process, largely due the aging condition of the Orange Bowl, and for a hotel room mix-up at Super Bowl XIII two months earlier. Dolphins owner Joe Robbie, locked in an ongoing feud with the city of Miami and Dade County over stadium improvements or construction of a new stadium, actually lobbied against Miami hosting the game. Robbie convinced the other owners to vote down Miami, in an effort to gain leverage towards building a new stadium. South Florida would not be selected to host another Super Bowl until Joe Robbie Stadium was built, and it hosted XXIII.\nThis was the first outdoor Super Bowl to have a Jumbotron present. A temporary Sony Diamond Vision screen was installed in northeast corner of the stadium just above the last row seats. The only other Super Bowl facilities to date which had replay screens were indoors: the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans (XII and XV), and the Pontiac Silverdome near Detroit (XVI).\nNFL players\u2019 strike.\nA 57-day-long players' strike reduced the 1982 regular season from a 16-game schedule to 9 games. Because of the shortened season, the NFL adopted a special 16-team playoff tournament. Division standings were ignored. Eight teams from each conference were seeded 1\u20138 based on their regular season records.\nThe modified schedule forced the league to extend the regular season into January for the first time. After the 57-day strike, the NFL extended the regular season one weekend (pushing the end of the regular season back from December 26 to January 2), moving back the start of the playoffs and eliminating the week off for the first time since Super Bowl IV.\nFour teams that made the playoffs the previous year failed to do so in the strike-shortened season, even with the greatly expanded postseason field. The San Francisco 49ers, the defending Super Bowl champions, struggled to a 3\u20136 record. The Buffalo Bills, New York Giants, and Philadelphia Eagles also did not qualify for the playoffs. However, the Cleveland Browns and Detroit Lions did qualify for the playoffs with 4\u20135 records, becoming the first teams in NFL history to compete in postseason play despite regular-season winning percentages below .500. No other losing teams would do so until the Seattle Seahawks reached the playoffs following the 2010 season, becoming the first team to accomplish this in a season unaffected by a strike. The 2014 Carolina Panthers, 2020 Washington team, and 2022 Tampa Bay Buccaneers also achieved playoff berths with winning percentages below .500 in seasons not shortened by a players' strike.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThe Dolphins finished the strike-shortened regular season with a 7\u20132 record, ranking them second in the AFC. The Miami club's main strength was its defense, nicknamed the \"Killer Bees\" because six of the defense's 11 starters had surnames that began with the letter B. The \"Killer Bees\", anchored by Pro Bowl defensive tackle Bob Baumhower, allowed the fewest total yards in the league (2,312) and the fewest passing yards in the league (1,027). Linebacker A. J. Duhe was extremely effective at blitzing and in pass coverage. The Dolphins' secondary, consisting of defensive backs Don McNeal, Gerald Small and brothers Lyle and Glenn Blackwood, combined for 11 interceptions.\nHowever, Miami's passing attack, led by quarterback David Woodley, ranked second to last in the league with 1,314 total yards, 8 touchdowns and 13 interceptions. One of the few bright spots in the Dolphins' passing attack was wide receiver Jimmy Cefalo, who gained 356 yards from just 17 receptions for an average of 20.9 yards per catch. Wide receiver Duriel Harris also provided a deep threat with 22 receptions for 331 yards.\nMiami's strength on offense was its ground game, ranking third in the league with 1,344 rushing yards. Pro Bowl running back Andra Franklin was the team's top rusher with 701 yards (third in the NFL) and seven touchdowns. Running back Tony Nathan rushed for 233 yards and caught 16 passes for another 114 yards. Woodley himself also rushed for 207 yards and two touchdowns. One reason for the Dolphins' rushing success was the blocking of their offensive line, led by future Hall of Fame center Dwight Stephenson, along with Pro Bowlers Bob Kuechenberg (a starter on Miami's early 1970s Super Bowl teams) and Ed Newman.\nWashington Redskins.\nSuper Bowl XVII was the Redskins' first Super Bowl victory (third NFL championship overall) and their second Super Bowl appearance; they were defeated by the Dolphins, 14\u20137, in Super Bowl VII. This was the second rematch in Super Bowl history (the first being the Pittsburgh Steelers and the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowls X and XIII). Washington finished the strike-shortened regular season with an NFC-best 8\u20131 record, earning their first playoff appearance in six years and allowing the fewest points (128) in the league.\nRedskins quarterback Joe Theismann finished the season as the top rated passer in the NFC, completing 161 of 252 (63 percent) pass attempts for 2,033 yards and 13 touchdowns, while also rushing for 150 yards. The main weapons in the passing game were wide receivers Charlie Brown (32 receptions, 690 yards and 8 touchdowns) and Art Monk (35 receptions, 447 yards and one touchdown). Running back John Riggins led the Redskins\u2019 ground game, rushing for 553 yards and three touchdowns during the regular season. Much of Washington's success on offense was attributed to their offensive line, affectionately known as \"The Hogs\".\nWashington also had impact players on special teams. Mark Moseley became the first placekicker to win the NFL Most Valuable Player Award, converting 20 of 21 field goal attempts and all 18 of his extra point attempts. Kick returner Mike Nelms gained a combined total of 809 yards returning kickoffs and punts.\nThe Redskins' defense was led by 6'7\", 296-pound defensive tackle Dave Butz, who anchored the line, along with defensive ends Dexter Manley and Tony McGee, who each recorded 6.5 sacks. Washington's secondary was led by defensive backs Vernon Dean and Jeris White, who each recorded three interceptions.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Dolphins advanced through the special 16-team playoffs by defeating the New England Patriots, 28\u201313, the San Diego Chargers, 34\u201313, and the New York Jets, 14\u20130, earning a trip to the Super Bowl for the fourth time.\nMeanwhile, the Redskins defeated the Detroit Lions, 31\u20137, the Minnesota Vikings, 21\u20137, and the Dallas Cowboys, 31\u201317.\nBefore the playoffs, the 33-year-old Riggins, who had averaged barely three yards per carry during the season, told coach Joe Gibbs \"I'm really getting down the road. I don't have many of these left. I've been out two weeks and I'm ready. Give me the ball.\" Gibbs did just that, and Riggins ran for a combined total of 444 yards and three touchdowns during those playoff victories.\nAnother key contributor in the NFC playoffs was backup wide receiver Alvin Garrett, who replaced Monk after he suffered a leg injury that kept him out of the entire postseason. Although he only recorded one reception during the entire regular season, Garrett caught a total of 13 receptions for 231 yards and four touchdowns in Washington's three conference playoff games.\nSuper Bowl pre-game news.\nEntering Super Bowl XVII, the Dolphins were favored to win, primarily because of their \"Killer Bees\" defense. It had recorded 12 interceptions in three AFC playoff games, including five each in the final two contests. Another reason was because 26 players on Washington's 45-man roster had been signed by the team as free agents, including 14 who had never been drafted by any NFL team. Only ten players on the Redskins roster had any prior playoff experience.\nAs was the case in Super Bowl VII, the Redskins were the designated home team. However, the Redskins chose to wear their white jerseys and burgundy pants for the game; in their previous Super Bowl loss to Miami, the Redskins were required to wear their burgundy and gold uniforms as the home team. Washington became the second team after the 1978 Dallas Cowboys to wear white as the home team in a Super Bowl. The Dolphins wore their aqua jerseys and white pants.\nThis was the first Super Bowl where both teams wore a face mask color other than gray. The Redskins switched to gold masks in 1978 and the Dolphins to aqua in 1980. \nBroadcasting.\nUnited States.\nThe game was televised in the United States by NBC. In the broadcast booth was Dick Enberg handling the play-by-play duties and color commentator Merlin Olsen. Len Berman and his \"NFL '82\" castmates, Mike Adamle (who also covered the Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremony), Ahmad Rashad and Pete Axthelm anchored the pregame, halftime and postgame coverage. Locally, for each of their home teams, it was seen on local NBC affiliates WRC-TV in Washington, D.C. and WCKT-TV (whose callsign would become WSVN later that summer; it is now a Fox station since January 1, 1989) in Miami, and for their home field it was seen on KNBC in Los Angeles.\nThe game was broadcast nationally on radio on CBS, with Jack Buck handling the play-by-play duties and color commentator Hank Stram in the broadcast booth. Brent Musburger anchored the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage with analysis from Irv Cross and Jimmy Snyder for CBS. Locally, Super Bowl XVII was broadcast on WMAL-AM in Washington, D.C. by Frank Herzog, Sam Huff and Sonny Jurgensen, and on WIOD-AM in Miami, Florida by Rick Weaver and Hank Goldberg.\nNBC's national Nielsen rating of 48.6 was the second-highest for a Super Bowl broadcast, trailing only the 49.1 garnered by Super Bowl XVI on CBS the year before. NBC introduced a new theme for the game; a brass-based piece that would see usage in various forms (as game introduction; pregame introduction or bumper music) for most of the remainder of the decade.\nFollowing the game, NBC aired the premiere episode of \"The A-Team\", beginning the regular tradition of the game's host network airing significant Super Bowl lead-out programs. As a way to hype the show for NBC, Mr. T was in attendance for the game.\nThe game is featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" under the title \"Hog Day Afternoon\", narrated by John Facenda and featuring interviews with Joe Bugel and radio commentary by Herzog, Jurgensen and Huff.\nInternational.\nThe Super Bowl was shown live in Canada on CTV, which also simulcasted NBC's coverage. In Mexico it was broadcast, with NBC's signal, live at Rose Bowl Stadium by Televisa Channel 5 XHGC. The game was also shown live in the UK for the first time when Channel 4, Britain's newest channel (launched November 2, 1982) covered it.\nEntertainment.\nSuper Bowl XVII was dedicated to University of Alabama coach Bear Bryant, who had died four days earlier. A moment of silence was held in his memory during the pregame ceremonies. Dolphins Tony Nathan, Dwight Stephenson, Bob Baumhower and Don McNeal were All-Americans for Bryant at Alabama, and Redskins reserve running back Wilbur Jackson was the first African-American to earn a football scholarship to Alabama.\nThe Los Angeles Unified School District All-City Band played during the pregame ceremonies. Later, actress Leslie Easterbrook performed the national anthem. Easterbrook almost missed the ceremony, saying, \"the limo driver couldn\u2019t find the Rose Bowl in Pasadena. When I finally got there I ran through that tunnel by myself and actually slid, as if I was diving for first base. I slid into the microphone and they had 60 seconds of silence for the passing of a football coach from Alabama. I caught my breath and did it.\"\nThe coin toss ceremony featured Pro Football Hall of Fame receiver Elroy Hirsch. Dolphins captain Bob Kuechenberg called \"tails,\" and the coin landed \"tails.\" However, referee Jerry Markbreit became confused by the similar design of both sides of the coin and incorrectly thought \"heads\" had landed. After a short discussion with his head linesman, Dale Hamer, Markbreit corrected his mistake before the kickoff, then asked Kuechenberg if the Dolphins would receive said kickoff, which they did. Justin Peters of \"Slate\", who watched all the Super Bowls over a two-month period in 2015 before Super Bowl 50, reported what transpired: \u201cTails is the call,\u201d said Markbreit. \u201cHeads,\u201d he said after the coin had dropped. \u201cNo, it\u2019s tails, it\u2019s tails,\u201d everyone then said. \u201cWhoop!\u201d Markbreit said, bending down before announcing \u201cTails!\u201d \u201cSo some confusion over what is heads and what is tails,\u201d Dick Enberg said. Peters called it one of the funniest of all Super Bowl moments.\nThe halftime show was produced by Bob Jani Productions and titled \"KaleidoSUPERscope\", and featured the Los Angeles Super Drill Team.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nAfter both teams exchanged punts on their first possessions to start the game, Miami scored first on their second possession in two plays from their own 20-yard line. Running back Tony Nathan first picked up 4 yards, and then quarterback David Woodley (at 24 years, 3 months, and 5 days old was the youngest quarterback to start a Super Bowl at the time) froze Washington defensive end Dexter Manley with a pump fake before throwing the ball to wide receiver Jimmy Cefalo, who caught the ball ahead of single coverage by safety Tony Peters at the Redskins 45 and raced untouched down the right sideline for a 76-yard touchdown completion. After the Dolphins forced the Redskins to punt, Miami reached the Washington 37 on their next drive, and Woodley attempted another deep pass, but before he could throw the ball, he was hit by Manley, causing Woodley to fumble, and defensive tackle Dave Butz recovered the ball at the Miami 46. The turnover led to Redskins kicker Mark Moseley's 31-yard field goal to cut the Dolphins' lead to 7\u20133, two plays into the second quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nDolphins cornerback/kick returner Fulton Walker returned the ensuing kickoff 42 yards to the Dolphins 47-yard line. From there, the Dolphins advanced to the Redskins 3-yard line. Woodley's pass fell incomplete on third down, however, so Miami had to settle for kicker Uwe von Schamann's 20-yard field goal to increase their lead to 10\u20133 with 6 minutes left in the half. Although the drive was only 50 yards long, it consisted of 13 plays and took 8:39 off the clock.\nAided by a 27-yard completion from quarterback Joe Theismann to tight end Rick Walker, 13 rushing yards, a 15-yard reception by fullback John Riggins, and a 12-yard run by Theismann himself, the Redskins marched 80 yards in 11 plays to score on wide receiver Alvin Garrett's 4-yard touchdown reception, tying the game, 10\u201310, with less than 2 minutes left in the half.\nHowever, the tie was immediately broken by the Dolphins. Fulton Walker returned the subsequent kickoff 98 yards for a touchdown to give Miami a 17\u201310 lead. It was the first kickoff return touchdown in a Super Bowl and the longest kickoff return in NFL postseason history, breaking the prior record of 97 yards by Vic Washington in 1972.\nAn illegal blocking penalty on Washington during the kickoff forced them to start their next drive at their own 7-yard line, but they managed to get to the 28 after their first four plays. A pass interference penalty on safety Lyle Blackwood on the next play moved the ball to the Miami 42-yard line. Immediately after Blackwood's penalty, wide receiver Charlie Brown's 26-yard reception advanced the Redskins to the Dolphins 16. After calling their final timeout with 14 seconds left, Washington made one last attempt to score a touchdown before trying a field goal. Theismann's subsequent pass was caught by Garrett, but he was tackled at the 7-yard line by safety Glenn Blackwood (Lyle Blackwood's younger brother) before he could get out of bounds, preventing any possible field goal attempt as the Redskins were unable to stop the clock before time expired in the half, keeping the Dolphins' lead at 17\u201310.\nThird quarter.\nThe teams opened the second half trading punts, but on their second possession of the third quarter, following an 11-yard reception by tight end Don Warren, the Redskins managed to fool the Dolphins with a reverse play near midfield. Riggins took a handoff from Theismann and then handed the ball off to Garrett, who was running in the opposite direction. The play worked perfectly, as Garrett ran the ball 44 yards to Miami's 9-yard line. The Dolphins' defense only allowed Washington to advance to the 3-yard line on their next three plays, though, so the Redskins settled for another 20-yard field goal by Moseley to cut their deficit to 17\u201313.\nAfter the next three possessions ended in punts, Theismann was intercepted by Miami linebacker A. J. Duhe at the Washington 47-yard line. The Dolphins reached the 37 when Woodley tried to pass the ball deep to Cefalo again. However, Redskins cornerback Vernon Dean deflected the ball and safety Mark Murphy made a one-handed interception at the 5-yard line while falling to the ground. After Washington got a first down to advance to their own 18, Miami defensive end Kim Bokamper deflected a pass from a scrambling and retreating Theismann. Bokamper nearly intercepted the pass for a touchdown just outside of the Redskins' end zone, but Theismann prevented the score with a timely move, knocking the ball out of Bokamper's hands. Following the near disaster for Washington, running back Clarence Harmon picked up a first down for the Redskins with a 12-yard run to the 30 before the period ended.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Redskins then drove to Miami's 43-yard line and once again tried a trick play, this time a flea flicker. Riggins took a pitch from Theismann, ran up to the line of scrimmage and pitched the ball back to Theismann, who then attempted a deep pass. This time, the Dolphins were not fooled; Lyle Blackwood made a diving interception at the 1-yard line (making this the first Super Bowl in which three consecutive drives ended with interceptions).\nHowever, Blackwood's interception turned out to be somewhat beneficial for Washington, as it pinned Miami back at their own 1. The Dolphins could only gain three yards with their next three plays, and Washington ended up getting the ball back with great field position on their own 48-yard line. The Redskins ran three plays to reach the Miami 43, but then faced a 4th-and-1. Instead of punting, the Redskins decided to gamble and attempt to get the first down with a run from Riggins, but Riggins did a great deal more than pick up the first down. Coach Joe Gibbs called his trademark play I-Right 70 Chip, starting tight end Clint Didier in motion towards the right, then reversing motion back to the left. The concept behind the play was for the Redskins' line and skill players (except for Theismann) to block everyone but the smallest cornerback on the field, leaving Riggins able and ready to break the tackle of that player (in this case, Miami cornerback Don McNeal). Theismann handed off to Riggins, who blasted through McNeal's arms at the line of scrimmage and still built up enough speed to outrun Glenn Blackwood for a 43-yard touchdown, giving Washington their first lead of the game, 20\u201317, with just over 10 minutes remaining. McNeal, who was assigned to cover Didier on the play, slipped briefly as Didier changed direction. The Redskins ran the play to the left, behind Didier and running back Otis Wonsley, and Riggins ran over McNeal to score the touchdown. Even if McNeal had kept his footing, it would not have mattered much. Despite a valiant effort, the 185-pound cornerback could do little more than hold on briefly as he met the 240-pound Riggins running with a full head of steam, hit him high, and slid down his body as \"The Diesel\" pulled away towards the end zone.\nWashington quickly forced Miami to punt on their next possession, and safety/punt returner Mike Nelms's 12-yard return gave the Redskins great field position at the Dolphins 41-yard line. The Redskins ran five consecutive running plays by Riggins, consuming a lot of time and moving the ball to the 19-yard line. On a 3rd-and-8 play, Theismann completed a key 10-yard pass to Brown for a first down at the Miami 9. Riggins advanced the ball three more yards on two more carries to reach the two-minute warning, at which point Theismann completed a 6-yard touchdown pass to Brown, giving Washington a 27\u201317 lead and essentially putting the game away. Fulton Walker returned the ensuing kickoff 36 yards to the 35-yard line, but the Dolphins could only advance to the 39 before turning the ball over on downs with 1:12 remaining, enabling the Redskins to run out the clock and claim their first Super Bowl title.\nWashington dominated the second half, allowing no pass completions and 34 rushing yards; Miami's longest gain of the game's final 30 minutes went for just nine yards. The Dolphins managed only nine first downs in the entire game, with just two in the second half. \"Their way is what we called Dolphin football,\" said left guard Bob Kuechenberg, one of only two holdovers from Miami's three previous Super Bowl teams in the 1970s (the other was defensive end Vern Den Herder who retired immediately following the game). \"They controlled the second half and they're fitting world champions.\nWoodley's poor performance in this game \u2014 four pass completions in 14 attempts for 97 yards, a touchdown, an interception and a lost fumble \u2014 was a factor in the Dolphins drafting Dan Marino three months later. After his 76-yard touchdown catch in the first quarter, Cefalo caught just one more pass for six yards. Duriel Harris recorded Miami's other two receptions in the game for a total of 15 yards. Woodley did not complete a pass in the final 40 minutes of play, notching his last completion of the day a few minutes into the second quarter. Walker finished with four kickoff returns for 190 yards and a touchdown, setting Super Bowl records for most kickoff return yards and highest single-game yards-per-return average (47.5).\nMeanwhile, Theismann, the first starting quarterback to win a Super Bowl while wearing a single-digit uniform number (7), finished 15 of 23 for 143 yards, two touchdowns and two interceptions. He also added 20 rushing yards on three carries. Brown was the Redskins' leading receiver with six receptions for 60 yards and a touchdown. Nelms returned 6 punts for 52 yards, both Super Bowl records, and returned two kickoffs for 44 yards.\nOverall, Washington gained 400 yards of offense \u2014 including a Super Bowl-record 276 rushing yards \u2014 while limiting Miami to 176 total yards.\nAbout Super Bowl XVII, Justin Peters commented, \"Super Bowl XVII capped off a strike-shortened season, and, as a result, the players seemed much better rested than usual, and the game was much more energetic than some of its predecessors.\"\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XVII: Washington Redskins 27, Miami Dolphins 17\n\"at Rose Bowl, Pasadena, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Rushing attempts\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XVII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nOfficials wore a black armband with number 11 in memory of side judge Vince Jacob, who died during the players' strike. Jacob had been an official since 1975. It was the first time NFL officials wore such a memorial on the field during a Super Bowl. Back judge Dick Hantak was on the same crew as Jacob (led by referee Fred Wyant) in 1981 and the first two games of 1982.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29144", "revid": "5718152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29144", "title": "Super Bowl XVIII", "text": "1984 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XVIII was an American football game played on January 22, 1984, at Tampa Stadium between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion and defending Super Bowl XVII champion Washington Redskins and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Los Angeles Raiders to determine the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1983 season. The Raiders defeated the Redskins, 38\u20139. The Raiders' 38 points scored and 29-point margin of victory broke Super Bowl records; it remains the most points scored by an AFC team in a Super Bowl, later matched by the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl LVII. This is the first time the city of Tampa hosted the Super Bowl and was the AFC's last Super Bowl win until Super Bowl XXXII, won by the Denver Broncos.\nThe Redskins entered the game as the defending Super Bowl XVII champions, finished the 1983 regular season with a league-best 14\u20132 record, led the league in fewest rushing yards allowed, and set a then-NFL record in scoring with 541 points. The Raiders posted a 12\u20134 regular-season record in 1983, their second in Los Angeles, having moved there from Oakland in May 1982.\nThe Raiders dominated Super Bowl XVIII outgaining the Redskins in total yards, 385 to 283, and built a 21\u20133 halftime lead, aided by touchdowns on Derrick Jensen's blocked punt recovery, and Jack Squirek's 5-yard interception return on a screen pass with seven seconds left in the first half. This is also the second out of five Super Bowls where the winning team outscored the losing team in every quarter. Los Angeles's defense also sacked Redskins quarterback Joe Theismann six times and intercepted him twice. Raiders halfback Marcus Allen, who became the third Heisman Trophy winner to be named the Super Bowl MVP, carried the ball 20 times for a then-record total of 191 yards (breaking the previous record of 166 yards set by John Riggins in Super Bowl XVII the year before) and two touchdowns, including a then-record 74-yard run in the third quarter. He also caught 2 passes for 18 yards. Allen was the first running back who was a halfback to be named Most Valuable Player. All previous running backs who won the MVP were fullbacks.\nThe telecast of the game on CBS was seen by an estimated 77.62 million viewers. The broadcast was notable for airing the famous \"1984\" television commercial, introducing the Apple Macintosh. The NFL highlight film of this game was the final voiceover work for famous NFL narrator John Facenda.\nAs of the 2024 season, this is the Raiders' most recent Super Bowl championship, and it was also the only time that a Los Angeles\u2013based team had won the Super Bowl until their then cross-town rival Los Angeles Rams won Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, California.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nThe NFL awarded Super Bowl XVIII to Tampa on June 3, 1981, at the owners' meetings in Detroit. This was the first time Tampa hosted the game, and it was the first Super Bowl to be played in Florida in a city other than Miami. Tampa Stadium won the rights to host the game in a landslide, earning 24 out of the 26 votes (there were two abstentions). Three other cities submitted bids for XVIII: Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Miami (Orange Bowl), and New Orleans (Superdome). Detroit (Silverdome) and Dallas (Cotton Bowl) also made presentations, but stated they were only interested in bidding for Super Bowl XIX. Detroit, in particular, was a long shot, as they were slated to host Super Bowl XVI in just over six months, and owners were not ready to award them a second game before they finished their first.\nTampa entered the meeting as a heavy favorite to land the game, representing a new market for the Super Bowl. The representatives led by Tampa mayor Bob Martinez and Tampa Bay Buccaneers owner Hugh Culverhouse touted the local hotels, proximity to Walt Disney World, and the availability of luxury boxes at the stadium. They even hired Pat Summerall to narrate their film presentation. They also received praise from the other owners for their fan support. The Buccaneers had joined the league as an expansion team in 1976, but despite starting 0\u201326, maintained a loyal fanbase. Pasadena received only one vote, owing much to the fact that they were already slated to host XVII. New Orleans fell out of consideration after a lackluster reception five months earlier at XV. Meanwhile, Miami, back in the running, was also voted down, in an apparent effort to continue providing Dolphins owner Joe Robbie with leverage to build a new stadium. With no outstanding options, owners decided to postpone the awarding of XIX until the 1982 meeting.\nWashington Redskins.\nThe Redskins entered the game appearing to be even better than the previous season when they defeated the Miami Dolphins 27\u201317 in Super Bowl XVII. The Redskins finished the regular season with a 14\u20132 record, the best in the NFL, and their two losses were only by one point each. In addition, the Redskins set new NFL records with 541 points breaking the previous mark of 513 points set by the 1961 Oilers (since broken by the 1998 Minnesota Vikings, the 2007 and 2012 New England Patriots, 2011 Green Bay Packers, 2011 New Orleans Saints, 2013 Denver Broncos, and 2018 Kansas City Chiefs), and also had a turnover margin of +43 and the top-ranked run defense.\nThe Redskins had a number of efficient offensive weapons. Quarterback Joe Theismann won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award for being the second rated passer in the league behind Steve Bartkowski, completing 276 out of 459 (60.1 percent) of his passes for 3,714 yards, 29 touchdowns, and only 11 interceptions. He rushed for 234 yards and another touchdown. Washington's main deep threats were wide receivers Charlie Brown (78 receptions, 1,225 yards, and 8 touchdowns) and Art Monk (47 receptions, 746 yards, and 5 touchdowns), with the latter fully healthy after the previous year's injury that caused him to miss the entire postseason. Wide receiver Alvin Garrett, who replaced Monk during that time, emerged as a significant contributor by catching 25 passes for 332 yards. Fullback John Riggins once again was the team's top rusher with 1,347 yards, and set a then-NFL record by scoring the most rushing touchdowns in a season (24). Multi-talented running back Joe Washington recorded 772 rushing yards, while catching 47 passes for 454 yards and 6 touchdowns. Kicker Mark Moseley led the NFL in scoring with 161 points, while Riggins ranked second with 144, making them the first teammates to finish a season as the NFL's top two scorers since 1951. Washington's powerful offensive line, \"The Hogs\", were led by two Pro Bowlers, guard Russ Grimm and tackle Joe Jacoby.\nThe Redskins' defense led the league in fewest rushing yards allowed (1,289). Pro Bowl defensive tackle Dave Butz recorded 11.5 sacks and a fumble recovery. On the other side of the line, defensive end Dexter Manley recorded 11 sacks and an interception. Defensive back Mark Murphy led the NFL with 9 interceptions, while the other starters in the secondary, Vernon Dean, Anthony Washington and Ken Coffey, along with rookie cornerback Darrell Green, combined for 13 interceptions. Washington, Coffey and Green filled the void left by the season-long suspension of safety Tony Peters and the season-long holdout by cornerback Jeris White.\nLos Angeles Raiders.\nThe Raiders made it to their fourth Super Bowl in team history after posting a 12\u20134 regular-season record. Raiders quarterback Jim Plunkett completed 230 out of 379 (60.7 percent) passes resulting in 2,935 yards and 20 touchdowns. His favorite target was tight end Todd Christensen, who led the NFL with 92 receptions for 1,247 yards and 12 touchdowns. Wide receivers Cliff Branch and Malcolm Barnwell combined for 74 receptions, 1,209 yards, and 6 touchdowns. But the largest impact on offense was running back Marcus Allen. In just his second NFL season, Allen led the team in rushing yards (1,014) and total yards from scrimmage (1,604), while ranking second on the team in receptions (68) and touchdowns (11). But Allen was not the only key running back on the team. Kenny King and Frank Hawkins combined for 1,119 total rushing and receiving yards, and 10 touchdowns. Los Angeles also had a powerful special teams attack led by Greg Pruitt, who led the NFL in punt returns (58), and punt return yards, setting a new NFL record with 666. He also added another 604 yards returning kickoffs and rushed for 154 yards and two scores.\nOn defense, their three-man front was led by Pro Bowl defensive linemen Howie Long (13 sacks, 2 fumble recoveries) and Lyle Alzado, who had 7 sacks, along with rookie Greg Townsend, who recorded 10.5 sacks and a 66-yard fumble return touchdown. The linebacking corps was led by Pro Bowlers Rod Martin and Matt Millen, along with 15-year veteran Ted Hendricks. Martin had six sacks and four interceptions. Cornerbacks Mike Haynes (acquired in a trade from New England) and Lester Hayes were widely considered to be the best cornerback tandem in the NFL. Pro Bowl Safety Vann McElroy recovered 3 fumbles and ranked second in the NFL with 8 interceptions. The Raiders' head coach was Tom Flores.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Raiders only allowed a combined total of 24 points in their playoff victories over the Pittsburgh Steelers, 38\u201310, and the Seattle Seahawks (who had beaten the Raiders twice during the regular season), 30\u201314. Allen had been particularly effective in the playoffs, gaining a total of 375 combined yards and scoring three touchdowns. The Raiders' defense limited Seahawks running back Curt Warner, who had led the AFC in rushing yards (1,449 yards), to just 26 yards on 11 carries.\nMeanwhile, the Redskins crushed the Los Angeles Rams 51\u20137, and then narrowly defeated the San Francisco 49ers 24\u201321, with Mark Moseley kicking the game-winning field goal with just 40 seconds left. Mirroring the previous postseason, Riggins was a key contributor, rushing for a combined playoff total of 242 yards and five touchdowns in the two games. In doing so, Riggins extended his NFL record of consecutive playoff games with at least 100 rushing yards to six. Brown also was a key contributor in both playoff wins, recording a combined total of 11 receptions for 308 yards and a touchdown. Washington's defense was just as effective at stopping their postseason opponent's rushing attack as they had been during the regular season, limiting running backs Eric Dickerson and Wendell Tyler to a combined total of 60 rushing yards. Dickerson was the NFL's leading rusher with 1,808 yards and 18 touchdowns during the season, but could only gain 16 yards on 10 carries against the Redskins' defense.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS, the last Super Bowl before ABC was added to the annual broadcasting rotation with the next game the following year (this was added to it as part of a new television contract that began with the 1982 season and a new alternation process that began with the previous game on NBC at the end of that season). The CBS broadcast team consisted of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden. Hosting pregame coverage for \"The Super Bowl Today\" was Brent Musburger, Irv Cross, Phyllis George (in her final assignment for CBS), and Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder. Other contributors included Jim Hill, sports director of CBS station KNXT in Los Angeles (which broadcast the game in its market; WDVM aired the game in the Washington, DC area); Charlsie Cantey; Pat O'Brien; Dick Vermeil; Tom Brookshier; Hank Stram; John Tesh; and CBS News correspondent Charles Osgood. During this game, CBS introduced a new theme and open that would later be used for their college football coverage until it was replaced by the current college football theme introduced on Super Bowl XXI (the next Super Bowl CBS aired at the end of the 1986 season).\nCBS Radio had the game nationally with Jack Buck and Hank Stram. Dick Stockton would serve as pregame host for CBS Radio coverage; while Musburger would also contribute halftime commentary in addition to hosting CBS television coverage Locally, Bill King and Rich Marotta called the game on KRLA in Los Angeles; and Frank Herzog, Sam Huff, and Sonny Jurgensen were on WMAL-AM on Washington, D.C.\nCBS's Super Bowl lead-out program was the pilot episode of \"Airwolf\".\nThe game was simulcast in Canada on CTV and in the United Kingdom on Channel 4.\nApple's famous \"1984\" television commercial, introducing the Macintosh computer and directed by Ridley Scott, ran during a timeout in the third quarter. The advertisement changed how the Super Bowl would be used as a media advertising platform.\nThe highlight package to Super Bowl XVIII was voiceover artist John Facenda's final project for NFL Films. Facenda died eight months after the game. An expanded version of \"Black Sunday\" (the highlight film's title) has appeared on \"NFL's Greatest Games\", containing an additional hour of game footage and more audio play-by-play from both the local KRLA and WMAL radio broadcasts.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities, which paid tribute to George Halas, featured the University of Florida Fightin' Gator Marching Band and the Florida State University Marching Chiefs. After a moment of silence for Halas, singer Barry Manilow performed the national anthem. The coin toss ceremony featured Pro Football Hall of Fame fullback and defensive tackle Bronko Nagurski.\nThe halftime show was a \"Salute to Superstars of Silver Screen.\"\nThis was the first Super Bowl to feature the game's logo on the uniforms, but only on the back of the helmets and only Washington wore it. The game logo wouldn't return to the uniforms until 1991's Super Bowl XXV, but this time it was located on the front of the jerseys of both teams. Afterwards, the logo was removed from the jerseys and wouldn't become a regular practice until Super Bowl XXXII in 1998.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nDuring the first half, the Raiders scored on offense, defense, and special teams, becoming the first team to score two non-offensive touchdowns in a Super Bowl. After both teams forced punts to start the game, Los Angeles tight end Derrick Jensen blocked Jeff Hayes' punt deep in Washington territory and recovered the ball in the end zone for the first touchdown of the game to give the Raiders a 7\u20130 lead. On their ensuing drive, the Redskins were forced to punt, but Raiders cornerback Ted Watts unknowingly deflected the ball with his arm during a block, and Redskins safety Greg Williams recovered the ball at the Raiders 42-yard line. However, Washington was only able to advance to the Los Angeles 27-yard line and came away with no points after kicker Mark Moseley missed a 44-yard field goal attempt wide left. After the teams traded punts again, Raiders running back Marcus Allen ran 20 yards in two plays to reach the Redskins 42 before the end of the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nHowever, the Raiders could not go any further than the Washington 39 and were forced to punt again to start the second quarter. During the kick, Los Angeles punter Ray Guy prevented a disaster when he leaped to pull in a high snap one-handed, before punting through the end zone for a touchback. After the Redskins were forced to punt, Raiders quarterback Jim Plunkett completed a 50-yard pass to wide receiver Cliff Branch, advancing the ball to the Redskins' 15-yard line. Branch said that the Raiders took advantage of the tailwind after the teams switched sides. Two plays later, Plunkett threw a 12-yard touchdown pass to Branch, increasing Los Angeles' lead to 14\u20130. One of the key contributors on the touchdown play was center Dave Dalby. After snapping the ball, Dalby had no one in front of him to block, so he backpedaled into the backfield and spotted linebacker Rich Milot coming at Plunkett from the left side, managing to throw a block against him just in time to prevent a sack and enable Plunkett to throw the ball. Branch became just the fourth player to catch a touchdown pass in two different Super Bowls (after Lynn Swann, John Stallworth, and Butch Johnson).\nOn their next drive, the Redskins moved the ball 73 yards in 12 plays to the Raiders 7-yard line, with quarterback Joe Theismann completing a 17-yard pass to wide receiver Alvin Garrett on 3rd-and-17 and three passes to tight end Clint Didier for a total of 50 yards. However, linebacker Rod Martin broke up Theismann's third-down pass attempt, forcing Washington to settle for Moseley's 24-yard field goal, cutting their deficit to 14\u20133. Los Angeles took the ensuing kickoff and drove 41 yards to the Redskins 40-yard line. The drive stalled when Plunkett's third-down pass fell incomplete, but Guy's 27-yard punt pinned Washington back at their own 12-yard line with 12 seconds left in the half. From there, head coach Joe Gibbs had Theismann run a screen play called \"Rocket Screen\", but Raiders linebacker Jack Squirek intercepted the pass and returned it 5 yards for a touchdown to give Los Angeles a 21\u20133 halftime lead. The defense was prepared for the play, as Theismann had successfully completed an identical screen pass to running back Joe Washington for a 67-yard gain in their 37\u201335 victory over the Raiders on October 2. In fact, Los Angeles linebackers coach Charlie Sumner had sent Squirek onto the field as a last-second substitution specifically to cover Washington. \"I was mad,\" said Raiders linebacker Matt Millen, who had to run off the field to avoid a penalty. \"I'd called a blitz, and I was cranked up for it, but he told Jack to play the screen and sent him in. I guess Charlie knows what he's doing, huh?\"\nThird quarter.\nWashington regrouped in the second half and reached the end zone on their opening drive by marching 70 yards in nine plays. First, Garrett returned the opening kickoff 35 yards from 5 yards deep in the end zone to the Redskins 30-yard line. Then, Theismann completed a 23-yard pass to receiver Charlie Brown to reach the Raiders 47-yard line. Eight plays later, fullback John Riggins finished the drive with a 1-yard touchdown run. (Riggins became the second player to run for touchdowns in back-to-back Super Bowls; he had one in Super Bowl XVII en route to winning that game's Super Bowl MVP award.) Moseley's extra point attempt was blocked by Raiders tight end Don Hasselbeck, but the Redskins had cut the score to 21\u20139 and were just two touchdowns away from taking the lead.\nHowever, the Raiders completely took over the rest of the game, preventing any chance of a Redskins comeback. On the ensuing drive, Washington cornerback Darrell Green was called for a 38-yard pass interference penalty while trying to cover Los Angeles wide receiver Malcolm Barnwell, setting up Allen's 5-yard touchdown run seven plays later to make the score 28\u20139 in favor of the Raiders. After the next three possessions resulted in punts, the Redskins had an opportunity to score after cornerback Anthony Washington forced and recovered a fumble from Branch at the Raiders 35. They moved the ball 9 yards in their next three plays, and then faced 4th-and-1. Washington attempted to convert the fourth down with a run by Riggins, just like their successful fourth-down conversion against the Miami Dolphins in the previous Super Bowl, but this time, Riggins was tackled by Martin for no gain, giving the ball back to Los Angeles.\nImmediately after the turnover on downs, on the last play of the third quarter, Plunkett handed the ball off to Allen, who started to run left as the play was designed. But after taking an unusually wide turn in that direction (he later confessed, \"I messed up.\"), Allen saw a lot of defenders in front of him and cut back to the middle before taking off for a then-Super Bowl record 74-yard touchdown run, increasing Los Angeles' lead to 35\u20139 (Allen's run broke the previous record of 58 yards set by Tom Matte in Super Bowl III). This play would later be immortalized by one of the last great lines from narrator John Facenda, who said, \"As Washington's hopes faded into the dying daylight, on came Marcus Allen, running with the night.\"\nFourth quarter.\nAfter both teams exchanged punts to start the fourth quarter, Theismann completed a 60-yard pass to Brown to reach the Los Angeles 12-yard line. Three plays later, a roughing the passer penalty on defensive end Dave Stalls gave Washington a new set of downs at the 8. On the next play, however, safety Mike Davis strip-sacked Theismann, and Martin recovered the ball for Los Angeles at the 31. The Raiders were forced to punt after a three-and-out, but on the third play of the Redskins' ensuing drive, cornerback Mike Haynes intercepted a pass intended for wide receiver Art Monk at the Raiders 42-yard line. A 39-yard run by Allen set up a 21-yard field goal by kicker Chris Bahr to cap off the scoring, 38\u20139. Los Angeles then forced Washington to punt, and ran out the clock for the win.\nPlunkett finished the game with 16 out of 25 pass completions for 172 yards and a touchdown. Theismann threw for more yards than Plunkett (243) but was just 16 out of 35 and was intercepted twice. He was also sacked six times. Branch was the top receiver of the game with six receptions for 94 yards and a touchdown. Guy punted seven times for 299 yards (42.7 average), with 244 net yards (34.8 average) and planted five of his seven punts inside the 20. Martin recorded a sack, a pass deflection, and a fumble recovery. Riggins, who had rushed for over 100 yards in his last six postseason games, was held to 64 yards and a touchdown on 26 carries, with his longest gain being just 8 yards. Brown was their top receiver with three receptions for 93 yards. Tight end Clint Didier caught five passes for 65 yards. Garrett recorded 100 yards on kickoff returns, and one reception for 17 yards. Part of both of Allen's touchdown runs were cutbacks, which, according to \"New York Daily News\" writer Larry Fox, burned an overpursuing Redskins defense.\nAfter the game, Redskins general manager Bobby Beathard said that Lester Hayes and Mike Haynes were the difference in the game. Haynes had played out his contract with the Patriots after the 1982 season, and sat out most of the first part of the 1983 season during contract negotiations. He eventually signed with the Raiders, who were forced to give the Patriots draft picks in compensation. He played the final five games of the regular season; his addition gave the Raiders two shutdown corners. According to Beathard, Hayes and Haynes \"changed our whole game plan.\" Hayes had only one tackle, but had the left side of the field covered so effectively that Theismann hardly bothered to throw there. Haynes had two tackles, one interception, and two pass breakups. Although Brown averaged 31 yards on his 3 receptions, Redskin wide receivers combined for only 5 catches, with none in the first half. Another factor was Guy; he punted seven times for an average of 42.7 yards and 34.8 net yards. Five of those punts pinned the Redskins inside their own 20.\nThis marked the final game in the Hall of Fame career of Raiders linebacker Ted Hendricks, who retired upon earning his fourth Super Bowl ring (three with the Raiders and one with the Baltimore Colts).\nThe Raiders were the first team to score an offensive, defensive, and special teams touchdown in the same Super Bowl. The Redskins became the second defending champion to lose a Super Bowl (their divisional rivals, the Dallas Cowboys, were the first, losing Super Bowl XIII after winning Super Bowl XII). The Redskins would be joined by the Green Bay Packers in 1998 (won Super Bowl XXXI, lost Super Bowl XXXII), the Seattle Seahawks in 2015 (won Super Bowl XLVIII, lost Super Bowl XLIX), the New England Patriots in 2018 (won Super Bowl LI, lost Super Bowl LII), and the Kansas City Chiefs in 2021 (won Super Bowl LIV, lost Super Bowl LV) and in 2025 (won Super Bowl LVIII, lost Super Bowl LIX).\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XVIII: Los Angeles Raiders 38, Washington Redskins 9\n\"at Tampa Stadium, Tampa, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XVIII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nFor the second consecutive Super Bowl, officials wore a black armband in memory of a recently deceased active official. In Super Bowl XVIII, it was number 5 to honor back judge Raymond Douglas, who died on Christmas Day at his home in Baltimore. Douglas officiated in Super Bowl IX and had been an official since 1968.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29145", "revid": "41380859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29145", "title": "Super Bowl XIX", "text": "1985 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XIX was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Miami Dolphins and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion San Francisco 49ers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1984 season. The 49ers defeated the Dolphins by the score of 38\u201316, to win their second Super Bowl. The game was played on January 20, 1985, at Stanford Stadium, on the campus of Stanford University in Stanford, California, the first Super Bowl played in the San Francisco Bay Area. This also became the second Super Bowl after Super Bowl XIV where the game was coincidentally played in the home market of one of the participants.\nThe game was hyped as the battle between two great quarterbacks: Miami's Dan Marino and San Francisco's Joe Montana. The Dolphins entered their fifth Super Bowl in team history after posting a 14\u20132 regular season record. The 49ers were making their second Super Bowl appearance after becoming the first team to win 15 regular season games since the league expanded to a 16-game schedule in 1978.\nWith Marino and Montana, the game became the first Super Bowl in which the starting quarterbacks of each team both threw for over 300 yards. In addition, the two teams combined for 851 total offensive yards, which at that time was a Super Bowl record. But after trailing 10\u20137 in the first quarter, the 49ers would end up taking the game in dominating fashion, scoring three touchdowns in the second quarter, and 10 unanswered points in the second half. Montana, who was named the Super Bowl MVP, completed 24 of 35 passes for a Super Bowl-record 331 yards (breaking the mark of 318 yards set by Terry Bradshaw) and three touchdowns. He also broke the Super Bowl record for most rushing yards gained by a quarterback with his five rushes for 59 yards and one rushing touchdown. San Francisco set a Super Bowl record with 537 total yards, breaking the previous record of 429 yards set by the Oakland Raiders in Super Bowl XI.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to be televised in the United States by ABC, joining the annual broadcasting rotation of the game with CBS and NBC. It was also the first time that the sitting U.S. president participated in the coin toss ceremony; Ronald Reagan appeared live via satellite from the White House and tossed the coin. This Super Bowl was unique in that it fell on the same day that he was inaugurated for a second term; because Inauguration Day (January 20) fell on a Sunday, Reagan was sworn in privately and the public ceremony took place the following day.\nThis Super Bowl also began the NFC's run of dominance. From 1984 to 1996, the National Football Conference won 13 consecutive Super Bowls and the average score per game in that span was nearly identical to the result of this game, NFC 38, AFC 17. The NFC scored 490 points and committed only 10 turnovers altogether during their run, while the AFC only scored 219 points and committed 44 turnovers.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XIX to Stanford Stadium on the campus of Stanford University in Stanford, California on December 14, 1982, at the owners' mid-season meeting held in Dallas. Near Palo Alto, it was the first Super Bowl to be held in the San Francisco Bay Area. It became the fourth primarily collegiate stadium to host a Super Bowl, following Tulane Stadium, then the home of the Saints (IV, VI, and IX), Rice Stadium (VIII) and the Rose Bowl (XI, XIV, and XVII; it later hosted XXI and XXVII). Owners had tentatively planned to award XIX during the owners' meetings in Detroit on June 3, 1981. Tampa (Tampa Stadium), Miami (Orange Bowl), New Orleans (Superdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Detroit (Silverdome), and Dallas (Cotton Bowl) each made presentations that day, with Detroit and Dallas expressedly bidding on only XIX. Tampa was selected for XVIII, but with no outstanding options, owners decided to postpone the awarding of XIX until their 1982 meeting. \nThe league eventually reopened the bidding process from scratch. Hosts for both XIX and XX would be selected, and potentially XXI as well. A total of ten cities put in bids: Palo Alto (Stanford Stadium), New Orleans (Superdome), Miami (Orange Bowl), Houston (Rice Stadium), Seattle (Kingdome), Detroit (Silverdome), Pasadena (Rose Bowl), Tampa (Tampa Stadium), Anaheim (Anaheim Stadium), and Jacksonville (Gator Bowl). Stanford Stadium was picked, despite having no lights at the time, no dressing rooms, and a substandard press box. Stadium officials promised much needed renovations, and the league agreed to provide temporary lighting. Representatives from New Orleans stressed that if they were not selected for XX, due to scheduling conflicts, they would not be able to host again until 1990. As such, the Superdome was subsequently selected for XX. Rice Stadium was speculated for XXI, but ultimately no decision was made for that game. Yet again, Miami was rejected, due to the aging condition of the Orange Bowl. A proposed sales tax levy to pay for a new stadium had failed at the ballot box on November 2, further sinking any chances for South Florida.\nMiami Dolphins.\nThe Dolphins advanced to the Super Bowl for the fifth time in franchise history, but the year began in tragedy as running back David Overstreet was killed in an automobile accident on June 24 (the team would wear decals on the back of their helmets with the number 20, Overstreet's jersey number). The Dolphins joined the Dallas Cowboys as the only teams to appear in five Super Bowls. Much of the media focus was on Miami's young quarterback, Dan Marino. In just his second year in the league, he broke nearly every NFL single-season passing record. Marino set a record for the most completions in a season (362) and became the first quarterback to throw for over 5,000 yards, reaching a total of 5,084. He set the record for the most games throwing for at least 300 passing yards (9) and the most games with 400 yards (4). Marino's 48 touchdown passes broke the previous record of 36, which was held by both George Blanda for the Houston Oilers in 1961 and Y. A. Tittle for the New York Giants in 1963. And he had the most games (6) and the most consecutive games (4) with at least 4 touchdown passes.\nThus going into Super Bowl XIX, many sports writers predicted that it would be the first of many Super Bowls that Marino would play in during his career. Marino had a unique ability to read the defenses quickly before setting up to throw, and his skill of quickly releasing the ball made it very difficult for defenders to sack him. In addition, he had protection given to him by an offensive line led by their All-Pro, and future Hall of Fame center Dwight Stephenson and Pro Bowl guard Ed Newman. Coming into Super Bowl XIX, Marino had only been sacked 13 times in the regular season and not once in the playoffs.\nThe Dolphins had a number of offensive threats for Marino to use. Wide receivers Mark Clayton (73 receptions, 1,389 yards, 18 touchdowns) and Mark Duper (71 receptions, 1,306 yards, 8 touchdowns) became the first teammates to each gain over 1,300 receiving yards in one season, while Clayton's 18 touchdown catches broke the NFL single-season record of 17 set by Don Hutson in 1942. Receiver Nat Moore caught 43 passes for 574 yards and 6 touchdowns, while tight end Dan Johnson contributed 34 receptions for 426 yards. While Miami's main offensive attack was passing, they still had a trio of great running backs: Tony Nathan, Woody Bennett, and Joe Carter. Both Nathan and Bennett finished the season with over 1,000 combined rushing and receiving yards, while Carter contributed 495 rushing yards. Despite Miami's superb offense, punter Reggie Roby still made the Pro Bowl, averaging 44.7 yards per punt with a net gain average of 38.7.\nHowever, the Dolphins' defense was a little suspect. They tied the Houston Oilers and the Minnesota Vikings for the most rushing yards allowed during the regular season (4.7 yards per attempt), and ranked just 19th in fewest yards allowed (5,759). The main bright spots on the defense were safeties, brothers Lyle and Glenn Blackwood, along with Pro Bowl inside linebacker A. J. Duhe, Pro Bowl nose tackle Bob Baumhower, and defensive end Doug Betters. Glenn Blackwood had picked off 6 passes during the season and returned them for 169 yards, while Betters recorded 14 sacks and a fumble recovery. Linebacker Charles Bowser was also a big contributor, recording 9 sacks and one fumble recovery.\nDespite their defensive flaws, the Dolphins finished 7th in the NFL in points allowed (298 points). Their powerful offense led the NFL in scoring (513 points) and total yards gained (7,064), and helped the team reach an AFC best 14\u20132 regular season record.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe 49ers advanced to their second Super Bowl in team history after becoming the first team to win 15 regular season games since the league expanded to a 16-game schedule in 1978. Much of the hype surrounding the team was their offense, which boasted five Pro Bowlers. Quarterback Joe Montana recorded 279 completions out of 432 attempts for 3,630 yards, 28 touchdowns, and only 10 interceptions. Fullback Roger Craig was one of the 49ers' major weapons, both rushing and receiving. Craig was the team's second-leading rusher with 649 rushing yards and 7 touchdowns, and also caught 71 passes for 675 yards. Pro Bowl halfback Wendell Tyler, who had rushed for a team record 1,262 yards during the regular season, recorded 7 rushing touchdowns, and also caught 28 passes for 230 yards and 2 touchdown receptions. Tight end (and former fullback) Earl Cooper also made an impact with 41 receptions for 459 yards and 4 touchdowns. Fellow tight end Russ Francis was another reliable target, catching 23 passes for 285 yards and two touchdowns. Wide receivers Freddie Solomon and Dwight Clark also were deep threats, gaining a combined total of 1,617 yards and 16 touchdowns. Up front, three of the 49ers' five starting offensive linemen, Randy Cross, Fred Quillan, and Keith Fahnhorst, had been selected to play in the Pro Bowl. Overall, San Francisco's offense finished the season ranked second in the NFL in scoring (475 points) and fourth in total yards (6,544).\nAlthough they did not get as much media attention as the offense, the 49ers' defense led the league in fewest points allowed during the regular season (227). All four of the 49ers' starting defensive backs, Ronnie Lott, Eric Wright, Carlton Williamson, and Dwight Hicks, were selected to play in the Pro Bowl. Pro Bowl linebacker Keena Turner was also a major defensive weapon, recording 2 sacks and 4 interceptions for 51 yards. Defensive end Dwaine Board anchored the line, recording 10 sacks and a fumble recovery. Future hall of fame Defensive end Fred Dean missed the first 11 games of the season holding out over a contract dispute, but immediately made his presence felt upon returning, recording 4 sacks in his five games.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Dolphins gained 405 yards of total offense in their 31\u201310 playoff win over the Seattle Seahawks, and over 500 yards as they defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers, 45\u201328, in the AFC Championship Game. In the victory over the Steelers (the only team to beat San Francisco during the season), Marino completed 21 of 32 passes for 421 yards and 4 touchdowns, with 1 interception.\nMeanwhile, the 49ers' underrated defense allowed the team to blitz through the playoffs. Although Montana threw a combined total of 5 interceptions in their 2 games, they only gave up a combined total of 10 points and no offensive touchdowns in their victories over the New York Giants, 21\u201310, and the Chicago Bears, 23\u20130.\nAt 33\u20133, the combined records for the two teams coming into the game were and still are the best in Super Bowl history. The 49ers were 17\u20131 and the Dolphins 16\u20132 including their playoff games.\nPregame news and notes.\nThis was the second time a team could have been considered a home team for a Super Bowl, with Stanford just away from San Francisco proper - Stanford is actually closer to the city than Santa Clara, where the 49ers play home games today. The 49ers' practice facility was located in Redwood City at the time, just from Stanford Stadium. Promotion for the Super Bowl also contributed to that feeling with many photographs of the Vince Lombardi Trophy near San Francisco landmarks such as the Golden Gate Bridge. Thus, the 49ers were considered the only team to have won the Super Bowl at home until the Tampa Bay Buccaneers achieved the same feat in Super Bowl LV in 2021. The Los Angeles Rams also played near home at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California in Super Bowl XIV, but lost to the Pittsburgh Steelers. In February 2022 the Rams beat the Cincinnati Bengals in Super Bowl LVI at SoFi Stadium in Inglewood, their home since 2020.\nThe 49ers, as the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, wore their home red uniforms and gold pants. The Dolphins wore their all-white road uniforms.\nThis would be the final Super Bowl where a regular position player wore the classic duck bill 2 bar face mask (Dolphins wide receiver Mark Duper).\nBroadcasting.\nUnited States.\nAs a result of the 1982 television contract signed by the NFL, this game was the first Super Bowl to be televised in the United States by ABC, with a new alternation process started for the 1983 game. Previously, the Super Bowl telecast alternated between CBS and NBC, while the networks simulcast the first AFL-NFL World Championship Game. The 1984 season was ABC's 15th year of airing \"Monday Night Football\", but ABC was never awarded the rights to any Super Bowl before. \nFrank Gifford was the play-by-play announcer, with analyst Don Meredith and then-Washington Redskins quarterback Joe Theismann served as color commentators. Al Michaels and Jim Lampley co-hosted the pregame (2 hours), halftime, and postgame coverage. Lampley also presided over the Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremony coverage for ABC. Michaels and Lampley were joined by O. J. Simpson, the normal \"Monday Night Football\" co-color commentator and Dallas Cowboys head coach Tom Landry, the latter serving as a special guest analyst. When interviewed as to why Theismann joined Gifford and Meredith in the booth instead of Simpson, \"Monday Night Football\" director Chet Forte was quoted in the January 14, 1985 edition of \"Broadcasting Magazine\" as saying that Theismann could contribute more due to having played both teams in the regular-season as well as having played in the two previous Super Bowls. Also helping out with ABC's coverage were Jack Whitaker, Dick Schaap, Donna de Varona, Ray Gandolf, and ABC News correspondents Stone Phillips, Jeff Greenfield, Judd Rose, and Bill Redeker.\nThis would be the only ABC Super Bowl for Gifford as play-by-play announcer, the final game for Don Meredith and the second (and last) time a commentator for the Super Bowl (Theismann) was an active player (Jack Kemp (then of the American Football League Buffalo Bills) in Super Bowl II was the only other active player to provide commentary). Michaels would call ABC's next six Super Bowls, until ABC lost their NFL rights in 2006.\nThis Super Bowl also marked the first to have closed captioning in real time throughout the game courtesy of the National Captioning Institute (previous Super Bowls only had \"scoreboard information\" captioned); with the captioning sponsored by Ford Motor Company and Kentucky Fried Chicken.\nOn radio, Jack Buck was the play-by-play announcer, while Hank Stram served as color commentator for CBS Radio Sports' national coverage. Brent Musburger hosted the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage for CBS Radio; Musburger was joined by analysts Irv Cross and Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder. Locally, Super Bowl XIX was broadcast by WIOD in Miami with Rick Weaver and Hank Goldberg; and by KCBS in San Francisco with Don Klein and Don Heinrich.\nABC's lead-out program was the series premiere of \"MacGruder and Loud\".\nInternational.\nShown on Channel 4, the XIX Super Bowl was the third to be broadcast live and in its entirety in the United Kingdom.\nSuper Bowl XIX was simulcast in Canada on CTV.\nIn Australia, Super Bowl XIX was broadcast on the Nine Network, live from 10.00am (Australian Eastern Summer Time) on Monday, January 21, 1985, with a repeat screening late at night. This was the first Super Bowl to be telecast in Australia.\nIn popular culture.\nClips from this game can be seen in the movie \"\" as the character Ray Finkle is in reality Dolphins kicker Uwe von Schamann. Von Schamann made three field goals and an extra point in this game, but Finkle missed the game-winning field goal in a fictional Super Bowl XIX. The latter play actually occurred six years later in Super Bowl XXV.\nThe \"NFL's Greatest Games\" episode \"Masters of the Game\" focuses on Super Bowl XIX. The film was narrated by Brad Crandall after legendary NFL Films announcer John Facenda died in September 1984. This was the last Super Bowl highlight film produced by NFL Films using film stock; beginning with the 1985 season, NFL Films videos were produced on videotape.\nThe Oliver Stone film, \"Any Given Sunday\", features an (off-screen) \"Pantheon Cup\" championship game where San Francisco beats Miami, 32\u201313. Stone, a longtime 49ers fan, based his film's finale on Super Bowl XIX.\nA major plot point in the episode \"Post Traumatic Slide Syndrome\" of the television show \"Sliders\" is based on this game. In the alternate reality, the 49ers play the Jets in the Super Bowl, which leads the main character Quinn Mallory to the conclusion that something is awry.\nEntertainment.\nPre-game.\nThe pre-game festivities featured a tribute to the NFL and an appearance by various team mascots. Later, a mega-choir formed by members of the San Francisco Children's Chorus, San Francisco Boys Chorus, San Francisco Girls Chorus and Piedmont Children's Choir performed the national anthem under well known choir director Louis Magor.\nIn honor of Inauguration Day, Ronald Reagan, himself a longtime California resident and former Governor of the state from 1967 to 1975, became the first president to participate in a Super Bowl coin toss ceremony. However, he did it from the White House via satellite. Pro Football Hall of Fame running back Hugh McElhenny, a former 49er, was on the field during the ceremony. This was the first Super Bowl where the coin was tossed after the visiting team had chosen heads or tails, not during. This would not become a regular practice until Super Bowl XXXIII in 1999. The U.S. Air Force provided four T-37 aircraft from nearby Mather Air Force Base (Sacramento, CA) and its 455th Flying Training Squadron for the fly-over. At $255 per hour of flying time for each aircraft, this T-37 flyover ranks as the most economical in the history of Super Bowls. In addition, all the pilots were young officers symbolizing California as the land of opportunity and youth.\nHalftime.\nThe halftime show was titled \"World of Children's Dreams\" and featured Tops In Blue, an elite performing tour ensemble consisting of members from the U.S. Air Force. Additional performers were recruited from USAF active, retired, and their dependents from mostly in and around Mather Air Force Base, Sacramento, CA. The show was produced and directed by Mr. Tom Edward, Director of Air Force Entertainment, Randolph Air Force Base, Texas. The stages were constructed by an all volunteer group of members from Mather Air Force that were designed by 1st. Lt. Larry Ruebling, who was a missile combat crew member stationed at Malmstom Air Force Base, Montana. The main stages consisted of a pirate ship, a gigantic piano, a circus stage, a space stage with a replica of the space shuttle and a replica of the lunar lander. When the lunar lander moved onto the center of the field it opened up and Mr. William P. Suitor walked to a moon stage where he blasted off and soared around the stadium on his jet pack. Most people don't remember the halftime show, but they do remember the jet pack. There were additional smaller stages built on golf carts in the form of stars that moved around the field.\nGame summary.\nInstead of the predicted shootout between quarterbacks Dan Marino and Joe Montana, the game was mostly one-sided. The 49ers' defense only allowed 25 rushing yards and 16 Dolphins points. San Francisco also intercepted Marino twice and sacked him 4 times. The Dolphins set a Super Bowl record for fewest rush attempts in a game (9).\nFirst quarter.\nIn the opening minutes of the game, it seemed that the game would live up to the hype. On the opening kickoff, 49ers running back/kick returner Derrick Harmon caught the ball too close to the sidelines and stepped out of bounds at the San Francisco 6-yard line. The 49ers managed to advance to their own 41, but were forced to punt, and Dolphins cornerback Fulton Walker returned the punt 8 yards to the Miami 36-yard line. Then on their first play of the drive, Marino completed a 25-yard pass to running back Tony Nathan. Four plays later, Miami reached the San Francisco 23-yard line. But on third down, 49ers cornerback Eric Wright tackled wide receiver Mark Clayton 2 yards shy of the first down. The Dolphins had to settle for a 37-yard field goal from kicker Uwe von Schamann to give them an early 3\u20130 lead.\nMiami's lead did not last long, as San Francisco stormed down the field on their next possession. The 49ers drove 78 yards in 8 plays, which featured a 16-yard run by Montana, followed by his 33-yard touchdown pass to running back Carl Monroe to give them their first lead of the game, 7\u20133. But Miami retook the lead on their ensuing drive. After a 5-yard rush by Nathan, the Dolphins went into a no-huddle offense, preventing the 49ers from making substitutions and keeping their run defense on the field. Marino completed five consecutive passes, hitting Clayton for 18 yards, wide receiver Mark Duper for 11, Clayton again for 13, and tight end Dan Johnson for 21. On the next play, Marino finished the drive by hitting Johnson for a 2-yard touchdown pass, giving the Dolphins a 10\u20137 lead with 45 seconds left in the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nIn the second quarter, the 49ers began to take control of the game. After being forced to punt, Bill Walsh switched to a 4\u20131\u20136 (or dime defense) to slow down the Dolphins' passing attack, with Keena Turner as the sole linebacker. Miami tried to run against the 4\u20131\u20136 alignment, to no avail. Safety Dwight Hicks broke up two consecutive Marino passes, and the Dolphins were forced to punt from their own 10-yard line. Then after taking the ball at the Miami 47-yard line, Montana scrambled for a 19-yard run, and then completed a 16-yard pass to wide receiver Dwight Clark to reach the 12-yard line. From there, running back Wendell Tyler rushed for 4 yards, and then Montana threw an 8-yard touchdown pass to running back Roger Craig, putting the 49ers back in front with a 14\u201310 lead.\nSan Francisco never trailed again for the rest of the game. Miami then had to punt again on their ensuing possession, and 49ers cornerback Dana McLemore returned the ball 28 yards to the 49ers 45-yard line. After advancing 15 yards with two running plays by Tyler and Craig, Montana completed a pair of passes to tight end Russ Francis to move the ball 29 yards to the Miami 11-yard line. Craig ran for 5 yards on the next play, and then Montana finished the drive himself with a 6-yard touchdown run, increasing San Francisco's lead to 21\u201310. After the ensuing kickoff, the Dolphins again were forced to punt after a three-and-out, and McLemore returned Reggie Roby's 39-yard punt 10 yards to the 49ers 48-yard line. Montana was sacked for a 5-yard loss by defensive end Doug Betters on the first play of the ensuing drive, but he struck back with a 20-yard completion to Craig and a 7-yard run over the next two plays. On the next play, wide receiver Freddie Solomon appeared to catch a pass from Montana at the 12 before losing a fumble to safety Lyle Blackwood. However, field judge Bob Lewis blew the play dead, ruling that Solomon's fumble was an incomplete pass. Bill Quinby, the side judge, who was nearest to the play, did not make any call. Five plays later, Craig finished the 9-play, 52-yard drive with his second touchdown of the game on a 2-yard run, increasing the 49ers' lead to 28\u201310.\nWith nearly two minutes left in the half, the Dolphins finally managed to get a good drive going on their next possession. Marino completed seven out of nine passes, the last one being a 30-yard pass to tight end Joe Rose, to reach the 49ers 12-yard line. However, San Francisco's defense tightened up on the next three plays, forcing two incompletions and a completed pass for no gain, and Miami was forced to settle for von Schamann's 31-yard field goal to cut their deficit to 28\u201313 with 12 seconds left in the half. Then the Dolphins caught a break as the 49ers botched the ensuing kickoff. San Francisco guard Guy McIntyre received von Schamann's short kick and was about to down the ball, but then changed his mind at the last second and decided to return it after being urged by teammates Monroe and Harmon. This turned out to be a mistake; McIntyre fumbled while being leveled by running back Joe Carter, and wide receiver Jim Jensen recovered the ball for Miami at the San Francisco 12. After that, von Schamann kicked a 30-yard field goal on the last play of the half, cutting the Dolphins' deficit to 28\u201316. \"I can laugh about the play now, but it wasn't funny at the time,\" McIntyre said after the game. \"My first instinct when I got the ball was to fall down. Then I heard everyone yelling, 'Get up! Get up!' So I got up, and here comes someone sneaking underneath me, and he hit the ball.\"\nSecond half.\nAny thoughts of a Dolphins comeback ended early in the third quarter, as they were shut out by the 49ers for the rest of the game. On the first play of the second half, San Francisco defensive end Dwaine Board tackled Nathan for a 1-yard loss. After an incompletion, Board sacked Marino for a 9-yard loss on third down, and McLemore returned Roby's 45-yard punt 8 yards to the 49ers 47. Montana went on to complete a 14-yard pass to Tyler and gain 16 yards on a scramble as he led San Francisco 43 yards in 9 plays to score on kicker Ray Wersching's 27-yard field goal, increasing their lead to 31\u201316. On the Dolphins' ensuing drive, they were forced to punt again after Marino was sacked twice, first by defensive tackle Manu Tuiasosopo, then by Board. Starting on their own 30-yard line after a 5-yard return by McLemore, Montana completed a 40-yard pass to Tyler, followed by a 13-yard pass to Francis to reach the Miami 17. Three plays later, Craig scored his third touchdown of the game on a 16-yard reception to make the score 38\u201316. Craig's third touchdown marked the first time in Super Bowl history that the same player scored three touchdowns, and also proved to be the last score from either team, as the defenses of both teams took over for the rest of the game \u2013 especially the 49ers' defense, who intercepted Marino twice. On Miami's ensuing drive following Craig's third touchdown, Wright intercepted a pass intended for Clayton at the 49ers 1-yard line. Montana then managed to escape a safety by completing a 9-yard pass to Craig. After the Dolphins were forced to punt on their first possession of the final period, McLemore fumbled the catch, and wide receiver Vince Heflin recovered the ball for Miami at the San Francisco 21. On the next play, however, Marino was intercepted again, this time in the end zone by safety Carlton Williamson. The 49ers responded by driving to the Dolphins 2-yard line on a 33-yard reception by Clark, only to then turn the ball over on downs with less than three minutes remaining in the game. Miami then reached the San Francisco 30 to end the game.\nHighlights.\nOverall, San Francisco gained a Super Bowl-record 537 yards, breaking the Oakland Raiders' record of 429 yards in Super Bowl XI, while limiting Miami to 314, with just 25 rushing yards. San Francisco's 38 points also tied a Super Bowl record set by the Raiders in Super Bowl XVIII.\nThe 49ers' 288 offensive yards in the first half also tied the Raiders in Super Bowl XI for the most offensive yards in a half during a Super Bowl.\nMarino finished the game with 29 out of 50 pass completions for 318 yards, 1 touchdown, and 2 interceptions. Clayton was the top receiver of the game, with 6 receptions for 92 yards. Walker returned 4 kickoffs for 93 yards and gained 15 yards on 2 punt returns. Nathan was the Dolphins leading rusher with 18 yards, while also catching 10 passes for 83 yards. Craig had 58 rushing yards, 77 receiving yards, and 3 touchdowns. He was the first player to score 3 touchdowns in a Super Bowl, and his 2 touchdown catches also tied a Super Bowl record. Tyler led San Francisco in rushing with 65 yards, and also caught 4 passes for 70 yards. Clark caught 6 passes for 77 yards. Board recorded 2 sacks. McLemore recorded 51 punt return yards, the second most in Super Bowl history. \"Sports Illustrated\" called 49ers defensive tackle Gary Johnson the Super Bowl's \"unofficial defensive MVP\" after he recorded one sack, flushed Marino out of the pocket numerous times, and had four unassisted tackles.\n49ers rookie defensive tackle Michael Carter became the first athlete to win an Olympic medal and Super Bowl ring in the same year. Before this game he had won a silver medal in the shot put competition at the 1984 Summer Olympics.\nThis would be the final game for San Francisco linebacker Jack Reynolds.\nReactions.\nAfter the game, Lyle Blackwood criticized the referee's ruling of Freddie Solomon's fumble as an incomplete pass. \"You don't want the game to hinge on that play, but you never know,\" Blackwood said. \"I could have taken the ball up the sideline. That's a 14-point swing.\" However, other Dolphins were not convinced. \"We were dominated to the point where one play didn't make much of a difference,\" said Dolphins coach Don Shula. \"Our major objective was to contain Montana, and we did a terrible, terrible job of it,\" added defensive coach Chuck Studley. Even Reggie Roby, who averaged only 39.3 yards per punt and didn't place any of his 6 punts inside the 20, took some responsibility for the loss. \"I was trying to kill the ball, and I kicked it bad,\" he said. \"I didn't hit one well. I was scared \u2013 scared to make a mistake. It was the worst game of my life, counting high school, college, counting everything.\" Meanwhile, in the 49ers' locker room, Joe Montana had his own explanation for the win. \"As far as my own game, well, I'd have to admit it was pretty close to the best I've ever played. I didn't throw anything I didn't have confidence in. We got in sort of a groove. Once you get going like that you gain confidence, and it carries over to the defense, and then back to the offense. It's a snowball kind of thing.\"https://\nThe 49ers' offensive line dominated the Dolphins' undersized defensive line, a major reason why Montana was only sacked once. Offensive line coach Bobb McKittrick recalled that when he and his linemen looked at film of the game, they were surprised at how one-sided the matchup was. According to McKittrick, he and the linemen wondered, \"This is a Super Bowl defense?\"\nWalsh recalled that he could see \"a distinct difference\" between his 49ers and the Dolphins during warmups. According to Walsh, it was obvious that the Dolphins were \"a one-dimensional team\" with no real ground game to compliment Marino's passing, and were nowhere near as physical as the 49ers.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XIX: San Francisco 49ers 38, Miami Dolphins 16\n\"at Stanford Stadium, Stanford, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http:// , https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Rushing attempts\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XIX, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame \u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nTom Kelleher became the first official to work five Super Bowls, a record which has been tied by four other officials, but never surpassed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29146", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29146", "title": "Super Bowl XXI", "text": "1987 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXI was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion New York Giants to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1986 season. It was the 21st Super Bowl and was played on January 25, 1987, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California. The Giants defeated the Broncos, 39\u201320, for their first Super Bowl and first NFL title since 1956. It was the first of consecutive Super Bowl losses for the Broncos, who lost the Super Bowl a year later 42\u201310 to the Washington Redskins.\nThis was the Broncos' first Super Bowl appearance since the 1977 season. Led largely through the play of quarterback John Elway and a defense that led the AFC in fewest yards allowed, the Broncos posted an 11\u20135 regular season record and two narrow playoff victories. The Giants, led by quarterback Phil Simms, running back Joe Morris, and their \"Big Blue Wrecking Crew\" defense, advanced to their first Super Bowl after posting a 14\u20132 regular season record and only allowing a combined total of 3 points in their two postseason wins.\nThe game was tight in the first half, with the Broncos holding a 10\u20139 halftime lead, the narrowest margin in Super Bowl history. The only score in the second quarter, however, was Giants defensive end George Martin's sack of Elway in the end zone for a safety. This began the Giants\u2019 run of scoring 26 unanswered points through the third and fourth quarters. Denver would counter with ten additional points toward the end of the game to narrow their margin of victory. The Giants also posted a Super Bowl record 30 points in the second half, and limited the Broncos to only 2 net yards in the third quarter. Simms, who was named the Super Bowl MVP, finished the game with 22 of 25 passes completed for 268 yards and three touchdowns. He also had 25 rushing yards on 3 carries. His 22 out of 25 (88%) completion percentage broke both a Super Bowl and NFL postseason record.\nThe telecast of the game on CBS was seen by an estimated 87.2\u00a0million viewers. The large national audience saw an early appearance of the now-traditional Gatorade shower, where players dump a cooler full of liquid over a coach's head following a meaningful win. The practice was first started by Giants players in 1985; it began to gain national attention during the 1986 season, when Parcells was doused after every win. Another tradition was set with the quarterback from the winning team stating after the game that he was \"Going to Disneyworld/Disneyland!\"; although this version was made into an advertisement (featuring \"When You Wish Upon A Star\" as its soundtrack) for later playback. Simms would be the first to say it live following the Giants win in Super Bowl XXV. Both he and Elway were each paid $75,000.\nThis loss also kicked off the Broncos' run of Super Bowl futility with John Elway under center that decade. They would make it back to the Super Bowl the very next year but lost 42\u201310 to the Washington Redskins, after leading 10\u20130 at the end of the first quarter. Two years later, they made it back but fell to the defending world champion 49ers 55\u201310.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXI to Pasadena, California, on May 24, 1984, during their May 23\u201325, 1984 meetings in Washington, D.C. Fourteen cities were part of the bidding process, which was scheduled to award four Super Bowls (XXI, XXII, XXIII, and XXIV). The bidding cities included: Anaheim, Detroit, Houston, Jacksonville, Miami, Minneapolis, New Orleans, Pasadena, Philadelphia, San Francisco, San Diego, Seattle, Tampa, and Tempe. The Philadelphia host committee assembled what was considered a strong, but long-shot bid, hoping to win the first outdoor Super Bowl in a cold weather city. Minneapolis went above and beyond in selling their unsuccessful bid, even staging a parade in the lobby of the hotel hosting the NFL owners' meeting that included a woman riding a white horse. To counter, Philadelphia Eagles-owner Leonard Tose launched a parade in the style of the Mummers Parade, featuring musicians and clowns. Philadelphia ultimately came close to landing a Super Bowl at Veterans Stadium, nearly approaching the needed number of votes to secure the game. The city's momentum was disrupted after the NFL owners passed a resolution calling for a future Super Bowl to be held in a Northern city with a domed stadium, affirming the league's interest in another cold weather city hosting the game, while undermining Philadelphia's ongoing effort to have the dome-less Veterans Stadium host a Super bowl.\nThe balloting for XXI took 13 ballots and over two hours to complete, with Pasadena finally receiving the winning bid. XXII was also voted on, but the voting for XXIII and XXIV was postponed. This was the fourth time that Pasadena hosted the game, and the sixth time it was held in the Greater Los Angeles Area.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Broncos won the AFC West with an 11\u20135 regular season record, largely through the play of quarterback John Elway. In just his fourth season in the league, Elway made an impact to the team with his ad-libbing skills. During the regular season, he had thrown for 3,480 yards and 19 touchdowns, while also rushing for 257 yards, the third-leading rusher on the team.\nElway did not really have a particular receiver who caught most of his passes during the regular season, but wide receivers Mark Jackson, Vance Johnson, Steve Watson, and tight end Orson Mobley all combined for 136 receptions and 2,132 yards. Pro Bowl running back Sammy Winder was the Broncos' top rusher with 789 yards and 9 touchdowns, while also catching 26 passes for another 171 yards and 5 touchdowns. Halfback Gerald Willhite rushed for 365 yards and 5 touchdowns, while also leading the team in receptions with 64 (for 529 yards and three touchdowns), and ranking third in the NFL in both punt return yards (468) and yards per return average (11.1). The Broncos also had a powerful offensive line, led by Pro Bowl guard Keith Bishop.\nThe Broncos' defense led the AFC in fewest rushing yards allowed (1,651). The defensive line was anchored by Pro Bowl defensive end Rulon Jones, who recorded 13.5 sacks and a fumble recovery. Denver's linebacking corps, led by three-time Pro Bowler Tom Jackson and Karl Mecklenburg, who recorded 9.5 sacks, was viewed as comparable to the Giants' Pro Bowl linebackers. Their secondary was led by Pro Bowl cornerbacks Dennis Smith and Louis Wright, along with Mike Harden, who intercepted 6 passes and returned them for 179 yards and 2 touchdowns. Wright, Steve Foley, and Jackson, the last remnants of Denver's Orange Crush defense of the 1970s, all retired after this Super Bowl.\nNew York Giants.\nThe Giants advanced to their first Super Bowl in team history, and were playing for their first league championship since they lost to the Chicago Bears in the 1963 NFL Championship Game. The Giants were led by quarterback Phil Simms, who threw for 3,487 yards and 21 touchdowns (but also 22 interceptions). Simms' main target was tight end Mark Bavaro, who caught 66 passes for 1,001 yards and 4 touchdowns. Although the Giants did not have one great wide receiver, they did have several good ones. Receivers Stacy Robinson, Bobby Johnson, and Phil McConkey combined for 76 receptions and 1,307 yards.\nHowever, running the ball was the Giants' primary offensive attack. Running back Joe Morris finished the regular season with a then-franchise record 1,516 rushing yards and 14 touchdowns, while also catching 21 passes for 223 yards and another touchdown. One reason for his success was fullback Maurice Carthon, who provided Morris with excellent blocking and was the team's second leading rusher with 260 yards. Another reason was the play of their offensive line, led by Pro Bowl left tackle Brad Benson and right tackle Karl Nelson. On special teams, punter Sean Landeta made the Pro Bowl with an average of 44.8 gross yards per punt (2nd in the NFL), a net average of 37.1, and 24 punts inside the 20.\nBut the Giants main strength was their defense, nicknamed The \"Big Blue Wrecking Crew\". After giving up 31 points in a season-opening loss to the Dallas Cowboys, the Giants had not given up more than 20 points in a game until the last game of the season, in a 55\u201324 win over the Green Bay Packers. The team ranked second in the NFL in fewest points (236) and yards (4,757) allowed. The Giants' defensive leader was Hall of Fame outside linebacker Lawrence Taylor, who led the league with 20.5 sacks during the regular season, won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award for the third time in his career, and became just the second defensive player to win the NFL Most Valuable Player Award (Alan Page was the first in 1971). At 6'3\" and 245 pounds, Taylor was big enough to break through the offensive lines of many teams, but he still had enough speed to chase down running backs. The Giants' other starting linebackers, Gary Reasons, Carl Banks, and future Hall of Famer Harry Carson, did not get as much media attention as Taylor, but Carson had been selected to play in the Pro Bowl, while Reasons had two interceptions and Banks recorded 6.5 sacks and 2 fumble recoveries. Nose tackle Jim Burt and right end Leonard Marshall, who were also both selected to the Pro Bowl, anchored the defensive line. Marshall recorded 12 sacks, 3 fumble recoveries, and 1 interception during the season. The Giants secondary was led by safeties Terry Kinard (4 interceptions, 2 fumble recoveries) and Kenny Hill (3 interceptions, 3 fumble recoveries), along with cornerback Perry Williams (4 interceptions).\nWith the play of their defense, the running attack led by Morris, and Simms' passing game, the Giants earned a 14\u20132 regular season record.\nThis is the only one of the New York Giants\u2019 five Super Bowl appearances where they were favored.\nPlayoffs.\nElway's ability to improvise on the fly, in part, helped Denver to make it through the playoffs, narrowly defeating the New England Patriots 22\u201317, and the Cleveland Browns 23\u201320, in the AFC Championship Game. The AFC Championship Game against the Browns was particularly significant because Elway displayed why many NFL experts thought Super Bowl XXI would be the first of many Super Bowls for him. In what became known as \"The Drive\", the Broncos started from their own 2-yard line, trailing 20\u201313, with 5:32 left to play. But in 15 plays, Elway led Denver 98 yards for a game-tying touchdown pass with 39 seconds left. The Broncos then won in overtime after Elway led them 60 yards in 9 plays to set up kicker Rich Karlis' game-winning field goal.\nMeanwhile, the Giants went on to only allow a combined total of 3 points in their playoff victories over the San Francisco 49ers, 49\u20133, and the Washington Redskins, 17\u20130, respectively. The dominating performances by the Giants' defense gave the team extra confidence going into their Super Bowl matchup versus the Broncos.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nMuch of the pregame hype centered around the confrontation between Elway and Taylor, and whether or not Taylor would be able to hurry Elway's throws or sack him. The Giants had narrowly defeated Denver during the regular season, forcing four turnovers in a 19\u201316 win despite being outgained in total yards 405 to 262. This was the last Super Bowl until Super Bowl XXXIV in which both teams entered the game having never won a Super Bowl before.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Giants wore their home blue uniforms and white pants. The Broncos donned their all-white road uniforms.\nThe New York players in this game wore stickers with the number 38 on their helmets as a tribute to former Giants fullback John Tuggle, who had died of cancer shortly before the start of the season at age 25. They also had patches on their uniforms as a memorial to former Giants defensive back Carl Lockhart, who had died of lymphoma at the age of 43 one month before Tuggle.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS. It featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden. Brent Musburger of \"The NFL Today\" anchored \"The Super Bowl Today\" pregame, halftime and postgame coverage. Helping Musburger were reporters Irv Cross and Will McDonough and analysts Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder (his last Super Bowl; as Snyder was fired before NFC Championship Game following a controversy over remarks suggesting African-Americans were better athletes because they were bred that way during slavery), Terry Bradshaw, Joe Theismann, Mariette Hartley from the recently-launched \"The Morning Program\" morning show (looking at the relationship between football and Hollywood), CBS News reporter Charles Osgood, Ben Wright (Wright, normally part of CBS golf coverage, was reporting from Milan, Italy and was reporting on international interest in the Super Bowl), Anne Butler, Pat O'Brien (reporting from a mine in Summit County, Colorado) and Dan Dierdorf (in his final CBS assignment before moving on to ABC's \"Monday Night Football\" for the following season; Dierdorf would return to CBS for the 1999 season); with additional features including home video footage recorded by backup Giants running back Tony Galbreath and Broncos guard Keith Bishop; an interview of both Bill Parcells and Indiana Hoosiers men's basketball) head coach Bob Knight (Parcells having been an assistant coach to Knight on the Army Black Knights men's basketball team during the 1966-67 season) and an opportunity to call one of three 900 numbers to determine whether one agree with Snyder\u2019s prediction of a 24-20 Giant victory, felt the Giants would win by a larger margin or that the Broncos would win.\nThis was the first NFL game to be broadcast in Dolby Surround sound and in stereo.\nNationally on radio, the game was carried over the NBC Radio Network. Don Criqui served as play-by-play with Bob Trumpy his color commentator. This was the last Super Bowl called by Criqui, as NBC Radio lost NFL rights following the season and he returned to his secondary play-by-play role on NBC television. Trumpy would call two more Super Bowls for NBC television (Super Bowl XXVII and Super Bowl XXVIII) as part of the network's No. 1 broadcast team. In the teams' local markets, the game was carried on WNEW-AM in New York City with Jim Gordon and Dick Lynch and KOA-AM in Denver, Colorado, with Bob Martin and Larry Zimmer.\nThe game was also broadcast in Canada on CTV and in the United Kingdom on Channel 4. The latter had commentary by Frank Gifford, John Smith and Don Shula. This was also the first Super Bowl to be telecast on commercial television in Asia, as the GMA Network in the Philippines aired its first Super Bowl. This game also marked the first Super Bowl to be broadcast live in Rome.\nSuper Bowl XXI is featured in \"NFL's Greatest Games\" under the title \"Land of the Giants\" and was narrated by John Doremus.\nMusic.\nThe game is notable for the two intended debuts of musical themes that have become syonymous with the network, for differing reasons. CBS opened the game with the theme music, composed by Lloyd Landesman, that would later be used for their college football coverage.\nCBS also originally planned to debut the song \"One Shining Moment\" during a postgame montage at the end of its coverage. Songwriter David Barrett had originally wrote \"One Shining Moment\" for basketball, being inspired after watching Larry Bird play. For the Super Bowl XXI montage, the lyrics were modified to make football references instead of basketball ones, such as changing \"The ball is \"tipped\"\" to \"The ball is \"kicked\"\". However, both the game and the postgame interviews ran past the expected airtime, and thus the montage was canceled and CBS instead went straight to its Super Bowl lead-out program, \"Hard Copy\". CBS then asked Barrett for permission to use the song after the 1987 NCAA Division I men's basketball championship game on March 30, in which Indiana beat Syracuse. \"One Shining Moment\" was used to close CBS's coverage of the tournament. The positive public response led to it becoming an annual feature on the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament coverage ever since.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame show was a salute to California and featured the pop music group The Beach Boys and Canadian jazz fusion band The Shuffle Demons. Singer Neil Diamond performed the national anthem. The show was directed and choreographed by Lesslee Fitzmorris. The coin toss ceremony featured Pro Football Hall of Fame defensive lineman Willie Davis.\nThe halftime show was a \"Salute to Hollywood's 100th Anniversary\" featuring an introduction by George Burns (who was only nine years younger than the Hollywood neighborhood in Los Angeles) and a performance by the Southern California high school drill teams and dancers.\nAs had been their tradition all season, upon securing their victory, Giants players celebrated by dumping a Gatorade cooler on head coach Bill Parcells. The 1986 Giants were the first team to initiate what has now become a standard post-game celebration, and the Super Bowl telecast enabled a large, national audience to first witness what has become commonplace.\nSuper Bowl XXI MVP Phil Simms became the first athlete to appear in an \"I'm going to Disney World!\" television ad, being recorded shouting the phrase while celebrating the team's victory immediately after the game.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nOn the Broncos' first play after receiving the opening kickoff, quarterback John Elway faked a handoff, then spun around and ran in the opposite direction for a 10-yard gain to the Denver 34-yard line. Then on third down, his 24-yard completion to wide receiver Mark Jackson advanced the ball to the Giants' 39-yard line. However, the Giants' defense tightened up and halted the drive at the 30-yard line, forcing Denver to settle for kicker Rich Karlis's 48-yard field goal to give them an early 3\u20130 lead. Karlis' kick tied a Super Bowl record for longest field goal set by Jan Stenerud of the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl IV.\nNew York responded on their first possession of the game with a 9-play, 78-yard drive. First, quarterback Phil Simms completed a 17-yard pass to wide receiver Lionel Manuel. Then running back Joe Morris ran for 11 yards to the Denver 41-yard line. Despite a holding penalty on New York tight end Mark Bavaro, the Giants marched to the Broncos 6 with Simms' 18-yard pass to wide receiver Stacy Robinson, and then a 17-yard completion to Bavaro two plays later. Simms finished the drive with a 6-yard touchdown pass to tight end Zeke Mowatt, giving the Giants a 7\u20133 lead.\nBroncos kick returner Ken Bell gave his team great field position by returning the ensuing kickoff 28 yards to the Broncos 42-yard line. Elway's first two passes were a 14-yard completion to running back Sammy Winder, followed by an 11-yard completion to tight end Orson Mobley, moving the ball to the New York 33-yard line. On the next play Elway called a screen pass for Winder, which he ran for a gain of 9 yards before going out of bounds. Linebacker Harry Carson hit Winder after he stepped out, drawing a penalty for unnecessary roughness. Then an unsportsmanlike conduct penalty was assessed to linebacker Lawrence Taylor for picking up and throwing the first flag.\nCarson's penalty was assessed for 12 yards, half the distance to the goal from the spot of the dead ball, and Taylor's was for half the distance from that spot, resulting in a total of 19 penalty yards and a first down for Denver at the New York 6-yard line. The Giants kept the Broncos out of the end zone for the first two plays, but on third down, Elway scored on a 4-yard quarterback draw to regain the lead for the Broncos, 10\u20137, with just over two minutes remaining in the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nAfter Denver forced a punt by New York to start the second quarter, Elway dropped back to pass from his own 18-yard line on 3rd-and-12. The Giants' pass rush forced him to scramble out of the pocket, but it gave him enough time to find wide receiver Vance Johnson for a 54-yard completion. Elway then moved the Broncos down the field further and after a third down completion to running back Steve Sewell, the third time Denver converted on the drive (Elway found Mobley for a second first down after the Johnson play), they had the ball on the New York 1-yard line with a chance to take a two-score lead.\nHowever, the Giants' defense stood their ground. First, Elway tried a run-pass option, but Taylor broke through the line and tackled him for a 1-yard loss. Carson stopped fullback Gerald Willhite on the next play for no gain on a run up the middle, and linebacker Carl Banks chased down Winder as he attempted to score on a sweep, tackling him for a 4-yard loss, bringing up 4th-and-goal from the 5. Karlis tried to salvage the drive with a 24-yard field goal, but he missed it wide right, giving him the record for the shortest missed field goal in Super Bowl history.\nThe Giants picked up a first down on the first play of the ensuing drive as Bavaro caught a 12-yard pass from Simms on the first play from scrimmage. Simms followed that up with an 8-yard completion to Robinson, and two plays later, Morris picked up a first down with a short run. The drive stalled there, and the Broncos got the ball back on their 15. Elway was tackled for a 2-yard loss by defensive end Leonard Marshall on the first play of the ensuing drive.\nWhat followed was one of the more controversial calls of the game. With the ball on his own 13-yard line, Elway found tight end Clarence Kay for a gain of 25 yards and an apparent first down. However, referee Jerry Markbreit conferred with his crew and reversed the call, determining that Kay had not controlled the ball before being tackled. However, the discussion among the crew continued for some time before NFL Director of Officiating Art McNally paged umpire Bob Boylston; this meant that, for the first time, the newly introduced instant replay system would be used in a Super Bowl.\nThe crew then waited while McNally and the officials in the replay booth took a second look at the play. They determined that the play should stand as called, since they were not able to find conclusive evidence that the pass was complete. However, CBS discovered that the referees had erred in their judgment; toward the end of the first half, the network showed the Kay play from the reverse angle view, which the replay booth did not have access to, and it clearly showed that the pass was caught cleanly.\nTo make things less ideal for the Broncos, the Giants' pass rush got to Elway again on third down and forced him into the end zone. George Martin, the veteran New York defensive lineman, tackled him there for a safety, cutting the Denver lead to 10-9 and giving the ball back to the offense with a chance to regain the lead. However, after Simms failed\nto complete a third down pass to Bavaro on third down (which, incidentally, would his last incompletion of the game), the Broncos were able to get the ball back.\nWith 1:09 left in the half, the Broncos started from their own 37-yard line. On second down, Elway completed a 31-yard pass to wide receiver Steve Watson, and then a 10-yard pass to Willhite, giving the Broncos a first down at the Giants 21. They moved the ball to the 16, which resulted from a penalty on nose tackle Jim Burt for jumping offsides, but the Giants forced two incompletions. The last of these saw Elway lead Mobley too far on a throw to the end zone and cause him to collide with the goal post.\nDespite having missed a relative chip shot field goal on his last attempt, Karlis was called upon again to try to extend the Denver lead, this time with a 34-yarder. Despite having made all but one of his attempts inside of 40 yards during the regular season, Karlis once again pulled the kick wide right and the drive ended with no points. Karlis later admitted his two misses in the first half were devastating to the Broncos: \"Both times I didn't get my hips all the way through the kicks. I was steering the ball, and I know better than that. I felt the team unravel after that. I really hurt them.\"\nThird quarter.\nIn the second half, the Giants dominated the Broncos, outscoring them 30\u201310 with four touchdowns and a field goal on their first five possessions.\nThe Giants took the opening kickoff in the third quarter, but faced 4th-and-1 after their first three plays. New York sent their punt formation out onto the field. Parcells had entertained the possibility of running a fake punt and sent backup quarterback Jeff Rutledge onto the field to line up as a third blocking back along with running backs Maurice Carthon and Lee Rouson. Parcells said his reasoning was that if the Broncos were not going to pick up on Rutledge being used as a decoy for a potential fake, he would take advantage. As he had thought, Denver paid no attention to Rutledge, and he moved under center while punter Sean Landeta split out as a receiver and Carthon and Rouson lined up in a split back set behind him. Rutledge then took the snap from center and ran a quarterback sneak to the New York 47-yard line for a first down. On the next play, Simms completed a 13-yard pass to Morris, and then followed it up with a 23-yard completion to Rouson. Three plays later, Simms finished the drive with a 13-yard touchdown pass to Bavaro to give the Giants a 16\u201310 lead. The Broncos were forced to punt on their next drive, and wide receiver Phil McConkey returned the punt 25 yards to Denver's 36-yard line. The Broncos managed to keep the Giants out of the end zone, but kicker Ra\u00fal Allegre increased New York's lead to 19\u201310 with a 21-yard field goal.\nDenver was again forced to punt on their ensuing possession. Afterwards, Simms completed a 17-yard pass to Manuel at the Broncos 45-yard line. Two plays later, the Giants executed a flea flicker play for a 44-yard gain. Simms handed off to Morris, but before he crossed the line of scrimmage, Morris pitched the ball back to Simms. With the ensuing pass, Simms found McConkey, who was wide open at the Broncos 20-yard line. After eluding safety Steve Foley, McConkey was upended by cornerback Mark Haynes just before he reached the goal line, throwing his hands up in mock frustration after being stopped at the 1-yard line. On the next play, Morris scored on a 1-yard touchdown run, increasing the Giants' lead to 26\u201310 and essentially putting the game away.\nFourth quarter.\nElway barely avoided a turnover by recovering his own fumble on the last play of the third quarter before getting sacked for an 11-yard loss by Marshall. After a false start by offensive tackle Ken Lanier pushed Denver back to their own 4-yard line to start the fourth quarter, Elway threw an interception to Giants cornerback Elvis Patterson, who was tackled at the Denver 42 by Watson, but an illegal use of hands penalty on Patterson after the interception moved the ball to the New York 48. On the second play after the turnover, Simms completed a 36-yard pass to Robinson. Four plays later, from the Broncos 6, Simms threw a pass to Bavaro in the end zone. The pass bounced off Bavaro's fingertips, but fell right into the hands of McConkey for a touchdown, extending the Giants' lead to 33\u201310.\nThe Broncos, now playing for pride, finally managed to get a good drive going on their next possession, advancing the ball 74 yards in 13 plays. Elway completed 5 of 6 passes for 46 yards (including a 15-yard reception by Jackson) and rushed for 14, while Karlis finished the drive with a 28-yard field goal, cutting Denver's deficit to 33\u201313. But Giants wide receiver Bobby Johnson recovered Karlis' ensuing onside kick attempt and New York responded with yet another scoring drive. Rouson ran twice for 21 yards, and then Simms ran for a 22-yard gain. On the next play, running back Ottis Anderson scored on a 2-yard touchdown run, giving the Giants a 39\u201313 lead after Allegre missed the extra point wide left.\nDenver finally scored their second touchdown of the game when Elway found Vance Johnson on a 47-yard bomb later on, which was the 100th recorded Super Bowl touchdown. However, by that point, the game had become so far out of reach that it did not do much good. Elway would eventually be replaced by Gary Kubiak, who took a sack to end the game, and the Giants were victorious in a 39\u201320 rout of the Broncos.\nAs the final seconds of the game ticked away, Carson, continuing the recent trend started by the Giants, gave Parcells a Gatorade shower, going as far as to take off his jersey and pads and sneak behind Parcells with a Rose Bowl security team shirt on. Thanks in large part to this particular Gatorade dunking, a tradition of sorts was formed that continues to this day. In addition, offensive tackle Brad Benson and center Bart Oates drenched Simms with a cooler of ice water. \"I think it was very appropriate to cool the guy down\", Oates explained, \"as hot as he was in the game.\"\nSimms finished with a passer rating of 150.92, the highest for one game in Super Bowl history. Morris was the top rusher of the game, gaining 67 yards, and added another 20 yards on 4 receptions. Robinson was the Giants' top receiver with 3 catches for 62 yards. Bavaro caught 4 passes for 51 yards and a touchdown. McConkey caught 2 passes for 50 yards and a touchdown, returned a punt for 25 yards, and even got to make a contribution after the game, discovering a dropped police pistol on the field and turning it over to a stadium security guard. Defensively, while the Broncos managed to bottle up Lawrence Taylor, Carl Banks had 14 tackles, 10 of which were unassisted and four of those for negative yardage, while Leonard Marshall had two sacks and forced a fumble. Elway finished the game with 22 out of 37 pass completions for 304 yards, 1 touchdown, and 1 interception. He also was the Broncos' leading rusher in the game, with 27 rushing yards and a touchdown on 6 carries. Denver's Vance Johnson was the top receiver of the game, with 5 receptions for 121 yards, an average of 24.2 yards per catch, and a touchdown.\nThe Giants' victory in Super Bowl XXI marked the second time in four months that the New York metropolitan area had won a championship in a major professional sport; three months before, the New York Mets had won the 1986 World Series.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXI: New York Giants 39, Denver Broncos 20\n\"at Rose Bowl, Pasadena, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: NFL.com Super Bowl XXI, Super Bowl XXI Play Finder NYG, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXI, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is also the first, and only time in history, an NFL game ended with a final score of 39\u201320.\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29147", "revid": "1314294874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29147", "title": "Super Bowl XXII", "text": "1988 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXII was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Washington Redskins and American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1987 season. The Redskins defeated the Broncos by the score of 42\u201310, winning their second Super Bowl. The game was played on January 31, 1988, at Jack Murphy Stadium in San Diego, California, which was the first time that the Super Bowl was played there. It was the second consecutive Super Bowl loss for the Broncos, who had lost to the New York Giants in the Super Bowl the year before.\nThis Super Bowl came at the end of a season that was shortened by a players' strike. Each team only missed one regular season game due to the labor dispute, but three games were played mostly with replacement players until the dispute was settled. This proved particularly costly for the defending Super Bowl champion New York Giants, who lost all three of their \"replacement player games\" and failed to make the playoffs. The Broncos were making their second consecutive (and third overall) Super Bowl appearance, after posting a 10\u20134\u20131 regular season record, largely through the strength of their quarterback, John Elway. The Redskins, who were making their fourth Super Bowl appearance, posted an 11\u20134 regular season record. Washington was led by quarterback Doug Williams, who entered the season as a backup, and was 0\u20132 as a starter during the regular season. He ended up leading Washington to their two playoff victories. In doing so, he was the first African-American quarterback ever to start in an NFL league championship game, let alone a Super Bowl.\nAfter trailing 10\u20130 at the end of the first quarter of the game, the Redskins scored 42 unanswered points, including a record-breaking 35 points in the second quarter, setting several other Super Bowl records, including most rushing yards (280) and most total yards (602). Williams, who was named the Super Bowl MVP, completed 18 of 29 passes for a Super Bowl record 340 yards and four touchdowns, with one interception. He also became the first player in Super Bowl history to pass for four touchdowns in a single quarter, and four in a half. Williams was the first African-American starting quarterback to win a Super Bowl.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXII to San Diego on May 24, 1984, during their May 23\u201325, 1984 meetings in Washington, D.C. This was the first of three Super Bowls played at Jack Murphy Stadium (the others being XXXII and XXXVII, both of which occurred after it was renamed Qualcomm Stadium).\nFourteen cities were part of the bidding process, which was scheduled to award four Super Bowls (XXI, XXII, XXIII, and XXIV). The bidding cities included: Anaheim, Detroit, Houston, Jacksonville, Miami, Minneapolis, New Orleans, Pasadena, Philadelphia, San Francisco, San Diego, Seattle, Tampa, and Phoenix/Tempe. The Philadelphia host committee assembled what was considered a strong, but long-shot bid, hoping to win the first outdoor Super Bowl in a cold weather city. Tempe and Jacksonville had no NFL team at the time; the Cardinals moved from St. Louis to Tempe in 1988, and the Jaguars were awarded as an expansion team in 1993, starting play in 1995.\nThe balloting for XXI took over two hours to complete. XXII was also voted on, but the voting for XXIII and XXIV was postponed. San Diego was awarded XXII, marking the second time that consecutive Super Bowls were played in the same state, with Pasadena selected for XXI. This has now happened three times in NFL history; Super Bowls II and III were both played at the Miami Orange Bowl and Super Bowls XLIII and XLIV were played in Florida (at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa and Hard Rock Stadium in Miami Gardens) and then repeated eleven years later with the roles reversed with Miami receiving Super Bowl LIV and Tampa receiving Super Bowl LV.\nWashington Redskins.\nThe primary storyline surrounding Super Bowl XXII was that Washington's Doug Williams was the first African-American quarterback ever to start in a Super Bowl. This was even more meaningful given that the Redskins had been among the last teams to sign a black player after they reentered the league.\nWilliams had taken a rather unconventional route to the Super Bowl. He began his career as the first round draft pick of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 1978. After five seasons (including a trip to the NFC championship game in 1979), a contract dispute caused him to leave the team and sit out the entire 1983 season before signing with the Oklahoma Outlaws of the newly formed USFL. When that league folded a few years later, Williams found himself out of a job until Redskins coach Joe Gibbs asked him to join the team to be the backup for quarterback Jay Schroeder. Williams played just one game in 1986, and spent most of the 1987 season on the bench. But injuries and inconsistent play from Schroeder made Gibbs promote Williams to starting quarterback.\nWilliams had played extremely well in his five regular season games, passing for 1,156 yards, 11 touchdowns and five interceptions. The Redskins' main receiving threat was wide receiver Gary Clark, who caught 56 passes for 1,066 yards, an average of 19 yards per catch. Wide receivers Ricky Sanders and Art Monk were also deep threats, combining for 80 receptions and 1,130 yards. Running back George Rogers was Washington's leading rusher with 613 yards. However, Rogers saw limited action in Super Bowl XXII due to injuries that later forced him into early retirement. Rookie running back Timmy Smith started in his place. Fullback Kelvin Bryant also was a big contributor, rushing for 406 yards, and catching 43 passes for 490 yards during the 1987 season. The Redskins offensive line was anchored by tackle Joe Jacoby, a 4-time pro bowl selection, and future Hall of Fame Center Russ Grimm.\nThe Redskins also had an excellent defensive unit, led by defensive backs Barry Wilburn, who recorded nine interceptions for 135 return yards and one touchdown; Todd Bowles, who intercepted four passes; and Darrell Green. Their line was anchored by defensive ends Charles Mann, who led the team with 9.5 sacks and recovered a fumble; and Dexter Manley, who recorded 8.5 sacks.\nThe Redskins finished the 1987 strike-shortened regular season as NFC East champions with an 11\u20134 record and the third seed in the NFC playoffs.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Broncos advanced to their second consecutive Super Bowl, overall the third appearance in team history. Quarterback John Elway had another excellent season, passing for 3,198 yards and 19 touchdowns. He was also the team's second leading rusher with 304 yards and four touchdowns. Wide receivers Vance Johnson and Ricky Nattiel, and tight end Clarence Kay, combined for 104 receptions and 1,754 yards. Running back Sammy Winder was the leading rusher with 741 yards and six touchdowns, while fullback Gene Lang rushed for 304 yards and caught 17 receptions. Denver's offensive line was led by guard Keith Bishop, who earned his second consecutive Pro Bowl selection. The Broncos also possessed a solid defensive unit, led by outside linebacker Karl Mecklenburg, who recorded 7 sacks and picked off three passes, and defensive back Mike Harden with four interceptions. Defensive end Rulon Jones led the line with 7 sacks.\nThe Broncos finished the strike-shortened 1987 season winning the AFC West with a 10\u20134\u20131 record and the number one seed in the AFC playoffs. Dan Reeves was the head coach.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Broncos routed the Houston Oilers in the divisional round of the playoffs, 34\u201310, jumping to a 14\u20130 first-quarter lead off of two quick Oilers turnovers, with Elway completing 14 of 25 passes for 259 yards and two touchdowns in the game. Vance Johnson recorded four catches for 105 yards, including a 55-yard reception to set up Elway's second touchdown pass. However, Johnson was injured during the game; he ended up missing AFC Championship game, and played only sparingly in the Super Bowl. Denver also lost safety Mike Harden for the rest of the season with a broken arm.\nDenver then won the AFC Championship Game in exciting fashion over the AFC Central champion Cleveland Browns, 38\u201333 for the second consecutive year. The Broncos seemed to be in control of the game during the first half, taking a 21\u20133 lead. However, with quarterback Bernie Kosar, Cleveland rallied back and tied the score 31\u201331 in the fourth quarter. Elway responded with a 20-yard touchdown pass to Sammy Winder, taking the lead back with less than five minutes left in regulation. The Browns took the ball back and drove to the Denver 8-yard line, but the drive ended with a play that became known as The Fumble, resulting in more bad luck in Cleveland professional sports lore: Denver defensive back Jeremiah Castille stripped the football from Browns running back Earnest Byner and recovered the ensuing fumble as Byner was rushing in for the potential tying touchdown, securing the Broncos' win.\nMeanwhile, the Redskins had narrow wins in the playoffs. First, they won at Soldier Field against the Chicago Bears, 21\u201317, ending Walter Payton's career. The key play was a 52-yard punt return for a touchdown by Redskins defensive back Darrell Green for the go-ahead touchdown. The Bears' Kevin Butler kicked a field goal to close the deficit to 21\u201317, but the Bears could get no closer. Noteworthy was the Redskins trailed 14\u20130 early in the game.\nThe Redskins won a defensive battle against the surprising Minnesota Vikings in the NFC Championship Game, 17\u201310. The Vikings barely made the playoffs with an 8\u20137 record during the strike-shortened regular season, but advanced to the NFC championship by winning on the road against the teams with the best records in the NFL, defeating the 12\u20133 New Orleans Saints 44\u201310, and the 13\u20132 San Francisco 49ers 36\u201324. The experienced Redskins, who had narrowly defeated Minnesota in a 27\u201324 overtime game during Week 15 of the season, put an end to the Vikings' string of upsets, aided by Williams' go-ahead touchdown pass to wide receiver Gary Clark with five minutes remaining to lead 17\u201310. Then they sealed the victory with 56 seconds left when Green knocked a pass out of the hands of running back Darrin Nelson at the one yard line on a fourth down and four play from the Redskins 6-yard line.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nComing into Super Bowl XXII, the Broncos were favored to win (\u22123 as noted on the NFL Today show by Jimmy \"the Greek\" Snyder) because most experts thought both teams were equal in terms of talent with Elway presumed to be the superior quarterback to Williams. Elway had won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award and was selected to start for the AFC in the Pro Bowl, while Williams had played just five regular season games in the 1987 season.\nBefore the game, it was announced that Williams underwent emergency root canal treatment for an abscessed lower right molar the previous night. Team dentist Barry Rudolph said there were no complications, and Williams then was pronounced fit to start.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Broncos opted to wear their home orange uniforms and white pants. The Redskins, as the road team, countered with white uniforms and burgundy pants that they typically wore during home games and which they also wore in their two previous Super Bowl appearances during the 1980s.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by ABC. The broadcast featured with play-by-play announcer Al Michaels and color commentators Frank Gifford and Dan Dierdorf. Keith Jackson hosted the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage for ABC, joined by analysts Lynn Swann and Mike Adamle as well as then Cleveland Browns head coach Marty Schottenheimer and then Minnesota Vikings head coach Jerry Burns. Bob Griese was originally planned to co-host with Jackson, but had to bow out due his wife Judi who was in the late stages of breast cancer, from which she died on February 15, 1988. Also helping with ABC's coverage were Jack Whitaker, Jim Hill and Becky Dixon. This was the first Super Bowl broadcast on ABC with the broadcast team of Michaels, Gifford, and Dierdorf in the booth (as the 1987 season was the first year the trio was together, with Dierdorf moving to ABC from CBS; Gifford was the only holdover from ABC's Super Bowl XIX telecast). The trio went on to man the booth for ABC's \"Monday Night Football\" from 1987 to 1997 and called Super Bowls XXV and XXIX.\nThe game was broadcast nationally on radio by CBS, with Jack Buck handling the play-by-play duties and color commentator Hank Stram in the broadcast booth, and Jim Hunter reporting from the sidelines. Brent Musburger anchored the Super Bowl XXII pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage with analysis from Will McDonough and Jimmy \"The Greek\" Snyder for CBS. Locally, Super Bowl XXII was broadcast on WMAL-AM in Washington, D.C. by Frank Herzog, Sam Huff and Sonny Jurgenson, and on KOA-AM in Denver, Colorado by Bob Martin and Larry Zimmer.\nABC's Super Bowl lead-out programs was the series debut of \"The Wonder Years\". This was only the second successful series to debut following a Super Bowl up to that time (\"The A-Team\", which had premiered following Super Bowl XVII, was the first). \"The Wonder Years\" was a late switch by ABC, which had initially scheduled the two-hour premiere of \"China Beach\", but concerns about the game running long and potentially pushing the premiere episode's conclusion after midnight Eastern Time contributed to the program change.\nThe game was simulcast in Canada on CTV and in the United Kingdom on Channel 4. It was also the first Super Bowl in which Mexico's Televisa brought a team of its own (instead of relying on the U.S. signal with comments made from Mexico City), airing on its Canal de las Estrellas.\nThe NFL Films \"NFL's Greatest Games\" highlight film was titled \"Ambush at Super Bowl XXII\"; and was the first such highlight film to feature former Boston and Buffalo radio personality Jeff Kaye as its narrator.\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities featured a tribute to entertainer Bob Hope, who was approaching the age of 85. Members representing the military service branches marched out onto the field in full dress uniforms, and in unison saluted Bob Hope for his dedication to helping the troops. Trumpeter Herb Alpert performed \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", while Pro Football Hall of Fame wide receiver Don Hutson participated in the coin toss ceremony (the game happened to coincide with Hutson's 75th birthday). Alpert's performance was the last non-vocal performance of the National Anthem in a Super Bowl to date.\nThe halftime show, produced by Radio City Music Hall, was titled \"Something Grand\" and featured performances by vocalist Chubby Checker, The Rockettes, and 88 grand pianos with the USC and San Diego State marching bands. Among the 44 Radio City Music Hall Rockettes, American performer Jennifer Jones made her national debut as its first African-American Rockette. Checker's performance marked the first time a major artist performed during the show.\nThis was the final Super Bowl to feature the football-style logo at the 35-yard-line which had been in use since Super Bowl XIV.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe game got off to a promising start for Denver. After forcing the Redskins to go three-and-out, the Broncos scored on their very first play from scrimmage, when quarterback John Elway threw a 56-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Ricky Nattiel, giving Denver a 7\u20130 lead after just 1:57 had elapsed in the game. It was the earliest touchdown any team had ever scored in Super Bowl history to that point (the record was later broken by Jerry Rice in Super Bowl XXIX, and again by Devin Hester in Super Bowl XLI). Immediately after the score, cornerback Darrell Green went over to teammate Barry Wilburn (who was covering Nattiel) and told Wilburn to forget about that play. The Broncos quickly forced Washington to punt again, and once again Elway displayed his superb scrambling skills. On the second play of Denver's ensuing possession, Elway completed a 32-yard pass to wide receiver Mark Jackson. Then, Elway caught a 23-yard pass from running back Steve Sewell, becoming the first quarterback ever to catch a pass in the Super Bowl (Elway had scored a receiving touchdown during opening day the previous year against the Raiders). Washington managed to halt Denver's drive on the 6, but kicker Rich Karlis kicked a 24-yard field goal to increase the Broncos' lead to 10\u20130.\nAfter yet another Redskins punt, Denver managed to drive to the Washington 30 on their third possession with two runs by running back Gene Lang for a total of 24 yards and an 18-yard reception by Sewell. But this time, they failed to extend their lead after Elway threw two incomplete passes, then got sacked for an 18-yard loss by safety Alvin Walton on third down, pushing the Broncos out of field goal range and forcing their first punt of the game.\nMeanwhile, the Redskins could not generate any offensive momentum in the first quarter, with the Broncos' defense forcing a punt on every drive. On the second play of Washington's ensuing drive, a 25-yard run by running back Timmy Smith was nullified by a holding penalty on tight end Don Warren. To make matters worse, three plays later, after completing a 20-yard pass to running back Kelvin Bryant, quarterback Doug Williams slipped and twisted his back left leg while planting to make a throw and had to leave the game. Williams was untouched by the Broncos' defense before he dropped the ball while falling to the ground; referee Bob McElwee, however, blew the play dead, costing Denver a fumble recovery, along with a 22-yard fumble return touchdown by defensive end Rulon Jones. Backup quarterback Jay Schroeder was sacked for an 8-yard loss by Broncos linebacker Karl Mecklenburg on his first snap, continuing the Redskins' offensive woes. By the time the quarter ended, the Broncos had more than twice as many total yards of offense (142) as the Redskins (64).\nSecond quarter.\nWilliams returned 43 seconds into the second quarter, and the Washington offense began to click. In the previous 21 Super Bowls, no team had ever overcome a 10-point deficit to win, but the second quarter took an abrupt turn in favor of the Redskins. And much like they had in the second half of Super Bowl XXI against the New York Giants, Denver's defense suffered an on-field meltdown, giving up six unanswered touchdowns to Washington, five of which were scored in the second quarter alone, and all of which were scored by the offense.\nFollowing another Broncos punt, on the Redskins' first play of the second quarter, wide receiver Ricky Sanders got behind cornerback Mark Haynes (who tried to jam him at the line of scrimmage) and safety Tony Lilly, and caught a pass from Williams, taking it 80 yards for a touchdown, cutting Washington's deficit to 10\u20137. After forcing the Broncos to punt on their next possession, Washington advanced to the Denver 27 on a 19-yard run by Smith. Facing 3rd-and-1, Williams connected with receiver Gary Clark, who made a diving catch in the end zone for a 27-yard touchdown to give Washington a 14\u201310 lead. From this point forward, the Redskins would go on to dominate the Broncos.\nAfter the ensuing kickoff, Denver drove to the Washington 26, aided by running back Sammy Winder's 25-yard reception and Elway's 21-yard run. But offensive tackle Dave Studdard, blocking defensive end Dexter Manley, went down with a knee injury. After Elway threw an incomplete pass on third down, Karlis missed a 43-yard field goal attempt wide left. On the first play of the Redskins' ensuing drive, Williams threw a 16-yard pass to Clark. Then on the next play, Smith took off for a 58-yard touchdown run, with blocking from guard Raleigh McKenzie and offensive tackle Joe Jacoby, increasing their lead to 21\u201310. Washington's offensive line featuring McKenzie and Jacoby figured greatly in a play known as the Counter Gap, which the Redskins ran repeatedly in the game.\nThe Redskins again forced a Broncos punt and increased their lead to 28\u201310 in three plays, the last two of which consisted of passes from Williams to Sanders; the first for 11 yards, and the second for a 50-yard touchdown, which made Sanders the first player in Super Bowl history to catch two touchdowns in one quarter. Three plays after the ensuing kickoff, Wilburn made up for his first quarter mistake by intercepting a pass intended for Nattiel on the Redskins 21, and once again, the Redskins stormed down the field to score. First, Smith broke loose for a 43-yard run, then Williams completed a pair of passes to Sanders for 28 yards to reach the Denver 7. Two plays later, Williams threw the fifth Washington touchdown of the quarter, an 8-yard pass to tight end Clint Didier to make the score 35\u201310. On Denver's next drive, Elway completed three consecutive passes for 40 total yards (including a 24-yard pass to Jackson) to advance to the Redskins 36. However, cornerback Brian Davis intercepted Elway's next pass at the 21 to end the half.\nIn the second quarter alone, Williams completed 9 of 11 passes for 228 yards and four touchdowns; Smith rushed five times for 122 yards and a touchdown; and Sanders caught five passes for 168 yards and two touchdowns. The Redskins scored 35 points and gained 356 yards in total offense, both Super Bowl records, and scored five touchdowns on 18 total offensive plays.\nDuring the regular season, the Broncos had allowed 35 points for the entire game only once\u2014and it was in that game, a 40\u201310 loss to the Houston Oilers in Week 4, that they fielded replacement players, with the regular players having gone on strike.\nWashington's 25-point lead at the half surpassed the previous record of 20 points set by San Francisco in Super Bowl XVI.\nSecond half.\nThe Broncos' second consecutive Super Bowl appearance continued to go downhill in the second half as the Redskins shut them out for the rest of the game. On Denver's first possession of the second half, Elway was intercepted again by Wilburn. Washington then drove to the Denver 29-yard line, aided by a 15-yard run by Bryant and a 12-yard reception by Clark, but kicker Ali Haji-Sheikh's 46-yard field goal attempt hit the right upright of the goal post. On the Redskins' next possession, their only turnover of the game was recorded when Williams threw a deep pass intended for Clark that was intercepted by cornerback Jeremiah Castille at the Broncos 2-yard line. Elway then managed to escape a safety by completing a 10-yard pass to Jackson from his own end zone. After another punt by the Broncos, Clark delivered a 25-yard run on a reverse to start the Redskins' next possession and end the third quarter.\nClark's run was the start of a four-play, 68-yard scoring drive, which also featured three runs by Smith for 43 yards, the last one being a 4-yard touchdown run to bring the game to its final score of 42\u201310. On the Broncos' next possession, Elway appeared to complete a 33-yard pass to wide receiver Vance Johnson on 4th-and-17, but this was nullified by a holding penalty on center Mike Freeman, bringing up 4th-and-27, and forcing yet another Denver punt. Washington then reached the Denver 13 to run out the clock and win the game.\nBy the end of the game, Elway was sacked five times and threw three interceptions. Smith finished the game with a Super Bowl record 204 rushing yards, and scored two touchdowns. Sanders caught nine passes for 193 yards and two touchdowns, and returned three kickoffs for 46 yards. His 193 receiving yards and his 235 total offensive yards were both Super Bowl records, and his 80-yard touchdown reception in the second quarter also tied a Super Bowl record. Clark caught three passes for 55 yards and a touchdown, while also rushing once for 25 yards. Wilburn recorded two interceptions, while Walton had two sacks. Meanwhile, running back Gene Lang was the Broncos' leading rusher, with only 38 yards on five carries. Elway finished the game with 14 out of 38 pass completions for 257 yards, one touchdown, and three interceptions. He was also Denver's second-leading rusher with 32 yards on three carries; this was the only Super Bowl in which Elway played without scoring a rushing touchdown. Jackson was Denver's top receiver with four catches for 76 yards.\nIn 2015, on the occasion of Super Bowl 50, \"Slate\" writer Justin Peters watched all the games over a two-month period. He considered Super Bowl XXII to be the best Super Bowl ever, declaring it was, \"The most significant Super Bowl ever played. The most unlikely comeback from the most unlikely quarterback, Doug Williams, who led his team to score 35 points in the second quarter: a single-quarter Super Bowl scoring record that still stands!\"\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXII: Washington Redskins 42, Denver Broncos 10\n\"at Jack Murphy Stadium, San Diego, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nFollowing this game, Johnny Grier was promoted to referee, becoming the first African-American to lead an NFL officiating crew.\nIn addition to Grier, Dale Hamer was promoted to referee in 1989. Don Wedge was a referee from 1976 to 1978 before becoming a side judge in 1979 (he was a back judge from 1972 to 1975).\nJack Fette retired following this game and became a replay official. He was the second official, after Tom Kelleher, to officiate in five Super Bowls.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29148", "revid": "44273096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29148", "title": "Super Bowl XXIII", "text": "1989 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXIII was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Cincinnati Bengals and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion San Francisco 49ers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1988 season. The 49ers defeated the Bengals 20\u201316, winning their third Super Bowl. The game was played on January 22, 1989, at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami (now part of the suburb of Miami Gardens, which became a separate city in 2003). This was the first Super Bowl hosted in the Miami area in 10 years, and the first in Miami not held at the Orange Bowl.\nThis was the second meeting between these two teams in the Super Bowl; their first meeting was seven years earlier. The game was also the third rematch between Super Bowl teams after Super Bowl XIII and Super Bowl XVII. This was the Bengals' second Super Bowl appearance after finishing the regular season with a 12\u20134 record. The 49ers were making their third Super Bowl appearance after posting a 10\u20136 regular season record.\nThe game is best remembered for the 49ers' fourth-quarter game-winning drive. Down 16\u201313, San Francisco got the ball on their own 8-yard line with 3:10 on the clock and marched 92 yards down the field in under three minutes. They then scored the winning touchdown on a Joe Montana pass to John Taylor with just 34 seconds left in the game. The game was tight throughout. The teams combined for five field goals, and battled to a 3\u20133 score by the end of the second quarter, the first halftime tie in Super Bowl history. Cincinnati's only touchdown, a 93-yard kickoff return by Stanford Jennings in the third quarter, was quickly answered by a four-play, 85-yard drive that ended with San Francisco wide receiver Jerry Rice's 14-yard touchdown reception. The touchdown came one play after Cincinnati cornerback Lewis Billups dropped what would have been a drive-ending interception in the end zone. Rice, who was named the Super Bowl MVP, caught 11 passes for a Super Bowl record 215 yards and a touchdown, while also rushing once for five yards.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXIII to Miami, Florida on March 14, 1985, during their March 10\u201315, 1985 meetings held in Phoenix. This was the sixth time that Miami hosted the game, and the first at Joe Robbie Stadium; the 5 previous Super Bowls in the area were played at the Miami Orange Bowl.\nOriginally, the selection was to be voted on during the May 23\u201325, 1984 meetings. However, after balloting for XXI took more than two hours, voting for XXIII was rescheduled. Twelve cities were part of the bidding process, which was scheduled to award two Super Bowls (XXIII and XXIV). The bidding cities included: Anaheim, Detroit, Houston, Jacksonville, Miami, Minneapolis, New Orleans, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, Tampa, and Tempe. Miami entered as the favorite.\nThis was the last Super Bowl played on the second to last Sunday in January. From 1990 to 2001, the game was played on the last Sunday of January, and from 2002 to 2021, on the first Sunday in February (with the exception of Super Bowl XXXVII, which was played on January 26, 2003). This was also the last east coast Super Bowl that began under daylight.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nFor the 49ers, it was their first Super Bowl appearance since they defeated the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl XIX. They had made the playoffs in the three seasons between Super Bowl XIX and Super Bowl XXIII, but were eliminated each time in the first round, primarily because of the poor performances by their offensive stars in those games; quarterback Joe Montana, receiver Jerry Rice, and running back Roger Craig all failed to produce a single touchdown. The previous season's 36\u201324 playoff loss to the Minnesota Vikings had been a particularly low point for Montana, who had played so poorly that head coach Bill Walsh had benched him early in the third quarter.\nIn the 1988 season, San Francisco won the NFC West with a 10\u20136 regular season record and earned the #2 playoff seed, but it was a long uphill battle. Two other teams in their division, the Los Angeles Rams and New Orleans Saints had also recorded 10\u20136 records, meaning not only did they earn a first-round bye with the narrowest possible margin, but a one more loss would have caused them to miss the playoffs altogether. The team had a quarterback controversy with Montana and Steve Young each starting during the season. Young had started three games during the year, in which the 49ers went 2\u20131, including a crucial 24\u201321 week 9 win over the Vikings in which Young scored the game winning touchdown on a dynamic 49-yard run with time running out in the 4th quarter. But after a 6\u20135 start, Montana led the 49ers to win four of their final five regular season games.\nMontana finished the regular season with 238 completions for 2,981 yards and 18 touchdowns, and also added 132 rushing yards. His favorite target was Rice, who recorded 64 receptions for 1,306 yards (a 20.4 yards per catch average) and 9 touchdowns. Craig was also a key contributor, leading the team in receptions (76) while finishing the season with a total of 2,036 combined rushing and receiving yards and 10 touchdowns, earning him the NFL Offensive Player of the Year Award. Fullback Tom Rathman also made a big impact, rushing for 427 yards and catching 42 passes for 387 yards. San Francisco also had a major special teams threat in second-year receiver John Taylor, who led the NFL in punt return yards (556), yards per return, (12.6), and touchdowns (2). He also gained 228 yards on kickoff returns and 325 receiving yards on just 14 receptions (a 23.2 yards per catch average).\nThe 49ers' defense was led by defensive backs Ronnie Lott, Eric Wright, Jeff Fuller, and Tim McKyer, who recorded a combined total of 18 interceptions. McKyer led the team with 7, while Lott recorded 5, along with 3 forced fumbles and 4 fumble recoveries. Linebacker Charles Haley was also a big contributor with 11.5 sacks and 2 fumble recoveries. The 49ers also had a solid defensive line, featuring Michael Carter (6.5 sacks), Danny Stubbs (6 sacks), Larry Roberts (6 sacks), and Pierce Holt (5 sacks).\nCincinnati Bengals.\nThe Bengals were also a team on the rebound. During the strike-shortened 1987 season, quarterback Boomer Esiason and head coach Sam Wyche had openly feuded, and the team finished with a miserable 4\u201311 record, including 0\u20133 in games played by replacement players. The coach and quarterback worked out their differences in the offseason, and Esiason ended up having the best season of his career en route to Super Bowl XXIII. During the regular season, he threw for 3,572 yards and 28 touchdowns with only 14 interceptions, while also rushing for 248 yards and a touchdown on 43 carries. Esiason's performance made him the top-rated quarterback in the league with a 97.4 passer rating and earned him the NFL Most Valuable Player Award.\nCincinnati had a number of offensive weapons, boasting six Pro Bowl selections. Wide receiver Eddie Brown was the top receiver on the team, with 54 receptions for 1,273 yards and 9 touchdowns, setting franchise records for most receiving yards in season, highest yards per catch average in a season (24.0) and most receiving yards in a single game (216 against the Pittsburgh Steelers). Wide receiver Tim McGee and Pro Bowl tight end Rodney Holman were also major threats, combining for 75 receptions, 1,213 yards, and 9 touchdowns. Rookie fullback Ickey Woods was their top rusher with 1,066 yards and 15 touchdowns, while also catching 21 passes for 199 yards and gaining a lot of media attention with his \"Ickey Shuffle\", a dance routine he did in the end zone to celebrate his touchdowns. Multi-talented running back James Brooks was also a key contributor, gaining a total of 1,218 combined rushing and receiving yards and 14 touchdowns. And the Bengals' offensive line was led by such Pro Bowl players as right guard Max Montoya and left tackle Anthony Mu\u00f1oz. Mu\u00f1oz was named the NFL Offensive Lineman of the Year for the third time in his career, and was selected to play in the Pro Bowl for the 8th season in a row. With all these weapons, Cincinnati's offense led the NFL in scoring (448 points), rushing yards (2,710), and total yards (6,302).\nThe Bengals' defense ranked 17th in the league, allowing 5,556 yards and 329 points during the regular season. Cincinnati had a superb defensive line, led by Pro Bowl defensive tackle Tim Krumrie (3 sacks and 3 fumble recoveries), along with linemen Jim Skow (9.5 sacks), David Grant (5 sacks), and Jason Buck (6 sacks). Their linebacking corps was led by 13-year veteran Reggie Williams, one of six players remaining from their 1981 Super Bowl team. Pro Bowl defensive backs Eric Thomas and David Fulcher combined for 12 interceptions, while safety Lewis Billups added 4 interceptions and 2 fumble recoveries. The team ended up winning the AFC Central with a 12\u20134 record.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Bengals went on to defeat the Seattle Seahawks in the AFC Divisional playoff game 21\u201313, and the Buffalo Bills in the AFC Championship Game 21\u201310. Woods was the key contributor in both wins, rushing for a combined total of 228 yards and 3 touchdowns. Cincinnati's 17th-ranked defense during the season made a major improvement in the playoffs, holding both their opponents to a combined total of 23 points and recording 5 interceptions.\nMeanwhile, Bill Walsh guided the 49ers to crushing playoff wins over the Minnesota Vikings, 34\u20139 and the Chicago Bears, 28\u20133. With the win over the Bears, the 49ers became the first road team to win an NFC Championship Game since the 1979 season.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nDespite the Bengals' superior regular season record and Esiason's MVP award, the 49ers were heavily favored to win the Super Bowl, mainly because of Montana. Montana had already led the 49ers to two previous Super Bowls and both times left with a championship ring and Super Bowl MVP honors. Esiason was also suffering from a sore left (throwing) shoulder, although the Bengals tried to keep it under wraps and made up for a lack of big-play passing attack with a run-heavy offense led by Woods and Brooks against their first two playoff opponents, Seattle and Buffalo.\nWhile Montana had his ups and downs during the regular season, he appeared to be playing his best in the postseason, throwing for 466 yards and 5 touchdowns in his two playoff games, with only 1 interception. In contrast, the sore-shouldered Esiason had thrown for only 202 yards and 1 touchdown, with 2 interceptions, in the Bengals' two playoff victories.\nWhile in Miami, Cincinnati suffered a major blow even before the game began. On the night before the Super Bowl, Stanley Wilson, the Bengals' best fullback and their third-leading rusher during the season with 398 yards, was caught using cocaine in his hotel room. The Bengals had no choice but to leave him off the roster. It was Wilson's third violation of the league's drug policy, and as a result he was banned from the league for life.\nBoth coaches had a long history with each other. In 1979, 49ers coach Bill Walsh had talked Sam Wyche out of retirement to come and join the team as an assistant coach. Wyche remained on Walsh's coaching staff until 1982, winning a Super Bowl ring against the Bengals in Super Bowl XVI.\nThe rematch was the third time in Super Bowl history two teams were meeting for a second time. Miami and Washington met in Super Bowls VII and XVII, with the teams splitting the games. Dallas and Pittsburgh met in Super Bowls X and XIII, with Pittsburgh winning both of those games. Both Dallas-Pittsburgh matchups were in Miami at the Orange Bowl. Pittsburgh and Dallas would later meet in Super Bowl XXX (which the Cowboys won by 10) to become the first two teams to ever meet three times in the Super Bowl. The Cowboys and Bills (Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII), Rams and Patriots (Super Bowls XXXVI and LIII), Eagles and Patriots (Super Bowls XXXIX and LII), Giants and Patriots (Super Bowls XLII and XLVI), 49ers and Chiefs (Super Bowls LIV and LVIII) and Eagles and Chiefs (Super Bowls LVII and LIX) have also met in two Super Bowls each.\nThe 49ers, as the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, wore their home red uniforms with gold pants. The Bengals, on the other hand, wore their all-white road uniforms.\nOvertown rioting.\nOn January 16, a Hispanic Miami police officer shot and killed a speeding black motorcyclist in the Overtown section of Miami. A large crowd gathered and turned violent, leading to rioting and looting which lasted into January 18. A television van and several automobiles and buildings were set on fire, and police used tear gas against the rioters. A teenager was shot and killed in the melee and more than $1 million worth of damage was done.\nRumors began that the Super Bowl might be moved to Tampa, and the incident later prompted the NFL to look at the league's hiring of minorities and its lack of black coaches at the time (the following season Art Shell became the first African-American NFL head coach of the modern era with the Los Angeles Raiders).\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC with Dick Enberg handling the play-by-play duties and color commentator Merlin Olsen in the broadcast booth. This would be Olsen's final Super Bowl broadcast, as he was demoted the following season to make room for retiring 49ers head coach Bill Walsh. Bob Costas and Gayle Gardner hosted the \"Super Bowl Live!\" pregame (2 hours), halftime, and postgame coverage with analysts Paul Maguire and then-Miami Dolphins head coach Don Shula. Also assisting with NBC's coverage were pregame roving reporter Jim Gray (who was also working as a researcher for NBC Sports at the time), Al Roker, who did a brief weather report at the beginning of the pregame show (Roker was already in Miami due to NBC News having sent him there as part of the \"Sunday Today\" coverage) and Marv Albert, who interviewed Sam Wyche and Boomer Esiason after the game. Meanwhile, during NBC's pregame coverage, Ahmad Rashad and John Candy hosted the Diet Pepsi Talent Challenge at the Miami Seaquarium. Also, Frank Deford narrated a special segment profiling recently deceased Pittsburgh Steelers owner Art Rooney.\nThis was also the first NFL game that NBC covered with their new \"Quantel Cypher\" graphics system, which was introduced during their coverage of the 1988 Seoul Olympics (they had used Chyron for their graphics prior to Super Bowl XXIII; the Cypher was also used for the network's presentation of the 1988 World Series). NBC also introduced their \"cursive font\" logo during this broadcast. Before, it was just the 1986 peacock logo with \"NBC SPORTS\" in their generic corporate font.\nWith the win, the 49ers became the first team to win Super Bowls televised on three different networks (CBS\u2013XVI, ABC\u2013XIX, and NBC). Since then, the Washington Redskins (in Super Bowl XXVI), the Green Bay Packers (in Super Bowl XXXI), the Pittsburgh Steelers (in Super Bowl XL), the New York Giants (in Super Bowl XLII), and the New England Patriots (in Super Bowl XLIX) have accomplished this same feat.\nAt the end of NBC's telecast, they played Rod Stewart's \"Forever Young\" against highlights of the past few months of sporting events to air on the network: The Summer Olympics from Seoul, the World Series between the Los Angeles Dodgers and Oakland Athletics, the Fiesta Bowl between the Notre Dame Fighting Irish and West Virginia Mountaineers, and finally Super Bowl XXIII. During the closing credits, NBC used the instrumental tune \"Everglade Run\" by Yanni.\nThis game also marked the debut of the USA Today Super Bowl Ad Meter. The first winner of the annual survey was an ad from American Express starring \"Saturday Night Live\" stars Dana Carvey and Jon Lovitz, who went to the game with different credit cards \u2013 Carvey with American Express, Lovitz with AmEx rival Visa.\nThe game aired on Channel 4 in the United Kingdom and was simulcast on CTV in Canada and Televisa's Canal de las Estrellas in Mexico. For viewers watching the game on AFN TV Europe (Armed Forces Network), AFN and NBC broke for a commercial just before the Montana-Taylor touchdown play. AFN continued their announcements and did not get back to the game until after the touchdown. AFN viewers saw the winning touchdown in replay.\nOn radio, the game was broadcast in the United States by CBS with Jack Buck handling the play-by-play duties and color commentator Hank Stram in the broadcast booth. Brent Musburger hosted the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage with analysts Dick Butkus, Irv Cross and Will McDonough, all from CBS' \"The NFL Today\". Locally, Super Bowl XXIII was broadcast by WKRC-AM in Cincinnati with Phil Samp and former Bengals Ken Anderson and Dave Lapham, and by KGO-AM in San Francisco with Lon Simmons (calling his final game as 49ers play-by-play announcer), Wayne Walker and Joe Starkey (who filled in for Simmons in 1987 and '88 for games which conflicted with the San Francisco Giants before taking over play-by-play full-time in 1989).\nEntertainment.\nThe pregame festivities honored the Miami and South Florida areas, along with a tribute to NASA.\nSinger Billy Joel later sang the national anthem. He also sang the national anthem at Super Bowl XLI, which coincidentally was held at the same venue. The coin toss ceremony featured former Miami Dolphins players Nick Buoniconti, Bob Griese, and Larry Little.\nThis was the last outdoor Super Bowl to start earlier than 6 p.m. Eastern Standard Time, as it started just after 5 p.m.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"Be Bop Bamboozled in 3-D\" and featured an Elvis impersonator, played by then-\"Solid Gold\" dancer Alex Cole, and hundreds of South Florida-area dancers and performers. Two portions of Elvis Presley songs were performed (\"Blue Suede Shoes\" and \"Burning Love\"), and the rest of the show instead featured songs from musicals among other tunes. Several scenes included computer generated 3-D images. Prior to the game, Coca-Cola distributed 3-D glasses at retailers for viewers to use. At the onset of the halftime show, primary sponsor Diet Coke aired the first commercial in 3-D. Coca-Cola had originally planned to use the 3-D Diet Coke commercial as part of the \"Moonlighting\" season finale, which was also aired in 3-D, but withdrew plans due to the 1988 Writers Guild of America Strike.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nSuper Bowl XXIII started out with devastating injuries on both sides. On the third play of the game, 49ers tackle Steve Wallace was taken off the field with a broken ankle and replaced by Bubba Paris. On the 14th play of the game, Bengals defensive lineman Tim Krumrie twisted his ankle nearly 180 degrees, shattering two bones in his left leg. Krumrie was replaced by rookie David Grant.\nAfter the two teams traded punts on their first drives of the game, the 49ers, aided by a roughing the passer penalty and a 17-yard screen pass to fullback Tom Rathman on 3rd-and-10, marched 73 yards from their own 3-yard line to the Bengals 24. But dropped passes, including one by receiver Mike Wilson on the 2-yard line (the first time in a Super Bowl that instant replay was used to reverse a call), forced them to settle for a 41-yard field goal from kicker Mike Cofer.\nOn the 49ers' next drive, Montana threw a pass to wide receiver Jerry Rice, who first tipped it to himself and then made a one-handed catch before stepping out of bounds at the San Francisco 45-yard line.\nSecond quarter.\nThen after reaching the Cincinnati 42-yard line, Montana spotted defensive back Lewis Billups trying to cover Rice one-on-one and made him pay for it by completing a pass to the receiver at the 10. But two plays later on a third-down play, Bengals safety David Fulcher made a touchdown saving tackle at the 2 to keep Rathman from scoring. Cofer then attempted a 19-yard field goal, but a poor snap from center Randy Cross, in his final game, (though NBC's Dick Enberg initially blamed backup guard Chuck Thomas; who lined up next to Cross and split long-snapping duties; primarily on punts) threw off the kicker's timing and his kick sailed wide left. Cofer succeeded Rich Karlis, who missed a 21-yard field goal in Super Bowl XXI, as the kicker with the shortest missed field goal in Super Bowl history, a record that still holds.\nThe 49ers then forced the Bengals to punt on their next drive. On the play, San Francisco Pro Bowl punt returner John Taylor misplayed punter Lee Johnson's kick, and it sailed over his head, bouncing all the way to the 49ers 9 to make it a then-Super Bowl record 63-yard punt. But Taylor made up for his mistake by chasing the ball down and returning it for a then-Super Bowl record 45 yards to the Bengals 46. Thanks to Taylor, a seemingly routine punt had turned into a double record setter. Taylor's Super Bowl record for longest punt return stood for 27 seasons until Super Bowl 50, when Denver Broncos' return specialist Jordan Norwood had a 61-yard return. Johnson's Super Bowl record for longest punt stood for 30 seasons until Super Bowl LIII, when Los Angeles Rams' punter Johnny Hekker had a 65-yard punt.\nHowever, the 49ers were unable to take advantage of their excellent starting field position. On first down, running back Harry Sydney fumbled a pitch from Montana and was downed for a 10-yard loss after he dove on the ball. On the next play, Montana was sacked by defensive lineman David Grant (who replaced Krumrie at nose tackle). Then on third down, Fulcher forced a fumble from 49ers running back Roger Craig, and Bengals defensive end Jim Skow recovered the ball on his own 41. Cincinnati then drove to the San Francisco 42, but after two incomplete passes and defensive end Danny Stubbs's eight-yard sack on Bengals quarterback Boomer Esiason, they were forced to punt. However, Johnson pinned the 49ers back at their own 11. Then the Cincinnati defense limited the 49ers to just one yard on their ensuing drive, and ended up with great field position after defensive back Ray Horton returned San Francisco punter Barry Helton's 37-yard punt five yards to the 49ers 44.\nOn their ensuing drive, the Bengals managed to get into scoring range by driving 28 yards to the San Francisco 16, assisted by an 18-yard completion from Esiason to receiver Tim McGee. But after Esiason's third down pass intended for wide receiver Eddie Brown was overthrown, they were forced to settle for kicker Jim Breech's 34-yard field goal with 1:15 left in the half.\nThe two teams went into their locker rooms tied 3\u20133, the first halftime tie in Super Bowl history, and the lowest halftime score since the Pittsburgh Steelers took a 2\u20130 halftime lead over the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl IX.\nThird quarter.\nOn their opening possession in the second half, the Bengals managed to get a sustained drive going, moving the ball 61 yards in 12 plays and taking 9:15 off the clock. Esiason, who completed only 4 of 12 passes for 48 yards in the first half, completed 3 of 4 passes for 54 yards on the drive, including a 20-yard completion to James Brooks and 23-yard and 11-yard completions to Cris Collinsworth (who was playing in his final game), setting up a 43-yard field goal from Breech to give the Bengals their first lead of the game, 6\u20133. Cincinnati then forced San Francisco to punt, but on the first play of their next drive, 49ers rookie linebacker Bill Romanowski intercepted a pass from Esiason at the Bengals 23. However, after a dropped pass by Rice, the 49ers' offense could not get a first down, and they had to settle for Cofer's 32-yard field goal to tie the game, 6\u20136.\nWith less than a minute left in the third quarter, it appeared that this would become the first Super Bowl ever to go three quarters without either team scoring a touchdown. But on the ensuing kickoff, Stanford Jennings received the ball at the 7, ran straight up the middle behind a wedge of blockers, and burst out of the pack into the open field. 49ers receiver Terry Greer managed to chase him down and trip him up at the 1, but he still fell into the end zone for a 93-yard touchdown return, giving the Bengals a 13\u20136 lead. Jennings joined Fulton Walker as the only other player at that time to return a kickoff for a touchdown in the Super Bowl. In the next three Super Bowls played in what is now Hard Rock Stadium, players duplicated Jennings' feat: Andre Coleman returned a kickoff against the 49ers in Super Bowl XXIX for the San Diego Chargers, Tim Dwight did so for the Atlanta Falcons against the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXIII, and Devin Hester did so for the Chicago Bears against the Indianapolis Colts in Super Bowl XLI.\nBut the 49ers immediately responded with a touchdown of their own on an 85-yard, 4-play drive. First, Montana threw a short pass to Rice, who turned it into a 31-yard gain.\nFourth quarter.\nThen the San Francisco quarterback completed a 40-yard pass to Craig on the first play of the fourth quarter, moving the ball to the Bengals 14. Montana's next pass was nearly intercepted but dropped by Cincinnati cornerback Lewis Billups in the end zone. On the next play, Montana threw a 14-yard touchdown pass to Rice to tie the game at 13.\nCofer's ensuing kickoff went out of bounds, giving the Bengals the ball at their own 35. But they could only reach their 43 before being forced to punt. Taylor nearly turned the ball over by fumbling Johnson's punt, but teammate Darryl Pollard recovered the ball at the San Francisco 18. On the first play of the ensuing drive, Montana completed a 44-yard pass to Rice, and then Craig ran for seven yards, moving the ball to the Bengals 31. But after Craig was tackled for a one-yard loss on the next play, Fulcher broke up a third-down pass intended for Taylor, and then Cofer's 49-yard field attempt sailed wide right.\nThe Bengals took over from their own 32 and regained the lead with a 10-play, 46-yard drive, featuring a 17-yard reception by backup receiver Ira Hillary on third and 13, along with 21 yards on three carries from Ickey Woods and a 12-yard play-action sideline pass to James Brooks. At the end of the drive, Breech kicked a 40-yard field goal, giving the Bengals a 16\u201313 lead with 3:20 left in the game. The 49ers returned the ensuing kickoff to their own 15 with 3:10 on the clock, but an illegal block penalty on the play pushed the ball back half the distance to the goal line to the 8.\nMontana then led an 11-play, 92-yard drive to score the winning touchdown. In order to calm his teammates in the huddle just before the final game-winning drive, Montana pointed into the stadium crowd and said, \"Hey, isn't that John Candy?\" The tactic worked, and the 49ers were able to drive down the field for the win. It became the defining moment of Montana's \"Joe Cool\" reputation. Assuming that the Bengals would expect him to throw the ball near the sidelines (to enable the receivers to step out of bounds to immediately stop the clock), Montana first threw a pair of completions in the middle of the field, one to Craig and one to tight end John Frank. His next pass went to the right sideline, 7 yards to Rice, which was then followed up by a pair of runs by Craig to reach their own 35-yard line. Montana then completed a 17-yard pass to Rice to advance to the Bengals 48-yard line, and followed it up with a 13-yard completion to Craig to move them to the 35-yard line.\nOn the next play, Montana threw his first incomplete pass of the drive, overthrowing Rice. After that, Cross committed an illegal man downfield penalty, which at the time was a 10-yard foul, moving the ball back to the 45 and bringing up second down and 20 with just 1:15 left in the game. But on the next play, Montana hit Rice with a 27-yard completion giving the 49ers the ball at the Cincinnati 18. An eight-yard pass to Craig then advanced San Francisco to the 10. Then with 39 seconds left, Montana finished the drive with a 10-yard TD pass to Taylor on a post pattern down the middle of the field, giving the 49ers a 20\u201316 lead with just 34 seconds remaining.\nThe Bengals returned the kickoff to the 25-yard line, and began their desperation drive with a five-yard completion to the sideline and a 3-yard sack, forcing them to use a timeout with 17 seconds remaining. On third down and eight from their own 27-yard line, Esiason just missed Collinsworth at the San Francisco 45-yard line, with the pass bouncing off Collinsworth's hands as he neared the sideline. On fourth down with ten seconds remaining, Esiason's desperation heave to a big crowd down the left sideline fell incomplete near the San Francisco 25-yard line as time expired, officially securing the victory for the 49ers.\nAlthough Jerry Rice was named MVP, Montana had an MVP-worthy performance, completing 23 of 36 passes for a Super Bowl record 357 yards, throwing for two touchdowns, and gaining 14 rushing yards. Craig finished with 71 yards rushing, and eight receptions for 101 receiving yards. He was the first running back in Super Bowl history to gain 100 receiving yards. Taylor finished the game with a Super Bowl record 56 punt return yards. His 18.7 yards per return was also the highest average in Super Bowl history. Linebacker Charles Haley had six tackles and two sacks. For Cincinnati, Jennings rushed one time for three yards, and gained 117 yards and a touchdown on two kickoff returns. Woods had a game-high 79 rushing yards. The sore-armed Esiason was limited to completing 11 out of 25 passes for 144 yards and an interception. Collinsworth (who retired after the game) was the Bengals' top receiver of the game, but with just three catches for 40 yards.\nThe 49ers became the sixth team to win the Super Bowl over a team with a better regular season record. The 49ers also became the first team since the NFL went to a 16-game schedule in 1978 to win the Super Bowl after winning only 10 games during the regular season. Their six regular season losses were tied for the most ever by a Super Bowl champion, until the 9\u20137 New York Giants won Super Bowl XLVI following the 2011 season. Additionally, the 49ers' 13 combined regular season and postseason wins are tied for the lowest ever for a league champion, also tied with the 2011 New York Giants.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXIII: San Francisco 49ers 20, Cincinnati Bengals 16\n\"at Joe Robbie Stadium, Miami, Florida\nAftermath.\nThis was the final NFL game coached by the 49ers' Bill Walsh, as he retired from NFL coaching. After spending the next three seasons as a broadcaster for NBC, he then coached Stanford from 1992 to 1994. Walsh then returned to the 49ers' front office, first serving as the team's vice president and general manager from 1999 to 2001, and as a consultant from 2002 to 2004.\n49ers center Randy Cross and Bengals wide receiver Cris Collinsworth both retired as players after the game and both subsequently became broadcasters (Cross on CBS, while Collinsworth joined HBO on their show \"Inside The NFL\"); though between 1994 and 1997, both Cross and Collinsworth would be employed as broadcasters for NBC.\nThis was also the final Super Bowl that Pete Rozelle presided over as NFL Commissioner. Paul Tagliabue was selected by league owners as Rozelle's successor in 1989, taking over the post midway through the 1989 season.\nThe Bengals would not appear in another Super Bowl until Super Bowl LVI.\nOn January 26, 2006, NFL.com ranked this game Number 1 on its list of the top 10 Super Bowls of all time. In 2019, in celebrating the 100th season, the NFL ranked the game as the 19th greatest game in NFL history.\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://, http://, http://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXIII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame \u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nBob Beeks became the third person, and first African-American, to officiate five Super Bowls, joining Tom Kelleher and Jack Fette. He was selected for five Super Bowls in ten seasons from 1979-88. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29149", "revid": "1318752777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29149", "title": "Super Bowl XXIV", "text": "1990 Edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXIV was an American football game played to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1989 season between the National Football Conference (NFC) and defending Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos. The 49ers defeated the Broncos by the score of 55\u201310. The game was played on January 28, 1990, at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana. 49ers Quarterback Joe Montana, who set eight player and additional records during the game, was named Super Bowl MVP for the third and final time in his career. \nIt was the 49ers fourth Super Bowl appearance as they finished the 1989 regular season with a league best 14\u20132 record. They entered the game in a bid to become the first back-to-back Super Bowl champions since the Pittsburgh Steelers, following their victory in Super Bowl XXIII the previous year. The Broncos, who posted an 11\u20135 regular season record, entered the Super Bowl looking to avoid tying the Minnesota Vikings with four Super Bowl losses as well as the Vikings record of losing three Super Bowls in four years.\nThroughout the game, the 49ers displayed an insurmountable dominance over the Broncos. Denver consistently struggled throughout the game as the offense was repeatedly stalled and made costly mistakes that the 49ers always capitalized on. Denver's only score of the first half was a field goal made by kicker David Treadwell halfway through the first quarter, making the game 3-27 by halftime. In the second half, the 49ers picked up where they left off. With the exception of Denver's only touchdown of the night in the third quarter, which occurred following a Pass Interference call on San Francisco's defense setting them up to score on the 49ers 1 yard line, the 49ers only continued to take advantage of Denver's offensive struggles, delivering multiple touchdowns and field goals in the remaining two quarters. Now comfortable with their lead, 55-10, 49ers Quarterback Backup Steve Young filled in for Joe Montana as the former, following numerous punts by the Broncos, lead the team to Denver's 30-yard line as the game ended.\nIt was the 49ers' fourth Super Bowl championship, and enabling them to successfully complete the bid to become back-to-back Super Bowl Champions. With the win, the 49ers became only the second NFL/NFC team to repeat since the Green Bay Packers in 1967. The Broncos were handed their fourth Super Bowl loss in franchise history, following losses in 1977's Super Bowl XII, 1986's Super Bowl XXI, and 1987's Super Bowl XXII. The game set numerous Super Bowl records, including the most points scored by one team (55), the largest margin of victory (45 points), and the most touchdowns scored by one team (8).\nRetrospectively, Super Bowl XXIV is considered one of the worst Super Bowls of all time, due to its one-sidedness and the Bronco's struggles. The game's broadcast on CBS marked a low for Super Bowl viewership at around 73.85 million viewers, becoming the lowest Super Bowl audience since 1969's Super Bowl III.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXIV to New Orleans, Louisiana on March 14, 1985, during their March 10\u201315, 1985 meetings held in Phoenix. This would be a record seventh time that New Orleans hosted the Super Bowl. Tulane Stadium was the site of Super Bowls IV, VI, and IX; while the Louisiana Superdome previously hosted XII, XV, and XX.\nOriginally, the selection was to be voted on during the May 23\u201325, 1984 meetings. However, after balloting for XXI took more than two hours, voting for XXIV was rescheduled to the following year. Twelve cities were part of the bidding process, which was scheduled to award two Super Bowls (XXIII and XXIV). The bidding cities included: Anaheim, Detroit, Houston, Jacksonville, Miami, Minneapolis, New Orleans, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Seattle, Tampa, and Tempe. New Orleans entered as the favorite.\nTeams.\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nThe 49ers entered the game seeking to win their second straight Super Bowl. Bill Walsh retired as head coach after San Francisco's 20\u201316 win over the Cincinnati Bengals in the previous year's Super Bowl, but rookie head coach George Seifert did not miss a beat, as he guided the 49ers to a league-best 14\u20132 regular season record. Their two losses were only by a combined margin of 5 points.\nThe 49ers' offense was just as dominating as it was during the previous regular season. Quarterback Joe Montana threw for 3,512 yards, 26 touchdowns, and only 8 interceptions, giving him what was then the highest single-season quarterback rating in NFL history (112.4). Montana also rushed for 227 yards and 3 touchdowns, and earned both the NFL Most Valuable Player Award and the NFL Offensive Player of the Year Award. Wide receiver Jerry Rice had another outstanding season, catching 82 passes for 1,483 yards and 17 touchdowns. Running back Roger Craig was the team's leading rusher with 1,054 yards and 6 touchdowns, and he recorded 49 receptions for 473 yards and another touchdown.\nBut other stars on the 49ers' offense began to emerge, enabling the team to spread the ball around. After being used primarily as a punt returner during his first two seasons, wide receiver John Taylor had a breakout season, catching 60 passes for 1,077 yards and 10 touchdowns, while also returning 36 punts for 417 yards. Tight end Brent Jones recorded 40 receptions for 500 yards. Fullback Tom Rathman had the best season of his career, rushing for 305 yards and catching 73 passes for 616 yards. Kicker Mike Cofer scored 136 points while making a career-high 80.6% of his field goals. Even Montana's backup, Steve Young, had a great year, throwing for 1,001 yards and 8 touchdowns with only 3 interceptions, while also rushing for 126 yards and 2 touchdowns. With all of these weapons, San Francisco's offense led the league in total yards from scrimmage (6,268) and scoring (442 points).\nThe 49ers' defense allowed the third-fewest points in the NFL (253). Defensive end Pierce Holt recorded 10.5 sacks, as did linebacker Charles Haley. In addition to Haley, their linebacking corps was anchored by Keena Turner, Matt Millen, and Bill Romanowski. Future Hall of Fame safety Ronnie Lott led the team with 5 interceptions. Defensive backs Eric Wright and Chet Brooks also combined for 5 interceptions between them.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Broncos were trying to avoid becoming the second team, after the Vikings, to lose a fourth Super Bowl. After appearing in Super Bowl XXI and Super Bowl XXII, the team missed the playoffs with an 8\u20138 record during the 1988 season. But they signed several new players in the offseason to help them win 10 of their first 12 games in 1989 and finish with an 11\u20135 record.\nOne of Denver's new major additions was rookie running back Bobby Humphrey, who rushed for 1,151 yards, caught 22 passes for 156 yards, and scored 8 touchdowns. Humphrey gave the Broncos a powerful running attack that they lacked in their previous Super Bowl seasons. Also new to the team was rookie kicker David Treadwell, who made the Pro Bowl with an 81.8% field goal percentage and ranked third in the NFL with 120 points. The defense, coordinated by Wade Phillips, had a new weapon as well: rookie free safety Steve Atwater. Together with veteran defensive backs Dennis Smith, Wymon Henderson, and Tyrone Braxton, the Broncos' secondary combined for 14 interceptions. Braxton led the team with 6, which he returned for 103 yards and a touchdown, while also recovering 2 fumbles. Linebacker Simon Fletcher lead the team with 105 tackles and 12 sacks, while veteran linebacker Karl Mecklenburg gained 7.5 sacks, 2 forced fumbles, and four fumble recoveries. Another new addition was defensive end Ron Holmes, who recorded 9 sacks. Defensive end Alphonso Carreker added 5.5 sacks.\nVeteran receiver Vance Johnson had the best season of his career, catching 76 passes for 1,095 yards and 7 touchdowns, while also returning 12 punts for 118 yards. However, quarterback John Elway played inconsistently during the regular season, throwing just as many interceptions as touchdowns (18) and recording only a 73.7 passer rating.\nPlayoffs.\nDespite his regular season problems, Elway ended up playing his best during the playoffs. First, he led the Broncos on a late touchdown drive to narrowly defeat the Pittsburgh Steelers, 24\u201323. The Steelers held a 17\u201310 halftime lead before Elway's 37-yard touchdown pass to Vance Johnson tied the game in the third quarter. Then after Pittsburgh scored two field goals to take a 23\u201317 fourth-quarter lead, Elway led the Broncos on a 71-yard drive to score on Melvin Bratton's 1-yard, game-winning touchdown run. On the ensuing drive, Randy Robbins then recovered a Steelers fumble on third down with 2:02 left to clinch the victory.\nThe Broncos then defeated the Cleveland Browns 37\u201321 in the AFC Championship Game. This was the third time in the last four years that both teams faced each other for the AFC Championship, and the previous two resulted in two of the most famous games in NFL Lore: The Drive and The Fumble. In this game, the Broncos seemed to be in complete control at first, building up a 24\u20137 lead. But Browns quarterback Bernie Kosar rallied his team back with two third-quarter touchdowns, cutting the lead to 24\u201321 going into the 4th quarter. Some observers began to wonder if this game would become known as \"The Comeback\". However, Elway destroyed any chance of a Browns comeback by leading the Broncos 80 yards and scoring with a 39-yard touchdown pass to Sammy Winder on the first drive of the 4th quarter. Denver then scored field goals on each of their next two drives to put the game away. Elway finished the game with 385 passing yards, 3 touchdowns, and no interceptions, while also leading Denver in rushing with 5 carries for 39 yards.\nMeanwhile, the 49ers started out their postseason by blowing out the Minnesota Vikings, 41\u201313. Minnesota started out the game by marching 70 yards on their opening drive and scoring a field goal to take a 3\u20130 lead. But the 49ers dominated the rest of the game. On their first play from scrimmage, Montana completed a short pass to Rice, who then took it all the way to the end zone for a 72-yard touchdown reception. The next time they had the ball, Montana led them on another touchdown drive, scoring on a short pass to tight end Brent Jones. Then defensive back Chet Brooks intercepted a pass from Vikings quarterback Wade Wilson and returned it 28 yards, setting up Montana's third touchdown pass on an 8-yard toss to Taylor. Then just before halftime, Montana threw another touchdown pass to Rice, giving the 49ers a 28\u20133 halftime lead. Then in the fourth quarter, San Francisco scored two more touchdowns to put the game away: a 53-yard interception return by Lott and a 4-yard run by Craig. Montana finished the game with 241 passing yards, 4 touchdowns, and no interceptions. Wilson was held to just 9 completions for 74 yards, and was intercepted twice.\nThe 49ers then entered the NFC Championship Game against the Los Angeles Rams, who had defeated San Francisco in one of their two regular season games against them, and were coming off postseason wins against two of the NFC's toughest teams, the New York Giants and the Philadelphia Eagles. The Rams scored first to take a 3\u20130 lead. However, the 49ers took over in the 2nd quarter, scoring 21 unanswered points on two touchdown passes by Montana and a touchdown run by Craig. By halftime, San Francisco had a commanding 21\u20133 lead and went on to a surprisingly easy 30\u20133 win and their second consecutive Super Bowl appearance. Montana had another superb performance, compiling 262 passing yards and 2 touchdowns, again without throwing an interception. Rams quarterback Jim Everett was held to 163 yards and threw 3 interceptions.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nAlthough Elway's performance in the AFC Championship Game was widely considered his best ever, many sports writers and fans believed that the Broncos' best effort would not be good enough to beat the 49ers. After all, Denver had barely defeated the Steelers, who only had a 9\u20137 regular season record, while the 9\u20136\u20131 Cleveland Browns had almost overcome a 17-point second half deficit before Denver put them away in the fourth quarter. Furthermore, the Elway-led Broncos had already lost two Super Bowls. On the other hand, the Montana-led 49ers, with their powerful offense, had already won three Super Bowls.\nMontana came into this game with a 7\u20130 record as a starting quarterback at the Superdome due to the 49ers' dominance of their then-NFC West rival New Orleans Saints. The 49ers' only loss in the Superdome in the 1980s came in 1986, when Mike Moroski started for an injured Montana.\nThe Broncos, as the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, wore their home orange uniforms with white pants. At the time, the Broncos were winless (0\u20132) in Super Bowls while wearing orange. The 49ers would wear white road uniforms with gold pants, which was the same combination they wore in their Super Bowl XVI victory.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS and featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden. Brent Musburger hosted all of \"The Super Bowl Today\" pregame (2 hours), halftime, and postgame events with help from his \"NFL Today\" co-hosts Irv Cross, Dick Butkus, and Will McDonough, along with game analysts Terry Bradshaw, Ken Stabler, and Dan Fouts, and then-Chicago Bears head coach Mike Ditka. Pat O'Brien, meanwhile, was stationed in San Francisco 49ers quarterback Joe Montana's hometown of Monongahela, Pennsylvania. Also contributing to the broadcast coverage were Lesley Visser; a satirical piece on instant replay by Sports Illustrated writer Curry Kirkpatrick, Bernard Goldberg of CBS' \"48 Hours\" and a feature segment of behind-the-scenes video recorded by Denver Broncos receiver Mark Jackson showing the Broncos' preparation for the Super Bowl.\nThis was the last NFL broadcast for the \"NFL Today\" team as it was constructed. Several weeks after the Super Bowl, a management change at CBS resulted in the firing of Brent Musburger; his last event for the network was the call of the 1990 NCAA Men's Basketball Championship Game on April 2. Irv Cross was taken off the studio team and became an analyst instead, serving in that role for two years with Tim Ryan. Dick Butkus returned to acting, while Will McDonough moved over to NBC\u2019s pregame, where he would remain until retiring. CBS went to a two-man studio team for 1990 with Greg Gumbel, who joined CBS from ESPN the prior year, replacing Musburger as host and Terry Bradshaw moving from his prior position as the No. 2 analyst alongside Verne Lundquist to the studio analyst position vacated by Cross. CBS would not return to using a four-man studio team until 1998, coinciding with their return to broadcasting NFL games for the first time since 1993.\nCBS debuted a new graphical package and theme song for their telecasts. The graphics became part of \"The NFL Today\" open while the theme continued to be used on game broadcasts for the next two seasons and replaced the original \"NFL Today\" theme (\"Horizontal Hold\" by Jack Trombey), which had been used in remixed form for the 1989 season. The last use of the actual theme was for the 1991 season's , while a remixed version was used for Super Bowl XXVI's pregame show.\nThis was the last Super Bowl to feature a kickoff time earlier than 6 p.m. ET.\nThe series premiere of \"Grand Slam\" was the Super Bowl lead-out program on CBS.\nThe game drew a national Nielsen rating of 39.0 for CBS, the lowest rating for a Super Bowl game since Super Bowl III in January 1969.\nNissan aired a commercial during Super Bowl XXIV advertising the new Nissan 300ZX Twin Turbo. Executives at Nissan pulled the commercial after the initial airing when they became concerned the commercial would promote street racing since the commercial features the 300ZX being faster than a sport bike, a formula one car and a fighter jet.\nOn radio, the game was broadcast in the United States by CBS and featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Jack Buck and color commentators Hank Stram and Randy Cross. Cross filled in for Stram when the latter was stricken with laryngitis and had to leave the broadcast in the third quarter of the game. Dick Stockton hosted all of the events. Locally, Super Bowl XXIV was broadcast by KGO-AM in San Francisco with Joe Starkey and Wayne Walker and by KOA-AM in Denver with Larry Zimmer and Jim Turner (Zimmer was moved from his normal position as a color commentator when the Broncos' regular play-by-play voice, Bob Martin, became seriously ill the day before the game; eventually losing his battle with cancer just under a month after the game).\nThis game was featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" under the title \"Coronation\".\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show was a salute to Mardi Gras and featured musician and singer David Clayton-Thomas.\nSoul and R&amp;B singer (and New Orleans native) Aaron Neville later sang the national anthem.\nThe coin toss ceremony featured the recent inductees to the Pro Football Hall of Fame: defensive back Mel Blount, quarterback Terry Bradshaw, offensive lineman Art Shell, and safety Willie Wood. Shell, who was then the head coach of the Los Angeles Raiders, became the first active head coach or player to join the coin toss ceremonies. Bradshaw, not to be outdone, joined the ceremonies on the occasion of the 15th anniversary of Super Bowl IX, which had been played at Tulane Stadium and saw the Pittsburgh Steelers win their first world championship.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was a salute to both New Orleans and the 40th anniversary of the comic strip Peanuts. The show featured performances by clarinetist Pete Fountain, fiddle player Doug Kershaw, and singer Irma Thomas \u2013 all Louisiana natives. Three local college bands, Southern University, ULL, and Nicholls State, joined in the performance. The finale featured a float that was dressed up as a riverboat that rose several stories high. The float was so huge that one of the goal posts had to be moved so it could be put on the field.\nGame summary.\nThe 49ers blew out the Broncos by gaining 461 yards of total offense, holding the ball for 39:31, and scoring on eight of their first 11 drives. The San Francisco defense also limited the Broncos to 167 yards, 12 first downs, and 20:29 time of possession, while recording six sacks and forcing four turnovers. The 49ers converted all of the turnovers into touchdowns, needing only four plays total to score on the last three.\nFirst quarter.\nOn their opening possession, the Broncos were forced to punt after a three-and-out, and the 49ers scored on their ensuing drive, marching 66 yards in 10 plays and scoring on a 20-yard touchdown pass from quarterback Joe Montana to wide receiver Jerry Rice.\nThe Broncos responded with a 49-yard drive, mainly on plays by running back Bobby Humphrey, who rushed 4 times for 22 yards and caught a 27-yard shovel pass, quarterback John Elway's longest completion of the game. The drive stalled at the San Francisco 25-yard line, forcing Denver to settle for kicker David Treadwell's 42-yard field goal to cut their deficit to 7\u20133.\nDenver's defense forced a three-and-out on San Francisco's next possession, and wide receiver Vance Johnson gave his team good field position with a 7-yard return to the Broncos' 49-yard line. But on the first play of the drive, Humphrey fumbled the ball while being tackled by defensive end Kevin Fagan, and safety Chet Brooks recovered the loose ball for San Francisco at the 49ers' 46-yard line. At this point, the 49ers completely took over the game.\nOn the first play after the turnover, a 14-yard run by fullback Tom Rathman was nullified by a holding penalty on center Jesse Sapolu, but Montana erased that penalty with a 20-yard pass to Rice. Four plays later, Rathman picked up a first down with a 4-yard run on 4th-and-1. The 49ers then reached the Broncos 10 on a 22-yard reception by Rice and scored on Montana's 7-yard touchdown pass to tight end Brent Jones two plays later. Kicker Mike Cofer missed the extra point attempt wide right, keeping the score at 13\u20133, but it turned out to be the only miscue the 49ers would make for the entire game.\nSecond quarter.\nOnce again, the Broncos were forced to punt three plays after the ensuing kickoff to start the second quarter, and the 49ers advanced 69 yards in 14 plays to score another touchdown. The key player on that drive was Rathman, who caught 3 passes for 39 yards, kept the drive alive with another successful 4th-and-1 conversion, and capped it off with a 1-yard touchdown run two plays later to increase the San Francisco lead to 20\u20133. After the next three possessions ended in punts, with under two minutes left in the first half, 49ers wide receiver John Taylor's 17-yard punt return gave San Francisco the ball at their own 41. In just 5 plays and over a minute, they scored their fourth touchdown of the game on a 38-yard completion from Montana to Rice, increasing their lead to 27\u20133 to end the half.\nThird quarter.\nWhen the second half started, the 49ers picked up right where they left off. After Denver forced San Francisco to punt to start the half, 49ers linebacker Michael Walter intercepted Elway's first pass of the half, and Montana threw a 28-yard touchdown pass to Rice on the next play, increasing the lead to 34\u20133. It was Montana's 10th Super Bowl touchdown pass breaking the previous record of 9 set by Terry Bradshaw. Then Elway was intercepted again on the Broncos' ensuing drive, this time by Brooks, who returned the ball 38 yards to the Denver 37-yard line. The turnover led to yet another San Francisco score. Two plays later, Montana fooled safety Steve Atwater with a pump fake in Rice's direction, and then threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Taylor (his 5th and final touchdown of the game and his 11th and final touchdown pass of his Super Bowl career), making the score 41\u20133 just over 5 minutes into the quarter. San Francisco had scored three touchdowns in less than 6 minutes to blow open the game.\nDenver's lone touchdown came on their next possession, a 61-yard, 5-play drive. First, Broncos safety Darren Carrington returned the ensuing kickoff from his own goal line to the 39-yard line. Elway's 13-yard completion to Johnson, a 34-yard run by Humphrey, and a pass interference penalty on 49ers linebacker Bill Romanowski moved the ball to the San Francisco 1-yard line. Two plays later, Elway capped off the drive with a 3-yard touchdown run, cutting their deficit to 41\u201310.\nFourth quarter.\nHowever, the 49ers continued to dominate the Broncos. San Francisco responded to Denver's score with an 11-play, 75-yard drive that took 6:56 off the clock. The drive included two runs and a reception by running back Roger Craig for a total of 26 yards, two runs by Rathman for a total of 22 yards, and a 12-yard reception by Rice. On the first play of the fourth quarter, Rathman finished the drive with a 3-yard touchdown run, giving the 49ers a 48\u201310 lead. Then after the ensuing kickoff, Elway was sacked for a 6-yard loss by defensive end Danny Stubbs. After an offsides penalty on linebacker Antonio Goss, cornerback Don Griffin strip-sacked Elway, and Stubbs returned the fumble 15 yards to Denver's 1-yard line before he was tackled by running back Steve Sewell and center Keith Kartz. Craig then closed out the scoring with the 49ers' eighth and final touchdown of the game, a 1-yard run, on the next play to make the final score of the game 55\u201310 in favor of San Francisco. The 49ers scored two touchdowns in this quarter before two minutes had elapsed. \nSan Francisco, now comfortable with their lead, but still with nearly an entire quarter left to play, had Steve Young fill in for Montana for the remainder of the game. After the next three possessions resulted in punts, the 49ers reached the Broncos 30 to end the game.\nRice finished the game with 7 receptions for 148 yards and a Super Bowl record 3 receiving touchdowns. He joined Craig as the only players to score three touchdowns in a Super Bowl (Craig did it in Super Bowl XIX \u2013 2 receiving and 1 rushing). Craig was the leading rusher of the game with 69 rushing yards and a touchdown, while also catching 5 passes for 34 yards. Rathman rushed for 38 yards and 2 touchdowns while also catching 4 passes for 43 yards. Taylor caught 3 passes for 49 yards and a touchdown and added another 38 yards on 3 punt returns. Elway was held to a passer rating of 19.4 on just 10 completions out of 26 attempts for 108 yards with no touchdowns and 2 interceptions. He managed to run for a touchdown, but fumbled twice (although he recovered one of them). Humphrey was Denver's leading rusher and receiver, with 61 rushing yards and 3 receptions for 38 yards. Carrington returned 6 kickoffs for 146 yards.\nA photo essay titled \"Ranking the Super Bowls\", written by media analyst Elliot Harrison and featuring Dallas personnel man Gil Brandt, ranked Super Bowl XXIV the lowest of the first 50 played. The article was published on the NFL's website.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXIV: San Francisco 49ers 55, Denver Broncos 10\n\"at Louisiana Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana\nAftermath.\nMontana and the 49ers looked to win a third consecutive Super Bowl in 1990 and once again finished with the league's best record at 14\u20132. However, in the that season, the 49ers were defeated by the New York Giants on a field goal as time expired. During the game, Montana was sacked from his blind side by Leonard Marshall and was forced to leave the game with a series of injuries including a broken finger, a bruised back, and a concussion. Later, it was discovered that Montana suffered an injury to his throwing elbow in the game and it was severe enough to cost him the entire 1991 season. Montana's injuries, which kept him out of fifteen games in 1992 as well, paved the way for Steve Young to become the 49ers' starting quarterback full-time and Montana was eventually traded to the Kansas City Chiefs in 1993. Young would win the 49ers another Super Bowl title in 1995 in Super Bowl XXIX.\nAfter Super Bowl XXIV, Elway and the Broncos entered a period of decline. 1990 saw them fall to 5\u201311, which put them last in the AFC West. While they returned to the playoffs in 1991, the Broncos failed to make the Super Bowl after losing the to the Buffalo Bills. That marked the first time in their existence that Denver lost a conference championship game. They eventually returned to success as Elway led the team to an NFL-best 13\u20133 record in 1996, only to lose , against the Jacksonville Jaguars. Incidentally, that was the final time in Elway's career that he would lose a playoff game. After his three previous attempts had gone unsuccessfully, Elway led the Broncos to Super Bowl XXXII where they finally broke through and won the Super Bowl for the first time in franchise history, over the Green Bay Packers. A year later, in what later proved to be the final game of his career, Elway led the Broncos to another victory in the Super Bowl as Denver won Super Bowl XXXIII 34\u201319 over the Atlanta Falcons and was named the game's Most Valuable Player.\nMontana, Young and Elway would meet again in the player introduction and coin toss ceremonies at Super Bowl 50 in Santa Clara, California. Elway and Terrell Davis were named honorary captains for the Broncos, while Young presented the ceremonial coin for the game. Montana flipped the coin while Elway called the toss on behalf of the then-current captains of the Broncos and Carolina Panthers. The Broncos went on to win their third world championship, 24-10.\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXIV, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2022 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis is also the first and only NFL game to end with a final score of 55\u201310, which is scorigami.\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;"}
{"id": "29150", "revid": "32968044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29150", "title": "Super Bowl XXV", "text": "1991 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXV was an American football championship game featuring an all-New York matchup between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Buffalo Bills and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion New York Giants to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1990 season. The Giants defeated the Bills by the score of 20\u201319, winning their second Super Bowl. This was the first Super Bowl to feature two teams representing the same state.\nThe game was held at Tampa Stadium in Tampa, Florida, on January 27, 1991, and was the last time a Super Bowl would be held at Tampa Stadium (replaced by the Raymond James Stadium). A memorable performance of \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" by Whitney Houston and the Florida Orchestra preceded the game. Jazz musician John Clayton arranged the piece. ABC, which broadcast the game in the United States, did not air the halftime show (which was headlined by the American boy band New Kids on the Block) live. Instead, the network televised a special \"ABC News\" report anchored by Peter Jennings on the progress of the ongoing Gulf War, then aired the halftime show on tape delay after the game.\nThe Bills and their explosive no-huddle offense were making their first of four consecutive Super Bowl appearance after finishing the regular season with a 13\u20133 record, and leading the league in total points scored with 428. In advancing to their second Super Bowl, the Giants also posted a 13\u20133 regular-season record, but with a ball-control offense and a defense that allowed a league-low 211 points. Super Bowl XXV became the first Super Bowl to feature two teams representing the same state, even though the Giants technically play in New Jersey.\nThe game is known for Bills placekicker Scott Norwood's last-second missed field goal attempt that went wide right of the uprights, starting a four-game losing streak in the Super Bowl for the Bills. The game became the first (and so far only) Super Bowl decided by one point and the first Super Bowl in which neither team committed a turnover. The Giants set a Super Bowl record-holding possession of the ball for 40 minutes and 33 seconds. The Giants also overcame a 12\u20133 second-quarter deficit and made a 75-yard touchdown drive that consumed a Super Bowl-record 9:29 off the clock. Giants running back Ottis Anderson, who carried the ball 21 times for 102 yards and one touchdown, was named Super Bowl MVP. He was the first awardee to receive the newly named \"Pete Rozelle Trophy\" (named for the former commissioner, Pete Rozelle). Anderson also recorded one reception for seven yards. The NFL in its 100 Greatest Games series ranked it at number 10.\nAs with Super Bowl XXI, Phil Simms, who quarterbacked the victor Giants, would notably state \"I'm going to Disney World!\" immediately after the game on live television (Disney sponsored the pregame and halftime shows, and took ownership of ABC five years later). This phrase (sometimes with Disneyland substituted) became a tradition for players on winning teams after the game.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXV to Tampa during a May 20, 1987 owners meeting held at Coronado, California. It was the second time that Tampa hosted the game; the city previously hosted XVIII on January 22, 1984. Voting for the \"silver anniversary\" Super Bowl drew bids from Tampa (Tampa Stadium), San Diego (Jack Murphy Stadium), Anaheim (Anaheim Stadium), Los Angeles (Coliseum), and Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium). The voting process took six ballots, and eventually narrowed down to two finalists: Tampa and San Diego. Anaheim and Los Angeles were eliminated on the first ballot, then Miami (already scheduled to host XXIII), was eliminated on the second. \nAfter three additional rounds, neither Tampa nor San Diego could garner the desired &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 vote (21 of 28 owners). To break the stalemate, the vote switched to a simple majority. Though the final tally was kept secret, Tampa was said to have won by a close margin of only 2\u20133 votes. The Tampa Bay area won by virtue of proven success hosting XVIII, and the plans to move the Gasparilla Pirate Festival to Super Bowl week. San Diego was slated to host XXII, but since that day had not yet come, some owners were reluctant to award the city a second Super Bowl before they completed their first.\nNew York Giants.\nThe 1990 New York Giants were built to head coach Bill Parcells's specifications of \"power football\": a strong defense and an offense meant to sustain extremely long drives. The Giants' defense ranked second in the league in fewest total yards allowed (4,392) and first in fewest points allowed, and boasted three Pro Bowl selections: defensive tackle Erik Howard, and linebackers Pepper Johnson and Lawrence Taylor (10.5 sacks and 1 interception). Linebacker Gary Reasons was also a strong force with 3 interceptions and 3 fumble recoveries. The secondary was led by defensive back Everson Walls, an offseason acquisition from the Dallas Cowboys, who recorded six interceptions, and safety Greg Jackson, who recorded five interceptions and four sacks. The Giants' offense was unspectacular, ranking just 17th in the league in yards gained and 13th in points scored. Despite that, they wore down opposing teams' defenses with extremely long drives, thus keeping their opponents' offense on the sidelines and preventing them from scoring. More importantly, the Giants set an NFL record by losing only 14 turnovers in a 16-game regular season. A big reason for the team's offensive success was the blocking of linemen Bart Oates and William Roberts, the only Pro Bowlers on the offense. Ottis Anderson was the team's leading rusher with 784 yards and 11 touchdowns, while also catching 18 passes for 139 yards. Kick returner Dave Meggett led the NFL in punt return yards (467), while also gaining 492 yards on kickoff returns, rushing for 164 yards, and catching 39 passes for 410 yards.\nNew York began the regular season by winning their first ten games, and then went into a tailspin and lost three of their next four. One week after losing to division rival Philadelphia Eagles, 31\u201313, the 10\u20131 Giants met defeat on \"Monday Night Football\" in a 7\u20133 defensive battle with the 10\u20131 San Francisco 49ers, who had won the previous two Super Bowls and ultimately finished the regular season with an NFL best 14\u20132 record. Then, in their 17\u201313 loss to the Bills, New York suffered a setback when starting quarterback Phil Simms, who had thrown for 2,284 yards and 15 touchdowns with only four interceptions during the year, went down for the season with a broken bone in his foot.\nSimms's replacement, Jeff Hostetler, had started only two games in his seven years as a backup with the Giants. However, Hostetler displayed polished passing and scrambling ability in his limited playing time during the season, and threw only one interception and committed no fumbles. With Hostetler at the helm, the Giants responded by winning their final two games to finish the regular season 13\u20133, good enough to win the NFC East and earn the second seed in the NFC playoffs.\nBuffalo Bills.\nThe Bills had a very talented team with nine Pro Bowl selections on their roster. Their defense was led by defensive end Bruce Smith, who recorded 19 sacks, forced four fumbles, and won the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award. Behind him, three of the Bills' starting linebackers, Darryl Talley, Shane Conlan, and Cornelius Bennett, were selected to the Pro Bowl. Defensive back Kirby Jackson led the team in interceptions with 3. On special teams, Pro Bowler Steve Tasker was a dominant threat, forcing fumbles, delivering jarring tackles, and blocking kicks.\nDespite their good defense, it was the Bills' flashy, high-powered offense that gained the most attention. Unlike the Giants, the Bills routinely used the no-huddle tactic to storm down the field and score points very quickly. Instead of going into a huddle after each play, quarterback Jim Kelly would immediately send his offense back to the line of scrimmage and make the call there after reading the defense. This strategy prevented opposing defenses from reading the Bills' formation correctly, making substitutions, or even catching their breath.\nThe Bills' no-huddle K-Gun offense worked well enough for Kelly to finish the regular season as the top-rated quarterback in the NFL (101.2), throwing for 2,829 yards, 24 touchdowns, and only nine interceptions. One reason for his success was that he had two outstanding wide receivers: future Hall of Famer Andre Reed, who made his specialty going across the middle on slants and crossing routes, recorded 71 receptions, 945 yards, and 8 touchdowns, and future Hall of Famer James Lofton, who was the big threat with 35 receptions for 712 yards (a 20.3 yards per catch average). Tight end Keith McKeller contributed 34 receptions for 464 yards and five touchdowns. Pro Bowl running back Thurman Thomas had an AFC-best 1,297 rushing yards, caught 49 passes for 532 yards, and scored 13 touchdowns. Thomas also led the NFL in yards from scrimmage for the second consecutive season. A key to the Bills' prolific offense was the blocking of its superb offensive line, led by All-Pro center Kent Hull and Pro Bowl left tackle Will Wolford.\nEven though Kelly missed the last two games of the season with a knee injury, suffered in the same game in which the Giants lost Simms, the Bills finished with a 13\u20133 regular season record.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Giants began their championship postseason run by a trivial elimination of the Chicago Bears, 31\u20133. In leading the Giants' \"power football\" offense, Hostetler threw only 17 passes, but two went for touchdowns and he threw no interceptions. He also directed a rushing attack that gained 194 yards, including 43 (and a touchdown) from Hostetler himself. This game offered a preview of what lay in store for Super Bowl XXV, as the Giants scored on drives of 75, 80, 49, and 51 yards, which lasted nine, 11, 11, and 16 plays, respectively. Overall, New York held the ball for 38:22, compared to Chicago's 21:38. However, New York lost another key player for the season when rookie running back Rodney Hampton, the team's second-leading rusher during the regular season with 455 yards, suffered a broken leg.\nThe following Sunday, the Giants upset the San Francisco 49ers 15\u201313 in the . The 49ers, an NFL-best 14\u20132 in the regular season and winners of the last two Super Bowls, were 8-point favorites at kickoff. Their outstanding defense was led by future Hall of Fame defensive back Ronnie Lott and linebacker Charles Haley, who led the NFC in sacks. San Francisco's offense was considered the best in the NFC, led by future Hall of Fame quarterback Joe Montana and wide receiver Jerry Rice. However, except for a 61-yard touchdown pass from Montana to wide receiver John Taylor, the Giants contained the 49ers' offense very well. A sack by Giants defensive end Leonard Marshall early in the fourth quarter knocked Montana out of the game. Despite their super defensive effort, the Giants still trailed 13\u20139 midway through the fourth quarter, but a 30-yard run from linebacker Gary Reasons on a fake punt set up kicker Matt Bahr's fourth field goal, cutting their deficit to 13\u201312. The 49ers (now led by Steve Young) tried to run out the clock on their ensuing possession, but running back Roger Craig had the ball dislodged by nose tackle Erik Howard, and Lawrence Taylor recovered the fumble in mid-air with 2:36 remaining. Five plays later, Bahr kicked his fifth field goal, a 41-yarder, as time expired to give New York the win.\nAs for the Bills, Jim Kelly returned from his injury to lead Buffalo to a 44\u201334 playoff victory over the Miami Dolphins. The Bills jumped to an early 20\u20133 lead, but Miami quarterback Dan Marino rallied his team back and cut Buffalo's lead to 30\u201327 going into the fourth quarter. However, Buffalo scored a touchdown on their first drive of the period with a 5-yard run by Thurman Thomas. Kicker Scott Norwood then recovered a fumble from Miami on the ensuing kickoff, allowing the Bills to put the game away with Kelly's 26-yard touchdown pass to Andre Reed. Kelly finished the game with 336 passing yards, three touchdowns, and 37 rushing yards. Reed was also a major factor, recording 123 receiving yards and a pair of touchdown catches. James Lofton caught seven passes for 149 yards and a touchdown. Thomas led the Bills' ground attack with 32 carries for 117 rushing yards and two touchdowns, while also catching three passes for 38 yards.\nBuffalo then crushed the Los Angeles Raiders 51\u20133 in the , the most lopsided score in AFC Championship Game history. The Bills' defense dominated the Raiders' offense, which was without running back Bo Jackson, who suffered a career-ending injury against the Cincinnati Bengals the week before, limiting them to an early field goal and intercepting five passes from quarterback Jay Schroeder. Meanwhile, the Bills' offense racked up 502 yards, piling up yards and points so fast the game was out of reach by the end of the first half. Kelly was 17 of 23 for 300 yards passing, and two touchdowns to Lofton. Thomas had 138 yards rushing, 61 yards receiving, and his backup, Kenneth Davis, tied a playoff record with three touchdowns.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nThe Bills and the Giants entered the game using contrasting styles. While the Bills led the league in total points scored (428), the Giants led the league in fewest points allowed (211). The teams had also met earlier in the season on December 15: the Bills defeated the Giants at Giants Stadium, 17\u201313, in a game which was close, but would prove to be not as close as Super Bowl XXV.\nThe Bills were thus heavily favored to win Super Bowl XXV. Most experts expected that the Giants' defense would not be able to contain the Bills' turbo-charged no-huddle offense, which had scored 95 points in 2 playoff games. Many also questioned how effective the Giants' offense would be after failing to score a single touchdown in the NFC Championship Game.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Giants wore their home blue uniforms and white pants. The Bills donned their road all-white uniforms, which marked the only time they wore white in their four consecutive Super Bowl appearances. Both teams wore a patch with the game logo on the left shoulder of their jersey to commemorate the silver anniversary of the Super Bowl. This would not become a Super Bowl standard until Super Bowl XXXII.\nWith the Gulf War having begun 10 days prior to this Super Bowl's scheduled date of January 27; rumors had begun circulating of a possible delay or cancellation of the conference championship games and the Super Bowl. However, the NFL quickly denied those rumors by stating the games would go on as scheduled.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by ABC. An estimated 750 million viewers worldwide have watched the Super Bowl. The broadcast featured the \"Monday Night Football\" team of play-by-play announcer Al Michaels and color commentators Frank Gifford and Dan Dierdorf. Brent Musburger hosted all the events with the help of then-ABC Sports analysts Bob Griese and Dick Vermeil, Musburger's regular color commentator on ABC's college football telecasts; with other contributors including Jack Arute, Bob Griese, Beth Ruyak, Jack Whitaker and ABC News correspondent Judd Rose (reporting from Saudi Arabia) as well as an interview with NFL Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.\nSponsors Coca-Cola and Diet Pepsi had to withdraw planned contest promotions or advertisements, due to the Gulf War situation. PepsiCo's contest, a heavily promoted $3 million giveaway in which viewers would be invited to call a toll-free number during the first three quarters; with the caller receiving a Diet Pepsi coupon and an opportunity to win one of 3 prizes totaling $1 million each, was also withdrawn under pressure from the telephone communications industry, the FCC, and Congress due to fears that the contest would cripple the \ntelephone system. Specifically, subscribers in much of the country could have been prevented from receiving a dial tone for as long as a minute due to the expected torrent of calls.\nCBS aired the game nationally on radio. Jack Buck served as play-by-play with Hank Stram as color commentator. In the teams' local markets, the game was carried on WNEW-AM in New York City with Jim Gordon, Dick Lynch, and Karl Nelson and WGR in Buffalo, New York with Van Miller, Ed Rutkowski, and Pete Weber.\nThe game was broadcast in the United Kingdom on Channel 4, in Mexico on the Canal de las Estrellas, in Canada on Global Television Network and in Venezuela on Venevisi\u00f3n. Because of the Gulf War situation, this marked the first time the Super Bowl aired in most countries around the world. Outside of North America and England, this Super Bowl aired for the first time in countries such as Australia and Russia.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nWhitney Houston performed \"The Star-Spangled Banner\" for Super Bowl XXV, backed by the Florida Orchestra under the direction of Maestro Jahja Ling. With America involved in the Gulf War, the positive response to the rousing performance was overwhelming; it would later see a release as a single and a video. It reached number 20 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 \u2013 making her the only act to turn the national anthem into a pop hit of that magnitude.\nHouston's rendition was critically acclaimed and is considered among the best performances of the U.S. national anthem in history. The \"\" album includes this music track. Following 9/11, the single was re-released by Arista Records, peaking at number 6 on the Hot 100 and was certified platinum by the RIAA.\nFormer NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle joined the coin toss ceremony.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"A Small World Salute to 25 Years of the Super Bowl\". Produced by Disney, it featured over 3,500 local children from different ethnic backgrounds and a performance by boy band New Kids on the Block, with special guest Warren Moon.\nABC did not broadcast the halftime show live. Instead, they televised a special ABC News report anchored by Peter Jennings on the progress of the Gulf War. The halftime show was later shown on tape delay after the game at around 10:40 EST, although most ABC affiliates ran the first episode of \"Davis Rules\" following the Super Bowl, and may have televised the remaining parts of the halftime show later.\nGame summary.\nTo counteract the Bills' no-huddle offense, the Giants' used a tough-nosed, conservative plan on both sides of the ball. On offense, the plan was to use a power running game utilizing Ottis Anderson, aided by quarterback rollouts, bootlegs, and play-action fakes. As tight end Mark Bavaro later recalled, \"We came out with three tight ends, fat slobs picking you up and moving you and letting you tackle O.J. [Anderson], if you could.\" This enabled them to take time off the clock and limit Buffalo's possessions. The Giants set a Super Bowl record for time of possession with 40 minutes and 33 seconds, including 22 minutes in the second half.\nOn defense, New York wanted to be physical with Buffalo's wideouts, and play with extra defensive backs to concentrate on stopping the Bills' passing game, while shifting focus away from trying to stop Buffalo's running game. In his book \"The Education of a Coach\", David Halberstam wrote that one of defensive coordinator Bill Belichick's specific plans to combat the Bills involved convincing his defense (who had been the best unit against the run in the NFL that season) that they would win the game if Thurman Thomas ran for more than 100 yards. Belichick also felt that Jim Kelly was not as good at reading defenses as some other elite quarterbacks were (for example, Joe Montana), and that Kelly tended to \"freeze\" what he was seeing from a series and then use that information on the next one, which meant the Giants could be a step ahead of him all game if they alternated their cover plans from drive to drive.\nFirst quarter.\nThe contrast in strategies was evident during the first quarter. After forcing the Bills to punt on their opening drive of the game, the Giants consumed 6:15 off the clock by marching 58 yards in 11 plays to score on a 28-yard field goal from kicker Matt Bahr. In that drive, New York ran six rushing plays, which included a 10-yard run by running back Dave Meggett, and five passing plays, which included quarterback Jeff Hostetler's passes for 13 and 16 yards to tight end Howard Cross and wide receiver Mark Ingram, respectively. However, Buffalo struck right back on their ensuing possession with a 6-play, 66-yard drive that took 1:23 off the clock, which included a 61-yard pass from quarterback Jim Kelly that was tipped by Giants cornerback Perry Williams, but caught by Bills wide receiver James Lofton to set up 1st-and-goal for Buffalo at the New York 8-yard line. However, the Giants' defense kept the Bills out of the end zone, forcing them to settle for kicker Scott Norwood's 23-yard field goal to tie the game, 3\u20133.\nAfter forcing New York to punt on their ensuing possession, Buffalo's offensive strategy started to work to perfection. Kelly led the Bills on a 12-play, 80-yard scoring drive that consumed 4:27 and moved the ball so effectively that the team never faced a third down. Kelly completed six consecutive passes (four to wide receiver Andre Reed) for 62 yards, and running back Don Smith capped off the drive with a 1-yard touchdown run to give Buffalo their first lead of the game, 10\u20133, early in the second quarter. Smith's touchdown was his only carry of the game and the last carry of his career. Reed's five receptions in the first quarter were a Super Bowl record.\nSecond quarter.\nAfter the teams traded punts, Bills punter Rick Tuten's 43-yard kick pinned the Giants at their own 7-yard line. On second down, after New York center Bart Oates was flagged for holding, Buffalo defensive end Bruce Smith sacked Hostetler in the end zone for a safety, increasing the Bills' lead to 12\u20133. On the play, Smith had a chance to force a fumble, since Hostetler was holding the football with only his throwing hand, but Hostetler held the ball away from Smith, ensuring that only two points would be surrendered.\nAfter the next three possessions ended in punts, the Giants got the ball at their own 13-yard line with 3:43 left in the second quarter. They abandoned their long-drive strategy and employed a quick-strike attack of their own. It worked, as Hostetler led the Giants on a 10-play, 87-yard drive, which featured an 18-yard run by running back Ottis Anderson, a 22-yard reception by Ingram, and a 16-yard run by Meggett. The drive ended with Hostetler's 14-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Stephen Baker with just 25 seconds left in the half, cutting New York's deficit to 12\u201310.\nThird quarter.\nThe Giants opened the third quarter and resumed their original game strategy by driving 75 yards in 14 plays to score on Anderson's 1-yard touchdown run, giving the Giants a 17\u201312 lead. The drive consumed a then-Super Bowl record of 9:29 (since surpassed by the Giants themselves in Super Bowl XLII) and included four successful third down conversions. The highlight of the drive was a 14-yard reception by Ingram on 3rd-and-13, in which he caught a short pass from Hostetler and broke five tackles by the Buffalo defense to get the first down and keep the drive alive. With his touchdown included, Anderson recorded five runs for a total of 37 yards during the drive. By this point, the Bills' offense had gone nearly two hours of real-time (counting the halftime show) since they last possessed the ball.\nAfter forcing the Bills to punt on their ensuing possession, a bad punt by Tuten set the Giants up with good field position at their own 42. They drove to the Buffalo 35-yard line, aided by a 10-yard reception by Cross, a defensive holding penalty on Bills cornerback Nate Odomes, and a 9-yard reception by Ingram. But when New York elected to convert 4th-and-2, Bruce Smith tackled Anderson for a 2-yard loss, giving the ball back to Buffalo on their own 37.\nFourth quarter.\nImmediately after the turnover on downs, the Bills advanced 63 yards in just four plays. Kelly completed a 9-yard pass to running back Thurman Thomas, followed by a pair of passes to running back Kenneth Davis for a gain of 23 yards. On the first play of the fourth quarter, Thomas broke three tackles by the Giants' defense and went the distance for a 31-yard touchdown run, putting the Bills back in front with a 19\u201317 lead. Thomas' touchdown marked 1,000 points scored in Super Bowl history (1,001 with the extra point). However, before the Buffalo defense had a chance to catch their breath, they found themselves back on the field trying to contain another long New York drive. This one went for 14 plays and 74 yards, half of which came off three passes from Hostetler to tight end Mark Bavaro and took 7:32 off the clock. The Bills managed to halt the drive at their own 3-yard line when linebacker Cornelius Bennett broke up Hostetler's third down pass, but Bahr kicked a 21-yard field goal to give the Giants the lead again, 20\u201319. On the Bills' ensuing possession, they could only advance to their own 41-yard line before having to punt, enabling the Giants to take more time off the clock. Buffalo finally forced New York to punt and took the ball at their own 10-yard line after a 38-yard punt by Sean Landeta, getting one more chance for a game-winning drive with 2:16 remaining.\nOn the Bills' final possession, Kelly led the team down the field with a mix of scrambles, short passes, and a pair of runs by Thomas, of which the last was for a critical 11 yards, managing to get the Bills to the Giants 29-yard line, just within field goal range with eight seconds to play. Norwood attempted a 47-yard game-winning field goal from the right hash of the 37-yard line, with backup quarterback Frank Reich the holder and center Adam Lingner the long snapper. (At the two-minute warning, ABC put up a graphic that showed Norwood's career history of field goal attempts of 40+ yards on grass fields; he was 1 for 5.) Norwood's kick sailed wide right, less than a yard outside of the goalpost upright. After Norwood's miss, the Giants ran out the clock to win their second Super Bowl title.\nThere were many impressive performances in the game by players from both teams. Jim Kelly completed 18 of 30 passes for 212 yards with no interceptions, while adding another 23 yards on six rushing attempts. Jeff Hostetler completed 20 of 32 passes for 222 yards and a touchdown, and rushed for 10 yards. Dave Meggett recorded 129 combined net yards (48 rushing, 18 receiving, 37 on punt returns, 26 on kickoff returns). But the best performances came from both teams' starting running backs. Ottis Anderson rushed for 102 yards, caught a pass for seven yards, and scored a touchdown. Thurman Thomas scored a touchdown, rushed for 135 yards, and caught five passes for 55 yards, giving him 190 total yards from scrimmage. Thomas' 135 yards are the most yards rushing for a member of a losing team. This was also only the second Super Bowl to have two 100-yard rushers. In Super Bowl III, New York Jets fullback Matt Snell recorded 121 rushing yards while Baltimore Colts halfback Tom Matte ran for 116. In lieu of saying the traditional \"I'm going to Disney World\", MVP O.J. Anderson said \"I'm dedicating this win for our troops\", although he was given the option of saying the former.\nAftermath.\nThe defensive game plan for the Giants, written by then-defensive coordinator Bill Belichick, has been included in the Pro Football Hall of Fame. The Giants' triumph helped Belichick and wide receivers coach Tom Coughlin make their names and eventually land head-coaching jobs with the Cleveland Browns and Boston College, respectively. Belichick was head coach of the New England Patriots, while Coughlin went from Boston College to be the first head coach for the Jacksonville Jaguars, and spent 12 seasons as the head coach of the New York Giants before resigning in 2016. Giants head coach Bill Parcells retired shortly after winning his second Super Bowl with the Giants. However, he went on to coach three other teams since then: the New England Patriots (whom he helped bring to Super Bowl XXXI) from 1993\u20131996, the New York Jets from 1997\u20131999, and the Dallas Cowboys from 2003\u20132006. Both Coughlin and Belichick have gone on to win Super Bowls as head coaches: Belichick with the Patriots in Super Bowls XXXVI, XXXVIII, XXXIX, XLIX, LI, and LIII; Coughlin with the Giants in Super Bowls XLII and XLVI, coincidentally both against Belichick's Patriots.\nIt was the first Super Bowl (and NFL Playoff game) in which neither team committed a turnover. The only other Super Bowl to date without a turnover is Super Bowl XXXIV, in which the St. Louis Rams defeated the Tennessee Titans 23\u201316. Because of Thomas's high production, some sports writers, such as \"Sports Illustrated\"'s Paul Zimmerman, felt that he should have won the game MVP even though his team lost, just as Chuck Howley had done in Super Bowl V.\nJim Kelly was the fourth starting quarterback to lose their Super Bowl debut and eventually make it back, after Craig Morton, whose Cowboys lost Super Bowl V to the Baltimore Colts but then got their redemption the next year in Super Bowl VI against the Dolphins, Bob Griese, who was the starting QB for the Dolphins in said loss but went on to get their redemption in Super Bowl VII the next year and then defend their title a year later, and John Elway, whose Broncos lost Super Bowl XXI but reached Super Bowl XXII the next year only to lose again. They eventually triumphed by winning back to back Super Bowls in XXXII and XXXIII. Kelly was the final starting quarterback to lose his Super Bowl debut and return until Jalen Hurts, whose Eagles reached Super Bowl LVII in 2023 but fell short against the Kansas City Chiefs, and then in 2025 reached Super Bowl LIX two years later with the two teams meeting again and the Eagles coming out on top.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXV: New York Giants 20, Buffalo Bills 19\n\"at Tampa Stadium, Tampa, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nSuper Bowl XXV was the first Super Bowl where no new player records were set. Three players tied a record. One single team record was set according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2022 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nLegacy.\nThe game, including the missed field goal at the end, is mentioned in a conversation in the campaign mode of \"\" in a mission that took place 6 days later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29151", "revid": "6204540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29151", "title": "Super Bowl XXVI", "text": "1992 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXVI was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Washington Redskins and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Buffalo Bills to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1991 season. The Redskins defeated the Bills by a score of 37\u201324, becoming the fourth team after the Pittsburgh Steelers, the now Las Vegas Raiders and the San Francisco 49ers to win three Super Bowls. The Bills became the third team, after the Minnesota Vikings (Super Bowls VIII and IX) and the Denver Broncos (Super Bowls XXI and XXII) to lose back-to-back Super Bowls. The game was played on January 26, 1992, at the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the first time the city played host to a Super Bowl.\nBoth teams finished the regular season with the best record in their respective conferences. The Redskins posted a 14\u20132 regular season record, and led the league during the regular season with 485 points. Washington head coach Joe Gibbs entered the game seeking his third Super Bowl victory with the team, but with his third starting Super Bowl quarterback, Mark Rypien. The Bills finished the regular season with a 13\u20133 record and advanced to their second consecutive Super Bowl, largely through the play of quarterback Jim Kelly and their \"K-Gun\" no-huddle offense. However, their defense ranked second to last in the league in total yards allowed.\nSuper Bowl XXVI was dominated by Washington. Early in the second quarter, the Redskins jumped out to a 17\u20130 lead from which the Bills could not recover. Washington also sacked Kelly four times and intercepted him four times. Rypien, who completed 18 of 33 passes for 292 yards, two touchdowns and an interception, was named Super Bowl MVP.\nThe telecast of the game on CBS was seen by an estimated 79.6 million viewers. This was the first time that a major television network successfully scheduled Super Bowl counterprogramming: Fox aired a special live football-themed episode of its popular sketch comedy show \"In Living Color\" during the halftime show.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXVI to Minneapolis during their May 24, 1989, meeting in New Orleans. Indianapolis (Hoosier Dome), Detroit (Pontiac Silverdome), and Seattle (Kingdome) also made bids for the game. Indianapolis' unsuccessful bid had seen the city offer the league perks such as free suites at and free limousine rides to the 1992 Indianapolis 500.\nSuper Bowl XXVI became the second Super Bowl to be played in a cold, winter climate city. The first one was Super Bowl XVI on January 24, 1982, at the Silverdome in Pontiac, Michigan, a suburb of Detroit. Temperatures in Minneapolis on game day were a high of and low of , about above average. This and Super Bowl LII, played at the Metrodome's replacement U.S. Bank Stadium, remain the northernmost Super Bowls ever played.\nThe Metrodome also hosted the 1992 NCAA Men's Basketball Final Four, making it the only stadium to host both events in the same calendar year. It also hosted the 1991 World Series as the Twins defeated the Braves. Minneapolis is the only city, and the Metrodome is the only venue, to host all three events in a 12-month span (all three of these events aired on CBS, who would go on to purchase their Twin Cities affiliate, WCCO-TV, later in the year). The Metrodome was the smallest stadium to ever host the Super Bowl in terms of capacity. Stadium representatives insisted they were planning to rectify the shortage of capacity by adding temporary seating. However, they accomplished it mostly by converting existing chair-back seats to bench seats. When the NFL found out about that plan, they did not approve. However, by then it was too late to move the game elsewhere. The attendance mark of 63,130 was second-lowest at the time (following the first Super Bowl's attendance of 61,946). It is now the 4th-lowest in history, behind LV (24,835), LVIII (61,629), and Super Bowl I.\nWashington Redskins.\nWashington entered Super Bowl XXVI leading the league during the regular season in scoring with 485 points, while allowing the second-fewest points (224). The team was led by Mark Rypien, head coach Joe Gibbs' third different starting Super Bowl quarterback. Rypien led the NFC during the regular season in passing yards (3,564) and touchdown passes (28). With 249 out of 421 completions and only 11 interceptions, he earned the second-highest passer rating in the league (97.9).\nRypien had several great targets to whom he could throw. Wide receiver Gary Clark was the main deep threat on the team, catching 70 passes for 1,340 yards and 10 touchdowns. On the other side of the field, wide receiver Art Monk, playing in his 12th NFL season, was just as reliable, catching 71 passes for 1,049 yards and 8 touchdowns. Monk's 71 receptions in 1991 gave him a career total of 801, just 18 behind the all-time record held by Steve Largent. Wide receiver Ricky Sanders was also a big element of the passing game, catching 45 passes for 580 yards and 5 touchdowns.\nThe Redskins' primary weapon in the backfield was running back Earnest Byner, who ranked 5th in the NFL with 1,048 rushing yards, while also catching 34 passes for 308 yards and scoring 5 touchdowns. Rookie running back Ricky Ervins was also a major asset to the running attack, rushing 145 times for 680 yards for an average of 4.7 yards per carry, while also catching 16 passes for 181 yards. And when Washington was near the goal line, they usually relied on fullback Gerald Riggs, who rushed for 248 yards and scored 11 touchdowns. The Redskins' offensive line, known as \"The Hogs\", was led by Pro Bowl tackle Jim Lachey and guard Mark Schlereth, along with four-time Pro Bowl veterans Russ Grimm and Joe Jacoby. The Hogs allowed the fewest sacks in the league with just 9, 10 sacks less than the team that allowed the second-fewest. Even Washington's special teams unit was a big threat. Running back Brian Mitchell led the NFL in punt return yards (600) and punt return touchdowns (2) with a 13.3 yards per return average, while also gaining 583 yards returning kickoffs. Kicker Chip Lohmiller made the pro bowl, leading the league in fields goals (31) and extra points (56) made.\nWashington's defense, which ranked third in the NFL in fewest yards allowed (4,638), was led by All-Pro defensive back Darrell Green, who was one of the fastest players in the NFL, and Pro Bowl linebacker Wilber Marshall. Green and Marshall recorded 5 interceptions each, with Marshall recording 75 return yards and a touchdown, while also compiling 5.5 sacks and forcing 4 fumbles. Safety Brad Edwards was also a big factor in the secondary, recording four interceptions. Up front, their line was anchored by defensive end Charles Mann, who recorded 11 of Washington's 50 sacks, and recovered a fumble. Defensive end Fred Stokes also made a big impact with 6.5 sacks, 2 fumble recoveries, and an interception.\nThe Redskins stormed to a league-best 14\u20132 regular season record. After crushing the Detroit Lions 45\u20130 on opening day, they recorded 11 consecutive wins before suffering their first loss to the Dallas Cowboys, 24\u201321. Their only other defeat was a meaningless loss to the Philadelphia Eagles in the final game of the regular season in which they rested most of their starters because they had already clinched the #1 NFC playoff seed.\nBuffalo Bills.\nThe Bills' no-huddle \"K-Gun\" offense once again dominated the league by gaining an NFL-leading 6,525 yards and scoring 458 points, second only to Washington. The leaders of the offense, quarterback Jim Kelly and running back Thurman Thomas, both had the best seasons of their careers. Kelly completed 64.1 percent of his passes for 3,844 yards and a league-leading 33 touchdowns, with only 17 interceptions, to give him a 97.6 passer rating. Thomas rushed for 1,407 yards, caught 62 passes for 620 yards, and scored 12 touchdowns to earn him both the NFL Offensive Player of the Year Award and the NFL Most Valuable Player Award. With 2,067 yards from scrimmage, Thomas led the league in that category for the third consecutive season. Just like Washington, Buffalo had more than one threat in their backfield. Running back Kenneth Davis emerged as a big threat, rushing for 624 yards, catching 20 passes for 118 yards, and scoring 5 touchdowns.\nThe Bills also had several major weapons in their passing game. Wide receiver Andre Reed led the team with 81 receptions for 1,113 yards and 10 touchdowns, and also rushed 12 times for 136 yards. On the other side of the field, veteran wide receiver James Lofton recorded 57 receptions for 1,072 yards and 8 touchdowns to earn his 8th Pro Bowl appearance and finished the year just 55 yards short of the all-time receiving yardage record, held by Steve Largent (13,089 yards). Pro Bowl tight end Keith McKeller was also a big contributor with 44 receptions for 434 yards, while receiver Don Beebe had 32 catches, 414 yards, and 6 touchdowns. Once again, the Bills' offensive line was led by center Kent Hull, along with left tackle Will Wolford and Pro Bowl left guard Jim Ritcher.\nBut the Bills had big problems on their defense. Buffalo ranked just 27th (out of 28 teams) in yards allowed, 19th in points allowed, and recorded only 31 sacks. A reason for this was that defensive linemen Bruce Smith and Jeff Wright had missed most of the season with injuries. One of the few bright spots on the Bills' defense was Pro Bowl linebacker Cornelius Bennett, who recorded 78 tackles, 9 sacks, and 2 fumble recoveries. Another Pro Bowl linebacker, Darryl Talley, led the team with 90 tackles and 5 interceptions, while also recovering 2 fumbles and forcing 4. Cornerback Nate Odomes was the leader of the secondary with 5 interceptions, which he returned for 120 yards and a touchdown, along with 66 tackles and a fumble recovery.\nDespite their defensive problems, the Bills finished the season with an AFC-best 13\u20133 regular season record.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Redskins first defeated the Atlanta Falcons, 24\u20137, in a rain-soaked playoff game that was closer than their 56\u201317 regular season win over Atlanta. Rypien had 442 passing yards and 6 touchdowns in the earlier game, but could only complete 14 out of 28 passes for 170 yards and no touchdowns in the rematch. Still, Washington dominated the Falcons again by forcing 6 turnovers and rushing for 162 yards. The Redskins held the ball for over 36 minutes while running back Ricky Ervins recorded 104 rushing yards and a touchdown.\nThen Washington crushed the Detroit Lions 41\u201310 in the NFC Championship Game. The Lions posted a 12\u20134 regular season record and were coming off a 38\u20136 playoff blowout over the Dallas Cowboys. Many sports writers predicted that the NFC Championship Game would be much closer than the Redskins' win over the Lions in the season opening game because Detroit's future Hall of Fame running back, Barry Sanders, did not play in it due to injury. He had recorded 1,548 rushing yards and 16 touchdowns in the remaining 15 games of the season, and 99 combined rushing and receiving yards against Dallas in the playoffs. However, the Redskins crushed Detroit in this game as well, quickly forcing two Lions turnovers and building up a 10\u20130 lead before the game was five minutes old. The Redskins scored 41 points off of two touchdown runs by Riggs, two field goals from kicker Chip Lohmiller, a pair of touchdown passes from Rypien to Monk and Clark, and Green's 32-yard 4th-quarter interception return for a touchdown. Sanders was held to just 59 total yards, and linebacker Wilber Marshall sacked Lions quarterback Erik Kramer three times.\nMeanwhile, the Bills first defeated the Kansas City Chiefs 37\u201314, avenging a 33\u20136 Monday night loss during the regular season, in which the Chiefs recorded six sacks, recovered five fumbles, and gained 239 rushing yards, with running backs Harvey Williams and Christian Okoye recording over 100 rushing yards each. During this playoff game, the Bills jumped to a 24\u20130 lead in the 3rd quarter, with Kelly throwing three touchdown passes, the first two to Reed and the third to Lofton. The Bills also got a big performance out of Thomas, who rushed for over 100 yards, and kicker Scott Norwood, who made three field goals. Meanwhile, unconcerned with Kansas City's weak passing game, Buffalo played Bennett and Talley close to the line of scrimmage on nearly every play to stuff the run. Both players combined for 13 tackles, while the Bills' defense held Kansas City to 77 yards on the ground. Chiefs running back Barry Word, who became their primary rusher since the Monday Night game and rushed for over 100 yards in each of Kansas City's previous three games, was limited to just 50 yards. In addition, Buffalo's defense knocked Chiefs quarterback Steve DeBerg out of the game and intercepted backup quarterback Mark Vlasic four times.\nBuffalo then played against the Denver Broncos, who were coming off a 26\u201324 win over the Houston Oilers, in which quarterback John Elway led them on an 87-yard drive to set up kicker David Treadwell's game-winning field goal with only 16 seconds left. It was predicted that this AFC Championship Game would be a shootout between the Bills' powerful offense and the superb postseason play of Elway. But neither Elway nor the Bills' offense had much success in the 10\u20137 Bills victory in a game totally dominated by defense. Bennett, who spent almost as much time in the Denver backfield as Elway, had another great game, constantly pressuring Elway, sharing one sack, and tackling Denver rushers behind the line of scrimmage three times. Bills linebacker Carlton Bailey also made a big impact late in the 3rd quarter, intercepting a screen pass from Elway and returning it 11 yards for Buffalo's only touchdown of the game. After backup quarterback Gary Kubiak scored Denver's only touchdown with less than two minutes to go, the Bills then clinched the victory when defensive back Kirby Jackson forced and recovered a fumble from running back Steve Sewell on Denver's final drive of the game. Treadwell's three missed field goals were a large factor in the outcome of the defensive struggle.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nDuring the week leading to Super Bowl XXVI, it seemed most of the pressure was on the Bills. The AFC Championship Game appeared to be the best defensive effort by Buffalo all season, as they held the Broncos to only a touchdown, while also limiting Elway to just 11 of 21 completions for 121 yards and no touchdowns, with one interception. But the Bills' high-powered offense was completely shut down, limited to just a single field goal for the entire game. In addition, the Bills could have easily been eliminated by the Broncos, had Treadwell not missed three field goal attempts, two of which hit the uprights. The performance also gave an opportunity for Gibbs and the Redskins' coaches to devise a strong game plan to exploit their Super Bowl opponent's weaknesses.\n\"Denver was successful being aggressive. That may have aided us a little bit in our thinking,\" said Redskins defensive coordinator Richie Petitibon. \"Looking at them before they had played Denver, we kind of thought you had to put pressure on this guy (Jim Kelly). We attacked the line of scrimmage more than usual. We wanted to blitz to stop the run early in the game. It's sometimes tough to pick up blitzes against the running game.\"\nRedskins linebacker Matt Millen was bidding to become the first player to play in a Super Bowl victory for three different franchises (he played in Super Bowl XV and Super Bowl XVIII with the Raiders, and Super Bowl XXIV with the 49ers). However, Millen was deactivated for the game and watched from the Redskins sideline. He retired from the NFL shortly after the game to pursue a career in broadcasting (and later as a team executive).\nDuring the CBS telecast, it was mentioned that Leonard Smith (the Bills' regular starting strong safety) couldn't play as a result of an infection in his knee.\nBills defensive line coach Chuck Dickerson mocked the Washington Redskins' famed offensive line, \"The Hogs\" in a television interview. Dickerson said Redskins tackle Joe Jacoby was \"a Neanderthal \u2013 he slobbers a lot, he probably kicks dogs in his neighborhood.\" He also said tackle Jim Lachey \"has bad breath. Players will fall down without him even touching them.\" Redskins coach Joe Gibbs got his hands on some tapes of Dickerson and played them at a team meeting on the night before the game. (Levy fired Dickerson three days after the game.)\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Bills elected to wear their home blue uniforms with white pants; the Redskins therefore wore white uniforms with burgundy pants, which was their own home preference at the time.\nThis was Jerry Markbreit's third Super Bowl as the game's referee (having previously officiated Super Bowls XVII and XXI) tying the record set by Norm Schachter (I, V, and X), Jim Tunney (VI, XI, and XII), and Pat Haggerty (XIII, XVI, and XIX).\nOff the field, Super Bowl XXVI was also the site of a protest led by the American Indian Movement. Attended by about 2,000 protestors, the demonstration was intended to pressure Redskins management into changing the team's name, which some found offensive. The team would remove the name Redskins in the 2020 season, thus making Super Bowl XXVI the last Super Bowl appearance for Washington under the franchise's old nickname (should Washington advance to any future Super Bowls, it will be as the Washington Commanders).\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS, and featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden for the fifth time. Lesley Visser, Jim Gray, and Pat O'Brien reported on the sidelines; Visser would later preside over the presentation of the Lombardi Trophy to the Redskins, becoming the first woman to do so. \"The Super Bowl Today\" was hosted by Greg Gumbel and Terry Bradshaw with Randy Cross and Dan Fouts contributing team reports, and Visser, Madden, Jim Gray, Bernard Goldberg and Mike Francesa (among others) contributing feature segments.\nThis would be the last Super Bowl to air on CBS until Super Bowl XXXV at the end of the 2000 season. CBS lost the NFC package to Fox following the 1993 season, leaving CBS without the NFL until it acquired the AFC package from NBC for the 1998 season. Super Bowl XXVI was not originally in CBS' rotation: since it had just broadcast Super Bowl XXIV two years earlier, CBS would have received Super Bowl XXVII as part of the rotation while NBC would have aired Super Bowl XXVI. Instead, the NFL made an exception for CBS, which had acquired the rights to the 1992 Winter Olympics (which started 13 days later), and allowed CBS to air the Super Bowl as a lead-in program for its Olympics coverage.\nFor this game, as they had done for Super Bowl XXIV, CBS debuted a new theme and opening for its NFL coverage. Composed by Frankie Vinci, the theme was used for the next two seasons on television and on CBS Radio after that; several remixes of the song were used from the time CBS resumed covering NFL games in 1998 until the end of the 2002 season; after that, CBS began using an E.S. Posthumus composition and has used it ever since. In addition, CBS also rolled out a new network-wide graphics package for its sports coverage. With a few minor tweaks, the red, white, and blue graphic displays stayed in place until 1996, when CBS rolled out a new orange and yellow package. \"Willing and Able\" by Prince was then used in a video montage during the closing credits of CBS' coverage.\nAlso, this game was part of a broadcasting service test commissioned by the U.S. Navy. The ships participating were the USS \"America\"; USS \"Concord\"; USS \"Eisenhower\"; USS \"Inchon\"; USS \"Monterey\"; USS \"Normandy\" and the USS \"Sierra\".\nFollowing the game was a \"60 Minutes\" interview with future President Bill and Hillary Clinton and an episode of \"48 Hours\".\nSuper Bowl XXVI was telecast in over 100 countries around the world, including Australia (Network Ten), Canada (CTV), Mexico (Canal 13) and the United Kingdom (Channel 4).\nIn popular culture.\nSuper Bowl XXVI was featured in the episode of \"The Simpsons\" entitled \"Lisa the Greek\", which aired three days prior to the game, and correctly predicted that Washington would win.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show featured local Minnesota youth including the Metropolitan Boys Choir, the Minnesota Youth Symphonies, and local marching bands.\nSinger Harry Connick Jr. later sang the national anthem. For the first time in Super Bowl History, the anthem was also performed in sign language, with Lori Hilary signing the anthem for the deaf fans. The coin toss ceremony featured Pro Football Hall of Fame head coach Chuck Noll. Noll, former Steelers Hall of Fame head coach who had retired a month earlier after 23 seasons, conducted the coin toss. Noll's Steelers had lost to both of these teams earlier in the season by large margins (52\u201334 to Buffalo and 41\u201314 to Washington).\nSTS-42, a Space Shuttle mission, was in orbit during the game. A live downlink between the Metrodome and \"Discovery\" happened during the pregame show. Three of the mission's seven crew members demonstrated a 'human coin toss' in space.\nBuffalo head coach Marv Levy stated his famous phrase \"Where else would you rather be?\" to his players moments before kickoff, as shown on NFL Films highlights.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"Winter Magic\", and featured a celebration to the winter season and the Winter Olympics. The halftime show was produced by Timberline Productions.\nNearly 2,000 performers were involved in the show. The show featured drill teams, professional dancers (including ballroom dancing couples), the 60-piece Minnesota Youth Symphonies, color guards and drill teams from area high schools, and rollerbladers. In addition, Pride of Minnesota marching band performed, former Olympic champions Brian Boitano and Dorothy Hamill skated. Singer Gloria Estefan performed during the show's finale.\nThe performance began with a 30-second overture, leading into an introduction by Brian Boitano and Dorothy Hamill, welcoming viewers to Minnesota, \u201cwhere winter\u2019s the hottest time of the year.\u201d This was followed by the original composition \"Winter Magic\". Performers on the field spelled out the word \"winter\" followed by the word \"magic\". This was followed by \"Walking in a Winter Wonderland\", followed by a rendition of \"Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy\".\nThis was followed by \"Frosty\", an original composition involving rapping based on the character described in the song Frosty the Snowman. During this performance two 30-foot inflatable snowman figures were inflated, and dancing snowman figures were also utilized. The University of Minnesota Marching Band took the field during this song.\nThis was followed by a salute to the 1992 Winter Olympics athletes, with Brian Boitano and Dorothy Hamill skating to the song \"One Moment in Time\", on sheets of Teflon that were embedded on the tops of large platforms that were placed on the field for the show. After they finished their skating performance, the tribute to Olympians continued to the song \"Don't Stop Me Now\". Members of the 1980 United States Men's Olympic Ice Hockey Team took stage for this tribute, holding sparklers. Rollerbladers also took part in this segment of the performance. Boitano and Hamill left the field on a snowmobile.\nGloria Estefan then took the stage, and performed her songs \"Live for Loving You\" and \"Get on Your Feet\". The show then concluded with a reprise of the \"Winter Magic\" song. Estefan would later perform at the halftime show for Super Bowl XXXIII which was held in her hometown of Miami.\nCounter-programming by \"In Living Color\".\nTo compete with the halftime show, Fox decided to broadcast a special live episode of \"In Living Color\" and was able to attract and keep Super Bowl viewers. As a result, in order to retain Super Bowl viewership, it was decided that Michael Jackson would perform at halftime during Super Bowl XXVII, followed by more big-name talent during subsequent Super Bowl halftimes.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nBoth teams entered the game as the two highest scoring teams in the league, but after the end of the first quarter, both of them would be scoreless.\nThe game started with a parade of miscues by both teams. First, the opening kickoff had to be redone because Bills kicker Brad Daluiso kicked the ball before referee Jerry Markbreit signaled to begin play. Then after Washington was forced to punt on their opening possession, Bills running back Thurman Thomas missed the first two plays of Buffalo's first drive because he misplaced his helmet.\nAfter an exchange of punts to start the game, Washington drove 87 yards, the majority of which came from quarterback Mark Rypien's four passes to wide receiver Art Monk for a total gain of 79 yards. Monk's fourth reception was for a 31-yard gain, in which he caught the ball at the Buffalo 27-yard line, and subsequently broke a tackle by cornerback Kirby Jackson, but was forced out of bounds at the 2-yard line by safety Mark Kelso. The Bills' defense then stiffened to keep the Redskins out of the end zone. After running back Gerald Riggs was stopped for no gain on two rushing attempts, Rypien appeared to complete a 2-yard touchdown pass to Monk. However, instant replay determined that after Monk caught the ball, his right foot stepped out of bounds, deeming the pass incomplete, and bringing up fourth down. This was the first time in Super Bowl history that instant replay was used to overturn a touchdown. Washington then tried to salvage the drive with a 19-yard field goal attempt by kicker Chip Lohmiller, but holder/backup quarterback Jeff Rutledge fumbled the snap, turning the ball over on downs and keeping the game scoreless.\nOn Buffalo's first play after the botched field goal attempt, quarterback Jim Kelly threw a pass intended for wide receiver Andre Reed that was tipped by Redskins cornerback Darrell Green and intercepted by safety Brad Edwards, who returned it 21 yards to the Buffalo 12-yard line. But three plays after the turnover, the Bills got the ball right back when Rypien threw a pass that was deflected by nose tackle Jeff Wright and intercepted by Jackson. Buffalo also could not capitalize on the turnover and were forced to punt to end the quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nIn the second quarter, the Redskins began to take over the game. On their next possession, a 19-yard run by running back Earnest Byner and a 41-yard completion from Rypien to wide receiver Ricky Sanders set up Lohmiller's 34-yard field goal to give Washington a 3\u20130 lead. The Redskins' defense then forced the Bills to a three-and-out on their ensuing possession, and Chris Mohr's 23-yard punt sailed out of bounds at the Washington 49-yard line. The Redskins then drove 51 yards in 5 plays, which included a 16-yard reception by wide receiver Gary Clark and a roughing the passer penalty on Buffalo linebacker Cornelius Bennett. The drive ended with Rypien's 10-yard touchdown pass to Byner, increasing the Washington lead to 10\u20130. On the Bills' next drive, Green intercepted a pass from Kelly at the Washington 45-yard line. Three plays later, Rypien completed a 34-yard pass to Clark to reach the Buffalo 15. A 14-yard run by running back Ricky Ervins then set up Riggs' 1-yard touchdown run to extend the Redskins' lead to 17\u20130.\nAfter the next three possessions ended in punts, Buffalo had a chance to score with 1:46 left in the half. Bills wide receiver Steve Tasker downed Mohr's 48-yard punt at the Redskins 1-yard line. Washington did not gain any net yards during the possession, but narrowly avoided a safety on second down when Wright appeared to tackle Byner in the end zone. However, Byner managed to stretch the ball outside of the end zone before his knee hit the ground, ensuring that the Bills would be kept off the board. After Rypien threw an incomplete pass on third down, Buffalo got the ball back after cornerback Cliff Hicks returned Kelly Goodburn's 42-yard punt 2 yards to the Washington 41-yard line. From there, Kelly completed a 21-yard pass to tight end Keith McKeller to reach the 20. But after an incomplete pass and an 8-yard sack on Kelly by linebacker Wilber Marshall, Edwards broke up a third-down pass intended for Reed in which Edwards hit Reed before the ball got to him; however, no flag for pass interference was thrown. In disgust, Reed threw his helmet to the ground, drawing a mandatory 15-yard unsportsmanlike conduct penalty that took the Bills out of field goal range and forced them to punt. As the teams ran off the field at halftime, Bills head coach Marv Levy confronted field judge Ed Merrifield, whom Levy thought missed the pass interference call and then threw the unsportsmanlike conduct flag against Reed.\nThe Bills became the ninth team to go scoreless in the first half of a Super Bowl, after the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III; the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowls IV, VIII, IX, and XI; the Redskins in Super Bowl VII, the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XII; and the Cincinnati Bengals in Super Bowl XVI. All eight of the previous teams ended up losing the game.\nThird quarter.\nWashington increased their lead to 24\u20130 just 16 seconds into the second half after linebacker Kurt Gouveia intercepted Kelly's pass on the first play of the third quarter and returned it 23 yards to the Bills' 2-yard line. The blitz that forced Kelly's rushed throw and led to the turnover had been drawn up by the Redskins' defensive coaches on the pregame bus ride to the Metrodome, as they came up with an idea to use their superior speed rushers against the powerful but not-that-mobile interior Bills' offensive line. On the next play, Riggs rushed 2 yards for his second touchdown of the game. The Redskins' 24\u20130 lead midway through the third quarter tied the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl VIII for the largest shutout lead in Super Bowl history. It was broken by the Seattle Seahawks' 36\u20130 lead in Super Bowl XLVIII.\nThe Bills finally got some momentum going with their next two drives. First, they drove 77 yards to the Redskins 3-yard line, aided by Kelly's two passes to running back Thurman Thomas for 16 yards, a 14-yard reception by wide receiver James Lofton on 3rd-and-10, and a 43-yard reception by wide receiver Don Beebe. Washington kept Buffalo out of the end zone, but kicker Scott Norwood's 21-yard field goal cut the deficit to 24\u20133. After forcing Washington to punt on their next possession, the Bills drove 56 yards in 6 plays, aided by a 29-yard pass interference penalty on Redskins cornerback Martin Mayhew in the end zone. The Redskins kept the Bills out of the end zone for the first two plays, but Thomas scored the first Buffalo touchdown of the game on a 1-yard run to cut Washington's lead to 24\u201310.\nHowever, the Bills' hopes of a comeback were dashed when the Redskins advanced 79 yards in 11 plays on their ensuing drive, which included three runs by Ervin for 15 yards, as well as four passes from Rypien to Clark for a total gain of 60 yards, the last of which was for a 30-yard touchdown, giving the Redskins a 31\u201310 lead with 1:24 left in the third quarter, and essentially sealing their third Super Bowl title. Three plays after receiving the ensuing kickoff, cornerback Alvoid Mays stripped the ball from Kelly, and it was recovered by defensive end Fred Stokes on the Buffalo 14-yard line.\nFourth quarter.\nAfter the turnover, the Redskins drove to the Bills' 7-yard line on a 17-yard reception by Monk and increased their lead to 34\u201310 on Lohmiller's 25-yard field goal on the second play of the fourth quarter.\nOn the Bills' ensuing drive, Kelly was sacked for a 9-yard loss by Stokes, then threw an incomplete pass, and then his fourth interception of the game to Edwards, who returned it 35 yards to the Buffalo 33. Five plays later, Lohmiller kicked his third field goal with 11:36 left in the game to increase the Redskins' lead to 37\u201310. Now comfortable with their lead, the Washington defense began to take it easy on the Buffalo offense. The Bills managed to respond with a 15-play, 79-yard drive, which featured a 15-yard penalty on Mays for delivering a late hit on Lofton, two receptions and a run by Thomas for 14 yards, a 17-yard catch by Lofton, an 11-yard reception by wide receiver Al Edwards, and two receptions by running back Kenneth Davis for 15 yards. The drive ended with Kelly's 2-yard touchdown pass to tight end Pete Metzelaars to cut the Buffalo deficit to 37\u201317. Then, after recovering an onside kick, the Bills drove 50 yards, aided by two runs and a reception by Davis for a total of 28 yards, as well as an 18-yard pass interference penalty on Mays. Kelly then threw a 4-yard touchdown pass to Beebe to make the score 37\u201324, but by then, only 3:55 remained in the game. Buffalo's second onside kick attempt was unsuccessful, and Washington reached the Buffalo 22-yard line to run the clock down to 25 seconds before turning the ball over on downs. From there, the Bills attempted one final pass play before the game ended.\nKelly completed 28 of a Super Bowl\u2013record 58 passes for 275 yards and two touchdowns, but was sacked four times, intercepted four times, and lost a fumble. Thomas ran for only 13 yards on 10 carries and was limited to 27 yards on four receptions. James Lofton was the top receiver for the Bills with 7 catches for 92 yards, but Reed was limited to just 5 catches for 31 yards. Clark had seven catches for 114 yards and a touchdown and Monk added seven for 113 yards (Clark and Monk became the third pair of teammates to each have 100 yards receiving in a Super Bowl; they joined the Steelers' John Stallworth and Lynn Swann, who did it in Super Bowl XIII and the Bengals' Cris Collinsworth and Dan Ross, who did it in Super Bowl XVI).\nErvins was the top rusher of the game with 72 yards. Byner recorded 49 rushing yards, and 3 receptions for 24 yards and a touchdown. On defense, Edwards recorded four tackles, broke up five passes, and returned two interceptions for 56 yards. The Redskins amassed 417 yards of total offense while limiting the explosive Bills to 283, with just 43 rushing yards.\nThe two teams combined for the most points in a 3rd quarter in Super Bowl history (24 total points: 14 for Washington and 10 for Buffalo) and the most combined in a second half (44 total points: 24 for Buffalo and 20 for Washington).\nWith the win, the Redskins became the first team, and Joe Gibbs the first coach, to win a Super Bowl with three different quarterbacks. Two other teams have since duplicated this feat: the New York Giants (Phil Simms in Super Bowl XXI, Jeff Hostetler in Super Bowl XXV, and Eli Manning in Super Bowls XLII and XLVI) and the Green Bay Packers (Bart Starr in the first two Super Bowls, Brett Favre in Super Bowl XXXI, and Aaron Rodgers in Super Bowl XLV).\nThis was the last major professional championship won by a D.C.-based team until the Capitals won the Stanley Cup in 2018. This was also the last game for Washington guard Russ Grimm.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXVI: Washington Redskins 37, Buffalo Bills 24\n\"at Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome, Minneapolis, Minnesota\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http:// , https://, https://\nIndividual leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXVI, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame \u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\n\"Note:\" Back judge and field judge swapped titles prior to the 1998 season.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29152", "revid": "10232273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29152", "title": "Super Bowl XXVII", "text": "1993 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXVII was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Buffalo Bills and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1992 season. The Cowboys defeated the Bills by the score of 52\u201317, winning their third Super Bowl in team history, and their first one in 15 years. This game is tied with Super Bowl XXXVII as the fourth-highest scoring Super Bowl with 69 combined points, as of 2024. The Bills became the first team to lose three consecutive Super Bowls, and just the second of four teams to play in three straight (the Miami Dolphins played in Super Bowls VI\u2013VIII, winning VII and VIII, the New England Patriots played in Super Bowls LI\u2013LIII, winning LI and LIII, and the Kansas City Chiefs played in Super Bowls LVII\u2013LIX, winning LVII and LVIII. The following 1993 season, the Bills became the only team to both play and lose four consecutive Super Bowls (on January 30, 1994, losing Super Bowl XXVIII to the Dallas Cowboys 30\u201313). The game was played on January 31, 1993, at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, and is the last NFL championship game to date to be held in a non-NFL stadium. It was also the seventh Super Bowl held in the Greater Los Angeles Area, which did not host another until Super Bowl LVI in 2022.\nThe Bills advanced to their third consecutive Super Bowl after posting an 11\u20135 regular season record, but entered the playoffs as a wild card after losing tiebreakers. The Cowboys were making their sixth Super Bowl appearance after posting a 13\u20133 regular season record. It was the first time that the two franchises had played each other since 1984.\nThe Cowboys scored 35 points off of a Super Bowl-record nine Buffalo turnovers, including three first half touchdowns. Bills backup quarterback Frank Reich, who replaced injured starter Jim Kelly in the second quarter, threw a 40-yard touchdown on the final play of the third quarter to cut the lead to 31\u201317. Dallas then scored three more touchdowns in the fourth quarter. Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman was named Super Bowl MVP, completing 22 of 30 passes for 273 yards and four touchdowns for a passer rating of 140.6, while also rushing for 28 yards.\nIn response to Fox's Super Bowl counterprogramming of a special episode of \"In Living Color\" during the previous year, the NFL booked Michael Jackson to perform during the entire Super Bowl XXVII halftime show. Jackson's performance started the league's trend of signing top acts to appear during the Super Bowl to attract more viewers and interest.\nBackground.\nArizona's Martin Luther King Day controversy.\nSuper Bowl XXVII was originally scheduled to be played at Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Arizona, the home of the Phoenix Cardinals and the Arizona State Sun Devils. In 1983, U.S. president Ronald Reagan signed a bill creating Martin Luther King Jr. Day, a federal holiday honoring African-American civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. Many states had adopted the holiday at the state level by the time it was first observed in 1986. Arizona governor Bruce Babbitt issued an executive order creating the state holiday after the state legislature had voted against it. Babbitt's successor, Evan Mecham, rescinded the order upon taking office in January 1987 on the grounds that Babbitt did not have the authority to issue such an order. Mecham had made his displeasure for the holiday widely known, saying that King did not deserve a holiday. In response, Dr. King's widow Coretta Scott King and musician Stevie Wonder spearheaded an entertainment and convention boycott of Arizona, condemning Mecham for rescinding the law and accused him of racism. Mecham was impeached and removed from office in 1988 on charges of obstruction of justice and financial misconduct. In September 1989, the state legislature approved the holiday, and it was signed into law by new governor Rose Mofford. However, a petition drive blocked enactment of the law until voters approved it at the ballot box.\nOn March 13, 1990, the NFL held its annual owners' meeting in Orlando, Florida. One of the items on the agenda was to determine a host city for Super Bowl XXVII. Three cities submitted bids: Los Angeles/Pasadena (Rose Bowl), San Diego (Jack Murphy Stadium), and Phoenix/Tempe (Sun Devil Stadium). While the Los Angeles proposal guaranteed the most profit, Phoenix represented a fresh market for the game, and the owners wanted to reward Cardinals owners Bill Bidwill for his years of service to the league. Arizona civil rights activist Art Mobley was sent to the meeting to lobby against Phoenix winning the vote, attempting to build awareness to the MLK Day controversy. The vote was conducted and Tempe was awarded the game, but committee chairman and Eagles owner Norman Braman warned that if the upcoming MLK Day ballot initiative failed, the NFL would not hesitate to pull the game from Arizona and move it elsewhere. The relocation effort was heavily pressured by NFL players, the majority of whom were African American. Many players expressed concern in playing a Super Bowl in a state which MLK Day wasn't recognized. \nThe issue began to heat up again as election day approached. Polls were mixed, but generally showed that the Arizona electorate approved of an MLK holiday. However, the issue was confusing to voters since there were two competing initiatives. Proposition 301 called for replacing Columbus Day with MLK Day while Proposition 302 would create a new paid holiday on King's birthday. Both initiatives required a yes/no vote, and some voters were unsure if they could vote \"yes\" on both. Both propositions were defeated; Proposition 302 lost by a narrow 49.2%\u201350.8% margin, while Proposition 301 fell convincingly (24.6%\u201375.4%). Some observers believed that \"The NFL Today\" on CBS Sports may have created a backlash on the vote. Two days before the election, Greg Gumbel reported that the NFL was threatening to move the game if the vote failed. Some voters resented that notion, feeling they were being intimidated by the league, and voted \"no\" in protest. After the failed vote, NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue recommended that the game be moved, and announced that the issue would be on the agenda at the next owners' meeting.\nWhen they met in Kohala, Hawaii, on March 19, 1991, the owners debated whether to pull the game from Arizona. The Phoenix/Tempe contingent was permitted to defend their position, and the two losing cities (Pasadena and San Diego) also made presentations to the selection committee. According to the league's bylaws, at least three-quarters of the owners (representing 21 of the 28 teams) were required to approve such a decision. After deliberating for over three hours, the owners voted to pull the game from Tempe, although the exact number of votes for and against the measure was not disclosed. The Rose Bowl was chosen as the replacement site, the first time it had hosted the game since Super Bowl XXI. The NFL offered a compromise by reserving Super Bowl XXX for Tempe on a \"preliminary\" and \"conditional\" basis. Arizona voters approved the MLK Day holiday in November 1992. The NFL responded by formally assigning Super Bowl XXX to Tempe at their March 1993 meeting.\nBuffalo Bills.\nThe Bills entered Super Bowl XXVII trying to avoid becoming the first team to lose three consecutive Super Bowls. Once again, the team was loaded with Pro Bowl players, boasting 12 Pro Bowl selections. During the regular season, Buffalo's no-huddle offense ranked as the number two offense in the league (6,114 yards) and ranked as the number one rushing offense (2,436 yards). Running back Thurman Thomas rushed for a career-high 1,487 yards and 9 touchdowns during the regular season, while also catching 58 passes for 626 yards and another 3 touchdowns. Running back Kenneth Davis rushed for 613 yards, caught 15 passes for 80 yards, and added another 251 yards returning kickoffs. Quarterback Jim Kelly had 269 out of 462 completions for 3,457 yards, 23 touchdowns, and 19 interceptions. Wide receiver Andre Reed led the team with 65 receptions for 913 yards and 3 touchdowns, receiver James Lofton contributed 51 receptions for 786 yards and 6 touchdowns, and wide receiver Don Beebe caught 33 passes for 554 and 2 touchdowns. Also, tight end Pete Metzelaars recorded 30 receptions for 298 yards and 6 touchdowns. The Bills also had one of the best offensive lines in the NFL, led by Pro Bowlers Will Wolford, Jim Ritcher, and Howard Ballard, along with center Kent Hull.\nOn defense, the line was anchored by end Bruce Smith (14 sacks) and nose tackle Jeff Wright (6 sacks, 1 fumble recovery), who were both fully recovered after missing almost all of the previous season due to injuries. The Bills were once again led by their trio of linebackers Darryl Talley (77 tackles, 4 sacks), Shane Conlan (66 tackles, 2 sacks, 1 interception), and Pro Bowler Cornelius Bennett (52 tackles, 4 sacks, 3 fumble recoveries). The secondary was aided by the emergence of second-year safety Henry Jones, who tied for the NFL lead with 8 interceptions, returning them for 263 yards and 2 touchdowns. Safety Mark Kelso recorded 7 interceptions, while Pro Bowl cornerback Nate Odomes had 5. Defensive back Cliff Hicks led the Bills special teams unit, returning 29 punts for 289 yards (9th in the NFL).\nHowever, the Bills' quest for a third consecutive Super Bowl suffered a major setback when they lost the final game of the season to the Houston Oilers. The loss caused the Bills to finish with an 11\u20135 record, losing out on the AFC East title to the Miami Dolphins based on tie-breaking rules, making them a wild card team for the playoffs. Thus, even if they won their first playoff game, they would have to win two on the road to make the Super Bowl. To make matters worse, Kelly also suffered strained knee ligaments during the loss to the Oilers and had to miss the first two playoff games. Furthermore, their first opponent in the playoffs ended up being the Oilers. A headline on a Buffalo newspaper stated the Bills' situation: \"Bills Begin The Longest Road Today.\"\nResurrection of the Dallas Cowboys.\nSuper Bowl XXVII saw the resurrection of the Dallas Cowboys. From 1966 to 1985, \"America's Team\" made the playoffs 18 out of 20 seasons under coach Tom Landry, including five Super Bowl appearances and two Super Bowl wins. But in the late 1980s, the team suffered several losing seasons, including a 3\u201313 regular season record in 1988. Then Jerry Jones bought the team on February 25, 1989, and in a controversial move, promptly fired Landry, the only coach Dallas had in 29 years as an NFL franchise. Jones replaced Landry with University of Miami head coach Jimmy Johnson, his former University of Arkansas teammate.\nWith Johnson as head coach and Jones as his own general manager, people in the league thought they could take advantage of them. Both lacked NFL experience, and instead of hiring coaching assistants with experience in the league, they hired ones that worked with Johnson in Miami. Compounding this issue was the departure of the two men that brought previous success to Dallas: founding president Tex Schramm and famed personnel man Gil Brandt.\nThe Cowboys' 3\u201313 record in 1988 did have a silver lining; it was the worst in the league and thus gave the Cowboys the first pick in the 1989 NFL draft. Jones and Johnson picked UCLA quarterback Troy Aikman, who would eventually go on to be selected to the Pro Bowl six times in his NFL career. Meanwhile, Jones and Johnson immediately started to shuffle the team's depth chart to find players talented enough to build a winning team. Linebacker Ken Norton Jr., one of the few holdovers from Landry's last losing seasons, would later claim that he would often go into a player huddle and meet new teammates for the first time.\nThen, Jones and Johnson made a move midway through the 1989 season that shocked many in the league: they traded their only Pro Bowl player, running back Herschel Walker, to the Minnesota Vikings for five veteran players and eight draft choices. Although the Cowboys finished the 1989 season with a 1\u201315 record, their worst record since the team's inception, the foundations for the Cowboys' return to glory had been set. Although Dallas had the league's worst record, they traded away the first pick in the 1990 draft so they could get backup quarterback Steve Walsh in the supplemental draft. Then with the 17th pick, they drafted running back Emmitt Smith, and the trifecta of Aikman, Smith, and wide receiver Michael Irvin (who was drafted by Landry in 1988) was now set. Dallas also signed veteran tight end Jay Novacek away from Phoenix, who went on to make the Pro Bowl in five of his six years with the Cowboys.\nJohnson also started to rebuild the team by drafting players who were fast, quick, and athletic. The defense was designed to become aggressive, while the offense was made to be a conservative one that did not make mistakes. In 1990, the Cowboys finished 7\u20139, but Smith won the NFL Rookie of the Year Award and Johnson was selected as NFL Coach of the Year. In 1991, the Cowboys finished with an 11\u20135 record and made the playoffs for the first time in six years.\nIn 1992, the Cowboys finished with a 13\u20133 regular season record, the second-best in the league and the best in team history. Although not a single one of their defensive players made the Pro Bowl, Dallas was ranked as the number one defense in the league (allowing only 4,278 yards), fourth in fewest points allowed (243), and ranked as the number one defense against the run (allowing only 1,244 yards), bringing back many fans' memories of the Doomsday Defenses of old. The defensive line was anchored by Jim Jeffcoat (10.5 sacks) and Tony Tolbert (8.5 sacks), along with future Hall of Fame pass rusher Charles Haley (six sacks), who had led the NFC in sacks in 1990 and had been acquired by Dallas in a trade with San Francisco. While Norton and Defensive Rookie of the Year Robert Jones anchored the linebacking corps, the team's solid secondary was led by defensive backs Kenneth Gant and James Washington, who both recorded 3 interceptions each, and rookie cornerback Kevin Smith. The last member of the secondary was defensive back Issiac Holt who had been acquired as part of the trade with the Vikings for Walker.\nDallas' offense finished second in the league in scoring with 409 points. Aikman had the best season of his career, completing 302 out of 473 passes (ranking second and fourth in the league) for 3,445 yards (fourth in the league) and 23 touchdowns (third in the league) while throwing only 14 interceptions, producing a quarterback rating of 89.6 (third best in the league). Smith led the NFL in rushing for the second year in a row with 1,713 yards and scoring 18 rushing touchdowns, while also catching 59 passes for 335 yards and a touchdown. Fullback Daryl Johnston was also an asset in the backfield, providing Smith with effective blocking and hauling in 32 receptions. Irvin, the team's emotional lightning rod, caught 78 passes for 1,396 yards and 7 touchdowns. Other contributors on the offense included wide receiver Alvin Harper (35 receptions for 562 yards and 4 touchdowns) and Novacek (68 receptions for 630 yards and 6 touchdowns). Dallas' dominant offensive line, later dubbed \"The Great Wall of Dallas\", was led by Pro Bowlers Nate Newton and Mark Stepnoski, along with 10-year veteran Mark Tuinei, free agent acquisition John Gesek and the youngster Erik Williams.\nWith all this talent, the Cowboys would be considered by many to be one of the deepest and most talented teams to take to the gridiron.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Cowboys easily defeated their first playoff opponent, the Philadelphia Eagles, 34\u201310. Dallas' defense held the Eagles to only 178 offensive yards and sacked quarterback Randall Cunningham five times. Meanwhile, the Cowboys recorded 160 rushing yards and 185 passing yards. Aikman completed 15 of 25 passes and 2 touchdowns, while Smith ran for 114 yards and a touchdown.\nDallas then defeated the San Francisco 49ers 30\u201320 in the NFC Championship Game at Candlestick Park. This was the first time that the two teams met in the NFC Championship since the 49ers narrowly beat the Cowboys in the 1981 NFC Championship Game on Joe Montana's late touchdown pass to Dwight Clark known as \"The Catch\". The 49ers came into the game with the league's best regular season record at 14\u20132 and led the league in scoring with 431 points. But in this game, the Cowboys built a 24\u201313 lead going into the fourth quarter, as Aikman capped a nine-minute drive with a 16-yard touchdown pass to Smith. However, Steve Young's 5-yard touchdown pass to Jerry Rice cut the lead to 24\u201320 with 4:22 left in the game. But instead of trying to run out the clock with a running play, the Cowboys called a pass play: 896 F Flat, with a post on one side and a curl on the other. Irvin switched places in the formation with Harper to catch the curl since Aikman had thrown there twice before, but Aikman threw to Harper on the post when the 49ers showed blitz and Harper caught it and turned it into a 70-yard gain to the 49ers 10-yard line. Three plays later, Aikman threw a 6-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Kelvin Martin to clinch the victory (the extra point was blocked). Aikman finished with 332 passing yards and 2 touchdowns, with no interceptions.\nThe Bills first defeated the Houston Oilers 41\u201338 in overtime, overcoming a 32-point deficit in what became known as \"The Comeback\". Playing without Kelly or Bennett in the lineup, nothing seemed to go right for the Bills in the first half. The Bills' offense could only score a single field goal, while their defense played even worse, as Oilers quarterback Warren Moon passed for 222 yards and 4 touchdowns, and Houston jumped to a 28\u20133 halftime lead. The disaster only seemed to get worse in the second half, as Thomas was knocked out of the game with a hip injury, while backup quarterback Frank Reich's first pass of the second half was intercepted by Bubba McDowell and returned 58 yards for a touchdown, making the score 35\u20133. However, the Bills suddenly stormed back to score five unanswered touchdowns to overcome the seemingly insurmountable deficit. First, Kenneth Davis scored on a 1-yard touchdown run. Then Buffalo recovered an onside kick and immediately scored again on Reich's 36-yard touchdown pass to Don Beebe. Reich then threw touchdowns of 26 and 18 yards to Andre Reed. In the fourth quarter, Reich hit Reed with a 17-yard score to give the Bills a 38\u201335 lead. The Oilers kicked a field goal late in the game to send it into overtime, but Nate Odomes' interception in the extra period set up kicker Steve Christie's game-winning field goal to give the Bills the biggest comeback win in NFL history at the time. The record was surpassed by the Minnesota Vikings' erasure of a 33-point deficit in their 39\u201336 routing of the Indianapolis Colts during week 15 of the 2022 NFL regular season, but the Buffalo victory remains the largest comeback win in NFL playoff history.\nBuffalo then recorded a 24\u20133 win on the road against the Pittsburgh Steelers, the AFC Central champions with the AFC's best regular season record at 11\u20135. Although Jim Kelly and Thurman Thomas had not recovered enough to play in this game, Reich threw for 160 yards, 2 touchdowns, and no interceptions, while Davis rushed for 104 yards and a touchdown. Meanwhile, the defense redeemed themselves after giving up 38 points against the Oilers by holding the Steelers to only a field goal.\nThe Bills then defeated the Miami Dolphins 29\u201310 in the AFC Championship Game. The Dolphins were coming off a 31\u20130 blowout playoff win over the San Diego Chargers. But Buffalo's defense dominated the Dolphins' offense, intercepting quarterback Dan Marino twice, recovering three fumbles, and limiting Miami to just 33 rushing yards. Although Buffalo's offense had trouble scoring touchdowns because Kelly and Thomas were rusty coming back from their injuries, Christie scored five field goals to make up for the difference. Kelly did connect with Thomas on a screen pass for a 17-yard touchdown, and Davis ran it in from two yards out for another score. As a result, the Bills became the fourth wild-card team to advance to the Super Bowl.\nThis marked the first time since the AFL\u2013NFL merger that the two Super Bowl teams each won their conference championship on the road, with Dallas winning in San Francisco and Buffalo in Miami. The only time it happened prior to 1992 was in 1966 (Super Bowl I), when Kansas City won at Buffalo and Green Bay won at Dallas. This would happen again in 1997, with Green Bay winning in San Francisco and Denver in Pittsburgh; in 2012, with San Francisco winning in Atlanta and Baltimore in New England; and in 2018, with the Los Angeles Rams winning in New Orleans and New England in Kansas City.\nSuper Bowl pre-game news and notes.\nEven though the Bills had more experienced players than the Cowboys, Dallas was favored to win Super Bowl XXVII based on the recent dominance of NFC teams in the Super Bowl. Some writers and fans were starting to compare Buffalo to the Super Bowl losers Minnesota Vikings and the Denver Broncos.\nStill, many thought that the inexperienced Cowboys might panic under the pressure of playing in their first Super Bowl, and thus make a number of mistakes. Also, some thought Buffalo's no-huddle offense could eventually wear down and dominate Dallas' young defense.\nFinally, Jimmy Johnson was looking to become the first head coach to win a college football national championship (Miami in 1987) and a Super Bowl.\nThis became last of five Super Bowl games played at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena. Two other Super Bowl games were played nearby at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. This was the last time that a Super Bowl was hosted in a different stadium than the city's NFL teams, as the Rose Bowl has long been considered more suitable than the Coliseum for the high-profile game. Los Angeles would not host another Super Bowl for almost three decades, since it had no NFL teams from 1995 to 2015, and having an NFL team in a market or region has long been a \"de jure\" requirement for bidding on the game. Los Angeles hosted Super Bowl LVI in 2022 at SoFi Stadium, and any other Los Angeles Super Bowl moving forward will be played there and not the Rose Bowl; since the 1990s the league has given preference in awarding the Super Bowl to brand new or recently renovated NFL stadiums, alongside a trend of teams demanding public money or relocating to play in new stadiums.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Cowboys elected to wear their home white uniforms with silver pants, forcing the Bills to wear their home blue uniforms with white pants.\nThis was the first meeting between Buffalo and Dallas since 1984, when the 0\u201311 Bills won 14\u20133 at home, with Greg Bell running for an 85-yard touchdown on the game's first play. The loss cost the Cowboys a playoff berth, as they lost a tiebreaker with the NFC East rival Giants.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast on television in the United States by NBC. Dick Enberg served as the play-by-play announcer with color commentator Bob Trumpy in the broadcast booth. CBS was originally scheduled to broadcast Super Bowl XXVII, but the NFL allowed NBC and CBS to swap Super Bowls XXVI and XXVII so CBS could use Super Bowl XXVI as a strong lead-in for its coverage of the 1992 Winter Olympics.\nBob Costas hosted all the events with analyst Mike Ditka, who joined NBC almost immediately after he was fired as head coach of the Chicago Bears earlier in January. Other contributors included former \"Boston Globe\" sportswriter Will McDonough (assigned to Buffalo's locker room); former Oakland/Los Angeles Raiders tight end Todd Christensen; \"The Tonight Show\" host Jay Leno; Cris Collinsworth (participating in an NFL Experience piece with Christensen as well as reporting from the Dallas locker room); former Los Angeles Lakers basketball player Magic Johnson (then working as a commentator for the \"NBA on NBC\"; Johnson was assigned to an interview with Dallas Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman, running back Emmitt Smith and wide receiver Michael Irvin); Paul Maguire; Gayle Gardner; Jim Lampley (who would replace Costas as host of \"NFL Live\" for the following season); and \"Dateline NBC\" correspondent Deborah Roberts (producing a special report on the Michael Jackson halftime show). Also included was an interview with former New York Jets defensive end Dennis Byrd and his wife Angela in the first one-on-one interview since Byrd suffered a paralyzing neck injury (which he eventually recovered from) suffered in a collision with teammate Scott Mersereau during their game against Kansas City.\nNBC's Super Bowl lead-out program was the series debut of \"\". This would be the third successful series to premiere after a Super Bowl (\"The A-Team\", which premiered after Super Bowl XVII, and \"The Wonder Years\", which premiered after Super Bowl XXII, were the other two successful series).\nSuper Bowl XXVII was broadcast to 125 countries around the world. In addition to the United States, this Super Bowl was also broadcast in Canada on CTV, in Germany on Tele 5, in Mexico on Canal 5, in Australia on the ABC, in the Philippines on GMA Network and World TV 21 and the United Kingdom on Channel 4.\nThe \"NFL's Greatest Games\" episode \"A Man and His Moment\" features Jimmy Johnson reading excerpts from his book \"Turning the Thing Around: My Life in Football\", interspersed with game footage and audio from Super Bowl XXVII. It was based on the Super Bowl XXVII highlight film, which had the same title as this episode.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pre show featured The Rockettes dance company in a tribute to Hollywood music and cinema in the United States. Also featured were former Eagles singer Glenn Frey and Fleetwood Mac.\nNational anthem.\nCountry music singer Garth Brooks sang the national anthem. He was accompanied by actress Marlee Matlin, who signed the anthem for the deaf fans. Brooks very nearly did not perform the anthem\u2014he left the stadium less than an hour before he was slated to sing, because of a dispute with NBC, regarding a video he asked them to air for the song \"We Shall Be Free\". Television producers spotted rocker Jon Bon Jovi in the crowd and were prepared to have him perform the anthem, until Brooks was finally coaxed back into the stadium.\nCoin toss.\nThe coin toss ceremony featured a future infamous celebrity, former Bills running back O. J. Simpson, who was working for NBC Sports at the time.\nHalftime show.\nAfter Super Bowl XXVI, where a special episode of \"In Living Color\", broadcast by future NFL broadcaster Fox during the game's halftime period, successfully attracted viewers away from the Super Bowl telecast on CBS (with viewership falling by 22% over halftime), the NFL began the process of heightening the profile of the halftime show in an effort to attract mainstream viewers. Radio City Productions, who would produce the halftime show, attempted to court Michael Jackson to serve as the headline act by meeting with him and his manager Sandy Gallin. After three failed negotiations, one having asked the NFL for a fee of $1 million, Jackson's management agreed to allow him to perform at Super Bowl XXVII.\nAlthough the league does not pay appearance fees for Super Bowl halftime performers, the NFL and Frito-Lay agreed to donate $100,000 to the Heal the World Foundation\u2014a charity that was founded by Jackson, as well as commercial time to air an appeal for the foundation's Heal L.A. campaign, which aimed to provide health care, drug education, and mentorship for Los Angeles youth, particularly children affected by the aftermath of the 1992 Los Angeles riots.\nJackson's set included a medley consisting of \"Jam\" (with the beginning of \"Why You Wanna Trip On Me\"), \"Billie Jean\" and \"Black or White\" (with the beginning of \"Another Part of Me\"). The finale featured an audience card stunt, a video montage showing Jackson participating in various humanitarian efforts around the world, and a choir of 3,500 local Los Angeles area children singing \"We Are the World\", later joining Jackson as he sang his single \"Heal the World\".\nThe halftime show was a major success, marking the first time in Super Bowl history that ratings increased between halves during the game with a whopping 133.4 million people tuning in, making it the most watched television broadcast of all time until surpassed in 2025 by the end of the second quarter and subsequent halftime show of Super Bowl LIX. \nmaking it the most watched Halftime Show at the time. Nine days later, Jackson would give the most watched television interview of all time with Oprah Winfrey.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Super Bowl XXVII halftime show\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe game got off to a promising start for Buffalo. After both teams were forced to punt on their opening possessions, Bills wide receiver Steve Tasker blocked Cowboys punter Mike Saxon's ensuing punt, knocking the ball out of bounds at the Dallas 16-yard line. Four plays later, running back Thurman Thomas scored on a 2-yard touchdown run to give the Bills the 7\u20130 early lead.\nDallas then reached their own 40-yard line on their next drive, but an illegal formation penalty on offensive tackle Mark Tuinei nullified running back Emmitt Smith's 12-yard run. Quarterback Troy Aikman then threw two consecutive incompletions, and the Cowboys were forced to punt again. The Bills subsequently advanced to midfield with the aid of a roughing the passer penalty on Cowboys defensive tackle Leon Lett and a 21-yard pass from quarterback Jim Kelly to wide receiver Andre Reed.\nThen the wave of turnovers began. On the next play, a blitz by safety Kenneth Gant led to Kelly throwing an interception to safety James Washington, who returned the ball 13 yards to the Bills 47-yard line. Six plays later, aided by a 20-yard reception by wide receiver Michael Irvin on 3rd-and-16, the Cowboys tied the game on Aikman's 23-yard touchdown pass to tight end Jay Novacek.\nBuffalo had to start at their own 10 following the ensuing kickoff due to an illegal block by Bills linebacker Mark Maddox. On the first play of the drive, defensive end Charles Haley strip-sacked Kelly, and defensive tackle Jimmie Jones picked the ball out of the air at the 2-yard line and dove into the end zone for a touchdown to give Dallas a 14\u20137 lead. The Cowboys had scored two touchdowns in a span of 15 seconds, the shortest time between touchdowns in Super Bowl history.\nThe Cowboys nearly forced yet another turnover when Bills wide receiver Brad Lamb returned the ensuing kickoff 33 yards to the Buffalo 37-yard line before Gant stripped the ball from him, but linebacker Keith Goganious recovered the ball for Buffalo on the 42. Running back Kenneth Davis then ran twice for a gain of 14 yards to end the first quarter.\nSecond quarter.\nOn the first play of the second quarter, Kelly's 40-yard completion to Reed set up 1st-and-goal for the Bills at the Cowboys' 4-yard line. However, the Dallas defense immediately tightened up as Buffalo failed to score on three rushing attempts, with linebacker Ken Norton Jr. meeting Davis in a hole inside the 1-yard line on third down and driving him backwards. On fourth down, Kelly threw a pass that safety Thomas Everett intercepted in the end zone for a touchback.\nDespite being forced to punt following Everett's interception, Dallas began to take over the game from there. On Buffalo's next drive, Norton delivered a hard hit on Kelly that re-injured the latter's knee, which he sprained earlier in the season, and playoff star Frank Reich took Kelly's place. Reich started out well, completing his first two passes, including a 38-yard completion to Reed to advance the ball to the Dallas 22-yard line, while Davis was also a major contributor on the drive, rushing five times for 28 yards. However, Thomas was stopped for no gain on 3rd-and-1 at the 4-yard line. Rather than attempt another fourth-down play near the goal line, the Bills settled for kicker Steve Christie's 21-yard field goal to cut their deficit to 14\u201310 with 3:24 left in the half.\nThe Cowboys exploded in the closing minutes of the first half. First, they responded to the Bills' field goal on their next possession with a 5-play, 72-yard drive, which consisted of a pair of passes from Aikman to Smith and Novacek for 17 yards, followed by a 38-yard run by Smith to give Dallas a first down inside the Buffalo 20-yard line as the half came to the two-minute warning. Aikman then finished the drive with a 19-yard touchdown pass to Irvin, increasing the lead to 21\u201310. On the first play of the Bills' ensuing drive, Thomas caught a swing pass from Reich, but fumbled the ball while being tackled by Lett, and Jones recovered it at the Buffalo 18-yard line. Aikman then threw another touchdown pass to Irvin to give Dallas a 28\u201310 lead (Irvin's two touchdown receptions made him the seventh player to do so in a Super Bowl. Irvin also became the second player, after Washington Redskins wide receiver Ricky Sanders in Super Bowl XXII, to catch two touchdowns in a single quarter. Furthermore, Irvin's two catches occurred in a span of 18 seconds, the fastest pair of touchdowns scored by the same player in Super Bowl history).\nWith just over a minute left in the first half, the Bills barely avoided another turnover when Davis recovered a fumbled handoff from Reich. But two plays later, cornerback Larry Brown intercepted Reich's pass at the Dallas 28-yard line to preserve the Cowboys' 18-point lead at halftime.\nThird quarter.\nDallas then took the opening drive of the second half and advanced 77 yards in 11 plays, which included two receptions by Irvin for 37 yards and four runs by Smith for 28 yards. However, on 3rd-and-goal at the Buffalo 2-yard line, Aikman's pass to Novacek in the end zone was overthrown, forcing Dallas to settle for kicker Lin Elliott's 20-yard field goal, increasing their lead to 31\u201310. After the Bills' next possession resulted in a punt and the Cowboys' resulted in a turnover on downs, Buffalo responded to Dallas' field goal with a 5-play, 61-yard drive, which ended with Reich's 40-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Don Beebe on the last play of the quarter. Despite their five turnovers in the first half, Buffalo only trailed Dallas 31\u201317 going into the final quarter, and after their comeback from the 32-point deficit to the Houston Oilers in the Wild Card game, a two-touchdown comeback seemed perfectly within their capabilities.\nFourth quarter.\nHowever, the Cowboys tightened up on both offense and defense, and held the Bills scoreless for the rest of the game. On Dallas' next possession, Smith fumbled the ball, which was recovered by Aikman, but resulted in a 12-yard loss. Two plays later, Aikman completed an 18-yard pass to Smith, but it brought up 4th-and-1 and the Cowboys punted. During the punt, Bills cornerback Cliff Hicks fumbled the catch and had to fall on the ball at the Buffalo 12. From there, the Bills did not gain a yard and punted back to the Cowboys. After an 11-yard run by Smith, Aikman threw a 45-yard touchdown pass to wide Alvin Harper, giving Dallas a 38\u201317 lead, and essentially putting the game away. However, the Cowboys were not done adding to their lead. On the second play of the Bills' next possession, Everett intercepted a pass from Reich and returned it 22 yards to the Buffalo 8-yard line, setting up another touchdown three plays later on Smith's 10-yard run. Two plays after Buffalo received the ensuing kickoff, Reich fumbled a high snap while in a shotgun formation. Norton recovered the loose ball and returned it 9 yards for a touchdown, capping off the scoring at 52\u201317. The 21 points by the Cowboys is the most for a team in the 4th quarter, matched by the Kansas City Chiefs in Super Bowl LIV. The Cowboys also became just the second team to score two defensive touchdowns in a Super Bowl. The Raiders also did so in Super Bowl XVIII with a blocked punt return and an interception return.\nOne of the more memorable moments of the game came after the Cowboys had built a 35-point lead. Cowboys defensive end Jim Jeffcoat strip-sacked Reich, and Lett picked up the ball with no one in front of him, appearing ready to score on a 64-yard fumble return, but Beebe ran a showboating Lett down from behind and stripped him of the ball just before he crossed the goal line, as the ball rolled out of the end zone for a touchback. Lett would redeem himself when he sacked Reich to end the game and give the Cowboys their first championship title since 1978. After the game, in an otherwise dejected Buffalo locker room, Bills owner Ralph Wilson went straight to Beebe and thanked him for his hustle and perseverance.\nSmith was the top rusher of the game, rushing for 108 yards and a touchdown, while also catching 6 passes for 27 yards. Irvin was the Cowboys' leading receiver with 6 receptions for 114 yards and 2 touchdowns. Novacek added 7 receptions for 72 yards and a touchdown. Lett recorded a sack, a fumble recovery, and 2 forced fumbles.\nReich and Kelly combined for 22 out of 38 completions for 276 yards and a touchdown, but also threw 4 interceptions. Thomas, who gained 2,113 combined rushing and receiving yards during the season, was held to just 29 combined rushing and receiving yards in the game. Reed was the Bills' top receiver with 8 receptions for 152 yards. Bills running back Kenneth Davis was their leading rusher with 86 yards. Davis also caught 3 passes for 16 yards and returned a kickoff for 21 yards, giving him 123 total yards.\nBuffalo had seven possessions which ended in four plays or less because of turnovers and resulted in five Dallas touchdowns. Irvin and Bills receiver Andre Reed each had over 100 yards receiving, making it the first time players from different teams had at least 100 yards receiving in a Super Bowl; Irvin had 114 yards, while Reed had 152. Reed's total is the highest for a player on a losing team.\nPostgame notes.\nBy virtue of his national championship with Miami in 1987, Jimmy Johnson also became the first coach to win both an NCAA Division I-A/FBS national championship and a Super Bowl. Only two coaches have since accomplished the feat: Johnson's Cowboys successor Barry Switzer of Oklahoma and Pete Carroll of USC and Seattle.\nAikman, Irvin and Norton also provided commentary for the 1992 Cowboys' installment of \"\", narrated by Alec Baldwin. The 1992 Cowboys were also ranked 5th out of the first 40 Super Bowl winning teams as selected by a 53-person panel of \"Blue Ribbon\" experts on the NFL and were the highest-placing Cowboys team.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXVII: Dallas Cowboys 52, Buffalo Bills 17\n\"at Rose Bowl, Pasadena, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXVII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nFor the first (and to date only) time in Super Bowl history, officials changed shirts at halftime, going from short sleeves in the first half to long sleeves for the second.\nDonnie Hampton died January 30, 1995, at age 47, one day after Super Bowl XXIX.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29153", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29153", "title": "Super Bowl XXVIII", "text": "1994 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXVIII was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Buffalo Bills to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1993 season. The Cowboys defeated the Bills, for the second straight year, by a score of 30\u201313, winning their fourth Super Bowl in team history, tying the Pittsburgh Steelers and the San Francisco 49ers for most Super Bowl wins. The Buffalo Bills became the only team to both play and lose four consecutive Super Bowls (XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII) for a 0\u20134 franchise Super Bowl record, and as of 2025, remains the team's most recent Super Bowl appearance. This is also the most recent consecutive Super Bowl rematch. The game was played on January 30, 1994, at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta. Since the 1993 regular season was conducted over 18 weeks (two byes per team), the traditional bye week between the conference championship games and the Super Bowl was not employed; the last time this had happened was before Super Bowl XXV.\nThis is the only time that the same two teams have met in consecutive Super Bowls. The defending Super Bowl XXVII champion Cowboys finished with a 12\u20134 regular season record, despite key players missing games due to injuries. The Bills were making their fourth consecutive Super Bowl appearance, but still seeking their first title, after also finishing with a 12\u20134 regular season record, largely through the strength of their no-huddle offense.\nAfter trailing 13\u20136 at halftime, the Cowboys scored 24 unanswered points in the second half. The Bills had built their lead off of running back Thurman Thomas' 4-yard touchdown run. But just 45 seconds into the third quarter, Thomas was stripped of the ball, and Dallas safety James Washington returned the fumble 46 yards for a touchdown to tie the game. From there, Cowboys running back Emmitt Smith, who was named the Super Bowl MVP, largely took over the game. On Dallas' next possession, Smith was handed the ball seven times on an eight-play, 64-yard drive that was capped off with his 15-yard touchdown run. He later scored on a 1-yard touchdown in the fourth quarter. Overall, Smith had 30 carries for 132 yards and 2 touchdowns, while also catching 4 passes for 26 yards.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXVIII to Atlanta during their May 23, 1990 meetings in Irving, Texas. It would be Atlanta's first of three Super Bowls (as of 2024) and first of two played at the Georgia Dome. Four cities submitted bids including Atlanta (Georgia Dome), Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium), New Orleans (Superdome), and Tampa (Tampa Stadium). On the first ballot, Tampa was eliminated, mostly due to the fact that they were already scheduled to host XXV. Tampa Bay representative Hugh Culverhouse Jr. immediately threw their support behind the Atlanta bid. Atlanta won on the fourth ballot, with owners rewarding Falcons owner Rankin Smith for his decision to keep the franchise in Atlanta, and for orchestrating the construction of the new stadium. However, the NFL attached conditions to Atlanta's hosting duties. The Georgia Dome was still under construction; the first concrete footings had just been poured that same week. The league gave Atlanta a deadline of September 1 to finalize the construction schedule and budget, otherwise they may consider reassigning the game. In September of that year, Atlanta was selected as the host for the 1996 Summer Olympics, with the Georgia Dome a key venue for the games. Almost immediately, the stadium's luxury boxes began to sell out, helping ensure the stadium would be completed within budget. The stadium was completed on-time for the 1992 season.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Cowboys' journey to Super Bowl XXVIII proved more difficult than the previous season. Pro Bowl running back Emmitt Smith held out the first two regular season games over a contract dispute, and Dallas lost both of those contests, including a 13\u201310 loss at home to the Bills. Pro Bowl quarterback Troy Aikman, along with a few other key players, missed games due to injuries.\nFollowing the loss to the Bills, Cowboys defensive end Charles Haley was so upset he slammed his helmet through a locker room wall, screaming \"We'll never win with a fucking rookie running back, and we have the greatest one ever sitting at home watching TV!\" in reference to Smith's replacement, Derrick Lassic. Team owner Jerry Jones apparently agreed, quickly signing Smith to a contract that made him the highest paid running back in the NFL. Jerry Jones, who was in the locker room when the helmet was thrown, said that it missed him by about 2 feet.\nWith Smith back in the starting lineup and Aikman healthy, Dallas went on to win their next seven games, including a dominating 26\u201317 win over the San Francisco 49ers and a 23\u201310 win on the road against the Philadelphia Eagles in which Smith rushed for 237 yards, the 6th highest total in NFL history. Their winning streak was finally snapped against the Atlanta Falcons, with Aikman on the sidelines with an ankle injury, and Smith knocked out of the game after his first carry. They also lost their next game against Miami due to an infamous error by defensive lineman Leon Lett that enabled the Dolphins to kick a game-winning field goal, but then went on to win their remaining five games. In the season finale against the New York Giants, with the Cowboys desperately trying to clinch the NFC East title and a first-round bye in the playoffs, Aikman showed he was at full health, completing 24 of 30 passes with no interceptions, while for Smith it was his career signature game. He suffered a first-degree separation in his right shoulder during the first half, but still finished with 229 total yards (168 yards rushing, 10 passes caught for 61 yards, and the team's only touchdown) in a 16\u201313 overtime win which enabled Dallas to finish with an NFC-best 12\u20134 record.\nThough not as dynamic as the previous year, Dallas' offense remained incredibly efficient, led by Aikman, who finished the regular season completing 271 out of 392 passes for 3,100 yards, 15 touchdowns, and six interceptions. Despite missing the first two games, Smith recorded 1,486 rushing yards and nine touchdowns, while catching 57 passes for 414 yards and another touchdown, earning him his third consecutive NFL rushing title and the NFL Most Valuable Player Award. Fullback Daryl Johnston was also a reliable backfield threat, scoring four touchdowns and contributing a career-high 50 receptions for 371 yards. Pro Bowler Michael Irvin was once again the team's leading wide receiver, catching 88 passes for 1,330 yards and seven touchdowns. Wide receiver Alvin Harper caught 36 passes for 777 yards and five touchdowns, while Pro Bowl tight end Jay Novacek had 44 receptions for 445 yards and one touchdown. Pro Bowlers Mark Stepnoski, Erik Williams, and Nate Newton anchored the offensive line. On special teams, rookie receiver Kevin Williams ranked seventh in the NFL with 381 yards on 36 punt returns, while also gaining 689 kickoff return yards and catching 20 passes for 151 yards.\nThe Cowboys' defense was anchored by such Pro Bowlers as lineman Russell Maryland, and Ken Norton Jr., and defensive backs Thomas Everett and Kevin Smith, who intercepted six passes during the season. Defensive end Tony Tolbert led the team with 7.5 sacks, while Charles Haley added 4 and Chad Hennings had 5.5.\nBuffalo Bills.\nThe Bills finished at the top of the AFC by clinching the conference's best regular season record, winning 7 of their first 8 games and finished the season at 12\u20134. Quarterback Jim Kelly once again led Buffalo's no-huddle offense by passing for 288 out of 470 regular season completions for 3,382 yards, 18 touchdowns, with 18 interceptions. Kelly was joining an elite class by starting his fourth Super Bowl. The only other quarterbacks to start four were Roger Staubach, Terry Bradshaw and Joe Montana, with John Elway, Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, and Patrick Mahomes later doing so. Kelly is the only one to start four consecutive Super Bowl games.\nRunning back Thurman Thomas led the AFC with 1,315 rushing yards and six touchdowns, while also catching 48 passes for 387 yards. Running back Kenneth Davis rushed for 391 yards and six touchdowns, while also recording 21 receptions for 95 yards. Pro Bowl wide receiver Andre Reed caught 52 receptions for a team-leading 854 yards and six touchdowns; wide receiver Bill Brooks had 60 receptions for 714 yards and five touchdowns; and wide receiver Don Beebe recorded 31 receptions for 504 yards and three touchdowns. Also, tight end Pete Metzelaars led the team with 68 receptions (a higher amount than his last four seasons combined) for 609 yards and four touchdowns. Pro Bowl offensive lineman Howard Ballard anchored the line.\nBuffalo's defense was the team's weakness, ranking 27th (second-to-last) in the league, giving up 5,554 total yards. The defense did have a few good contributors, such as Hall of Fame lineman Bruce Smith (14 sacks, one fumble recovery), Pro Bowl linebacker Cornelius Bennett (five sacks, two fumble recoveries), linebacker Darryl Talley (101 tackles, two sacks, two fumble recoveries, three interceptions) and cornerback Nate Odomes, who led the NFL with nine interceptions and one fumble recovery. Linebacker Marvcus Patton, who had moved up to the starting lineup to replace departed Pro Bowler Shane Conlan, was also an impact player, intercepting two passes and recovering three fumbles.\nPlayoffs.\nIn the NFC, Dallas' first opponent in the playoffs was the Green Bay Packers, who were coming off a thrilling 28\u201324 win over the Detroit Lions in the Wild Card Game, in which quarterback Brett Favre had thrown the winning touchdown pass to Sterling Sharpe with only 55 seconds left in the game. In this game, the Packers scored first with a field goal, but Dallas stormed back with 17 consecutive points in the second quarter. First, Aikman threw a 6-yard touchdown pass to Harper. Then with time running out the period, Dallas scored again on an Eddie Murray field goal. Green Bay then fumbled the ensuing kickoff, allowing the Cowboys to score again with Aikman's 6-yard pass to Novacek. The Cowboys went on to stave off an attempted Packers comeback in the second half and win the game, 27\u201317. Aikman finished the game with 28 of 37 completions for 302 yards and 3 touchdowns, with 2 interceptions. Irvin recorded 9 catches for 126 yards and 2 touchdowns.\nOne week later, Dallas faced the San Francisco 49ers in the NFC Championship Game for the second year in a row in what was, at the time, the last NFL game to air on CBS. The 49ers had the NFL's highest scoring offense with 473 points, 97 more than the runner-up Cowboys. The last time the two teams played for the NFC title, Dallas won when Aikman thwarted an attempted 49ers comeback with a touchdown drive late in the fourth quarter. But this time, the game was extremely one-sided. The Cowboys scored touchdowns on four of their five first-half possessions. By the end of the half, Dallas had a commanding 28\u20137 lead. Aikman completed 14 of 18 passes for 177 yards and three touchdowns with no interceptions, while also rushing for 25 yards, but was knocked out of the game with a concussion in the third quarter. Then San Francisco scored a touchdown, making the score 28\u201314 with plenty of time left for a comeback. However, their hopes were soon dashed as backup quarterback Bernie Kosar, who had already played in three conference championship games and was unable to advance to the Super Bowl each time, led the Cowboys 82 yards to go up 35\u201314 on his 42-yard touchdown pass to Alvin Harper. Murray then put the finishing touches on San Francisco with a 50-yard field goal, while all the 49ers could do was score a useless touchdown in \"garbage time\" to make the final score 38\u201321. Smith rushed for 88 yards, caught seven passes for 85 yards, and scored two touchdowns. Meanwhile, the Dallas defense held 49ers running back Ricky Watters, who rushed for over 100 yards and scored 5 touchdowns in the divisional round, to just 37 yards on 12 carries.\nBuffalo's first opponent was the Los Angeles Raiders, led by quarterback Jeff Hostetler, who had led the New York Giants to victory over the Bills in Super Bowl XXV three years earlier. The Raiders had also edged out the Bills 25\u201324 in week 14 of the regular season. In this game, the Raiders built up a 17\u201313 halftime lead, but Buffalo stormed back with 16 second half points. First, they scored on Kelly's 25-yard touchdown pass to Brooks. Then on their next drive, kicker Steve Christie kicked a 29-yard field goal to give the Bills a 23\u201317 lead. Los Angeles managed to respond with an 86-yard scoring strike from Hostetler to receiver Tim Brown, but Buffalo stormed right back with Brooks' 22-yard touchdown reception in the fourth quarter. The Bills ended up winning the game 29\u201323, having scored 16 points in a span of 6:18 in the second half. Kelly threw for 287 yards and two touchdowns with no interceptions.\nOne week later, the Bills took on the Kansas City Chiefs for the AFC title. Led by 4-time Super Bowl winning quarterback Joe Montana, Kansas City had defeated the Bills 23-7 during the regular season, and were coming off thrilling narrow wins against the Pittsburgh Steelers and Houston Oilers in the playoffs. In the days leading up to the game, many sports writers and fans were eager for the possibility of a Super Bowl in which Montana took on the San Francisco 49ers led by Steve Young, who had replaced Montana as their starting quarterback, or the Dallas Cowboys, who had displaced the 49ers to become the most dominant team in the NFC. However, Buffalo quickly crushed this prospect, burying Kansas City with a dominating 30\u201313 victory in the AFC Championship Game. Thomas rushed for 186 yards and three touchdowns, and caught two passes for 22 yards. On defense, the Bills limited Montana to just 9 of 23 completions for 125 yards and no touchdowns, with one interception. In addition, Kansas City's future Hall of Fame running back, Marcus Allen, was held to just 50 rushing yards on 18 carries.\nBoth Dallas and Buffalo were the top seeded teams in their respective conferences, earning home field advantage throughout the playoffs. Until the New Orleans Saints and Indianapolis Colts qualified for Super Bowl XLIV, this was the last time that both number one seeds advanced to the Super Bowl.\nPregame news.\nMany sportswriters and fans were a bit upset that the Bills advanced to their fourth consecutive Super Bowl. They were distressed with Buffalo having lost the three previous Super Bowl games and did not want to see them lose again. Some Bills fans appeared to be defensive about their team's presence in the game; during Buffalo's victory in the AFC Championship Game a week earlier, one fan displayed a banner defiantly proclaiming, \"We're back; deal with it, America!\"\nTherefore, the Super Bowl hype was more focused onto Cowboys owner/general manager Jerry Jones and head coach Jimmy Johnson. Although the two rebuilt the team with young talent that eventually won the previous year's Super Bowl, both men had huge egos that conflicted with each other. Both had different ideas on the future personnel plans for the Cowboys, and both wanted equal credit for the team's recent success. The dispute became so ugly that Super Bowl XXVIII became Johnson's final game coaching the Cowboys after his feud with Jones boiled over. Johnson would join Vince Lombardi, Bill Walsh, and Bill Parcells on the short list of coaches who won a Super Bowl in what turned out to be their last games with the winning franchise; like Lombardi and Parcells but unlike Walsh, Johnson would later return to coach another team, helming the Miami Dolphins between 1996 and 1999 before retiring from coaching for good.\nThis was the fourth rematch in Super Bowl history, and the first time that both teams met in consecutive years. Both the Bills, as the designated home team in the AFC/NFC annual rotation, and the Cowboys wore the same uniforms as the previous year, with the Bills donning the home blue jersey/white pants set and the Cowboys wearing the white jersey/silver pants set.\nBefore the game, the Super Bowl became the target of protests over the Georgia state flag, which at the time included the Confederate battle flag and was seen as offensive by the African-American community. Several high-profile Georgia politicians got involved, including state senator Ralph D. Abernathy. The NFL tried to duck the issue, with spokesman Greg Aiello stating, \"We're not a political-advocacy group. It's not our role to get involved in political issues that have nothing to do with the Super Bowl.\" However, the NFL had cancelled plans to hold the Super Bowl in Phoenix three years earlier after a referendum to make Martin Luther King Jr. Day an Arizona state holiday was defeated. Ultimately, the flag was not flown inside the Georgia Dome, but was mounted on a pole outside the stadium.\nVice President Al Gore attended the game.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC, with play-by-play announcer Dick Enberg and color commentator Bob Trumpy. Jim Lampley hosted all the events with the help of analysts Mike Ditka and Joe Gibbs and sideline reporters O. J. Simpson (on Buffalo's sideline) and Will McDonough (on Dallas' sideline). While Lampley was busy covering the trophy presentation, Bob Costas (who also interviewed Dallas head coach Jimmy Johnson and Dallas owner/general manager Jerry Jones together prior to the game) covered for Lampley at the host and analysts' desk (and signed off the broadcast for NBC). NBC also introduced a new NFL theme music by composer John Colby that would be retained for the 1994 season. This would be Simpson's last \"NFL on NBC\" appearance before being charged with murder later in Summer 1994.\nThis remains the only time a single network had held consecutive Super Bowls outright. The league normally alternated the Super Bowl broadcast among its television networks, except for Super Bowl I in which both NBC and CBS televised it simultaneously. The five-year NFL contract signed in 1989 had a provision where the last Super Bowl in the contract (XXVIII) would not be rotated, but would go to the highest bidder. NBC, which had held XXVII (according to the original rotation, NBC would have had XXVI and CBS XXVII, but the NFL allowed the networks to switch the two games in order to allow CBS a significant lead-in to its coverage of the 1992 Winter Olympics), was the only network to bid on XXVIII.\nNBC's Super Bowl lead-out programs were the fifth episode of \"The Good Life\" and the seventeenth episode of \"The John Larroquette Show\".\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show held before the game was titled \"Georgia Music Makers\" and featured performances by the rap music duo Kris Kross, the rock band The Georgia Satellites, country musician Charlie Daniels, and the Morehouse College Marching Band.\nThe United States Trampoline Association (USTA) performed on 4 trampolines during \"Jump\" performed by Kris Kross.\nLater, singer Natalie Cole, accompanied by the Atlanta University Center Chorus, sang the national anthem with elements of America the Beautiful.\nTo honor the 25th anniversary of the New York Jets' upset win in Super Bowl III, that game's MVP, former Jets quarterback Joe Namath joined the coin toss ceremony.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"Rockin' Country Sunday\" and featured country music stars Clint Black, Tanya Tucker, Travis Tritt, and Wynonna Judd. The show's finale included a special appearance by Naomi Judd, who joined Wynonna in performing The Judds' single \"Love Can Build a Bridge\", to which everyone eventually joined in, along with special guests, Stevie Wonder, Lisa Hartman Black, The Georgia Satellites, Ashley Judd, Joe Namath, Elijah Wood and Charlie Daniels.\nThis was the first Super Bowl halftime show in which the main stadium lights were turned off for the performance. The show included dancers with yard-long light sticks.\nGame summary.\nThough the Bills had a lead at halftime, Super Bowl XXVIII would have an identical outcome to the three preceding Super Bowls and end with a Buffalo loss.\nFirst quarter.\nDallas wide receiver Kevin Williams returned the opening kickoff 50 yards to the Buffalo 48-yard line. The Cowboys began the drive with quarterback Troy Aikman's 20-yard pass to wide receiver Michael Irvin. But the Cowboys could only pick up 4 yards on their next three plays, forcing them to settle for kicker Eddie Murray's 41-yard field goal, giving them an early 3\u20130 lead.\nThe Bills then responded with an 8-play, 43-yard scoring drive. Quarterback Jim Kelly's two passes to wide receiver Andre Reed and running back Thurman Thomas for 11 and 24 yards, respectively, advanced the ball across the Dallas 40-yard line. After a 3-yard run by running back Kenneth Davis, however, Kelly threw two straight incompletions. The Bills then tied the game, 3\u20133, with kicker Steve Christie's 54-yard field goal, the then-longest field goal in Super Bowl history. Christie's record stood for 30 years, until it was broken in Super Bowl LVIII by San Francisco 49ers kicker Jake Moody's 55-yard field goal, which was subsequently broken by Kansas City Chiefs kicker Harrison Butker's 57-yard field goal in the same Super Bowl.\nBuffalo then forced Dallas to punt, but on the first play of the Bills' ensuing possession, Cowboys safety James Washington stripped the ball from Thomas, and safety Darren Woodson recovered the fumble at midfield. Aided by wide receiver Alvin Harper's 24-yard reception, the Cowboys drove to the Buffalo 7-yard line, but had to settle for Murray's 24-yard field goal to regain the lead, 6\u20133.\nAfter receiving Murray's kickoff, the Bills could only reach their own 41-yard line before being forced to punt. However, they were given a new set of downs when Cowboys cornerback Dave Thomas was flagged for running into punter Chris Mohr on the play.\nSecond quarter.\nTaking advantage of their second chance, the Bills extended their drive to 80 yards in 17 plays, which featured three short passes from Kelly to wide receiver Don Beebe for 22 yards and six runs by Thomas for 18 yards, the last one being a 4-yard touchdown run, giving the Bills their first lead of the game, 10\u20136, early in the second quarter.\nDallas started out their ensuing drive with a 15-yard reception by Irvin and a 13-yard run by running back Emmitt Smith to reach midfield. They were eventually forced to punt, but Cowboys linebacker Matt Vanderbeek downed John Jett's 43-yard punt at the Bills' 1-yard line. A 19-yard completion from Kelly to Reed moved Buffalo out from the shadow of their own end zone, and they eventually reached the Cowboys 46-yard line, but they too were forced to punt. However, Mohr matched Jett's feat with a 45-yard punt that was downed at the Dallas 1-yard line by Buffalo wide receiver Steve Tasker.\nAs the Bills had done, the Cowboys managed to get out of their own territory and advance to the Buffalo 37-yard line. However, Bills cornerback Nate Odomes intercepted a pass intended for Irvin, and returned it 41 yards to the Dallas 47-yard line with 1:03 left in the half. Kelly completed a pair of passes to Thomas and Reed for gains of 12 and 22 yards, respectively, to move the ball to the Dallas 12-yard line. But the Cowboys defense tightened up on the next three plays, so Christie kicked a 28-yard field goal to increase Buffalo's lead to 13\u20136 and end the half.\nThird quarter.\nBuffalo's command over the game proved short-lived, as they began to face a red-hot Dallas defense in the second half. Three plays into the third quarter, defensive tackle Leon Lett forced a fumble on Thomas, and Washington returned the ball 46 yards for a touchdown to tie the game, 13\u201313.\nBills wide receiver Russell Copeland then returned the ensuing kickoff 22 yards to the Buffalo 37-yard line, but on third down, Cowboys defensive ends Jim Jeffcoat and Charles Haley shared a 13-yard sack on Kelly to force the Bills to punt. The Cowboys then scored on an 8-play, 64-yard drive in which Smith carried the ball on seven of the eight plays, gaining all but 3 of the 64 yards himself, and finished the drive with a 15-yard touchdown run (his longest run of the game) to give Dallas a 20\u201313 lead. Both teams then exchanged punts twice before the quarter ended.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Dallas defense continued to stop the Buffalo offense throughout the second half. Washington intercepted a pass from Kelly on the first play of the fourth quarter and returned it 12 yards to the Bills' 34-yard line. A false start penalty on offensive tackle Erik Williams on the next play moved the ball back to the 39, but on the next three plays, Smith ran twice for 10 yards and caught a screen pass for 9. Aikman then completed a 16-yard pass to Harper on 3rd-and-8, setting up 1st-and-goal at the Bills' 6-yard line. Buffalo managed to keep Dallas out of the end zone on the next three plays, but on 4th-and-goal, Smith scored his second touchdown of the game on a 1-yard run, increasing the lead to 27\u201313.\nThe Bills started their ensuing drive from their own 22-yard line and managed to reach their own 36. Cowboys defensive tackle Jimmie Jones made two key plays, however; a second-down tackle on Thomas for a 1-yard loss and a 13-yard sack on Kelly on third down to push the ball back to the 22-yard line and force Buffalo to punt, leading to a poor, 29-yard kick by Mohr, which the Cowboys recovered at their own 49-yard line. Dallas then cemented their second consecutive Super Bowl title with a 9-play, 49-yard scoring drive that took 4:10 off the clock. On the sixth play of the drive, Aikman completed a 35-yard pass to Harper to the Bills 1-yard line. After a false start penalty against center Frank Cornish pushed them back to the 6-yard line, the Cowboys ran the ball on their next three plays to force the Bills to use up all of their timeouts. Murray then kicked a 20-yard field goal with 2:50 left in the game, capping off the scoring at 30\u201313. Buffalo then reached the Dallas 22-yard line on their final possession, only to turn the ball over on downs in the game's closing seconds.\n\"This one is the worst,\" Reed said after the game, referring to the Bills' streak of four consecutive Super Bowl losses. \"We should have won. Then they come up with 24 unanswered points. That last fumble was once in a million. These things always happen to the Bills. It rips the heart out of you.\" \"Dallas didn't wear us down in the second half,\" added Thomas. \"I fumbled. I cost us the game.\" However, center Kent Hull managed to find some consolation. \"In the immediate future, we'll be thought of as losers,\" he said. \"But one day down the road, when I'm no longer playing, they'll say, 'Wow, they won four straight AFC championships. They must have been good.'\"\nFor the Cowboys, Troy Aikman completed 19 out of 27 for 207 yards with 1 interception, while Alvin Harper was the team's top receiver with three catches for 75 yards. Emmitt Smith, still suffering the effects of a shoulder injury during the regular-season finale, became just the second player in Super Bowl history to rush for 100 yards in back-to-back Super Bowls (the other being Larry Csonka, who did it in Super Bowls VII and VIII). He also became the fourth player to rush for touchdowns in back-to-back Super Bowls (joining Franco Harris, John Riggins and Thomas). Smith also became the first player to lead the league in rushing yards, win the NFL Most Valuable Player Award, and win Super Bowl MVP all in the same season. He was also the fourth player, after Bart Starr (1966), Terry Bradshaw (1978), and Joe Montana (1989) to win both the NFL MVP and Super Bowl MVP during the same season. Defensively, James Washington, who began as the nickel-back to counter Buffalo's \"no-huddle\" and frequent use of three wide receivers, had a phenomenal game with his 46-yard fumble return touchdown, an interception, forcing a Thurman Thomas fumble that Darren Woodson recovered, and collecting 11 tackles. Washington had only started in one game for the Cowboys during the season, but finished this one just a few votes short of earning the MVP award.\nFor the Bills, wide receiver Andre Reed finished the game with 6 receptions for 75 yards to lead Buffalo, with Don Beebe catching 6 passes for 60 yards and returning 2 kickoffs for 63 yards. Thomas was limited to just 37 rushing yards, but he also caught 7 passes for 52 yards (Thomas became the first player in Super Bowl history to score touchdowns in four Super Bowls: he scored one touchdown in each of the Bills' four straight appearances, XXV-XXVIII). Kenneth Davis was the Bills' top rusher with 38 yards. Kelly finished the game completing 31 of 50 passes for 260 yards and 1 interception. His 31 completions was a then-Super Bowl record. Kelly became the only player ever to throw 50 passes in two Super Bowls. In addition to his 50 passes in this game, he threw a Super Bowl-record 58 passes in Super Bowl XXVI.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXVIII: Dallas Cowboys 30, Buffalo Bills 13\n\"at Georgia Dome, Atlanta, Georgia\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXVIII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29154", "revid": "32968044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29154", "title": "Super Bowl XXIX", "text": "1995 edition of the Super Bowl\nSuper Bowl XXIX was an American football championship game featuring an all-California matchup between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion San Diego Chargers and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion San Francisco 49ers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1994 season. The 49ers defeated the Chargers by a score of 49\u201326, the most points ever earned in a Super Bowl game, becoming the first team to win five Super Bowl championships. The game was played on January 29, 1995, at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami, Florida. As of 2025, this is the last Super Bowl to feature two teams from the same state.\nThis game is regarded as 49ers quarterback Steve Young's final leap out of the shadow of his predecessor, Joe Montana, who had won four Super Bowls with the 49ers (in 1981, 1984, 1988, and 1989), two with Young as the backup quarterback. With Young at the helm, and a defense consisting of several veteran free agents who joined the team during the previous offseason, San Francisco finished the regular season with a league-best 13\u20133 record, and led the league in total points scored (505). The Chargers, on the other hand, were regarded as a \"Cinderella\" team, and advanced to their first Super Bowl after posting an 11\u20135 regular-season record and overcoming halftime deficits in both of their playoff wins.\nThis was the first Super Bowl in which both teams scored in all four quarters. The combined aggregate score of 75 points and the ten total touchdowns both remain Super Bowl records. Still, the 49ers controlled most of the game, with Young completing touchdown passes in each of the 49ers' first two drives. The Chargers were able to cut the deficit late in the first quarter, 14\u20137, on a 13-play, 78-yard drive, but could not slow down San Francisco afterwards. Young was named the Super Bowl MVP, throwing a Super Bowl-record six touchdown passes, and completing 24 out of 36 passes for 325 yards.\nDespite the predicted blowout (18.5-point is the second largest margin a team has been favored by in a Super Bowl), the fact that San Diego did not have as much national appeal nor a relatively large core fan base, and two teams from California playing, which could have significantly diminished interest along the East Coast, the telecast of the game on ABC still had a Nielsen rating of 41.3.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXIX to Miami during their May 23, 1991 meeting in Minneapolis. Three cities presented bids: Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium), Tampa (Tampa Stadium), and Houston (Astrodome). New Orleans pulled out of the running early on due to conflicts with other conventions. Houston was considered an early favorite, since they had not hosted the game since 1974. However, the Astrodome would need to add approximately 10,000 temporary seats in order to meet the NFL's capacity requirement of 70,000.\nRules required a candidate to receive a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 vote (21 of 28 owners) in order to win the bidding. Tampa was eliminated on the first ballot, having just hosted XXV, along with their lack of premium seating. Then neither Miami nor Houston managed to get 21 votes on the second ballot or on the third ballot. For the fourth ballot, the threshold was reduced to a simple majority. In what was said to be a close vote, Miami was selected as the host. It marked the seventh time overall the Miami-area hosted the Super Bowl, and the second time it was played in Joe Robbie Stadium.\nSan Diego Chargers.\nThe Chargers were the biggest surprise of the 1994 season, with very few expecting them to even reach the playoffs, let alone the Super Bowl.\nSan Diego suffered losing seasons in the 1980s until former Washington Redskins general manager Bobby Beathard joined the team in 1990. Beathard decided to rebuild the Chargers using the same model that he used to build the Redskins into Super Bowl contenders during the 1980s: a powerful running game built around big linemen, a passing game that helped sustain extremely long drives, and a bending but steady defense. After former Georgia Tech head coach Bobby Ross was hired by the Chargers in 1992, the team won the AFC West with an 11\u20135 regular season record and won an opening round playoff game against Kansas City. But in 1993, they slumped back to 8\u20138 and did not reach the postseason.\nBefore the start of the 1994 season, San Diego was not expected to do well because they had so many newcomers via the draft and free agency; the Chargers ended up with 22 new players on their roster, and 10 of them became starters. However, they ended up winning their first six regular season games en route to an 11\u20135 record, the AFC West championship, and the #2 AFC playoff seed. The Chargers went into the final game of the season against the Pittsburgh Steelers needing a win to get the #2 seed (a loss would have given that spot to the Miami Dolphins), which came with a first-round bye and a home game in the divisional round of the playoffs. Backup quarterback Gale Gilbert, subbing for injured starter Stan Humphries, led the Chargers to a come-from-behind 37\u201334 win, with John Carney kicking a game-winning field goal in the game's final seconds.\nThe Chargers' offense was led by quarterback Stan Humphries, who was the Redskins' backup to Mark Rypien during the 1991 season, when they won Super Bowl XXVI. During the 1994 season for San Diego, Humphries completed 264 out of 453 attempts for 3,209 yards and 17 touchdowns, with 12 interceptions. Wide receiver Mark Seay was the team's leading receiver with 58 receptions for 645 yards and 6 touchdowns. Wide receiver Tony Martin had 50 catches for 885 yards and 7 touchdowns, wide receiver Shawn Jefferson recorded 43 catches for 627 yards and 3 touchdowns, and tight end Alfred Pupunu had 21 receptions for 214 yards and 2 touchdowns.\nRunning back Natrone Means led the team in rushing with 1,350 yards and 12 touchdowns. He also recorded 39 receptions for 235 yards, and was named to the Pro Bowl. Third-down back Ronnie Harmon was also a big contributor, catching 58 passes for 615 yards and a touchdown. Meanwhile, the Chargers' special teams was also a major threat with Andre Coleman, who returned 49 kickoffs for 1,293 yards (26.4 average yards per return) and 2 touchdowns.\nThe Chargers had an excellent defensive line, anchored by Pro Bowl defensive end Leslie O'Neal, who led the team with 12.5 sacks and forced four fumbles, defensive tackle Chris Mims, who recorded 11 sacks, and Shawn Lee, who added 6.5 sacks and a fumble recovery. Their linebacking corps was led by Junior Seau, who was a Pro Bowl selection for the fourth consecutive year, recording 123 tackles, 5.5 sacks, and 3 fumble recoveries. Defensive back Stanley Richard was a major weapon in the secondary, recording 4 interceptions, 224 return yards, and 2 touchdowns. Defensive back Darrien Gordon was also a major asset to the team, recording 4 interceptions and 32 return yards, while also adding another 475 yards and 2 touchdowns returning punts. Safety Rodney Harrison was a rookie on the team.\nChargers backup quarterback Gale Gilbert became the first player to be a member of five consecutive Super Bowl teams. He had been a third-string quarterback for the Buffalo Bills, who had won AFC Championships in the four previous seasons (1990\u20131993).\nSan Francisco 49ers.\nFrom the 1988 to the 1993 seasons, the 49ers played in five out of six NFC Championship Games, winning Super Bowls XXIII and XXIV. But after head coach George Seifert's team lost two consecutive NFC Championship games to the Dallas Cowboys in 1992 and 1993, San Francisco brought in several veteran free agents to strengthen their defense. Among the players signed were defensive linemen Richard Dent (the MVP of Super Bowl XX), Charles Mann, Rhett Hall, and Rickey Jackson; linebackers Ken Norton Jr. and Gary Plummer; and cornerback Deion Sanders.\nThe free agents enabled the 49ers to jump from the 18th-ranked defense in the league to the 8th, and to jump from the league's 16th-best defense against the run to the 2nd. Pro Bowl defensive lineman Dana Stubblefield led the team with 8.5 sacks. Rookie defensive tackle Bryant Young was also a big threat to opposing quarterbacks and rushers, recording 42 tackles, 6 sacks, and a fumble recovery. Behind them, Norton played very effectively at the middle linebacker position, leading the team with 77 tackles and recording an interception. Pro Bowl safety Merton Hanks led the team with 7 interceptions for 93 return yards, while Sanders had 6 interceptions for 303 return yards and 3 touchdowns, earning him the NFL Defensive Player of the Year Award. His 303 return yards was the third-highest total in NFL history, while his touchdown returns of 74, 93, and 90 yards made him the first player ever to have two 90-yard interception returns in one season. Pro Bowl safety Tim McDonald was also a big contributor, recording 2 interceptions for 79 yards and a touchdown.\nThe 49ers' offense was led by quarterback Steve Young, who replaced future Hall of Famer Joe Montana as the starter in 1991 and 1992 due to injuries. After Young led the league in passing in both seasons, Montana was traded to the Kansas City Chiefs, leaving Young as the undisputed starter in 1993. But even with his impressive passing statistics, Young was criticized as \"not being able to win the big games\" as Montana had done in leading the 49ers to Super Bowl victories in XVI, XIX, XXIII, and XXIV. It also didn't help that the team had lost to Montana's Chiefs 24\u201317 during the regular season.\nStill, Young again led the league in passing during the 1994 regular season with a passer rating of 112.8, breaking Montana's record for the highest regular season rating in NFL history. Young recorded 324 out of 461 completions for 3,969 yards, 35 touchdowns, and just 10 interceptions. He also had 58 rushes for 293 yards and 7 touchdowns, and earned the NFL Most Valuable Player Award.\nWith Young at the helm, the 49ers led the league in total points scored (505) and helped them earn a league best 13\u20133 regular season record. Pro Bowl running back Ricky Watters was the team's leading rusher with 877 yards and 6 touchdowns, while also recording 66 receptions for 719 yards and 5 touchdowns. Rookie fullback William Floyd was the team's second-leading rusher with 305 yards and 6 touchdowns, while also having 19 receptions for 145 yards. The team's leading receiver was Pro Bowl wide receiver Jerry Rice, who had 112 catches for 1,499 yards and 13 touchdowns, while also gaining 93 yards and two more touchdowns rushing the ball. Receiver John Taylor was also a reliable target, catching 41 passes for 531 yards and 5 touchdowns. Pro Bowl tight end Brent Jones added 49 receptions for 670 yards and 9 touchdowns. The offensive line was led by Pro Bowl center Bart Oates, another offseason free agent pickup, and Pro Bowl guard Jesse Sapolu.\nRunning back Dexter Carter had a standout season as a returner on special teams, gaining a combined total of 1,426 yards and a touchdown returning both punts and kickoffs.\nPlayoffs.\nChargers.\nIn the AFC Divisional Playoffs, the Chargers managed to overcome a 21\u20136 halftime deficit to defeat the Miami Dolphins, 22\u201321. In the first half, San Diego was limited to only two John Carney field goals, while Miami quarterback Dan Marino threw for over 180 yards and 3 touchdowns. However, the Chargers dominated the Dolphins in the second half, limiting their offense to just 16 plays. In the third quarter, after the Chargers were stopped on fourth and goal at the 1-yard line, Chargers defensive lineman Reuben Davis tackled Dolphins running back Bernie Parmalee in the end zone for a safety. San Diego then took the ensuing free kick and marched 54 yards to score on Means's 24-yard touchdown run. Then with time running out, Humphries threw an 8-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Mark Seay, giving his team a one-point lead. The Dolphins, aided by a pass interference call, responded with a drive to the Chargers' 31-yard line, but kicker Pete Stoyanovich's potential game-winning 48-yard field goal attempt sailed far to the right of the goal posts and sealed San Diego's stirring win.\nSan Diego then faced the Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC Championship Game. Once again, the Chargers fell behind early as the Steelers built up a 13\u20133 halftime lead, but Humphries fooled the Steelers secondary with a 43-yard play-action touchdown pass to a wide open tight end Alfred Pupunu. The Chargers then took a 17\u201313 lead when Martin beat the Steelers secondary (particularly a badly overmatched Tim McKyer) down the right sideline for a 43-yard touchdown reception. On their final drive, the Steelers advanced to the San Diego 3-yard line, but Chargers linebacker Dennis Gibson sealed the victory on fourth down by deflecting quarterback Neil O'Donnell's pass intended for running back Barry Foster to turn the ball back over to San Diego. Just like the 49ers in the NFC title game, the Chargers advanced to the Super Bowl despite the fact that their opponent had outgained them in many key statistical categories such as total plays (80\u201347), total offensive yards (415\u2013226), and time of possession (37:13\u201322:47).\n49ers.\nThe 49ers first defeated the Chicago Bears, 44\u201315, in the NFC Divisional Playoffs. Although Chicago scored first with a field goal, San Francisco scored 37 unanswered points to put the game out of reach by the end of the third quarter. Floyd scored three rushing touchdowns, while Young rushed for a touchdown and threw for another.\nSan Francisco then defeated their nemesis, the Dallas Cowboys, 38\u201328, in the NFC Championship Game. Expected to be a close game, the 49ers converted 3 Dallas turnovers into 21 points in the first quarter. On the third play of the game, cornerback Eric Davis returned an interception from Cowboys quarterback Troy Aikman for a touchdown. Wide receiver Michael Irvin lost a fumble on Dallas' next drive, setting up Young's 29-yard touchdown pass to Watters. Then Cowboys returner Kevin Williams lost a fumble on the ensuing kickoff, and it was recovered by kicker Doug Brien at Dallas' 35-yard line. Several plays later, Floyd scored on a 1-yard touchdown run to give San Francisco a 21\u20130 lead less than 8 minutes into the game. With the score 24\u201314 in the closing minutes of the first half, Aikman threw 3 straight incompletions, and a short punt by the Cowboys set up Young's 28-yard touchdown completion to Rice with 8 seconds remaining in the first half. The Cowboys eventually cut their deficit to 38\u201328 with a touchdown run by Emmitt Smith and Aikman's 10-yard touchdown pass to Irvin in the final period, but they were unable to score again. Although the Cowboys outgained the 49ers in total offensive yards (451\u2013294), Aikman broke an NFC Championship Game record with 380 yards passing, and Irvin also broke an NFC Championship Game record with 192 receiving yards, Dallas was ultimately unable to overcome their first-quarter turnovers.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nEntering Super Bowl XXIX, most sports writers and fans thought the Chargers had absolutely no chance of defeating the 49ers. San Francisco was on track, winning 12 of its last 13 games (with their only loss in that span coming against the Minnesota Vikings in a meaningless regular season finale at Minnesota), including their playoff victories. Many people also thought that the NFC Championship Game between the 49ers and the Cowboys was \"the real Super Bowl\", because those two teams were commonly viewed as vastly superior to any AFC team. Furthermore, San Francisco had defeated San Diego, 38\u201315, during the regular season. As a result, the 49ers entered the game favored to win by 18.5-point, surpassed only by the 19.5-point, by the Baltimore Colts who were favored over the New York Jets in Super Bowl III more than two decades prior.\nMany also speculated that Super Bowl XXIX would be the least watched game in Super Bowl history because the Chargers did not have as large of a core fan base as other AFC teams like the Chiefs, the Dolphins, or the Steelers. (This prediction ultimately turned out to be false. Although Super Bowl XXIX was viewed by 125.2 million people and had a Nielsen rating of 41.3, Super Bowl XXVI three years earlier was seen by 119.7 million viewers and recorded a 40.3 rating.)\nThis was the seventh Super Bowl to be played in Miami, at the time tying both New Orleans, Louisiana and the Greater Los Angeles area for hosting the Super Bowl the most times. It remains the only Super Bowl played between teams that play their home games in the same state (although Super Bowl XXV was played between the New York Giants and the Buffalo Bills, two teams representing areas of New York, the Giants play their home games in New Jersey).\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by ABC, with play-by-play announcer Al Michaels and color commentators Frank Gifford and Dan Dierdorf. Lynn Swann reported from the Chargers sideline and Lesley Visser reported from the 49ers sideline. Visser became the first woman assigned to a Super Bowl sideline; she had previously become the first woman sportscaster to cover the Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation ceremony, when she covered Super Bowl XXVI for CBS. Brent Musburger hosted all the Super Bowl XXIX pregame (2 hours), halftime, and postgame events with the help of then-ABC Sports analyst Dick Vermeil, Musburger's regular color commentator on ABC's college football telecasts, and then-New York Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason.\nThis was the last Super Bowl broadcast by the broadcast team of Michaels, Gifford and Dierdorf. The three called \"Monday Night Football\" from the 1987 to 1997, and also worked ABC's coverage of Super Bowls XXII and XXV. This would also be the last Super Bowl aired on ABC until the 1999 season (when Al Michaels called the game with Boomer Esiason). This would also be the final Super Bowl hosted by Musburger, as all subsequent Super Bowls on ABC were hosted by ESPN's Chris Berman following the Disney purchase of ABC (which included ESPN), and the subsequent integration of ESPN and ABC Sports (now ESPN on ABC). Also, the trophy presentation for this game was the last to be held in the winning team's locker room, as all subsequent Vince Lombardi Trophy presentations would be held on the field.\nFor the Super Bowl lead-out program, ABC premiered the television drama \"Extreme\" starring James Brolin; this was the last series to premiere following the Super Bowl until \"Family Guy\" premiered following Super Bowl XXXIII and is one of only four in the last 14 years to premiere following a Super Bowl (joining \"Family Guy\", its spinoff \"American Dad!\", and \"Undercover Boss\" which premiered following Super Bowl XLIV), since the networks have preferred to have new episodes of established shows to catch as much of the post-game audience as possible.\nThirty-second television advertisements for Super Bowl XXIX averaged $1.15 million in costs, the first time that Super Bowl ads exceeded the $1 million mark.\nSuper Bowl XXIX aired in over 150 countries worldwide. It was simulcast in Canada on CTV and TVA (in French), in Mexico on Televisa's Canal 5, whose commentators were able to call the game live from San Diego on the last minute, in Germany on Tele 5, in Australia on ABC, in the Philippines on the GMA Network and later aired in the United Kingdom on Channel 4.\nThis Super Bowl would later be featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" under the title \"Exercise in Excellence\". The Super Bowl highlight film on which the episode was based was the only Super Bowl highlight film to be narrated by Harry Kalas.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the Tuesday prior to the Super Bowl, the ABC sitcom \"Full House\" aired an episode called \"Super Bowl Fun Day\" involving main characters Danny Tanner and Rebecca Donaldson reporting at the game for their show \"Wake Up, San Francisco\". (\"Full House\" was set in San Francisco, and this was the only time during the show's run that the 49ers advanced to a Super Bowl aired on ABC.) A week earlier, the \"Seinfeld\" episode \"The Label Maker\" involved Jerry trying to give away his tickets to the game. He eventually decided to go, but unfortunately was stuck sitting next to Newman. Two days after the Super Bowl, the game was the main plot feature of an episode of the ABC sitcom \"Home Improvement\", \"Super Bowl Fever\", in which Jill was sick with the flu while Tim and his buddies tried to watch the game.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show held before the game featured country music singer Hank Williams Jr., who performed his theme song for \"Monday Night Football\", which was based on his single \"All My Rowdy Friends Are Coming Over Tonight\".\nActress and singer Kathie Lee Gifford (Frank Gifford's wife) later sang the national anthem. She was accompanied by then-Miss America Heather Whitestone who signed the anthem for the hearing impaired.\nTo honor the NFL's 75th season, four former players all Hall of Fame members, who were named to the league's 75th Anniversary All-Time Team joined the coin toss ceremony: Otto Graham, Joe Greene, Ray Nitschke, and Gale Sayers.\nA special 75th anniversary logo was painted at midfield. Each player also wore a patch on his jersey with the same logo; the 75th anniversary patch was worn by all players league-wide during the 1994 season. During the regular season, teams also wore \"throwback\" jerseys for selected games. The 49ers wore their throwbacks (which paid tribute to the 1957 Niners) for most of the season, this game included.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of the Forbidden Eye\" and was produced by Disney to promote their Indiana Jones Adventure attraction at Disneyland that opened later that year. The show featured actors playing Indiana Jones and his girlfriend Marion Ravenwood who were raiding the Vince Lombardi Trophy from the Temple of the Forbidden Eye. The show also had performances by singers Tony Bennett and Patti LaBelle, jazz trumpeter Arturo Sandoval, and the Miami Sound Machine. The show ended with everybody singing \"Can You Feel The Love Tonight\", the song featured in Disney's (which later acquired ABC) 1994 film \"The Lion King\". The dancers on the field were members of the Coral Gables Senior High marching band.\nThis halftime show also had a connection with past ABC programming: the first two \"Indiana Jones\" films had their broadcast premieres on ABC, and the network aired a TV series, \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\", from 1992 to 1993 (actually serving as the lead-in to \"Monday Night Football\" at one point).\nRadio.\nThe game was broadcast on nationwide radio by CBS with play-by-play announcer Jack Buck and color commentator Hank Stram. Jim Hunter hosted all of the events. Locally, Super Bowl XXIX was broadcast by XTRA-AM in San Diego with Lee \"Hacksaw\" Hamilton and Jim Laslavic and by KGO-AM in San Francisco with Joe Starkey and Wayne Walker.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nAfter 49ers running back Dexter Carter returned the opening kickoff 9 yards to the San Francisco 26-yard line, a face mask penalty on Chargers linebacker Doug Miller allowed San Francisco to start at their own 41. On the third play of the drive, quarterback Steve Young threw a 44-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Jerry Rice to take an early 7\u20130 lead. The 49ers became the second team to take the opening kickoff and score a touchdown on that first drive (the first being the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl VIII), and also set a new Super Bowl record for the fastest touchdown (later broken by the Chicago Bears' Devin Hester in Super Bowl XLI). After forcing the Chargers to punt after a three-and-out on their opening possession, the 49ers advanced 79 yards in four plays, with Young rushing for 21 yards and then throwing a 51-yard touchdown pass to running back Ricky Watters to give San Francisco a 14\u20130 lead less than 5 minutes into the first quarter and set a Super Bowl record for the fastest second touchdown scored by a team.\nSan Diego responded on their ensuing possession, marching 78 yards in 13 plays and taking more than 7 minutes off the clock. The drive featured two receptions and a run by running back Ronnie Harmon for 33 yards and six runs by running back Natrone Means for 22 yards, the last one being a 1-yard touchdown run, cutting the Chargers' deficit to 14\u20137. However, the 49ers quickly countered after the ensuing kickoff, driving 70 yards in 10 plays. Rice started off the drive with a 19-yard reception and 10-yard run on a reverse play, while Young added a 12-yard completion to wide receiver John Taylor and a 15-yard scramble.\nSecond quarter.\nFour plays into the second quarter, Young threw a 5-yard touchdown pass to fullback William Floyd, increasing the San Francisco lead to 21\u20137 and making the 49ers the second team to score on its first three possessions (after Green Bay) of a Super Bowl and the first (and only as of 2024) to score touchdowns on its first three possessions.\nAfter the next three possessions ended in punts, Chargers punter Bryan Wagner's 40-yard punt from his own 9-yard line gave the 49ers the ball at the San Diego 49. San Francisco then marched on a 9-play drive, which included two receptions by Rice for 19 yards and ended with Young's fourth touchdown pass, an 8-yard toss to Watters, with 4:44 left in the half, making the score 28\u20137. San Diego then took the ensuing kickoff and drove 62 yards from their own 25-yard line to the San Francisco 13, featuring a 17-yard reception by wide receiver Mark Seay, a 10-yard reverse run by wide receiver Shawn Jefferson, and a 33-yard gain on a screen pass from quarterback Stan Humphries to running back Eric Bieniemy, the Chargers' longest play of the game. But after Humphries threw three incomplete passes, one of which was a perfectly thrown pass that Seay dropped in the end zone, they were forced to settle for kicker John Carney's 31-yard field goal, cutting their deficit to 28\u201310.\nA 33-yard completion from Young to tight end Brent Jones helped the 49ers reach the San Diego 29-yard line on their next possession, but Young's third-down pass to Jones was overthrown, and kicker Doug Brien missed a 47-yard field goal attempt wide right. The Chargers then drove to their own 46-yard line, but 49ers cornerback Eric Davis intercepted Humphries' third-down pass intended for wide receiver Tony Martin in the end zone for a touchback with 10 seconds left in the half, and the score remained 28\u201310 at halftime. The Chargers' 18-point halftime deficit ended up being the closest scoring margin they would reach for the rest of the game.\nThird quarter.\nThe 49ers picked up right where they left off going into the second half. The Chargers were forced to punt after three plays on the opening drive of the half, and Carter returned the ball 11 yards to his own 38-yard line. Young subsequently completed two passes to Rice for 37 yards (including a 21-yard pass on 3rd-and-17) and a 16-yard pass to Taylor on a 7-play, 62-yard drive that ended with Watters' third touchdown of the game on a 9-yard run, increasing the 49ers' lead to 35\u201310. After a 33-yard kickoff return by wide receiver Andre Coleman, the Chargers advanced to the San Francisco 33-yard line, aided by a 23-yard reception by tight end Alfred Pupunu, but they turned the ball over on downs when Humphries' 4th-and-7 pass intended for Martin was broken up by Davis. Young then led San Francisco on a 10-play, 67-yard drive, aided by a 22-yard pass interference penalty against cornerback Darrien Gordon on 3rd-and-14, to score on his fifth touchdown pass, a 15-yard completion to Rice. But San Diego immediately responded when Coleman returned the ensuing kickoff 98 yards for a touchdown. Then Humphries completed a pass to Seay for a two-point conversion (the first in Super Bowl history; the rule had been adopted by the NFL at the start of the season), but it only cut the deficit to 42\u201318.\nThe 49ers were forced to punt on their next drive, but the Chargers ended up turning the ball over on downs again when Means was tackled for a 4-yard loss by safety Merton Hanks on 4th-and-1 from the San Diego 37.\nFourth quarter.\nSix plays later, after three runs by Watters for 25 yards, Young threw his record-setting sixth touchdown pass to Rice on a 7-yard completion with 13:49 remaining in the game, increasing the San Francisco lead to 49\u201318 and essentially ending any hopes of a San Diego comeback. The Chargers, now playing for pride, responded with a 13-play, 59-yard drive to reach the San Francisco 7-yard line. Humphries led his team down the field 12 yards for the first four plays, but hurt his ankle while being tackled by defensive tackle Bryant Young, and was temporarily replaced by Gale Gilbert, who completed two passes to Harmon for 24 yards, but threw an interception on 4th-and-6 to cornerback Deion Sanders, who returned the ball to the San Francisco 14-yard line. After two punts by the 49ers and an interception by San Francisco defensive back Toi Cook (during which Humphries returned to the game), the Chargers scored the final points of the game on a 67-yard, 8-play drive, which consisted of two receptions by Seay for 30 yards and two receptions by Martin for 42 yards, the second of which was caught for a 30-yard touchdown. TV viewers didn't see most of the play as ABC had cut to the 49ers celebrating on the sideline. Humphries then completed another pass for a two-point conversion, this time to Pupunu, to make the final score 49\u201326. The 49ers recovered the ensuing onside kick and ran time off the clock before punting to the San Diego 7. San Diego drove to the San Francisco 35 before the game ended. Once the 49ers victory was assured, Young said \"somebody take the monkey off my back!\" Years later, he regretted saying that saying this was a team effort not an individual performance.\nAt the end of the game, Young showed his jubilation at finally being able to win \"the big one\" while accepting the MVP trophy. \"There were times when this was hard! But this is the greatest feeling in the world! No one \u2014 \"no one!\" \u2014 can ever take this away from us! No one, \"ever!\" It's ours!\" Young and his teammates were equally enthusiastic in the locker room afterwards. \"We're part of history,\" said guard Jesse Sapolu. \"This is probably the best offense people will see in their lifetimes.\" \"Is this great or what?\" Young added. \"I mean, I haven't thrown six touchdown passes in a game in my life. Then I throw six in the Super Bowl! Unbelievable.\"\nRice caught 10 passes for 149 yards and 3 touchdowns, tying his own record for most touchdown receptions in a Super Bowl, and becoming the first player ever to do it twice. He also recorded 10 rushing yards. Watters rushed for 47 yards and a touchdown, while also catching 3 passes for 61 yards and two touchdowns. Means, who rushed for 1,350 yards in the regular season, was held to just 33 yards in the game. Humphries finished 24 out of 49 for 275 yards and one touchdown, with two interceptions. Seay was the Chargers' top receiver with 7 receptions for 75 yards, while Ronnie Harmon added 8 catches for 68 yards. Defensive end Raylee Johnson had two sacks. Coleman's 8 kickoff returns for 244 yards and a touchdown set the following Super Bowl records: most kickoff returns in a Super Bowl, most kickoff return yards in a Super Bowl, and most combined net yards gained in a Super Bowl.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to have two players each score three touchdowns. Rice matched his Super Bowl XXIV performance with his three touchdown catches. Watters also had three touchdowns, matching Roger Craig's three touchdowns (two receiving and one rushing) in Super Bowl XIX. Watters also became the second running back to catch two touchdown passes in a game, matching Craig.\nKen Norton Jr. became the first player to win three straight Super Bowls, although as a member of two teams. Norton was a member of the Cowboys teams who won Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII. Deion Sanders became the first player to play in both a Super Bowl and a World Series, playing in the 1992 World Series with the Atlanta Braves.\nChargers quarterback Gale Gilbert became the first player to be a member of five straight Super Bowl teams. Gilbert was a member of the Bills who played in four straight Super Bowls (XXV\u2013XXVIII). Gilbert was on the losing team in all five Super Bowl games.\nThe 49ers' spectacular performance led to their offensive coordinator, Mike Shanahan, and defensive coordinator, Ray Rhodes, earning head coaching positions in 1995 for the Denver Broncos and the Philadelphia Eagles, respectively. Bobby Ross became the second coach, after Jimmy Johnson in Super Bowl XXVII, to lead a team to a college football national championship (Georgia Tech in 1990) and a Super Bowl. One year later, Barry Switzer would join Johnson as the only head coaches to win championships in both NCAA Division I-A (now FBS) college football and the NFL.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXIX: San Francisco 49ers 49, San Diego Chargers 26\n\"at Joe Robbie Stadium, Miami, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://, http://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Longest gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXIX, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Pro Football Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nJerry Markbreit became the first official to serve as referee in four Super Bowls, a record that still stands.\nOfficials wore a black armband with number 42 to honor umpire Dave Hamilton, who died on January 9 at age 61 due to liver failure. Hamilton had completed his 20th season as an NFL official in 1994. \nThe day after the Super Bowl, Donnie Hampton, who had been a field judge since 1988, died of a heart attack at age 47. \nAftermath.\nAs of the 2024 season, this is the only Super Bowl played between teams based in the same state.\nIt is also the most recent Super Bowl title to date for the 49ers. They would play in three more in the 21st Century (Super Bowl XLVII, Super Bowl LIV and Super Bowl LVIII), but lost all of them.\nAs for the Chargers, the implications of their defeat were far worse in hindsight. This remains the only Super Bowl the Chargers have ever played in. Including the era before the AFL\u2013NFL merger, it is the third championship game that the Chargers have lost. The AFL Championship in 1963 remains to this day as the only major sports championship the city of San Diego has won (and also the longest championship drought for any city that has at least two major sports franchises), so even though they were heavy underdogs, the loss still had great significance. The Chargers did not win another playoff game until the 2007 season, when they reached the AFC Championship Game but lost to the then-undefeated New England Patriots, 21\u201312. Super Bowl XXIX would be their only appearance while playing in San Diego before they moved to Los Angeles following the 2016 season.\nNotable deaths from 1994 Chargers team.\nIn addition, eight players from the 1994 Chargers Super Bowl team have died prior to reaching age 45. They include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29155", "revid": "1316131343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29155", "title": "Super Bowl XXX", "text": "1996 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXX was an American football game between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Dallas Cowboys and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Pittsburgh Steelers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1995 season. The Cowboys defeated the Steelers by the score of 27\u201317, winning their fifth Super Bowl in team history. The game was played on January 28, 1996, at Sun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Arizona, the first time the Super Bowl was played in the Phoenix metropolitan area.\nBoth teams entered the game trying to tie the San Francisco 49ers for the record for most Super Bowl wins by a franchise (5). The Cowboys, who posted a 12\u20134 regular season record, were making their eighth Super Bowl appearance, while the Steelers, who recorded an 11\u20135 regular season record, were making their fifth appearance. This was also the fifth rematch between Super Bowl teams. The game was the third time the two longtime rivals had met in a Super Bowl, the most between any two NFL teams. The two teams met previously in Super Bowl X in 1975 and Super Bowl XIII in 1979, with Pittsburgh having won both games. Dallas became the first team to win three Super Bowls in four years, while Pittsburgh's defeat was their first Super Bowl loss in team history. As of today, this remains the last time the Cowboys appeared in a Super Bowl.\nDallas' Larry Brown, a 12th-round draft pick, who was still grieving the death of his infant son two and a half months prior, became the first cornerback to be named Super Bowl MVP by recording two interceptions in the second half, which the Cowboys converted into two touchdowns to prevent a Steelers comeback. Dallas built a 13\u20130 lead in the second quarter before Pittsburgh scored with 13 seconds left in the half to cut their deficit to 13\u20137. Midway through the 3rd quarter, Brown made his first interception and returned it 44 yards to the Pittsburgh 18-yard line to set up running back Emmitt Smith's 1-yard touchdown run. The Steelers then rallied to cut their deficit to 20\u201317 in the 4th quarter. But Brown recorded his second interception on Pittsburgh's next drive and returned it 33 yards to the Steelers 6-yard line to set up Smith's 4-yard rushing touchdown.\nThe NBC television broadcast broke the record at the time for the most-watched sporting event ever on American television, and was the second-most watched television program of all time behind the final episode of \"M*A*S*H\" in 1983.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nSun Devil Stadium in Tempe, Arizona, the home of the Phoenix Cardinals and the Arizona State Sun Devils was originally chosen as the venue for Super Bowl XXVII on March 13, 1990. However, the NFL pulled that game from Arizona in the midst of a large entertainment and convention boycott to protest the state's refusal to adopt the Martin Luther King Jr. Day holiday. As a compromise, however, the NFL owners reserved Super Bowl XXX for Tempe on a \"preliminary\" and \"conditional\" basis. Arizona voters approved the MLK Day holiday in November 1992. The NFL responded by formally assigning Super Bowl XXX to Tempe at their March 1993 meeting in Palm Desert, California. No others cities put in a bid or were considered for the hosting duties.\nSuper Bowl XXX was the last to be hosted in a stadium containing bleacher seats, and would also be the last Super Bowl to be held on a college campus, as the stadium sits on the campus of Arizona State University.\nDallas Cowboys.\nThe Cowboys entered the 1995 regular season attempting to become the first team in NFL history to win three out of the last four Super Bowls. They had previously won Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII but their chance of a \"three-peat\" (winning three consecutive championships) was thwarted when they lost the NFC Championship Game to the San Francisco 49ers, the eventual Super Bowl XXIX champions. It was the Cowboys\u2019 eighth appearance in the Super Bowl, the most of any franchise; the Steelers tied this record in 2010 when that team advanced to Super Bowl XLV. The Patriots became the third team to reach the mark in 2014 when that team went on to win Super Bowl XLIX, and the Denver Broncos the fourth team in 2015 in Super Bowl 50.\nAfter taking over the Cowboys in 1989, team owner/general manager Jerry Jones and head coach Jimmy Johnson rebuilt the team into a Super Bowl contender with young talent. Both had different ideas on the future personnel plans for the Cowboys, and both wanted equal credit for the team's recent success. As a result, Johnson eventually left the team after their Super Bowl XXVIII win and was replaced by former University of Oklahoma head coach Barry Switzer, who had one of the highest winning percentages of any college football coach in history, with a mark of .837.\nIn 1995, the Cowboys finished with a 12\u20134 regular season record, the best in the NFC. Pro Bowl quarterback Troy Aikman finished the regular season completing 280 out of 432 passes for 3,304 yards and 16 touchdowns, with only seven interceptions. Pro Bowl running back Emmitt Smith won his fourth and last league rushing crown in his career with 1,773 yards, and broke a league single-season record with 25 rushing touchdowns. Smith was also a reliable receiver out of the backfield, recording a career-high 62 receptions for 375 yards. Fullback Daryl Johnston added 111 rushing yards, while also catching 30 passes for 248 and scoring three touchdowns. Pro Bowl wide receiver Michael Irvin led the team in receiving with 111 catches for 1,603 yards and 10 touchdowns. Kevin Williams was another big receiving threat with 38 receptions for 613 yards, while also racking up 1,274 return yards on special teams. Pro Bowl tight end Jay Novacek had 62 receptions for 705 yards and five touchdowns. Dallas' offensive line was led by Pro Bowl selections Larry Allen, Ray Donaldson, Nate Newton, and Mark Tuinei. However, Donaldson suffered a season-ending injury late in the season and would be replaced by Derek Kennard.\nDallas' major acquisition before the season was four-time Pro Bowl cornerback Deion Sanders. Coincidentally, Sanders won the Super Bowl the year before with San Francisco. However, Sanders only played nine regular season games for the Cowboys in 1995 due to injuries, and thus only recorded 24 tackles and two interceptions for 34 yards. However, safety Darren Woodson was named to the Pro Bowl with 89 tackles and two interceptions for 46 return yards and a touchdown. Cornerback Larry Brown led the team in interceptions with six for 124 return yards and two touchdowns. Pro Bowl defensive end Charles Haley led the team in sacks with 10.5, while defensive end Chad Hennings added 5.5. Safety Brock Marion recorded six interceptions, returning them for 40 yards and a touchdown.\nAfter starting fast at 8\u20131, the Cowboys hit a major bump in the road, losing big at home to the 49ers, 38\u201320 (they trailed 31\u201314 at halftime). Coincidentally, the 49ers, the previous Super Bowl champion, also suffered a blowout loss at home the prior season (40\u20138 to the Philadelphia Eagles). Adding insult to injury, the 49ers were without starting quarterback Steve Young and fullback William Floyd. The game was highly anticipated, with verbal exchanges between the teams during the week, and it marked the beginning of a difficult stretch for the team. The following four games resulted in two more losses for the Cowboys. However, after a narrow 21\u201320 win against the New York Giants, the Cowboys regained their dominating form, trouncing the Arizona Cardinals (who were playing their home games at Sun Devil Stadium) 37\u201313 on Christmas night in Arizona as part of \"Monday Night Football\", and then cruising through the playoffs with convincing wins against the Philadelphia Eagles and the Green Bay Packers. Brown foreshadowed his Super Bowl XXX heroics with a key interception against Green Bay quarterback Brett Favre late in the NFC Championship Game.\nPittsburgh Steelers.\nSuper Bowl XXX was the first time that the Steelers advanced to the league championship game since winning Super Bowl XIV and the first under head coach Bill Cowher. Cowher took over the team in 1992 after longtime head coach Chuck Noll retired after a 23-year tenure and leading the team to four Super Bowl wins. During Cowher's first year, the Steelers captured the number one AFC playoff seed with an 11\u20135 regular season record, but were eliminated in their first playoff game against the Buffalo Bills, 24\u20133. Cowher then led the Steelers into the playoffs in 1993 and 1994, but were also eliminated, including a 17\u201313 upset loss to the San Diego Chargers in the 1994 AFC Championship Game.\nIn 1995, the Steelers overcame a 3\u20134 start (including a 20\u201316 upset loss to the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars) to win eight of their final nine games and finished with an 11\u20135 record, the second-best in the AFC. Their offense was led by quarterback Neil O'Donnell, who completed 246 out of 416 passes for 2,970 yards and 17 touchdowns, with only seven interceptions. Pro Bowl wide receiver Yancey Thigpen was the team's leading receiver with 85 receptions for 1,307 yards and five touchdowns. Other contributors in the passing game included wide receivers Andre Hastings (48 catches for 502 yards and one touchdown) and Ernie Mills (39 receptions for 679 yards and 8 touchdowns), who both also excelled as returners on special teams. Mills gained 1,306 yards returning kickoffs, while Hastings returned 48 punts for 474 yards and a touchdown. The Steelers' rushing attack was led by Erric Pegram, who recorded 813 yards and five touchdowns, and Bam Morris, who had 559 yards and nine touchdowns. On special teams, newly acquired kicker Norm Johnson led the NFL in both field goals made (34) and field goals attempted (41), while also successfully making all 39 of his extra point attempts. Leading the offensive line was future Hall of Fame center Dermontti Dawson, who made the Pro Bowl for the third consecutive year.\nThe Steelers' defense ranked second in the league in total yards allowed (4,833). Pro Bowl linebacker Kevin Greene led the team with nine sacks, while another Pro Bowl linebacker, Greg Lloyd, led the team with 86 tackles, while also collecting 6.5 sacks and three interceptions. The secondary was led by Pro Bowl defensive back Carnell Lake and Willie Williams, who led the team with seven interceptions and 122 return yards. The secondary also featured future Hall of Fame defensive back Rod Woodson, who missed almost the entire season with a knee injury, but healed quickly enough to return in time for the playoffs. He is still the only NFL player to suffer and return from a torn ACL and still play in the same season.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Cowboys first defeated the Philadelphia Eagles, 30\u201311. The score was tied 3\u20133 into the 2nd quarter, until Dallas scored 27 consecutive points to put the game out of reach. First, Deion Sanders scored a 21-yard touchdown on an end-around play. Emmitt Smith then capped off a 79-yard drive with a 1-yard touchdown run before halftime. Kicker Chris Boniol later scored two field goals in the 3rd quarter, and Troy Aikman completed a 9-yard touchdown pass to Michael Irvin in the 4th quarter, giving the Cowboys a commanding 30\u20133 lead. Meanwhile, Eagles quarterback Randall Cunningham was limited to just 11 of 26 completions for 161 yards and no touchdowns, with one interception. Philadelphia could only score a single field goal and Cunningham's meaningless 4-yard touchdown run late in the 4th quarter.\nDallas then advanced to their fourth consecutive NFC Championship Game, where they faced the Green Bay Packers, who had eliminated the San Francisco 49ers in the other NFC Divisional Playoff Game. Dallas jumped to an early 14\u20133 lead with a pair of first quarter touchdown passes from Aikman to Irvin. However, Packers quarterback Brett Favre threw two touchdowns to take a 17\u201314 lead midway through the second quarter: a 73-yard strike to wide receiver Robert Brooks and a 24-yard pass to tight end Keith Jackson. Dallas stormed right back with a Boniol field goal, and a record 99-yard drive to score on Smith's 1-yard touchdown run, giving them a 24\u201317 halftime lead. In the third quarter, Green Bay regained the lead, 27\u201324 with a field goal and another touchdown pass from Favre to Brooks. However, Dallas scored two unanswered touchdowns in the fourth quarter to put the game away, 38\u201327. A 90-yard drive was capped with Smith's second touchdown run. On Green Bay's ensuing drive, Larry Brown intercepted a pass from Favre and returned it 28 yards to set up Smith's third touchdown run. Smith finished the game with 150 rushing yards and three touchdowns, while also catching two passes for 17 yards. Aikman threw for 255 yards and two touchdowns, with no interceptions. Irvin caught seven passes for 100 yards and two touchdowns.\nFor the Steelers, they started their playoff run with a 40\u201321 win over the Buffalo Bills. Pittsburgh dominated the Bills right from the start, building up a 23\u20137 halftime lead. Buffalo scored two touchdowns in the second half, but Bam Morris's two rushing touchdowns in the fourth quarter ended any thoughts of a Bills comeback. The Steelers' defense limited Buffalo's Jim Kelly to just 135 passing yards and one touchdown, while intercepting him three times. Bills running back Thurman Thomas, who had rushed for 158 yards and caught three passes for 42 yards in Buffalo's wild card playoff win over the Miami Dolphins, was held to just 46 rushing yards and 12 receiving yards. Meanwhile, Morris rushed for 106 yards and two touchdowns, while kicker Norm Johnson made four field goals.\nPittsburgh then narrowly defeated the Indianapolis Colts, 20\u201316 to advance to their first Super Bowl since the 1979 season. In the second quarter, Neil O'Donnell's controversial 5-yard touchdown pass to Kordell Stewart gave Pittsburgh a 10\u20136 halftime lead (replays showed that Stewart stepped on the end line before making the catch, which would have made him ineligible). Stewart later said after the game: \"I was hit in the end zone for pass interference earlier but (the refs) didn't throw a flag, so what goes around comes around.\" After the teams exchanged field goals in the third quarter, Indianapolis quarterback Jim Harbaugh threw a 47-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Floyd Turner to give the Colts a 16\u201313 lead in the fourth quarter. The Steelers drove 67 yards on their final drive (keyed by a 4th down-and-3 conversion and a 37-yard pass play from O'Donnell to Ernie Mills) to score the go-ahead touchdown on a 1-yard run by Morris with 1:34 left. Mills broke up what would have been a game-clinching interception by Colts linebacker Quentin Coryatt several plays earlier. The Colts responded by driving to the Steelers 29-yard line, and on the game's final play, Harbaugh threw a Hail Mary intended for wide receiver Aaron Bailey in the end zone. Bailey attempted to make a diving catch, but the pass was batted away at the last second by Randy Fuller and ruled incomplete.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by NBC, including local NBC stations KXAS-TV in Dallas and WPXI-TV in Pittsburgh. The broadcast featured play-by-play announcer Dick Enberg and color commentators Phil Simms, Paul Maguire, and Jim Gray and Will McDonough on the sidelines. Greg Gumbel hosted all of the events with the help of NBC analysts Ahmad Rashad, Mike Ditka, Joe Gibbs, and Joe Montana. The Vince Lombardi Trophy presentation that year began a tradition which continues today, in which it is held on the field instead of inside the winners' locker room as was the case previously. NBC purchase KXAS which aired all three of the Cowboys' 1990s Super Bowl victories.\nFor the Super Bowl lead-out program, NBC broadcast an hour-long episode of \"Friends\", \"The One After the Superbowl\", restarting a trend in which the prized post-Super Bowl time slot was given to an established program. Previously, networks typically used the occasion to premiere a new show, with little success. Of the new series premiering after the Super Bowl from 1983 to 1995, only \"The A-Team\" (NBC, after Super Bowl XVII), \"The Wonder Years\" (ABC, after XXII), and \"\" (NBC, after XXVII) had lengthy runs.\nThe radio broadcast was carried by CBS Radio, with Jack Buck and Hank Stram announcing. It was Buck's last NFL broadcast. Super Bowl XXX was broadcast to over 150 countries including Australia on Network Ten, Canada on CTV, Germany on Tele 5, Mexico on Canal 5, the Philippines on the GMA Network, and the United Kingdom on Channel 4.\nDue to the fact that the game's Roman numeral, XXX, is usually associated with pornography, a number of internet filters blocked web sites for the event. This was one of the early cases of a web filter problem. Super Bowl XXX is the subject of the \"NFL's Greatest Games\" episode \"Duel in the Desert\", based on the Super Bowl highlight film with the same name, which was narrated by Earl Mann.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show featured dancers in celebration of the culture of Native Americans in the United States, the traditions of the American Old West, and the great outdoors. Actress and singer Vanessa Williams sang the national anthem. After the anthem to honor the 10th anniversary of the \"Challenger\" disaster, there was a flyover in a missing man formation.\nHonoring the 30th Super Bowl game, several past Super Bowl MVPs joined the coin toss ceremony (similar to 10 years earlier in Super Bowl XX, and then repeated every 10 years thereafter in Super Bowl XL and Super Bowl 50). Joe Montana, MVP of Super Bowls XVI, XIX, and XXIV, tossed the coin.\nHalftime show.\nDiana Ross performed during the halftime show, titled \"Take Me Higher: A Celebration of 30 years of the Super Bowl\". The show featured a number of her songs along with pyrotechnics, special effects, and stadium card stunts. The show ended with Ross singing \"Take Me Higher\" from her 1995 nineteenth studio album of the same name, and she left the field in a helicopter.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Steelers elected to wear their home black uniforms with gold pants, while the Cowboys wore their home white uniforms with silver pants. This uniform matchup was also featured in Dallas and Pittsburgh's two prior Super Bowl meetings, with Pittsburgh as the \"home\" team in X and Dallas as the \"home\" team in XIII.\nSuper Bowl XXX began with Dallas wide receiver Kevin Williams returning the opening kickoff 18 yards to the 29-yard line. On the Cowboys' first possession, quarterback Troy Aikman completed a 20-yard pass on second down to wide receiver Michael Irvin, which was followed by a 23-yard rush by running back Emmitt Smith to advance to the Pittsburgh 28-yard line. The run would be Smith's longest of the day (as well as his longest run on a grass field the entire season) and the longest for either team. On 3rd-and-8 from the 26-yard line, Williams could only gain 2 yards on a reverse play, forcing Dallas to settle for a 42-yard Chris Boniol field goal.\nOn the Steelers' first possession, the Dallas defense forced a three-and-out and subsequent punt, which Cowboys cornerback Deion Sanders returned 11 yards to the 25-yard line. After two Smith runs, Aikman completed two quick passes, the first to Irvin for an 11-yard gain and the second to Sanders (who was brought in on offense as an extra receiver) for 47 yards. Sanders became the only player in Super Bowl history to record a Super Bowl interception on defense and a reception on offense (he recorded an interception as a member of the 49ers a year earlier in Super Bowl XXIX). Four plays later, Aikman completed a 3-yard touchdown pass to tight end Jay Novacek (playing in what would be his last game, as Novacek missed the following season due to back injuries before retiring), increasing Dallas' lead to 10\u20130. It was the second Super Bowl in which Novacek scored Dallas's first touchdown (he also scored their first touchdown in Super Bowl XXVII).\nAfter the Steelers managed to advance to the Dallas 36-yard line on their ensuing drive, the possession fell apart due to a miscue by center Dermontti Dawson. Pittsburgh had lined up in the shotgun formation, and Dawson's snap sailed over quarterback Neil O'Donnell's head. O'Donnell managed to recover the fumble, but the Steelers were unable to recover from the 13-yard loss, and they had to punt two plays later.\nSecond quarter.\nAfter the punt, Dallas drove to the Steelers' 24-yard line. However, a pass interference penalty on Irvin nullified a 24-yard touchdown reception and moved the ball back to the 34-yard line. On the next play, Aikman completed a 19-yard pass to Novacek, bringing up second down and 1 from the 15-yard line. However, the Steelers' defense stopped Smith for no gain on the next play, and then tackled him for a 3-yard loss on third down. Boniol then kicked a 35-yard field goal, increasing Dallas' lead to 13\u20130.\nAfter an exchange of punts, Steelers wide receiver Andre Hastings returned John Jett's punt 11 yards to the Pittsburgh 46-yard line. After O'Donnell's first-down pass fell incomplete, Dallas linebacker Charles Haley then sacked the Steelers quarterback for a 10-yard loss, forcing third down and 20. O'Donnell's next pass was a 19-yard completion to Hastings, and then a 3-yard run on fourth down by wide receiver/backup quarterback Kordell Stewart netted a first down. Nine plays later, O'Donnell threw a 6-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Yancey Thigpen with just 13 seconds left in the half, cutting Pittsburgh's deficit to 13\u20137.\nThird quarter.\nAfter the third quarter began with another exchange of punts, the Steelers advanced the ball to their own 48-yard line. However, on third down, Cowboys cornerback Larry Brown intercepted O'Donnell's pass at the Dallas 38-yard line and returned it 44 yards to the Pittsburgh 18-yard line. Aikman then completed a 17-yard pass to Irvin to reach the 1-yard line, setting up a 1-yard touchdown run by Smith to increase Dallas' lead to 20\u20137.\nOn their next drive, the Steelers faced second down and 2 on their own 47-yard line but turned the ball over on downs after running back Bam Morris was tackled for no gain on three consecutive running plays: a draw play to the left, a run to the left, and one to the middle. The Steelers defense held, however, forcing Dallas into a three-and-out; after a 6-yard run by Smith and an incompletion, Aikman's third-down pass was broken up by defensive back Rod Woodson (who had missed most of the season due to a knee injury), forcing the Cowboys to punt.\nFourth quarter.\nOn their next drive, the Steelers advanced from their own 20-yard line to the Dallas 19. However, Dallas defensive end Tony Tolbert sacked O'Donnell on third down for a 9-yard loss, one of four Dallas sacks in the game, forcing Pittsburgh to settle for kicker Norm Johnson's 46-yard field goal with 11:20 left in the game, cutting the deficit to 20\u201310.\nOn the ensuing kickoff, Pittsburgh surprised the Cowboys by executing a successful onside kick, with defensive back Deon Figures recovering the ball for Pittsburgh at their own 47-yard line. O'Donnell hit Hastings on two consecutive passes for 23 total yards. His next pass went to wide receiver Ernie Mills for 7 yards, and then Morris ran for 5 yards and caught a pass for a 6-yard gain to the Dallas 11-yard line. Three plays later, Morris scored on a 1-yard touchdown run, cutting Pittsburgh's deficit to 20\u201317.\nWith the aid of linebacker Levon Kirkland's 8-yard sack of Aikman, the Cowboys were forced to punt on their next drive, and Pittsburgh regained possession of the ball at their own 32-yard line with 4:15 remaining, giving them the opportunity to start a game-winning drive. However, on second down, Brown intercepted another O'Donnell pass and returned it 33 yards to the Steelers' 6-yard line. The play was a mirror image of O'Donnell's first interception to Brown; a throw in the right flat thrown under a heavy Cowboys blitz into the arms of Brown with no Steelers receiver in sight. After the game, O'Donnell said that he was throwing in the spot he expected receiver Corey Holliday to be on the second interception, saying that he expected Holliday to make an out-cut instead of an in-cut. Mills responded by questioning why O'Donnell would throw to a spot and not a man in a Super Bowl. Brown said he was all alone on both picks because he expected O'Donnell to throw to the outside to seemingly get rid of the ball amidst the Cowboys' blitz.\nTwo plays following the interception, Smith scored once again with 3:43 left in the game, increasing the Cowboys' lead to 27\u201317. Despite being held to 49 yards on the ground and only 9 in the second half, Smith scored the game-clinching touchdown by making a devastating cutback on Kirkland, the best player on Pittsburgh's defense that day. The Steelers responded by driving to the Cowboys' 40-yard line, but after O'Donnell threw four consecutive incompletions, Pittsburgh turned the ball over on downs with 1:42 left in the game, sealing Dallas' victory. After that, Dallas ran out most of the clock with three quarterback kneels and an intentional delay of the game penalty before punting the ball back to the Steelers. Pittsburgh regained possession of the ball with three seconds remaining, but O'Donnell's Hail Mary pass was intercepted by Dallas safety Brock Marion on the final play of the game.\nThe Steelers had outgained the Cowboys in total yards, 310\u2013254 (201\u201361 in the second half), had 25 first downs compared to the Cowboys' 15, and limited Dallas' powerful running attack to just 56 yards. However, they were unable to overcome O'Donnell's interceptions, which led to two Cowboys touchdowns. The irony of the game was that O'Donnell entered Super Bowl XXX as the NFL's all-time leader in fewest interceptions per pass attempt.\nTroy Aikman finished the game with 15 out of 23 completions for 209 yards and a touchdown (Aikman became just the third quarterback to win three Super Bowl games; Terry Bradshaw and Joe Montana each won four). Smith was the Cowboys' leading rusher with 49 yards and 2 rushing touchdowns (Smith became just the fifth player to score a touchdown in three Super Bowl games, joining Lynn Swann, Franco Harris, Thurman Thomas, and Jerry Rice; he also became the first player to rush for two touchdowns in two Super Bowls). Irvin was Dallas' top receiver with 5 catches for 76 yards. Novacek caught 5 passes for 50 yards and a touchdown. Defensive end Chad Hennings recorded 2 of the 4 Dallas sacks in the game. The Dallas defense did not allow a play from scrimmage longer than 20 yards.\nAlthough his 3 interceptions were costly, O'Donnell recorded 28 of 49 completions for 239 yards and a touchdown. Morris was the top rusher of the game with 73 yards and a touchdown, and also caught 3 passes for 18 yards. Hastings was the top receiver of the game with 10 receptions for 98 yards and returned 2 punts for 18 yards. Mills caught 8 passes for 78 yards and gained 79 yards on 4 kickoff returns, giving him 157 total yards. A knee injury he sustained in the fourth quarter would keep him out for most of the 1996 season.\nSince the Super Bowl.\nCharles Haley became the first player to win five Super Bowl championships, winning two with San Francisco (XXIII and XXIV) and two previously with Dallas (XXVII and XXVIII). Barry Switzer became the second head coach, after former Cowboys and University of Miami head coach Jimmy Johnson, to win a college football national championship (University of Oklahoma 1974, 1975, 1985) and a Super Bowl title. Only one other coach has since equaled the feat: Pete Carroll (USC and Seattle).\nAfter a many-year-long tradition of presenting the Vince Lombardi Trophy to the winning team in its locker room after the game, the NFL began the tradition of presenting the trophy on the field.\nThe outcome of the game had rather large ramifications for two soon-to-be free agents after their performances. Larry Brown, who was named Super Bowl MVP for his two interceptions, parlayed his performance into a lucrative free agent contract with the Oakland Raiders. However, he was not very effective and was cut from the team after two injury-plagued seasons. Neil O'Donnell left the Steelers in the offseason and signed a long-term free agent contract with the New York Jets, accepting New York's more lucrative offer. O'Donnell's tenure in New York, like Brown's in Oakland, was plagued by injuries and ineffective play, and he was released from his contract following the 1997 season. Both players finished their careers as backups, Brown returning to the Cowboys in 1998 and O'Donnell playing for the Cincinnati Bengals and Tennessee Titans until his retirement in 2003.\nBoth teams posted 10\u20136 records in 1996 and won their opening playoff games by sizable margins before losing in the divisional round of the NFL playoffs. Pittsburgh reached the AFC Championship Game in 1997 before most of the team's nucleus was broken up during the 1998 and 1999 off-seasons. Coach Bill Cowher and defensive back Willie Williams were the team's lone links to be a part of the Super Bowl XL championship team. The team acquired running back Jerome Bettis in the 1996 offseason after releasing Morris for possession of illegal drugs months after Super Bowl XXX. Pittsburgh eventually reclaimed the record for most Vince Lombardi Trophies with six, following their victory in Super Bowl XLIII.\nSuper Bowl XXX served as the final Super Bowl victory for the Cowboys' dynasty of the 1990s. Dallas won only one more postseason game until 2009. In addition, the Cowboys have not reached the NFC Championship Game since winning Super Bowl XXX, the fourth longest active Conference Championship appearance drought in the NFL (not including the Houston Texans who have never appeared in a Conference Championship Game but have only been a franchise since 2002). Injuries forced Michael Irvin and fullback Daryl Johnston to retire after the 1999 season, and Aikman also retired due to injuries one year later. Smith became the NFL's all-time leading rusher in 2002 before he was released by the team after that season. Statistically, 1995 was the best season for the Cowboys' triplets, although all three have said that the 1995 Super Bowl was easily the toughest of the three Super Bowl runs. The Cowboys also became the first team to win Super Bowls under three head coaches (Tom Landry in Super Bowls VI and XII, Jimmy Johnson in Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII, and Switzer). Two other teams have since won Super Bowl championships under three coaches, with the Green Bay Packers winning under Vince Lombardi, Mike Holmgren, and Mike McCarthy, and the Pittsburgh Steelers winning under Chuck Noll, Cowher, and Mike Tomlin.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXX: Dallas Cowboys 27, Pittsburgh Steelers 17\n\"at Sun Devil Stadium, Tempe, Arizona\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXX, according to the official NFL.com boxscore and the ProFootball reference.com game summary.&lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nPopular culture.\nA portion of this Super Bowl was \"predicted\" six years earlier by NBC series \"Quantum Leap\". In the January 17, 1990 episode \"All Americans\", Al (Dean Stockwell) says in conversation with Sam (Scott Bakula), \"I've been watching Super Bowl XXX. Ooo, Sam, the Steelers are down by 3. You wouldn't believe...\" The Steelers \"were\" the AFC team in the game. They trailed by 3 twice in the game: unremarkably, early in the second quarter (3\u20130); but again at the critical turning point late in the 4th quarter (20\u201317) that ultimately gave the Cowboys the win and would lend credence to Al's suspense at the game's ending.\nSeveral characters in the 1996 Elmore Leonard crime novel \"Out of Sight\" watch the game on TV, with one betting on it.\nIn the third episode of the first season of \"Better Call Saul\", \"Nacho\", Mike Ehrmantraut mentioned a case when he was a police officer in Philadelphia that a bookie took six million dollars in bets for this game and disappeared after losing the bet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29156", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29156", "title": "Super Bowl XXXI", "text": "1997 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXXI was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion New England Patriots and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Green Bay Packers to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1996 season. The Packers defeated the Patriots 35\u201321, their third Super Bowl victory and first since Super Bowl II in 1968. The Packers also extended their league record for the most overall NFL championships to 12. It was also the last in a run of 13 straight Super Bowl victories by the NFC over the AFC. The game was played on January 26, 1997, at the Louisiana Superdome in New Orleans, Louisiana.\nThis Super Bowl featured two clubs that had recently returned to competitiveness. After 24 mostly dismal seasons since Vince Lombardi left, the Packers' fortunes turned after head coach Mike Holmgren and quarterback Brett Favre joined the team in 1992. After four losing seasons, the Patriots' rise began in 1993 when Bill Parcells was hired as head coach, and the team drafted quarterback Drew Bledsoe. Under their respective head coaches and quarterbacks, Green Bay posted an NFC-best 13\u20133 regular season record in 1996, while New England advanced to their second Super Bowl after recording an 11\u20135 record in what would be their first of ten Super Bowl appearances under owner Robert Kraft.\nThe game began with the teams combining for 24 first-quarter points, the most in Super Bowl history. The Packers then scored 17 unanswered points in the second quarter, including Favre's then-Super Bowl record 81-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Antonio Freeman. In the third quarter, the Patriots cut the lead to 27\u201321 due to running back Curtis Martin's 18-yard rushing touchdown. But on the ensuing kickoff, Desmond Howard returned the ball a then-Super Bowl record 99 yards for a touchdown. The score proved to be the last one, as both teams' defenses took over the rest of the game. Howard became the first special teams player ever to be named Super Bowl MVP. He gained a total of 154 kickoff return yards, and also recorded a then-Super Bowl record 90 punt return yards, thus tying the then-Super Bowl records of total return yards (244) and combined net yards gained (244).\nThis was the first Super Bowl broadcast by Fox under its first contract to carry NFL games. By a large margin it was the highest-rated program aired in Fox's history at the time.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXXI to New Orleans during their October 26, 1993, meeting in Chicago. The bidding process was scheduled to award two Super Bowl sites (XXXI and XXXII), the first time that multiple hosts were selected at the same meeting since XXIII and XXIV were voted on in 1985. This was the eighth time that New Orleans hosted the game, and fifth time it would be played in the Superdome.\nFour cities entered the bidding for the two games: New Orleans (Superdome), San Diego (Jack Murphy Stadium), Los Angeles/Pasadena (Rose Bowl), and Tampa (Tampa Stadium). The New Orleans representatives bid only on XXXI, Los Angeles only bid on XXXII, while San Diego and Tampa made themselves available for both games. Rules required a candidate to receive a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 vote (21 of 28 owners) in order to win the bidding. If no winner received the necessary votes after three rounds, the fourth round would revert to a simple majority.\nTampa was eliminated during the balloting, leaving New Orleans and San Diego as the two finalists for XXXI. New Orleans, an overwhelming favorite going into the meeting, was picked. San Diego would manage to win the vote for XXXII.\nNew England Patriots.\nAfter coach Raymond Berry benched and then cut future CFL record-setting MVP and champion Doug Flutie before being fired himself in 1989, the Patriots had three more losing seasons, including a dismal 1\u201315 regular season record in 1990. Then, in 1993, New England turned to veteran head coach Bill Parcells to lead the team, hoping to repeat the success he had with the New York Giants.\nAlthough the Patriots posted a 5\u201311 regular season record during Parcells' first year, eight of their losses were by 7 points or fewer. To Parcells' credit, much of the improvement was the result of the contributions from their draft picks that they made before the season: linebackers Willie McGinest and Chris Slade. Tight end Ben Coates also became a major contributor as a favorite target of quarterback Drew Bledsoe, who was taken with the #1 overall pick in the 1993 draft. With that improvement, the team was sold to Robert Kraft in January 1994 for a then-record price of $200 million. It was an astonishing price considering the Patriots had long been considered a laughingstock by local and national media as well as opponents and had one of the worst stadiums in the league (Foxboro Stadium). During the losing spell they had rarely sold out, resulting in most games going without local television coverage. Sports in New England at that time centered on the beloved, successful, Celtics and Red Sox, and even Bruins, not the NFL team orphaned in remote Foxborough, Massachusetts, thirty miles outside Boston. (During an earlier run of 13 years in the 1970s and 1980s with only 1 losing season, the very competitive Patriots sold out that venue regularly.)\nThe team then posted a 10\u20136 record in 1994 after starting the regular season at 3\u20136 but were eliminated by the Cleveland Browns in their first playoff game. The Krafts had also eliminated the practice of TV blackouts (and courted and nailed deals with local affiliates), and the season resulted in a resurgence of popularity in the NFL game across the region. New England then had a let down and failed to make the playoffs in 1995, a year when many organizations were coming to grips with the new salary cap put in by the NFL to improve competition in the league. In the offseason, Parcells hired his old Giants defensive coordinator, Bill Belichick, as assistant head coach and defensive backs coach. Part of the team's spotty performance that season might have been that the head coach, Parcells, and the new owner, Kraft, did not get along well. Belichick came to serve during the 1996 season as the head coach's interface with the Kraft family and the non-football operations side of the business.\nAfter losing their first two games in the 1996 regular season with lackluster performances, the Patriots ran through the rest of the season competitive in every game, finishing with an 11\u20135 record (their best in the Parcells era) and winning the AFC East. The Patriots' offense became the 7th-best unit in the league in terms of yards, and 2nd-best (behind the Packers) in points. Their pass offense, led by Bledsoe and wide receiver Terry Glenn, ranked third in the NFL. Bledsoe threw for 4,086 yards and 27 touchdowns against 15 interceptions. Glenn set a rookie record with 90 receptions, which yielded 1,132 yards and 6 touchdowns. Tight end Ben Coates was also a big contributor, catching 62 passes for 682 yards and 9 touchdowns. Wide receiver Shawn Jefferson recorded 50 receptions for 771 yards and 4 touchdowns.\nRunning back Curtis Martin was the focal point of the rushing attack with his 1,152 yards and 14 touchdowns on the ground, while also catching 46 passes for another 333 yards and 3 touchdowns. Pro Bowl running back Dave Meggett provided the team with a good special teams threat, gaining 1,369 yards and a touchdown returning kickoffs and punts, while also rushing for 122 yards and catching 33 passes for 292 yards.\nOn defense, the team's main weapon was Pro Bowler McGinest, who recorded 49 tackles, 2 fumble recoveries, an interception which he returned 46 yards for a touchdown, and a team-leading 9.5 sacks. Linebacker Chris Slade added 7 sacks and 3 forced fumbles. New England also had a solid secondary, led by defensive backs Willie Clay (72 tackles, a fumble recovery, 4 interceptions, 50 return yards), Ty Law (56 tackles, 3 interceptions, 45 return yards, 1 touchdown), and Lawyer Milloy (54 tackles, 1 sack, 1 fumble recovery, 2 interceptions).\nGreen Bay Packers.\nAfter winning Super Bowl II after the 1967 regular season, the Packers became a losing team for much of the 1970s and 1980s, only making the playoffs in 1972 and the strike-shortened 1982 season. In addition to having the reputation of being a poor team, the Packers were unable to attract good players because many did not want to play in Green Bay's cold winter climate for a small market team.\nAll that changed when former San Francisco 49ers offensive coordinator Mike Holmgren became the Packers head coach in 1992. During his first year, the team improved to a 9\u20137 regular season record, barely missing the playoffs. One of the significant players on the 1992 Packers team was second-year quarterback Brett Favre, who spent his rookie season as a third-string quarterback for the Atlanta Falcons. During a September 20, 1992, game against the Cincinnati Bengals, Favre replaced injured starter Don Majkowski and proceeded to lead the team to a comeback victory. Afterwards, Favre became the starter for the rest of that season and held that position with the Packers until his purported retirement and subsequent conditional trade to the New York Jets in 2008 (followed by a departure for Minnesota in 2009).\nGreen Bay then made the playoffs in the 1993, 1994, and the 1995 seasons. As Holmgren, Favre, and the Packers continued to win, they were able to attract impact free agents like veteran defensive end Reggie White, nicknamed the \"Minister of Defense\", who joined the team in 1993.\nIn 1996, the Packers posted an NFC-best 13\u20133 regular season record after winning eight of their first nine games to start the season. After losing two straight games in November, they finished off the regular season winning their remaining five games, including dominating wins over two playoff teams: the Denver Broncos, 41\u20136, and the Minnesota Vikings, 38\u201310. The Packers' defense also led the league in both fewest points and yards allowed. They allowed 210 points and also scored an NFL-best 456 points, becoming the first team since the 1972 Miami Dolphins to score the most points in the league and allow the fewest. They set an NFL record with seven wins by at least 25 points.\nFavre won the NFL Most Valuable Player Award for the second straight season after throwing for 3,899 yards and an NFC record 39 touchdown passes during the 1996 regular season, with only 13 interceptions. His 39 touchdown passes were the third-highest total in league history at that time. Favre was also a good runner, ranking third on the team with 136 rushing yards and scoring 2 touchdowns.\nThe Packers had another valuable asset in game-breaking kick returner Desmond Howard. The former Heisman Trophy winner's NFL career as a wide receiver was widely viewed as a disappointment up until this point, recording just 92 receptions in his first four NFL seasons. After joining Green Bay before the 1996 season, the team used him as a kick returner. Howard excelled in this role and ended up setting an NFL record with 875 punt return yards, while also leading the league in yards per return (15.1) and punt return touchdowns (3). He also caught 13 passes for 95 yards and added another 460 yards returning kickoffs.\nGreen Bay also had a number of offensive weapons. Wide receiver Antonio Freeman led the team with 933 yards and 9 touchdowns. Multi-talented veteran wide receiver Don Beebe, who had the best season of his career, was also a constant breakaway threat, catching 39 passes for 699 yards and 4 touchdowns and adding another 403 yards and a touchdown returning kickoffs. Beebe was a member of the Buffalo Bills during their four Super Bowl losses and was thus extremely eager for another shot at a Super Bowl win. Late in the season, after a string of injuries sent star receiver Robert Brooks out for the season and caused Freeman to miss four games, Green Bay made another big addition to their receiving corps by signing Andre Rison, who had been cut by the Jacksonville Jaguars and finished the season with 47 receptions for 593 yards and 3 touchdowns. The Packers also had two outstanding tight ends: Pro Bowler Keith Jackson recorded 40 catches for 504 yards and 10 touchdowns, and Mark Chmura had 28 receptions for 370 yards.\nAlthough Green Bay's running game did not have any standout backs or Pro Bowlers, running backs Dorsey Levens and Edgar Bennett, and fullback William Henderson were all very good at blocking, running, and receiving. Bennett was the team's leading rusher with 899 yards, while also catching 31 passes for 176 yards and scored 3 touchdowns. Levens rushed for 566 yards, caught 31 passes for 226 yards, returned 5 kickoffs for 84 yards, and scored 10 touchdowns. Henderson had 130 rushing yards, caught 27 passes for 203 yards, and returned 2 kickoffs for 38 yards. Up front, Pro Bowl center Frank Winters anchored the offensive line, along with guard Adam Timmerman.\nOn defense, White continued to be a weapon, recording 29 tackles, 3 fumble recoveries, and led the team with 8.5 sacks. Defensive tackle Santana Dotson was also a big asset, recording 5.5 sacks and a fumble recovery. In the secondary, the team was led by safety Eugene Robinson, who recorded 55 tackles, 6 interceptions, and 107 return yards. Defensive back LeRoy Butler was also a major force, recording 65 tackles, 6.5 sacks, 2 fumble recoveries, and 5 interceptions for 149 return yards and a touchdown.\nPlayoffs.\nAided by Martin's 166 rushing yards and 3 touchdowns, including a 78-yard touchdown run in the 2nd quarter, the Patriots first eliminated the defending AFC champion Pittsburgh Steelers, 28\u20133. New England gained a total of 346 yards in the game, while limiting Steelers quarterback Mike Tomczak to just 110 passing yards with no touchdowns and 2 interceptions.\nThe Patriots then defeated the Jacksonville Jaguars 20\u20136 in the AFC Championship Game. The Jaguars, an expansion team in 1995, advanced after upsetting the AFC's top seed, the Denver Broncos. However, New England took advantage of several key Jacksonville miscues in a game dominated by defense. A bad snap allowed Patriots defensive back Larry Whigham to tackle Jaguars punter Bryan Barker at the Jacksonville 4-yard line, setting up Martin's 1-yard touchdown run a few plays later. The Jaguars scored a field goal in the 2nd quarter, but Jacksonville punt returner Chris Hudson's fumble set up Patriots kicker Adam Vinatieri's 29-yard field goal. Eventually, the teams exchanged field goals, and the Patriots led 13\u20136 going into the 4th quarter. With under 4 minutes left in the game, the Jaguars reached the New England 5-yard line, but Patriots safety Willie Clay intercepted a pass in the end zone. After New England was forced to punt, cornerback Otis Smith recovered a fumble from Jaguars running back James Stewart and returned it 47 yards for a touchdown to put the game away.\nMeanwhile, the Packers first eliminated the San Francisco 49ers, 35\u201314. Green Bay's defense and special teams dominated the game, forcing 5 turnovers, and helped the team score 35 points even though Favre was limited to just 79 passing yards. San Francisco starting quarterback Steve Young, who was still suffering from a rib injury sustained during the 49ers' 14\u20130 playoff win over the Philadelphia Eagles the previous week, had to leave the game in the 1st quarter. Howard opened up the scoring by returning a punt 71 yards for a touchdown. Later, he returned a punt 46 yards to set up Favre's 4-yard touchdown pass to Andre Rison. By the time the first half ended, Green Bay had a commanding 21\u20137 lead. San Francisco cut their deficit to 7 points with a 3rd-quarter touchdown, but the Packers responded by driving 72 yards to score a touchdown of their own, in which a fumble by Bennett was recovered in the end zone by Freeman. Green Bay then put the game away with an 11-yard touchdown run by Bennett.\nGreen Bay then defeated the Carolina Panthers 30\u201313 in the NFC Championship Game. Like the Jaguars, the Panthers were a 1995 expansion team that advanced to the conference title game. But unlike Jacksonville, Carolina came into the contest as the NFC's #2 seed and had eliminated the defending Super Bowl champion Dallas Cowboys, 26\u201317. In the NFC Championship Game, Carolina scored first with a 3-yard touchdown reception by Howard Griffith, but Green Bay scored on two touchdown passes by Favre and a field goal in the 2nd quarter to take a 17\u201310 halftime lead. The Packers then dominated the second half, only allowing one more field goal from the Panthers. Levens recorded 5 catches for 117 yards and a touchdown, along with 88 rushing yards. Bennett rushed for 99 yards and a touchdown. Favre threw for 292 yards and 2 touchdowns with 1 interception. Kicker Chris Jacke scored three field goals. By advancing to the Super Bowl, the Packers broke a streak since Super Bowl XXVI that had either the Dallas Cowboys or the San Francisco 49ers representing the NFC in the championship game. It also marked the Packers' first Super Bowl appearance since winning the first two to culminate their dynasty under Lombardi and Hall of Fame quarterback Bart Starr.\nSuper Bowl pregame news and notes.\nThe Packers were favored to win the game by 14 points, largely because many thought the Patriots were a Cinderella team, and because of the recent dominance of the NFC in Super Bowl games.\nThe signing of Andre Rison by Green Bay late in the season had been a surprise to the league. Rison had been released by two teams over the previous two years and was known as a serious disciplinary problem for skipping team meetings. The previous year, the Packers had tried to sign Rison and Favre had spoken positively when a deal was not reached, stating \"We saved a lot of money, and a lot of heartache because he was a problem internally.\" Rison later replied that if he were a defensive player, \"I'd try to break his face.\" He also added \"maybe a couple of years ago, I would have said he's a hillbilly jealous of a black man making money. But now I'm at this age. No comment.\"\nMuch of the pregame hype surrounded the conflict between Parcells and Patriots owner Robert Kraft. Kraft took control of the team after Parcells was hired, and the two of them had different ideas on how to run the organization. Six days before the Super Bowl, in an article by Will McDonough, \"The Boston Globe\" reported Parcells would leave the Patriots after the Super Bowl to become the coach of the New York Jets. The book \"Patriot Reign\" alleges the Patriots have cell phone records showing Parcells was in constant contact with the Jets during the week. Then-Patriots defensive backs coach (and former head coach) Bill Belichick is quoted as saying Parcells' plans to leave for the Jets were a distraction, \"Yeah, I'd say it was a little bit of a distraction all the way around. I can tell you first-hand, there was a lot of stuff going on prior to the game. I mean, him talking to other teams. He was trying to make up his mind about what he was going to do. Which, honestly, I felt [was] totally inappropriate. How many chances do you get to play for the Super Bowl? Tell them to get back to you in a couple of days. I'm not saying it was disrespectful to me, but it was in terms of the overall commitment to the team.\" Parcells even refused to travel back with the rest of the Patriots after the game and was eventually hired by the rival Jets.\nTo honor former NFL commissioner Pete Rozelle, who died on December 6, 1996, each player wore a special helmet decal with Rozelle's signature, \"Pete\", printed across the NFL logo. Tributes to Rozelle were also published in the game program.\nStarting with this game, through Super Bowl XXXVII, the Super Bowl logo was painted at the 50-yard line, and the teams' helmets were placed on the 30-yard lines. In the past Super Bowl games since Super Bowl VI, the NFL logo was painted on the 50-yard line, except for Super Bowls XXV and XXIX. The Super Bowl XXV logo was painted at midfield, and the NFL 75th Anniversary logo was painted at midfield in Super Bowl XXIX. The league started to put the NFL logo at midfield again for Super Bowl XXXVIII.\nCoincidentally, the first Super Bowl appearance for the Patriots was also in the Superdome and against an NFC Central team on the same calendar day (January 26). In Super Bowl XX, the Patriots lost to the Chicago Bears, whose rivalry with the Packers is said to be the NFL's oldest.\nAs the designated home team, the Packers wore their home green uniforms and gold pants, while the Patriots went with their road white uniforms and silver pants.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was the first Super Bowl to be televised in the United States by Fox. Play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden, both previously of CBS, called the game. This was the first of three Super Bowls to be called by Summerall and Madden while with Fox (Super Bowls XXXIII and XXXVI being the others). James Brown hosted all the pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage with help from his fellow \"Fox NFL Sunday\" cast members Terry Bradshaw, Howie Long, and Ronnie Lott.\nFox's broadcast was the first Super Bowl to have a constant, live-updating graphic for the score, time, and down and distance. Fox had introduced the \"FoxBox\" when it began its NFL coverage in 1994, and the graphic positioned over live action eventually became the norm in virtually all sports broadcasts at the national and regional production levels.\nContinuing the trend of Super Bowl television ratings, the telecast broke the then-record for the highest-rated program in the history of the then-ten-year-old Fox network. For the Super Bowl lead-out program after the game, Fox televised \"The X-Files\" episode \"Leonard Betts\".\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show featured Los del R\u00edo, who performed their multi-platinum smash hit \"Macarena\", the dance craze that became a worldwide summer hit in 1996. Country singer-songwriter Mary Chapin Carpenter and Cajun musical group BeauSoleil also appeared singing Carpenter's hit \"Down at the Twist and Shout\".\nR&amp;B singer Luther Vandross later sang the national anthem, and Miss Louisiana 1996 Erika Schwarz Wright performed sign language for the national anthem.\nThe coin toss ceremony featured the winning head coaches of the previous Super Bowl games played in New Orleans: Hank Stram (Super Bowl IV), Tom Landry (Super Bowl VI, Super Bowl XII), Chuck Noll (Super Bowl IX), Tom Flores (Super Bowl XV), Mike Ditka (Super Bowl XX), and George Seifert (Super Bowl XXIV). Hank Stram was given the honor of doing the coin toss.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"Blues Brothers Bash\" and featured actors Dan Aykroyd, John Goodman, and Jim Belushi as The Blues Brothers. The show highlighted blues music and also had performances by singer James Brown and the rock band ZZ Top.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nThe Packers forced the Patriots to punt on the opening possession of the game and started their first drive with great field position after wide receiver Desmond Howard returned the ball 32 yards to the Green Bay 46-yard line. Green Bay then opened up the scoring with quarterback Brett Favre's 54-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Andre Rison on their second offensive play of the game, giving them an early 7\u20130 lead. Then on the second play of New England's ensuing drive, cornerback Doug Evans intercepted a pass from quarterback Drew Bledsoe at the Patriots' 28-yard line. On the first play after the turnover, Patriots defensive end Ferric Collons sacked Favre for a 10-yard loss, but Packers running back Dorsey Levens rushed for 4 yards and caught a pass for 14 over the next two plays, setting up kicker Chris Jacke's 37-yard field goal to increase Green Bay's lead to 10\u20130.\nNew England stormed back, scoring touchdowns on each of their next two possessions. On the second play of the Patriots' ensuing drive, Bledsoe completed a 32-yard screen pass to fullback Keith Byars and followed it up with a \"dump-off\" pass to running back Curtis Martin, who caught the ball near the line of scrimmage and ran 20 yards to the Packers' 27-yard line. Bledsoe then threw three straight incompletions, but on the third attempt, Packers cornerback Craig Newsome was called for pass interference in the end zone, which gave the Patriots a new set of downs at the 1-yard line. On the next play, Bledsoe completed a 1-yard touchdown pass to Byars to cut New England's deficit to 10\u20137.\nThe Patriots then forced the Packers to punt from their own 17-yard line after a three-and-out, giving the Patriots the ball back after running back Dave Meggett received Craig Hentrich's 39-yard punt at the New England 43-yard line. The Patriots advanced 57 yards in just four plays; after a 7-yard reception and a 2-yard run by Martin on their first two plays, Bledsoe completed a 44-yard pass to wide receiver Terry Glenn to advance to the Green Bay 4-yard line, and then tight end Ben Coates caught a 4-yard touchdown pass, giving New England their first lead of the game, 14\u201310. The Packers and Patriots combined for 24 points, the most ever scored in the first quarter of a Super Bowl. The Patriots became the first team in Super Bowl history to score two touchdowns in the first quarter and lose the game.\nSecond quarter.\nNew England's lead did not last long. After the teams exchanged punts twice going into the second quarter, Favre threw a Super Bowl-record 81-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Antonio Freeman, putting Green Bay back in front with a 17\u201314 lead, and they would not trail New England again for the rest of the game. On third down of the Patriots' next drive, safety LeRoy Butler powered through Meggett's block attempt and managed to drag Bledsoe down with one arm for a 9-yard sack, forcing a punt by Tom Tupa that Howard returned 34 yards to the Patriots' 47-yard line. Green Bay then drove to the New England 14, featuring a 23-yard reception by Rison and a 12-yard run by Levens, to score on Jacke's 31-yard field goal to increase their lead to 20\u201314.\nMeggett returned the ensuing kickoff 21 yards to the Patriots 25-yard line. On the first play of the drive, Bledsoe completed a 19-yard pass to Coates to advance to their own 44-yard line. But two plays later, Packers safety Mike Prior intercepted a long pass intended for wide receiver Shawn Jefferson and returned it 8 yards to the Green Bay 26-yard line. After the turnover, Favre completed a 10-yard pass to tight end Keith Jackson, followed by a 22-yard pass to Freeman, and Levens rushed four times for 31 yards on a 9-play, 74-yard drive that took 5:59 off the clock. Favre finished the drive himself with a 2-yard touchdown run to give Green Bay a 27\u201314 lead with just 1:11 left in the half.\nAfter a 24-yard kickoff return by Meggett, Bledsoe completed an 18-yard pass to Coates, and followed it up with a 10-yard pass to Glenn. Then after a 1-yard run by Meggett on the next play, Bledsoe completed a 7-yard pass to wide receiver Vincent Brisby to bring up 3rd-and-2 from the Packers' 42. However, Green Bay's defense forced back-to-back incompletions from Bledsoe, turning the ball over on downs with just 19 seconds left before halftime. The Packers tried to get into scoring range by calling a pass on the next play, but linebacker Willie McGinest sacked Favre for a 7-yard loss, and the score remained 27\u201314 at halftime.\nThird quarter.\nHoward returned the second half kickoff 23 yards to the Green Bay 25-yard line. From there, Favre led the Packers all the way to the New England 37, aided by two passes to tight end Mark Chmura for 13 yards and two passes to fullback William Henderson for 14 yards. However, the Patriots' defense stood their ground on this drive. They stopped Levens for no gain on 3rd-and 1, and then linebacker Ted Johnson sacked him for a 7-yard loss on 4th down. Then after driving to the Green Bay 41-yard line, New England was forced to punt, but they managed to pin Green Bay deep in their own territory when Howard made a fair catch of Tupa's 29-yard punt at the 12-yard line. On the ensuing drive, a 7-yard sack by Patriots cornerback Otis Smith helped the Patriots' defense force the Packers to punt, and the Patriots got the ball back with great field position after Meggett returned Craig Hentrich's 48-yard punt 6 yards to the New England 47-yard line.\nTaking advantage of their excellent starting field position, New England drove 53 yards in 7 plays, which featured a 13-yard reception by Coates and three runs by Martin for 30 yards, the last of which was for an 18-yard touchdown to cut Green Bay's lead to 27\u201321. But the Packers immediately responded on the ensuing kickoff when Howard returned the ball 99 yards for a touchdown (the only kickoff Howard returned for a touchdown in his career) \u2013 the longest play in Super Bowl history (later broken in Super Bowl XLIII and broken again in Super Bowl XLVII). Favre then completed a pass to Chmura for a two-point conversion, giving the Packers a 35\u201321 lead. The conversion marked the only points Chmura scored all season.\nFourth quarter.\nHoward's touchdown proved to be the last score of the game, as the defenses of both teams took over for the rest of the game. After the teams exchanged punts twice, Bledsoe threw his third interception of the game to Newsome. Green Bay then advanced to the New England 30-yard line, only to have Jacke miss a 47-yard field goal attempt wide right. After another exchange of punts, Bledsoe was intercepted again, this time by linebacker Brian Williams, allowing the Packers to run out the clock for the win.\nAfter the game, Favre reflected on his long road to becoming a Super Bowl champion, which included the death of his friend Mark Harvy in a car accident during the season. \"Through everything I really believed I'd be here today. Right here in this stairwell, talking about being world champions. My best friend's gone forever. Trouble never seems to be far away, and the future won't be all rosy, but they can't take this away from me. Thirty years from now, the kids will be getting ready for Super Bowl LXI, and NFL Films will drag out Steve Sabol \u2014 he'll be around 102 then \u2014 and he'll talk about how Brett Favre fought through such adversity. And there will be other players and coaches. But I know this: We etched our place in history today.\"\nThe Packers outgained the Patriots 323 yards to 257 and intercepted Bledsoe four times. Freeman was the top receiver of the game, finishing with 105 receiving yards and a touchdown on only 3 receptions. Dorsey Levens was the game's leading rusher with 61 rushing yards and caught 3 passes for 23 yards. Favre completed 14 out of 27 passes for 246 yards and 2 touchdowns and had 12 rushing yards and another touchdown on 4 carries. Favre became the first Super Bowl-winning quarterback to have at least three touchdowns (Favre had 2 throwing, 1 rushing) and not be named Super Bowl MVP.\nBledsoe finished the game with 11 more pass completions (25) than Favre, but only 7 more total passing yards (253). His four interceptions tied a Super Bowl record. Martin was limited to just 41 rushing yards and 1 touchdown on 11 carries, but he also caught 3 passes for 28 yards. Meggett recorded 155 combined net yards (117 kick return, 30 punt return, 8 receiving). Coates was the Patriots' leading receiver with 6 catches for 67 yards and a touchdown.\nThis was the first Super Bowl played at the Superdome in which the losing team's point total was something other than 10. The Dallas Cowboys beat the Denver Broncos 27\u201310 in Super Bowl XII, the Oakland Raiders defeated the Philadelphia Eagles 27\u201310 in Super Bowl XV, the Chicago Bears beat the New England Patriots 46\u201310 in Super Bowl XX, and the San Francisco 49ers beat the Denver Broncos 55\u201310 in Super Bowl XXIV.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXXI: Green Bay Packers 35, New England Patriots 21\n\"at Louisiana Superdome, New Orleans, Louisiana\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXXI, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. &lt;br&gt;Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nAftermath.\nPackers.\nThe Packers returned to the Super Bowl the following year, losing to the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl XXXII in San Diego, California. In 2007, the Packers were favored to return to the Super Bowl to face the Patriots again but were upset at Lambeau Field by the eventual champion New York Giants, who went on to knock off the previously undefeated Patriots. It proved to be Favre's final game as a Packer, but three years later, Favre's successor Aaron Rodgers helped drive the Packers to regain the Vince Lombardi Trophy in Super Bowl XLV in Dallas against the Pittsburgh Steelers. Super Bowl XXXI was the Packers\u2019 last win in the Superdome for 23 years; their next win wouldn't come until Week 3 of the 2020 season.\nPatriots.\nFive years later, Belichick had returned to the Patriots and was in his second season as head coach, while Milloy, Law, Vinatieri, McGinest, Tedy Bruschi and Otis Smith, who all played in this Super Bowl, were still with the team when they made an unexpected return to the Superdome to face the \"Greatest Show on Turf\" St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI. Bledsoe was also still there, but was now backing up Tom Brady, who was then just a second-year player who had thrown only three passes in his rookie season but had gone 11\u20133 as a starter to finish the regular season after Bledsoe had been knocked out in Week 2 against the Jets. (Bledsoe had replaced Brady after Pittsburgh's Lee Flowers knocked Brady out of the AFC Championship Game and proceeded to throw for a touchdown.) Law gave the Patriots a lead with an interception return for a touchdown off St. Louis' MVP Kurt Warner, and eventually, Vinatieri's 48-yard field goal as time expired following a clutch Brady drive \u2013 the first time a Super Bowl was won with a score on the final play \u2013 gave the Patriots a 20\u201317 upset victory and their first Super Bowl on their third visit to the Superdome on the NFL's ultimate stage. It also marked the birth of the Patriots' dynasty as the first of six Super Bowl victories in nine appearances under Brady and Belichick.\nOfficials.\nJeff Bergman and his father, Jerry Bergman Sr., became the first father-son combination to officiate Super Bowls. Jerry was the head linesman (now down judge) for four Super Bowls (XIII, XVI, XVIII, XXIII).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29157", "revid": "50356442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29157", "title": "Super Bowl XXXII", "text": "1998 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXXII was an American football game played between the National Football Conference (NFC) champion and defending Super Bowl XXXI champion Green Bay Packers and the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Denver Broncos to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1997 season. The Broncos upset the heavily favored Packers by the score of 31\u201324. The game was played on January 25, 1998, at Qualcomm Stadium in San Diego, California, the second time that the Super Bowl was held in that city. Super Bowl XXXII also made Qualcomm Stadium the only stadium in history to host both the Super Bowl and the World Series in the same year.\nThis was Denver's first league championship after suffering four previous Super Bowl losses, three of which were under Elway, and snapped a 13-game losing streak for AFC teams in the Super Bowl (the last win being the Los Angeles Raiders' win in Super Bowl XVIII after the 1983 season). The Broncos, who entered the game after posting a 12\u20134 regular-season record in 1997, became just the second wild card team to win a Super Bowl and the first since the Raiders in Super Bowl XV. The Packers, who entered the game as the defending Super Bowl XXXI champions after posting a 13\u20133 regular-season record, were the first team favored to win by double digits to lose a Super Bowl since the Minnesota Vikings in Super Bowl IV.\nThe game was close throughout much of the contest. The Broncos converted two turnovers to take a 17\u20137 lead in the second quarter before the Packers cut the score to 17\u201314 at halftime. Green Bay kept pace with Denver in the second half, before tying the game with 13:31 remaining. Both defenses stiffened until Broncos running back Terrell Davis scored the go-ahead touchdown with 1:45 left. Despite suffering a migraine headache that caused him to miss most of the second quarter, Davis was named Super Bowl MVP. He ran for 157 yards, caught two passes for 8 yards, and scored a Super Bowl record three rushing touchdowns. As of 2025, Davis remains the most recent running back to be named Super Bowl MVP.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners voted to award Super Bowl XXXII to San Diego during their October 26, 1993, meeting in Chicago. The bidding process was scheduled to award two Super Bowl sites (XXXI and XXXII), the first time that multiple hosts were selected at the same meeting since XXIII and XXIV were voted on in 1985. This was the second time that San Diego hosted the game; the city previously hosted XXII ten years earlier. The Broncos played in both XXII and XXXII, the first franchise to play two different Super Bowls in the same stadium twice; they had already played twice at the Superdome (XII and XXIV).\nFour cities entered the bidding for the two games: New Orleans (Superdome), San Diego (Jack Murphy Stadium), Los Angeles/Pasadena (Rose Bowl), and Tampa (Tampa Stadium). The New Orleans representatives bid only on XXXI, Los Angeles only bid on XXXII, while San Diego and Tampa made themselves available for both games. Rules required a candidate to receive a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 vote (21 of 28 owners) in order to win the bidding. If no winner received the necessary votes after three rounds, the fourth round would revert to a simple majority.\nNew Orleans was selected for XXXI, at which time the voting for XXXII commenced. Tampa was eliminated during the first ballot, leaving San Diego and Los Angeles as the two finalists for XXXII. The prospects for Los Angeles suffered after Raiders owner Al Davis left the meeting before the presentation. San Diego representatives, meanwhile promised to add 12,000 temporary seats to Jack Murphy Stadium to counter the Rose Bowl's capacity advantage. In addition, since San Diego had not hosted the Super Bowl in a decade, and Pasadena had just hosted one nine months earlier, owners tipped towards San Diego. After two deadlocked rounds, San Diego won by simple majority on the fourth vote.\nGreen Bay Packers.\nThe Packers entered the 1997 season coming off of their win in Super Bowl XXXI. They then repeated as NFC Central division champions, earning a 13\u20133 regular-season record. Green Bay's offense ranked 2nd in the league in points scored (only behind their eventual Super Bowl opponent, the Broncos) and 4th in yards gained, while their defense respectively ranked 5th and 7th in those two categories.\nQuarterback Brett Favre had another Pro Bowl season and became the first player ever to win the NFL MVP award three times, winning it for the third consecutive year (Favre was named co-MVP in 1997 with Detroit Lions running back Barry Sanders). Favre led the league with 35 passing touchdowns and completed 304 out of 513 attempts for 3,867 yards, with 16 interceptions, while ranking second on the team in rushing with 187 yards and a touchdown. Wide receiver Antonio Freeman led the team in receptions with 81 catches for 1,243 yards and 12 touchdowns. Wide receiver Robert Brooks was also a major deep threat, catching 60 passes for 1,010 yards and 7 touchdowns. Pro Bowl tight end Mark Chmura recorded 38 receptions for 417 yards and 6 touchdowns. Pro Bowl halfback Dorsey Levens, who had the best season of his career, led the team in rushing with 1,435 yards and 7 touchdowns, while also catching 53 passes for 373 yards and 5 touchdowns. Fullback William Henderson rushed for 113 yards and caught 41 passes for 367 yards and a touchdown. On special teams, receiver Bill Schroeder led the team with 33 punt returns for 342 yards, while also gaining 562 yards on 24 kickoff returns.\nOn the Packers' defense, the line was led by veteran Pro Bowl selection Reggie White, who led the team with 11 sacks. Behind him, Santana Dotson recorded 37 tackles and 5.5 sacks. In the secondary, Pro Bowl defensive back LeRoy Butler led the team with 5 interceptions, while also adding 70 tackles. Safety Eugene Robinson led the team with 74 tackles while also recording 2.5 sacks, 2 fumble recoveries, and 1 interception. Cornerback Mike Prior recorded 4 interceptions, while rookie Darren Sharper recorded 2 of them, both of which he returned for touchdowns.\nDenver Broncos.\nThe Broncos entered Super Bowl XXXII after suffering four Super Bowl losses: Super Bowls XII, XXI, XXII, and XXIV from 1978, 1987, 1988, and 1990, respectively. In all of those losses, the Broncos never had the ability to rush well enough or score enough points to be competitive. Denver had been defeated by a large margin in each one, losing all four by a combined scoring margin of 163\u201350.\nThe previous three Super Bowl losses were under starting quarterback John Elway, whose ad-libbing skills enabled the Broncos to advance to the league's championship game in a span of three out of four seasons. Elway also led his team to the 1991 AFC Championship Game, but they lost in a defensive struggle to the Buffalo Bills, 10\u20137.\nThe team's fortunes changed when Mike Shanahan became head coach of the Broncos in 1995. Shanahan was previously Denver's offensive coordinator during Super Bowl XXI and XXII losses but was fired in 1991 after a power struggle between him and then-head coach Dan Reeves over the offensive personnel. Shanahan then served as the offensive coordinator for the San Francisco 49ers from 1992 to 1994, including the 49ers' Super Bowl XXIX win. Under Shanahan, the San Francisco offense ranked first in the league in total yards gained for all three of his seasons there.\nWhen Shanahan returned to the Broncos in 1995, he selected running back Terrell Davis in the 6th round of the NFL draft. Davis became the cornerstone of Denver's rebuilt running game, leading the team with 1,117 rushing yards in just his rookie year. The Broncos finished the 1995 regular season with just an 8\u20138 record. By 1996, the Broncos had the league's best offense, gaining 5,791 total yards, and recorded the AFC's best regular-season record at 13\u20133, but they were upset by the second year Jacksonville Jaguars, 30\u201327 in the playoffs.\nDuring the 1997 regular season, the Broncos once again had the league's best offense with 5,872 total yards and led the league in total points scored with 472. Although they recorded a 12\u20134 regular-season record, they finished in second place behind the 13\u20133 Kansas City Chiefs in the AFC West.\nDavis, a Pro Bowl selection, remained the team's leading rusher, recording 1,750 yards and 15 touchdowns (first in the AFC and second in the NFL behind only co-league MVP Barry Sanders's 2,053 rushing yards), while also catching 42 passes for 287 yards. At 37 years old, Elway still posted a Pro Bowl season with 280 out of 502 completions for 3,635 yards, 27 touchdowns, and only 11 interceptions. He also rushed for 215 yards and another touchdown. Pro Bowl tight end Shannon Sharpe led the team with 72 receptions for 1,107 yards. Wide receiver Rod Smith, who was not drafted by any NFL team and recorded only 22 receptions for 389 yards and 3 touchdowns in his two previous seasons, had a breakout year with 70 receptions for 1,180 yards and 12 touchdowns. Wide receiver Ed McCaffrey, who played in Shanahan's 1994 49ers offense, recorded 45 receptions for 590 yards and 8 touchdowns. Denver's offensive line was led by seven-time Pro Bowl left tackle Gary Zimmerman and Pro Bowl center Tom Nalen.\nOn defense, the major acquisition to the team prior to the season was former Chiefs defensive lineman Neil Smith. Smith had a Pro Bowl season for the 6th time in his career with 28 tackles and 8.5 sacks. Defensive end Alfred Williams recorded 36 tackles, 8.5 sacks, and a fumble recovery. The linebacking corps was led by veteran Bill Romanowski, who had 55 tackles and 2 sacks, and John Mobley, who led the team with 97 tackles while also recording 4 sacks, a fumble recovery, and an interception.\nThe secondary was led by veteran defensive backs Tyrone Braxton, who led the team with 4 interceptions for 113 yards and 1 touchdown, and Steve Atwater, who had 53 tackles, 1 sack, 2 fumble recoveries, and 2 interceptions for 42 yards and 1 touchdown. Defensive back Darrien Gordon recorded 50 tackles, 2 sacks, 4 fumble recoveries, 4 interceptions, 64 return yards, and 1 touchdown. He also returned 40 punts for 543 yards and 3 touchdowns.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Broncos entered the playoffs as a wild-card team and defeated the Jacksonville Jaguars, 42\u201317, the Kansas City Chiefs, 14\u201310, and the Pittsburgh Steelers, 24\u201321, making Denver the fifth wild-card team to make it to the Super Bowl. Meanwhile, the Packers were victorious against the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 21\u20137, and the San Francisco 49ers, 23\u201310.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nThe Packers came into the game as 11-point favorites, having compiled a 13\u20133 record regular-season record compared to the Broncos' 12\u20134 and coming in as defending Super Bowl champions after winning Super Bowl XXXI 35\u201321 over the New England Patriots. Furthermore, the Packers had easily crushed their two playoff opponents, while the Broncos had barely edged out their final two postseason victories by a margin of one score.\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Broncos chose to wear their newly unveiled home navy uniforms with white pants. The uniforms replaced the \"Orange Crush\" uniforms they previously wore in three of their four Super Bowl losses. The Packers wore their customary road white uniforms with gold pants. Both teams wore the Super Bowl XXXII logo on the left breast of their jersey. The Super Bowl logo was previously worn in Super Bowl XXV to commemorate the game's silver anniversary. All future Super Bowl teams would wear the game's logo on their jerseys.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was televised in the United States by NBC, with play-by-play announcer Dick Enberg (calling his eighth and final Super Bowl), color commentators Phil Simms and Paul Maguire, and sideline reporter Jim Gray. Greg Gumbel hosted all the events and was joined by co-host Ahmad Rashad and commentators Cris Collinsworth, Sam Wyche, and Joe Gibbs. This was Gumbel's final assignment for NBC as he returned to CBS for the 1998 season. During the game, NBC (partnering with Silicon Graphics Inc.) included real-time 3D computer graphics on SGI's Onyx2 computers to display a model of Qualcomm Stadium and simulating real-time animation of action such as receiver patterns and yards after the catch; along with a second model known as \"Football Guy\", which allowed viewers to see defensive players from the quarterback's vantage point, accompanied by commentary by Randy Cross.\nThis broadcast was the last for NBC as the AFC network after 33 years. CBS was awarded the AFC package for the 1998 season, and NBC would not return to covering the NFL until 2006 when they signed on to televise \"Sunday Night Football\" and then Super Bowl XLIII in February 2009. As a result of NBC losing NFL rights, among others, Gumbel and Simms moved on to become CBS's lead NFL broadcast team.\nFor the Super Bowl lead-out program, NBC broadcast an hour-long episode of \"3rd Rock from the Sun\", \"36! 24! 36! Dick\". As a transition from NBC's live Super Bowl coverage and the program, Gumbel played himself attempting to close the postgame show before he was \"attacked\" by show star John Lithgow. NBC's Denver affiliate KUSA instead broadcast its own 30-minute local postgame show before airing the episode. (WGBA-TV aired the Super Bowl in the Green Bay area.)\nThis was the last time Channel 4 in the United Kingdom showed the Super Bowl \u2013 and their last NFL coverage until 2010 \u2013 after they had been showing the event since 1983 (Super Bowl XVII). Only Sky Sports showed it live until Channel 5 joined them in 2003 (Super Bowl XXXVII). It also marked the last Super Bowl until 2007 for CTV in Canada after airing the NFL and the event since Super Bowl XVI (the lead out program rights were held by new rightsholder Global); from 1999 to 2006 the Super Bowl aired on the Global Television Network. CTV had aired NFL football since 1970 and the Super Bowl since 1982 (Super Bowl XVI). It was also the final NFL game for GMA Network in the Philippines until the 2006 season; GMA had aired NFL football since 1986 and the Super Bowl since Super Bowl XXI in 1987. The Super Bowl was broadcast on ABC 5, also from 1999 until 2006. It was also the final Super Bowl in which the Televisa family of networks aired on its own in Mexico, also until 2007, being broadcast on Canal 5; Televisa had aired NFL football since 1970 and the Super Bowl since 1988 (at the time, the only other Super Bowl in San Diego). Azteca 13 likewise exclusively aired all Super Bowls from 1999 until 2006, except for 2004, including Super Bowl XXXVII which was the next Super Bowl to be played at Qualcomm Stadium.\nIn Australia, Super Bowl was broadcast live on SBS.\nThis game was later featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" as This One's for John.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show, narrated by actor and comedian Phil Hartman (who was murdered four months later), celebrated the music and history of California. It featured performances by The 5th Dimension, Lee Greenwood, and The Beach Boys. Singer Jewel later sang the U.S. national anthem.\nTo honor the 10th anniversary of the Washington Redskins' win in Super Bowl XXII, the only other previous Super Bowl played in San Diego, the game's MVP, Doug Williams, and former head coach Joe Gibbs, participated during the coin toss ceremony. They were joined by the recently retired longtime college football head coach Eddie Robinson, who ran the Grambling State University Tigers football team from 1942 until 1997.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"A Tribute to Motown's 40th Anniversary\" and featured Boyz II Men, Smokey Robinson, Queen Latifah, Martha Reeves and The Temptations. With her performance, Latifah was the first rapper to perform at the Super Bowl.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nPackers wide receiver Antonio Freeman returned the opening kickoff 19 yards to the Green Bay 24-yard line. On 3rd-and-9, quarterback Brett Favre completed a 13-yard pass to Freeman. Then running back Dorsey Levens rushed for 27 yards on three consecutive plays, advancing the ball to the Denver 35-yard line. Favre capped the drive with two completions to Freeman, a 13-yard gain followed by a 22-yard touchdown strike, giving the Packers a 7\u20130 lead. The touchdown-scoring drive on the opening kickoff was only the third in Super Bowl history, joining the Miami Dolphins in Super Bowl VIII and the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIX).\nThe Broncos responded with a 10-play, 58-yard drive, ignited by running back Vaughn Hebron returning the kickoff 32 yards to the Denver 42-yard line. Denver then drove to the Green Bay 46-yard line. On 3rd-and-10, a holding penalty on Packers cornerback Doug Evans nullified quarterback John Elway's incomplete pass to wide receiver Willie Green and gave the Broncos a new set of downs down. On the next play, running back Terrell Davis reeled off his longest run of the game, a 27-yard gain to the Green Bay 14. After a 2-yard run by Davis, Elway scrambled 10 yards to set up 1st-and-goal at the 2-yard line. Two plays later Davis scored a 1-yard touchdown run to tie the game.\nOn the second play of the Packers' next possession, Broncos safety Tyrone Braxton intercepted a pass from Favre at the Green Bay 45-yard line. Davis ran for 16 yards on Denver's first play, bringing the ball to the 29. A combination of short passing and 10 yards gained on three more rushes by Davis (who was briefly taken out of the game during the drive because the onset of a migraine headache caused by an unintentional trip by defensive tackle Santana Dotson, which had severely impaired his vision) brought the ball to the Green Bay 1 yard line as the 1st quarter expired.\nSecond quarter.\nDenver head coach Mike Shanahan schemed a play-action rush for the first play of the second quarter. Believing that the Packers would not be fooled by a fake third-down handoff on the one yard line without Davis on the field, he reinserted the back. The misdirection worked, and Elway drove in for a touchdown, giving the Broncos a 14\u20137 lead. Davis later said his vision was so impaired that he was afraid Elway would call an audible at the line and try to hand him the ball. Instead, he perfectly executed the play, drawing the Green Bay defense into the middle of the line and allowing Elway to rush into the end zone on the right completely untouched. By halftime, Davis had taken migraine medication, and his vision had returned to normal, allowing him to play the rest of the game.\nOn the Packers' ensuing possession, Broncos safety Steve Atwater strip-sacked Favre, and defensive end Neil Smith recovered the fumble on the Green Bay 33-yard line. Despite being unable to get a first down, Denver nonetheless capitalized on the turnover when kicker Jason Elam kicked a 51-yard field goal, then the second-longest in Super Bowl history, to increase their lead to 17\u20137. Both teams exchanged punts on their next possessions, and Denver safety Dedrick Dodge downed punter Tom Rouen's 47-yard kick at Green Bay's 5-yard line with 7:38 left in the half. But the Packers stormed down the field on their ensuing drive, marching 95 yards in 17 plays, which featured two completions from Favre to tight end Mark Chmura for 32 yards (the first one being a 21-yard catch on 3rd-and-10 from his own 5-yard line), as well as three runs by Levens for 26 yards. The drive ended with Favre's 6-yard touchdown pass to Chmura with just 12 seconds left in the half, cutting Green Bay's deficit to 17\u201314.\nThird quarter.\nOn the first play after the second half kickoff, Davis fumbled the ball while surrounded by several defenders; Packers cornerback Tyrone Williams recovered, giving Green Bay excellent field position on the Denver 26-yard line. The Broncos' defense forced a three-and-out, but defensive end Alfred Williams was flagged for jumping offsides on 4th-and-4, negating a 39-yard field goal by Packers kicker Ryan Longwell and giving the Packers a new set of downs at the Broncos' 15-yard line. Back-to-back false starts by offensive linemen Adam Timmerman and Frank Winters pushed the Packers back to the 25-yard line. On third down and twenty Levens' 16-yard run run came up short of a first down; Longwell then kicked a 27-yard field goal, tying the game at 17\u201317.\nDenver's offense stalled once more on their next possession, resulting in a punt, but their defense forced Green Bay into a third straight three-and-out. On the ensuing punt Broncos defensive back Tony Veland was called for an offsides penalty, giving the Packers another new set of downs near midfield. A fourth straight three-and-out forced another Green Bay punt.\nThe Broncos got a break during the ensuing punt when cornerback Darrien Gordon mishandled the ball and recovered it at his own 1-yard line. However, Green Bay was forced to replay the punt when long snapper Rob Davis was flagged for going downfield as an ineligible player, but punter Craig Hentrich's 51-yard kick pinned Denver back at their own 8-yard line. But the Green Bay defense could not stop Denver as they marched on a 13-play, 92-yard drive. Aided by a 36-yard reception by wide receiver Ed McCaffrey (the longest play of the game), the Broncos advanced to the Green Bay 12-yard line. On 3rd-and-6 from the 12-yard line, Elway scrambled for an 8-yard run and dove for the first down, a play in which he was hit so hard by three Packers defenders that he spun sideways in mid-air. This run was later referred to as \"The Helicopter,\" and what many consider as Elway's career-defining moment and the defining moment of the game. Two plays later, Davis scored on another 1-yard touchdown run, giving the Broncos a 24\u201317 lead.\nOn the ensuing kickoff, Denver fullback Detron Smith ran full speed into the wedge of the Green Bay blockers, forcing Freeman outside, to his left. Freeman fumbled while being tackled by Veland, and cornerback Tim McKyer recovered the ball for the Broncos at the Green Bay 22. In the quarter's closing seconds, Denver immediately tried to capitalize on the turnover by trying a quick-strike touchdown pass, intended for wide receiver Rod Smith as he ran a post pattern following a fake handoff and a roll out by Elway, but Packers safety Eugene Robinson intercepted Elway's pass in the end zone and returned it to the 15-yard line. On the last play of the quarter after the turnover, Favre completed a 27-yard pass to Freeman to reach the Green Bay 42.\nFourth quarter.\nFreeman's reception was the start of a four-play, 85-yard drive on four straight Green Bay pass completions. After a 25-yard pass interference penalty on Gordon, Favre completed back-to-back passes to Freeman; the first for 17 yards, and the second for a 13-yard touchdown. On the scoring play, Freeman and wide receiver Robert Brooks ran a \"criss-cross\" pattern, with Freeman on the inside running towards the sidelines. Gordon hesitated as to which receiver to cover, and Favre hit Freeman for the score, tying the game once again, at 24\u201324.\nAfter the ensuing kickoff, the Packers forced Denver's offense to punt from its 29 yard-line. With a short punt of only 33 yards, the Packers took possession with good field position, having 1st-and-10 at their own 48-yard line. On 3rd-and-8 from the Denver 39, Favre dropped back to pass and Denver's defense blitzed, leaving Brooks to face one-on-one coverage deep. Favre attempted the pass to a seemingly wide-open Brooks at the Denver 16-yard line, but Atwater knocked the pass away at the last second, leaving the Packers just outside of field goal range and forcing another punt.\nThe Broncos took over at their own 18 yard line and drove to the Packers 39 yard line. Despite being tired and having had to play from behind almost the entire game, the Packers' defense was still able to stop the Broncos' just outside of field goal range on the ensuing possession, forcing a punt and giving Green Bay a first down at their own 10-yard line with 5:25 remaining in the game. The Broncos' defense responded with its fifth three-and-out of the second half.\nHentrich then punted the ball 39 yards to the Packers' 49-yard line, giving Denver a chance for a potential game-winning drive with only 3:27 left in the game. On the first play of the ensuing drive, Packers defensive tackle Darius Holland committed a 15-yard face-mask penalty while tackling Davis on a 2-yard run, moving the ball to the 32-yard line. Two plays later, Elway completed a 23-yard pass to fullback Howard Griffith, aided by a powerful block by McCaffrey. A holding penalty on tight end Shannon Sharpe nullified an 8-yard touchdown run by Davis and pushed the Broncos back to the 18-yard line. Davis then rushed 17 yards to the 1-yard line, and the Broncos a time-out, their first. This left the Broncos facing 2nd-and-goal with 1:47 left in the game. Both teams had two time-outs remaining.\nPackers coach Mike Holmgren told his team to let the Broncos score to maximize the time the Packers would have on the clock for a potential game-tying drive. He admitted later that he had thought that it was 1st-and-goal rather than 2nd-and-goal, a crucial distinction in clock-management decision-making on the play. Davis then scored his third rushing touchdown, with 1:45 remaining in regulation, putting Denver ahead 31\u201324.\nThe Packers still had one more chance to either tie the game before the end of regulation and send the contest into overtime, or go for a two-point conversion for the win. Shanahan famously instructed his defensive coordinators to keep playing the same blitzing defense they had done throughout the game, instead of falling into a prevent defense. Freeman returned the Broncos' kickoff 22 yards to the 30-yard line. A 22-yard screen pass to Levens immediately advanced the ball to the Denver 48-yard line, with 1:30 remaining. Green Bay then hurried to the line of scrimmage and ran another screen to Levens, for no gain. The 19 seconds burned off the game clock caused the Packers to take their second time-out.\nOn the next play, Favre completed a 13-yard pass to Levens, who ran out of bounds at the Broncos' 35-yard line, stopping the clock. With 1:04 left, the Packers had a first down with one time-out still remaining.\nOn first down, Favre completed a 4-yard pass to Levens, who was stopped in bounds by linebacker John Mobley. Even with the Packers in hurry-up mode the short gain took 22 seconds off the clock before the next snap. With 42 seconds remaining Favre's pass to Freeman hit him in both hands and the chest at the Denver 15, but Broncos cornerback Darian Gordon stripped the ball loose. The incomplete pass stopped the clock, leaving the Packers with 3rd-and-6 and 37 seconds remaining. On third down Favre passed to Brooks, covered by cornerback Randy Hilliard, but a hard hit to both by Atwater broke it up (and sent all three players out of the game). Although play had been stopped for an injury time out, NFL rules governing the final two minutes of a game charged both teams with a time-out, erasing Green Bay's last. With 32 seconds remaining and Green Bay facing 4th-and-6 on the Denver 31-yard line, Favre threw a short pass over the middle intended to tight end Mark Chmura. Mobley broke it up, giving the ball back to the Broncos and cementing their first-ever Super Bowl victory.\nPost-game.\nDuring the post-game victory celebration, Broncos owner Pat Bowlen held the Vince Lombardi Trophy aloft and said, \"this one's for John,\" saluting Elway's successful completion of his long quest for a Super Bowl victory. Eighteen years later, after the Broncos won Super Bowl 50, Elway, now the general manager for the team, would salute Bowlen, who had been diagnosed the year before with Alzheimer's disease, in the same fashion by raising the trophy and exclaiming \"this one's for Pat.\"\nDenver's offensive performance had been so consistent that except for two penalties and Elway's kneel-downs to end each half, the Broncos did not lose yardage on any play from scrimmage. Green Bay's Reggie White, Gilbert Brown, LeRoy Butler and others were unable to register a sack against the Broncos' front line. Elway completed 12 out of 22 passes for 123 yards, with 1 interception. He became the sixth player to score touchdowns in three different Super Bowls, joining Lynn Swann, Franco Harris, Thurman Thomas, Jerry Rice, and Emmitt Smith. He was also the Broncos' second-leading rusher behind Terrell Davis, with 17 yards and a touchdown on 5 carries. Davis became the only player to rush for three touchdowns in a Super Bowl, and the only non-San Francisco 49er to score three in a Super Bowl - joining Roger Craig, Jerry Rice (twice), and Ricky Watters in the feat. Only New England running back James White has matched this achievement since, in Super Bowl LI. Davis's three touchdowns in this Super Bowl gave him a total of 48 points (8 touchdowns) during the postseason, an NFL record.\nDenver's defense limited Green Bay to only 10 points in the second half, despite Green Bay having nine possessions during it. The Packers' first four possessions of the second half were all 3-and-out's. Their fifth possession of the second half resulted in a lost fumble by their kick return team, the sixth possession resulted in an 85-yard drive and a touchdown, the seventh ended in four plays and a punt, the eighth resulted in another 3-and-out, and the ninth and final possession ended on a fourth down stop.\nBoth Freeman and Favre had outstanding performances for the second Super Bowl game in a row. Favre completed 25 out of 42 passes for 256 yards and 3 touchdowns, with 1 interception. Freeman caught 9 passes for 126 yards and 2 touchdowns, and also gained another 104 yards on 6 kickoff returns, giving him 230 total yards, the third highest total in Super Bowl history. Freeman also tied himself for second all-time in touchdown catches in Super Bowls with three, joining Lynn Swann, John Stallworth, and Cliff Branch, trailing only Rice's eight. He also became just the third player to have at least 100 yards receiving in back-to-back Super Bowls, joining Rice and Stallworth. Levens was Green Bay's leading rusher with 90 yards, and was their second-leading receiver with 56 yards on 6 receptions.\nDenver, which had been 0-4 in Super Bowls, became the first team with even a previous 0\u20132 record to win a Championship. The Broncos' victory snapped the NFC's 13-game winning streak in the Super Bowl, which traced back to the Los Angeles Raiders victory over the Washington Redskins in Super Bowl XVIII. Denver also became the first team to score on four 1-yard touchdown runs in a Super Bowl. The Packers became the third defending Super Bowl champion to lose, joining the Dallas Cowboys (1977\u201378: won Super Bowl XII, lost Super Bowl XIII) and the Washington Redskins (1982\u201383: won Super Bowl XVII, lost Super Bowl XVIII), and would be later joined by the Seattle Seahawks (2013\u201314: won Super Bowl XLVIII, lost Super Bowl XLIX), the New England Patriots (2016\u201317: won Super Bowl LI, lost Super Bowl LII) and the Kansas City Chiefs (twice, 2019-20: won Super Bowl LIV, lost Super Bowl LV, and 2023-24: won Super Bowl LVIII, lost Super Bowl LIX).\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXXII: Denver Broncos 31, Green Bay Packers 24\n\"at Qualcomm Stadium, San Diego, California\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nOne new record was set and several were tied in Super Bowl XXXII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the ProFootball reference.com game summary. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nNOTE: the titles of field judge and back judge were swapped before the next season.\nJohn Robison was originally assigned as the field judge, but was pulled by Vice President of Officiating Jerry Seeman after he missed a call in the Vikings-Giants wild card game. Don Dorkowski, the field judge for the NFC championship game, was named as Robison's replacement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29158", "revid": "36941121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29158", "title": "Super Bowl XXXIII", "text": "1999 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXXIII was an American football game played between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion and defending Super Bowl XXXII champion Denver Broncos and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion Atlanta Falcons to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1998 season. The Broncos defeated the Falcons by the score of 34\u201319, winning their second consecutive Super Bowl. The game was played on January 31, 1999, at Pro Player Stadium in Miami, Florida (now part of the suburb of Miami Gardens, which became a separate city in 2003).\nThe defending Super Bowl champion Broncos entered the game with an AFC-best 14\u20132 regular season record. The Falcons, under former Broncos head coach Dan Reeves, were making their first Super Bowl appearance after also posting a 14\u20132 regular season record.\nAided by quarterback John Elway's 80-yard touchdown pass to receiver Rod Smith, the Broncos scored 17 consecutive points to build a 17\u20133 lead in the second quarter from which the Falcons could not recover. In the final game of his career before his announced retirement on May 2, 1999, Elway completed 18 of 29 passes for 336 yards with one touchdown and one interception, and also scored a 3-yard rushing touchdown. At 38 years old, Elway became the oldest player to be named Super Bowl MVP, a record that stood until Tom Brady surpassed it in 2017 at the age of 39, coincidentally also against the Falcons.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners originally voted to award Super Bowl XXXIII to Candlestick Park in San Francisco during the owners meeting in Rosemont, Illinois on November 2, 1994. Two cities were in consideration for the game, San Francisco and Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium). Though Miami's bid was considered superior, San Francisco was the favorite since the Bay Area had not hosted the game since 1985. The host committee was also promising $26 million in stadium renovations. Before long, however, it became unclear if the proposed stadium renovations would happen. The game was formally withdrawn from San Francisco in March 1996. Al Davis made a pitch to keep the game in the Bay Area by moving it over to Oakland Coliseum, but the idea failed to gain any support.\nIn the fall of 1996, the NFL reopened the bidding from scratch. The NFL owners scheduled a vote during the October 31, 1996, meeting in New Orleans, which was to award two Super Bowls, XXXIII and XXXIV. A total of five cities submitted bids: Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium), Atlanta (Georgia Dome), Tampa (Raymond James Stadium), Phoenix/Tempe (Sun Devil Stadium), and Los Angeles (Coliseum). Miami, a previous finalist for the game, was an early favorite. Tampa also became a favorite after voters passed a ballot measure in September 1996 to fund the construction of a new stadium. NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue threw his support behind Tampa based on the new stadium plans. The Los Angeles host committee originally was going to partner with Pasadena (Rose Bowl), but switched their plans to the Coliseum after a renovation plan was announced. However, the Los Angeles bid was dismissed when their delegation failed to convince the owners that planned stadium renovations would be completed in time.\nOwners initially planned on selecting only two hosts (XXXIII and XXXIV), but decided to name three after strong showings by the respective delegations. Miami, Atlanta, and Tampa were selected to host XXXIII, XXXIV, and XXXV, respectively. This was the eighth time that the South Florida area hosted the game, and the third at Joe Robbie Stadium.\nDenver Broncos.\nFollowing the Broncos' victory during Super Bowl XXXII the previous season, many wondered if 15-year veteran quarterback John Elway would retire after finally winning a Super Bowl. But Elway decided to stay with the Broncos and see if he could lead them to a second consecutive championship. Under the leadership of head coach Mike Shanahan, the Broncos stormed to the top of the AFC with a 14\u20132 regular record in 1998, winning their first 13 games before suffering their first loss to the New York Giants and would lose again the very next week against the Miami Dolphins on Monday night, only to win a meaningless season finale against the Seattle Seahawks. The losses to the Giants and Dolphins didn't hurt the Broncos' playoff chances as they already had their division (and home-field advantage) locked up.\nThe Broncos' offense, under the leadership of Elway and running back Terrell Davis, had another outstanding regular season, ranking second in the NFL with 501 points and third in total offense with 6,276 yards. Davis had one of the greatest seasons of any running back in NFL history, rushing for 2,008 yards, catching 25 passes for 217 yards, and scoring 23 touchdowns to earn him both the NFL Most Valuable Player Award and the NFL Offensive Player of the Year Award. Nevertheless, Davis' rushing numbers did not reduce Elway's passing production. The 38-year-old quarterback made the Pro Bowl for the 3rd year in a row and the 9th time in his career, throwing for 2,806 yards and 22 touchdowns, with only 10 interceptions. A big reason for Elway's passing success was that he had two Pro Bowl wide receivers and a Pro Bowl tight end to throw to. Wide receivers Ed McCaffrey (64 receptions, 1,053 yards and 10 touchdowns) and Rod Smith (86 receptions, 1,222 yards, 6 touchdowns, and 66 rushing yards) provided the team with outstanding deep threats, while tight end Shannon Sharpe (64 receptions, 786 yards and 10 touchdowns) provided a sure-handed target over the middle. In week 3 against the Oakland Raiders, Elway pulled his hamstring, forcing the Broncos to go with veteran journeyman Bubby Brister. Despite losing Elway to injury the Broncos didn't lose a beat, as Brister won all four games that he started and posted a higher quarterback rating than Elway for the season. The Broncos also had three Pro Bowlers anchoring their offensive line: center Tom Nalen, guard Mark Schlereth, and tackle Tony Jones. On special teams, running back Vaughn Hebron returned 46 kickoffs for 1,216 yards and a touchdown, giving him a 26.4 yards per return average.\nThe Broncos' defense typically did not get as much attention as their offense, but it was still effective, giving up 308 points (8th fewest in the NFL). Up front, the line was anchored by defensive tackles Maa Tanuvasa and Trevor Pryce, who each recorded 8.5 sacks. Behind them, Pro Bowl linebacker Bill Romanowski recorded 55 tackles, 7.5 sacks, 3 fumble recoveries, and 2 interceptions. The secondary was led by Pro Bowler Steve Atwater and Darrien Gordon, who led the team with 4 interceptions, which he returned for 125 yards and a touchdown. Gordon was also a great punt returner, returning 34 punts for 379 yards.\nAtlanta Falcons.\nThe Falcons advanced to their first Super Bowl in franchise history. Like the Broncos, they finished the 1998 regular season with a 14\u20132 record, including wins in each of their last nine games. Unlike the Broncos, the Falcons' success in 1998 was very surprising to many because they had a 7\u20139 record in the previous season and a 3\u201313 record the year before that. In fact, the franchise recorded just four non-losing seasons in the nineteen years prior to 1998, and just two in its previous fifteen.\nThe Falcons' fortunes began to improve after Dan Reeves became their head coach in 1997. During Reeves' first season with Atlanta, they finished the season 6\u20132, after starting out 1\u20137, to compile a 7\u20139 record overall. Reeves was the Broncos' head coach from 1981 to 1992, leading the Elway-led Broncos to Super Bowls XXI, XXII, and XXIV. However Elway and the Broncos lost all three, including a 55\u201310 loss to the San Francisco 49ers in Super Bowl XXIV. Reeves was in constant conflict with his coaching staff and some of his players for the three ensuing seasons. The Broncos fired Reeves after the 1992 season and Reeves spent four seasons as the head coach of the New York Giants before joining the Falcons.\nPro Bowl quarterback Chris Chandler led the Falcons' offense extremely well, throwing for 3,154 yards and 25 touchdowns with just 12 interceptions, while also rushing for 121 yards and 2 touchdowns. Backup quarterback Steve DeBerg (who was Reeves' quarterbacks coach with the Giants in 1995 and 1996) had come out of retirement as a player after 5 years and played in place of an injured Chandler in the October 25 game against the New York Jets. Wide receivers Tony Martin and Terance Mathis provided the team with a superb deep threat, each recording over 60 receptions and 1,100 receiving yards, while also combining for 17 touchdowns. Tight end O.J. Santiago added 27 receptions for 428 yards and 5 scores. However, the biggest threat on offense was Pro Bowl running back Jamal Anderson, who rushed for 1,846 yards, caught 27 passes for 319 yards, and scored 16 total touchdowns. Rookie wide receiver Tim Dwight gave the team a great special teams attack, gaining a total of 1,236 yards and scoring a touchdown on kickoff and punt returns.\nThe Falcons' defense ranked second in the league for fewest rushing yards allowed (1,203), eighth for fewest total yards allowed (5,009), and fourth for fewest points allowed. Defensive linemen Lester Archambeau (10 sacks, 2 fumble recoveries, 5 forced fumbles), Chuck Smith (8.5 sacks, 4 fumble recoveries, 3 forced fumbles) and Shane Dronett (6.5 sacks, 4 force fumbles) excelled at pressuring quarterbacks and stopping the run. Behind them, the Falcons had two outstanding linebackers, Pro Bowler Jessie Tuggle (65 tackles, 3 sacks, 1 fumble recovery) and Cornelius Bennett (69 tackles, 1 sack, 2 fumble recoveries). Bennett played with the Buffalo Bills when they suffered their four consecutive defeats in Super Bowls XXV, XXVI, XXVII, and XXVIII; and thus was determined to finally get a championship ring that had eluded him in the past. The Falcons' secondary was led by Pro Bowl cornerback Ray Buchanan, who recorded seven interceptions and 102 return yards, and Pro Bowl safety Eugene Robinson (four interceptions), who was with the Green Bay Packers when they appeared in Super Bowls XXXI and XXXII.\nThe season was punctuated by Reeves receiving emergency coronary bypass surgery after Week 14. Doctors said he could have been \"within hours of a catastrophic heart attack.\" Although asked to rest for at least six weeks, Reeves returned to the sidelines for Week 17. Then-defensive coordinator Rich Brooks substituted for Reeves as head coach in Weeks 15 and 16, and won both games.\nThe Falcons did not return to the Super Bowl until 2016, when they lost 34\u201328 in overtime to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl LI.\nPlayoffs.\nThe Broncos avenged their Monday night loss to the Miami Dolphins, a team which had the number one defense in the league that year, 38\u20133 in the divisional round and then beat the New York Jets, who had the second best defense in the NFL that year, 23\u201310 in the AFC Championship game. After the Jets scored on a John Hall field goal to take a 3-0 lead at halftime, and increasing it on a Curtis Martin touchdown run to make it 10-0 early in the 3rd quarter, the Broncos took control of the rest of the game scoring 23 unanswered points. Meanwhile, the Falcons were victorious against the San Francisco 49ers, 20\u201318 and then upset the heavily favored 15\u20131 Minnesota Vikings on the road, 30\u201327 in overtime.\nThis was the third Super Bowl in history that featured two teams with fewer than three losses, and second since the advent of the 16-game schedule. Both teams came into the game with 16\u20132 records after the playoffs. The first was Super Bowl XII, featuring two 12\u20132 teams: the Dallas Cowboys and the Denver Broncos. The only Super Bowl featuring a better matchup record-wise was Super Bowl XIX, when the San Francisco 49ers had a 17\u20131 record and the Miami Dolphins had a 16\u20132 record.\nSuper Bowl pregame news.\nMuch of the pregame hype was centered around John Elway confronting his former coach Reeves. Broncos head coach Mike Shanahan was hurt and angered by Reeves' pregame assertion that Shanahan and Elway had conspired to have him fired during his stint with the Broncos. Media coverage also focused on whether or not Elway would retire after the season (which he eventually did).\nElway became the first quarterback to start five Super Bowls; he previously started Super Bowls XXI, XXII, XXIV, and XXXII. Broncos defensive lineman Mike Lodish was making his record sixth appearance in a Super Bowl. He played with the Buffalo Bills in all four of their Super Bowl losses (Super Bowl XXV through XXVIII) and with the Broncos' first Super Bowl win the year before.\nOn the night before the Super Bowl, Falcons safety Eugene Robinson was arrested for solicitation of prostitution. While driving alone in a rented car along a downtown Miami street, he approached a female undercover police officer posing as a prostitute and offered $40 for oral sex. Although he was released from jail and allowed to play the game, he was widely denounced by the press and fans for the incident. Ironically, on the morning of the day Robinson was arrested for the incident, he had received the Bart Starr Award for his \"high moral character.\"\nAs the designated home team in the annual rotation between AFC and NFC teams, the Falcons chose to wear their regular black home uniforms with silver pants, with the Broncos going for the road white uniforms and pants.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by Fox and featured the broadcast team of play-by-play announcer Pat Summerall and color commentator John Madden. James Brown hosted all the events with help from his then-fellow \"Fox NFL Sunday\" cast members Terry Bradshaw, Howie Long and Cris Collinsworth. The starting lineups were shown using a virtual television. To television viewers, it appeared as if the end zone opened up and a giant television came up out of the ground. The virtual television displayed video announcing the starting lineups. The virtual television effect was provided by PVI Virtual Media Services using their L-VIS virtual graphics system.\nFor Super Bowl lead-out programs, Fox first aired the pilot episode of \"Family Guy\", \"Death Has a Shadow\". \"Family Guy\" would become, at the time, only the fourth series to premiere after the Super Bowl and then have a very successful, lengthy run afterwards. The three other successful series that premiered after the Super Bowl were \"The A-Team\" after Super Bowl XVII, \"The Wonder Years\" after Super Bowl XXII, and \"\" after Super Bowl XXVII. This was followed by \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Sunday, Cruddy Sunday\". Actress Calista Flockhart (then the star of Fox's \"Ally McBeal\") and boxer Evander Holyfield (the then-heavyweight champion), both die hard Falcons fans, were in attendance for the game.\nCounterprogramming.\nDuring halftime, USA Network aired a special edition of \"WWF Sunday Night Heat\" called \"Halftime Heat\" featuring a match between The Rock and Mankind for the WWF Championship in an Empty Arena Match that took place in Arizona and had been taped five days before. Mankind won the title, just seven days after losing it to The Rock at the Royal Rumble.\nFoxSports.com also ran an online-only Internet halftime show, Webcast live from South Beach Miami, and hosted by then-Fox Sports Net anchorman Keith Olbermann. This halftime show was sponsored by Victoria's Secret and available exclusively in Windows Media Player. Viewer questions were solicited via the FoxSports.com website.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show, narrated by actress Tori Spelling, depicted the adventure of a Caribbean cruise from its festive departure to its journey to exotic destinations. The show included a performance by KISS, along with their trademark elaborate costumes and theatrical pyrotechnics.\nCher later sang the U.S. national anthem.\nTo honor the 40th anniversary of the 1958 NFL Championship, also known as \"The Greatest Game Ever Played\", the following participants of that game appeared during the coin toss ceremony: Raymond Berry, Lenny Moore, Jim Parker, Art Donovan, Gino Marchetti, Frank Gifford, Roosevelt Brown, Don Maynard, Sam Huff, and Tom Landry, the defensive coordinator of the New York Giants. Weeb Ewbank, head coach of the Baltimore Colts in that game, was also scheduled to appear, but died November 17, 1998.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was titled \"A Celebration of Soul, Salsa and Swing\" and featured Big Bad Voodoo Daddy, Stevie Wonder, and Gloria Estefan.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nFalcons wide receiver Tim Dwight returned the opening kickoff 31 yards to the Falcons' 37-yard line. Aided by a 25-yard pass interference penalty against Broncos safety Steve Atwater (which was actually meant to be called against cornerback Ray Crockett) and four runs by running back Jamal Anderson for 24 total yards, the Falcons reached the Broncos' 8-yard line. However, linebacker Bill Romanowski sacked quarterback Chris Chandler for a 7-yard loss on third down, forcing the Falcons to settle for kicker Morten Andersen's 32-yard field goal to give them an early 3\u20130 lead.\nThe Broncos then responded with a 10-play, 80-yard scoring drive. Quarterback John Elway's 41-yard completion to wide receiver Rod Smith and two receptions by tight end Shannon Sharpe for a total of 26 yards set up fullback Howard Griffith's 1-yard touchdown run, giving the Broncos a 7\u20133 lead. However, Sharpe injured his knee just before Griffith's touchdown after making his second catch before being upended by cornerback Ray Buchanan. Sharpe did play on the Broncos' next drive, but was taken out of the game after that. After the Broncos forced the Falcons to punt on their next possession, Elway threw a pass that was deflected by Sharpe and intercepted by defensive back Ronnie Bradford, who returned it to the Broncos' 35-yard line.\nSecond quarter.\nHowever, the Falcons failed to capitalize on the turnover, as the Broncos' defense stood their ground on the first two plays of the second quarter. First, they tackled Anderson for no gain on 3rd-and-1, then stopped him for a 2-yard loss on fourth down, turning the ball over on downs. Broncos running back Terrell Davis then rushed four times for 28 yards and wide receiver Rod Smith caught an 18-yard pass as the Broncos drove 63 yards in 11 plays to score on kicker Jason Elam's 26-yard field goal, increasing their lead to 10\u20133.\nThe Falcons then advanced to the Broncos' 8-yard line on their next drive, aided by back-to-back completions from Chandler to wide receiver Terance Mathis for 46 yards, but failed to score again when Andersen's 26-yard field goal attempt sailed wide right. Immediately after the Broncos got the ball back, Smith broke ahead of Falcons safety Eugene Robinson, caught a pass from Elway, and took off for an 80-yard touchdown reception, giving the Broncos a 17\u20133 lead (the fourth 80+ yard touchdown pass play in Super Bowl history). At the time of the game, the television audience did not see most of that play, as Fox was still airing a commercial for \"The Matrix\". Aided by Dwight's 42-yard kickoff return and a 23-yard reception by wide receiver Tony Martin, the Falcons responded by driving to the Broncos' 11-yard line and scoring on Andersen's 28-yard field goal to cut their deficit to 17\u20136 going into halftime.\nThird quarter.\nThe Broncos opened the second half by driving 74 yards to the Falcons' 20-yard line, aided by Elway's two completions to wide receiver Ed McCaffrey for 32 yards, but ended up scoring no points after Elam's 38-yard field goal attempt sailed wide right. Chandler responded on the next two plays with a 19-yard completion to Martin and a 12-yard scramble to advance the ball to the Broncos' 41-yard line. However, the Broncos' defense continued to dominate the Falcons' offense, as linebacker John Mobley sacked Chandler for a 6-yard loss, then cornerback Darrius Johnson intercepted a pass intended for Mathis and returned it 28 yards to the Falcons' 42-yard line. The Broncos then drove to the 29-yard line, but Elam missed another field goal attempt wide left, this time from 48 yards.\nThe Falcons then drove to the Broncos' 21-yard line on Anderson's two runs for 28 yards and Mathis' 13-yard reception, giving them a chance to cut their deficit to one score. On the next play, however, Chandler threw a pass that was deflected high in the air by nose tackle Keith Traylor and intercepted by cornerback Darrien Gordon, who returned it 58 yards to the Falcons' 24-yard line before being tackled by Chandler. Three plays later, on 3rd-and-6, Elway's 15-yard completion to McCaffrey set up 1st-and-goal for the Broncos at the Falcons' 5-yard line.\nFourth quarter.\nOn the first play of the final quarter, Griffith scored his second touchdown of the game on a 1-yard run to increase Denver's lead to 24\u20136.\nThe Falcons reached the Broncos' 26-yard line on their ensuing drive, aided by a 15-yard run by Anderson, and Chandler's two passes to tight end O. J. Santiago and Martin for 13 and 16 yards, respectively, but Gordon intercepted another pass at his own 2-yard line and returned this one 50 yards to the Falcons' 48-yard line. On the next play, Elway completed a short pass to Davis, who turned it into a 39-yard gain. Two plays later, Elway finished the drive himself with a 3-yard touchdown run, giving the Broncos a 31\u20136 lead and essentially putting the game away. Elway, who previously ran for touchdowns in Super Bowls XXI, XXIV, and XXXII, became the second player after Buffalo Bills running back Thurman Thomas to score a touchdown in four different Super Bowls.\nThe Falcons finally scored their first touchdown of the game when Dwight returned the ensuing kickoff 94 yards, cutting their deficit to 31\u201313, but tight end Byron Chamberlain recovered the ensuing onside kick attempt for the Broncos. Three plays later, a 25-yard completion from Elway to McCaffrey set up Elam's 37-yard field goal, increasing the Broncos' lead to 34\u201313 with just over 7 minutes left in the game.\nThe Falcons finally put together their best scoring drive of the game, advancing the ball 76 yards in 16 plays. The drive featured a 17-yard reception by Martin, two receptions by wide receiver Ronnie Harris for 21 yards, and four receptions by Mathis for 30 yards, the last of which was for a 3-yard touchdown, cutting the Falcons' deficit to 34\u201319 (Chandler's pass to Martin on the two-point conversion attempt was incomplete), but by then there was only 2:04 left in the game. Chamberlain again recovered the ensuing onside kick, but the Falcons got the ball back on their own 30-yard line with 1:34 left after forcing a turnover on downs. However, safety George Coghill stripped the ball from Anderson at the Falcons' 33-yard line, and safety Tyrone Braxton recovered it, allowing the Broncos to run out the clock and win their second consecutive Super Bowl title. The Broncos' 17 and the Falcons' 13 combined for a Super Bowl record 30 aggregate fourth-quarter points.\nThe Falcons' offense gained a total of 337 yards, were not penalized once, and drove inside the Broncos' 30-yard line seven times. Nevertheless, the Falcons' offense scored only 13 points and committed four turnovers. Meanwhile, the Broncos gained a total of 457 yards and scored 34 points.\nFor the Broncos, Davis rushed for 102 yards and caught 2 passes for 50 yards. Davis's 102 rushing yards in the Super Bowl gave him over 100 rushing yards for the seventh consecutive postseason game (and he was the third player to run for 100 yards in back-to-back Super Bowls, the others being Larry Csonka in Super Bowls VII and VIII, and Emmitt Smith in Super Bowls XXVII and XXVIII). Davis became just the second player to be on a Super Bowl-winning team after being named the NFL Most Valuable Player and leading the league in rushing. Emmitt Smith was the first one, but also was named Super Bowl MVP for Super Bowl XXVIII during that year. Marcus Allen is the only other player to win all three of these honors during his career. Allen won the 1985 NFL MVP Award and rushing title while being named Super Bowl XVIII MVP at the conclusion of the 1983 season. Smith caught 5 passes for 152 yards and a touchdown, an average of 30.4 yards per catch. Gordon recorded 2 interceptions and returned them for a Super Bowl record 108 yards.\nFor the Falcons, Jamal Anderson rushed for 96 yards and caught 3 passes for 16 yards. Dwight returned 5 kickoffs for 210 yards, the second most in Super Bowl history, and the highest Super Bowl career yards per return average (42.0). Mathis led the Falcons with 7 receptions for 85 yards. Chandler finished the game with 19 out of 35 completions for 219 yards and a touchdown but was intercepted 3 times.\nDan Reeves became the fourth head coach to lose four Super Bowls, joining Bud Grant, Don Shula, and Marv Levy. Reeves lost Super Bowls XXI, XXII, and XXIV while coaching the Broncos.\nAs previously mentioned, this was John Elway's final game as a player, and this was also the final game in a Broncos uniform for safety Steve Atwater who was traded in the offseason to the Jets.\nThis was the first time that an AFC team won a Super Bowl in Miami in 20 years. The last time was when the Pittsburgh Steelers won Super Bowl XIII in 1979. The win also made the Broncos the first AFC team to win back-to-back titles since the Steelers did in both the 1978 and 1979 seasons.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXXIII: Denver Broncos 34, Atlanta Falcons 19\n\"at Pro Player Stadium, Miami, Florida\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://, http://\nIndividual statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXXIII, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2017 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary.Some records have to meet NFL minimum number of attempts to be recognized. The minimums are shown (in parentheses).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nPrior to the start of the 1998 NFL season, the league swapped position titles with the field judge and back judge.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29159", "revid": "36941121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29159", "title": "Super Bowl XXXIV", "text": "2000 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXXIV was an American football game played at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta, Georgia, on January 30, 2000, to determine the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 1999 season. The National Football Conference (NFC) champion St. Louis Rams defeated the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Tennessee Titans 23\u201316 to claim their first Super Bowl win and first NFL championship since 1951. It is the most recent NFL championship in which both teams were seeking their first Super Bowl title.\nBoth teams were returning to the postseason after struggles and relocation. Led by The Greatest Show on Turf offense, the Rams entered their second Super Bowl appearance with an NFC-best 13\u20133 regular-season record. Their season marked the franchise's first playoff run since 1989 and first since moving from Los Angeles to St. Louis. The Titans also finished the regular season with a 13\u20133 record and advanced to their Super Bowl debut as a wild card. In their first season after retiring the franchise's Oilers name, the Titans were making their first playoff run since 1993 and first since moving from Houston to Tennessee.\nThe Rams scored three field goals by halftime and added a third-quarter touchdown to take a 16\u20130 lead. The Titans responded with 16 straight points to tie the game near the end of regulation, the first time a Super Bowl team had erased a deficit of more than 10 points. On their ensuing drive, the Rams regained the lead with wide receiver Isaac Bruce's 73-yard touchdown. Super Bowl XXXIV is best remembered for its final play, in which the Titans reached the Rams' 10-yard line with six seconds remaining, but linebacker Mike Jones tackled wide receiver Kevin Dyson one yard short of the goal line to prevent a touchdown that could have forced overtime or won the game for the Titans. The play became known as \"One Yard Short\" and \"The Tackle\". Rams quarterback Kurt Warner, the first undrafted quarterback to win a Super Bowl, was named Super Bowl MVP after setting Super Bowl records for passing yards (414) and pass attempts without an interception (45). Warner became the sixth player to win Super Bowl MVP and NFL MVP in a single season, a feat that would go unrepeated for 23 seasons.\nThe game has been called the \"Dot-com Super Bowl\" for the large amount of advertisements purchased by dot-com companies. Regarded as one of the greatest Super Bowls of all time, it was featured on \"NFL's Greatest Games\" as \"The Longest Yard\".\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners awarded Super Bowl XXXIV to Atlanta during their October 31, 1996, meeting in New Orleans. A total of five cities submitted bids: Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium), Atlanta (Georgia Dome), Tampa (Raymond James Stadium), Phoenix/Tempe (Sun Devil Stadium), and Los Angeles (Coliseum). The Los Angeles host committee originally was going to partner with Pasadena (Rose Bowl), but switched their plans to the Coliseum after a renovation plan was announced. However, the Los Angeles bid was dismissed when their delegation failed to convince the owners that planned stadium renovations would be completed in time.\nOwners initially planned on selecting only two hosts (XXXIII and XXXIV), but decided to name three after strong showings by the respective delegations. Miami, Atlanta, and Tampa were selected to host XXXIII, XXXIV, and XXXV, respectively. This was the second time that Atlanta hosted the game, the first being XXVIII. Atlanta garnered a sympathy vote as Falcons owner Rankin Smith was terminally ill. Due to logistical conflicts, Atlanta would not be able to host the Super Bowl again until 2005, and some NFL owners desired to award the game to the city before Smith died (which occurred nearly a year later in October 1997). Tampa Bay Buccaneers owner Malcolm Glazer protested afterwards, feeling that he had been promised the game after securing funding for a new stadium. As a result, XXXV was added to agenda, and Tampa was selected for that game.\nSt. Louis Rams.\nThe Rams entered 1999 having been among the league's stragglers for a decade. The reasons are many, including, some suggest, mismanagement by executive John Shaw. The franchise moved to a taxpayer-funded stadium in St. Louis, Missouri for the 1995 season but continued to struggle. In 1997, the team hired Dick Vermeil as their head coach, bringing him back to the NFL after 15 years of retirement. Vermeil had previously turned the Philadelphia Eagles from one of the worst teams in the league into a Super Bowl team in 1980, but his first two seasons with the Rams were hardly stellar, winning just five games in 1997 and four in 1998.\nLittle was expected of the Rams for 1999. Indeed, \"ESPN The Magazine\"'s 1999 NFL preview predicted the Rams would be the worst team in the NFL, worse even than the Cleveland Browns, who had returned as an expansion team that year. Trent Green, who had just been signed as the Rams starting quarterback, suffered a season-ending knee injury in the preseason, making undrafted quarterback Kurt Warner the team's new starter. Warner, who started the season as a backup to Green, had previously played for the Iowa Barnstormers of the Arena Football League and the Amsterdam Admirals of NFL Europe.\nThe Rams proceeded to shock the NFL with an NFC-best 13\u20133 regular season record and outscored their opponents 526\u2013242, the highest scoring margin (284) of any Super Bowl champion.\nThe Rams' high-powered offense, run by offensive coordinator Mike Martz, was nicknamed \"The Greatest Show on Turf\". In Warner's first NFL season in 1998, he played only one game and threw just 11 passes. But in 1999, he experienced one of the most spectacular seasons ever by a quarterback, recording a passer rating of 109.2, completing 65.1 percent of his passes for 4,353 yards, 41 touchdowns, and just 13 interceptions, and earning the NFL Most Valuable Player Award. Besides Warner, several other Rams compiled significant statistics. Halfback Marshall Faulk, in his first year with the Rams after spending five seasons with the Indianapolis Colts, had the best season of his career and won the NFL Offensive Player of the Year Award, while finishing second in MVP voting to Warner. He scored 12 touchdowns, rushed for 1,381 yards, and recorded a team-leading 87 receptions for 1,048 yards. In all, Faulk gained a record 2,429 total yards and became just the second running back in NFL history to gain over 1,000 yards rushing and receiving in the same season (Roger Craig was the first to do it, in 1985). Faulk held the NFL record for yards from scrimmage in a single season until Tennessee's Chris Johnson broke it in 2009. Faulk wasn't the only weapon at Warner's disposal in 1999. Veteran receiver Isaac Bruce was the top Rams receiver with 77 receptions for 1,165 yards and 12 touchdowns. while breakout rookie wide receiver Torry Holt recorded 52 receptions, 788 yards, and 6 touchdowns. Even the team's third wide receiver, Az-Zahir Hakim, was a big contributor by catching 36 passes for 677 yards and 8 touchdowns, while also returning punts for 461 yards and another touchdown. The Rams' offensive line was led by Pro Bowlers Orlando Pace and Adam Timmerman. Timmerman, acquired by the Rams in 1999, had previously won Super Bowl XXXI with the Green Bay Packers. On special teams, receiver Tony Horne returned 30 kickoffs for 892 yards and 2 touchdowns, giving him an NFL-leading 29.7 yards per return average. Overall, the Rams' offense led the league in total yards gained (6,639), scoring (526 points), and passing touchdowns (42).\nThe Rams' defense led the league in fewest rushing yards allowed (1,189) and fewest rushing touchdowns allowed (4), while giving up just 242 points. Overall, the defense ranked 4th in the league in fewest total yards (5,056). The line was anchored by Pro Bowl defensive end Kevin Carter and defensive end Grant Wistrom. Carter led the league with 17 sacks, while Wistrom recorded 8.5 sacks and 2 interceptions, returning both for touchdowns and a combined total of 131 yards. Behind them, the Rams had three linebackers: London Fletcher (66 tackles and 3 sacks), Mike Jones (4 interceptions for 96 return yards and 2 touchdowns, and 2 fumble recoveries for 51 return yards and a touchdown), and Todd Collins (72 tackles, a sack, and 2 interceptions for 16 yards). The secondary was led by Pro Bowler Todd Lyght (6 interceptions), Dexter McCleon (4 interceptions), and rookie Dr\u00e9 Bly (3 interceptions).\nThis was the Rams' first playoff appearance since 1989 and only the second Super Bowl appearance in team history.\nTennessee Titans.\nThe Titans advanced to their first Super Bowl in team history, after originating as a charter member of the American Football League. From 1960 to 1996, the team was owned by Houston, Texas businessman Bud Adams and known as the Houston Oilers. By 1995, however, Adams, like Rams owner Georgia Frontiere, was lured to move his team from Houston, in this case to a new stadium in Nashville, Tennessee. Since this new stadium was not ready until the 1999 season, Adams decided to move his team to Liberty Bowl Memorial Stadium in Memphis, Tennessee in 1997 after playing before small Houston crowds in 1996.\nThe renamed Tennessee Oilers also played before sparse Memphis crowds, and thus spent the 1998 season playing at Nashville's Vanderbilt Stadium. After the new Adelphia Coliseum (now known as Nissan Stadium) was completed in 1999, the team's name was changed to the Tennessee Titans. With the Titans' Super Bowl appearance, every former AFL team had now played in the Super Bowl, including the original eight AFL teams and two AFL expansion teams: the Miami Dolphins and the Cincinnati Bengals.\nThe 1999 Titans were led by quarterback Steve McNair and running back Eddie George. McNair had missed five games due to injuries during the season, but he was still able to put up solid numbers, throwing for 2,179 yards and 12 touchdowns with 8 interceptions. Despite his injury problems, McNair finished the season as the second-leading rusher on the team with 337 yards and 8 touchdowns. When McNair was out with injuries, the team was able to rely on backup quarterback Neil O'Donnell, who threw for 1,382 yards and 10 touchdowns, with only 5 interceptions. George also had an outstanding season, rushing for 1,304 yards, and catching 47 passes for 458 yards (his receptions, receiving yards, and receiving touchdowns were all career highs). In all, George scored a grand total of 13 touchdowns, and was selected to play in the Pro Bowl for the 3rd consecutive year.\nAnother contributor on the Titans' offense was fullback Lorenzo Neal, who frequently served as George's lead blocker and was widely considered one of the best blocking backs in the league. The team did not have any outstanding deep threats, but wide receiver Yancey Thigpen recorded 38 receptions for 648 yards, wide receiver Kevin Dyson had 54 receptions for 658 yards, and tight end Frank Wycheck caught 69 passes for 641 yards. Thigpen, however, would not play in the Super Bowl because of a right foot fracture he suffered in the AFC Championship Game. Up front, their line was anchored by Pro Bowl tackle Bruce Matthews. On special teams, Derrick Mason racked up 1,030 combined return yards and a touchdown.\nThe Titans' defense was also extremely effective. Pro Bowl defensive end Jevon Kearse anchored the line, recording 14.5 sacks to go along with 8 forced fumbles and was named the NFL's Defensive Rookie of the Year. The linebackers corps was led by Eddie Robinson, who recorded 64 tackles and 6 sacks, while also recovering and forcing 3 fumbles. Their secondary was led by cornerback Samari Rolle, who led the team with 4 interceptions, and veteran safety Marcus Robertson, who would miss the game with a broken leg.\nThe Titans finished the regular season with a 13\u20133 record (including a home win over the Rams), but finished second behind the 14\u20132 Jacksonville Jaguars (who had the best record in the NFL that season) in the AFC Central. The Jaguars' only two losses were to the Titans, but the Titans' three losses forced them to enter the playoffs as a wild-card team.\nPlayoffs.\nPlaying in his first ever NFL playoff game, Warner threw for 395 yards and 5 touchdowns, with 1 interception, as the Rams defeated the Minnesota Vikings, 49\u201337 in St. Louis, by scoring 35 unanswered points in the second half. Bruce caught 4 passes for 133 yards and a touchdown. Faulk gained 101 combined rushing/receiving yards and scored 2 touchdowns. Although Vikings quarterback Jeff George threw for 423 yards and 4 touchdowns, three of his scores occurred late in the 4th quarter, after the Rams had already put the game away.\nThe Rams then narrowly defeated the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 11\u20136 at home, in a hard-fought defensive struggle in the NFC Championship Game. The first half ended with the Rams leading 5\u20133 on a Jeff Wilkins field goal and after a bad snap by the Buccaneers went through their own end zone for a safety. The Buccaneers then scored a field goal in the 3rd quarter to take the lead. But Warner threw a 30-yard go-ahead touchdown pass to receiver Ricky Proehl with 4:44 left in the game.\nMeanwhile, the Titans started out their postseason by narrowly defeating the Buffalo Bills, 22\u201316 in Nashville, on a famous, trick kickoff return play that became known in NFL lore as the Music City Miracle. The Titans jumped to a 12\u20130 halftime lead with an Al Del Greco field goal, a safety by Kearse, and a McNair touchdown run. However, the Bills came back to take the lead, 13\u201312 with Antowain Smith's two touchdown runs in the second half (the two-point conversion after Smith's second touchdown failed). In the 4th quarter, the Titans regained the lead after Del Greco kicked his second field goal. With 16 seconds left in the game, Bills kicker Steve Christie made what seemed to be the game-winning 41-yard field goal to give his team the lead, 16\u201315. However, Neal received the ensuing kickoff and handed the ball off to Wycheck, who then lateraled the ball to Dyson on the other side of the field, who eventually ran 75 yards to the end zone for the game-winning touchdown. The play was reviewed to determine whether Wycheck had lateraled the ball to Dyson or made an illegal forward pass. Referee Phil Luckett upheld the original call on the field of a touchdown, giving the Titans the win.\nThe Titans then defeated the Indianapolis Colts, 19\u201316 in Indianapolis. After both teams exchanged field goals in the first half, George scored on a 68-yard touchdown run to give his team a 13\u20139 lead. Del Greco then kicked two more field goals in the 4th quarter to put the game away. George finished the game with a franchise playoff record 162 rushing yards and a touchdown, while Del Greco made four field goals.\nThe Titans then eliminated the Jacksonville Jaguars, 33\u201314, in the AFC Championship Game at Jacksonville. The Jaguars finished the 1999 regular season with a league-best 14\u20132 record, and advanced to the AFC title game after crushing the Miami Dolphins 62\u20137 and limiting future Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Marino to just 11 of 25 completions for 95 yards and 1 touchdown, with 2 interceptions. However, the Titans' defense dominated the Jaguars in the AFC Championship Game, forcing 6 turnovers. The Jaguars led 14\u201310 at halftime, but the Titans then scored 23 unanswered points on two touchdown runs by McNair, a safety, and Derrick Mason's 80-yard kickoff return for a touchdown. Although McNair passed for only 112 yards and one touchdown with one interception, he rushed for 91 yards and 2 touchdowns on 9 carries. George rushed for 86 yards and caught 3 passes for 19 yards.\nPre-game notes.\nIn January 2000, two ice storms struck the Atlanta area within a week of each other. The second storm occurred during the week the Super Bowl was hosted. Despite the rare adverse weather conditions, city and state crews kept streets and sidewalks free of ice, and MARTA public transport kept running. The Atlanta region does not receive more ice storms than most other areas of the country, and Super Bowl XXXIV was played indoors and unaffected by the elements. But some residents believe the poor weather during Super Bowl week negatively impacted the city's chances of hosting another Super Bowl, including the bid it lost for Super Bowl XLIII. That bid included meteorological data showing the rarity of such storms in the area. They eventually got the bid to host Super Bowl LIII.\nNashville, home of the Titans, is also the midway point of the Atlanta-St. Louis highway corridor, which contains the entirety of Interstate 24, and uses Interstate 64 and Interstate 75 to complete the route.\nIt is the most recent Super Bowl in which neither team had already won a Super Bowl.\nThe Titans, as the designated home team, wore navy blue jerseys with white pants. The Rams wore white uniforms with yellow pants, which would be the final appearance for these uniforms before rebranding to a new Millennium Blue/New Century Gold combination the next season.\nBroadcasting.\nABC televised the game in the United States, with play-by-play announcer Al Michaels and color commentator Boomer Esiason. Chris Berman from Disney-owned corporate sibling ESPN hosted all the events. Berman was joined by fellow ESPN analyst Steve Young, while ESPN's Mike Tirico was on hand for the post-game presentation of the Vince Lombardi Trophy. Lesley Visser and Lynn Swann served as sideline reporters. Other contributors included Dan Fouts, Jimmy Roberts, Bob Griese and Brent Musburger (who introduced a special memorial tribute to Walter Payton, who had died from bile duct cancer the previous November).\nThis was Esiason's only Super Bowl as a color commentator on television. ABC Sports would fire him a little over a month later in early March, with the reason being for his dismissal was simply his poor chemistry and hatred of Michaels (Michaels himself also hated Esiason). Esiason would then serve as the lead color commentator for Westwood One radio, calling Super Bowls XXXV (the game played the following year) to LII.\nThis was the first Super Bowl to be aired in high definition and 5.1 Dolby Digital. ABC chose to use the 720p format.The game was later featured as one of the \"NFL's Greatest Games\" as The Longest Yard.\nThe game attracted an average of 88.5 million viewers, with an 43.3 rating and 63% share on ABC. Also, In Canada an estimated nation-wide viewership of 3.1 million watched the game. \nAdvertising.\nThis game is often referred to as the \"dot-com\" Super Bowl since it was held during the height of the dot-com bubble, and several Internet companies purchased television commercials. Among them, E-Trade's commercial featured a chimpanzee dancing in an E-Trade T-shirt and the text \"Well, we just wasted 2 million bucks\". Lifeminders.com ran a commercial of plain typewritten text beginning with the line \"This is the worst commercial on the Super Bowl. But it might be the best thing you see tonight.\" Pets.com famously paid millions for an advertisement featuring a sock puppet, though the company would collapse before the end of the year.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nThe pregame show featured a tribute to \"The Great American Music of the 20th Century\". Narrated by the Smothers Brothers, the show highlighted some of the unique American musical styles such as gospel, big band, classical, country and rock. Singers Tina Turner and Travis Tritt along with the Georgia Tech Marching Band and the Georgia Mass Choir performed during the show.\nCountry singer Faith Hill then sang the national anthem.\nTo celebrate the 30th anniversary of Super Bowl IV, the following participants of the game were featured during the coin toss ceremony: Bud Grant, Lamar Hunt, Bobby Bell, Paul Krause, Willie Lanier, Alan Page, and Jan Stenerud.\nHalftime show.\nThe E-Trade Super Bowl Halftime Show was produced by Disney and titled \"Tapestry of Nations\" after the Epcot parade of the same name. The show, narrated by actor Edward James Olmos, was inspired by the Walt Disney World Millennium Celebration. It featured a full symphony orchestra conducted by Steven Byess; a multi-generational, 80-person choir; and singers Phil Collins, Christina Aguilera, Enrique Iglesias, and Toni Braxton.\nGame summary.\nFirst half.\nBoth teams' defenses seemed to dominate most of the first half. The Rams started the game out strong by taking the opening kickoff and marching to the Titans' 17-yard line, which featured a 17-yard completion on 3rd-and-7 from quarterback Kurt Warner to wide receiver Isaac Bruce. But on 3rd-and-9 at the 17, safety Blaine Bishop pressured Warner to throw an incomplete pass. Then the ensuing 35-yard field goal attempt by kicker Jeff Wilkins failed when punter/holder Mike Horan fumbled the snap and was tackled by cornerback Donald Mitchell, giving the ball to Tennessee on their own 29-yard line. The Titans responded by moving the ball to the Rams' 29-yard line, aided by running back Eddie George's 32-yard reception from quarterback Steve McNair. However, they also came up empty after kicker Al Del Greco missed a 47-yard field goal attempt wide left.\nFor the rest of the half, the Titans were forced to punt on all of their possessions. Meanwhile, the Rams were able to reach inside the Titans' 20-yard line on all four of their remaining drives before halftime, but on each one, the Titans' defense forced the Rams to settle for field goal attempts by Wilkins, who made three out of four attempts from 27, 29, and 28 yards, respectively (his only miss was his second attempt, a 34-yarder that sailed wide right, on the third play of the second quarter). Wilkins' three field goals gave the Rams a 9\u20130 halftime lead, but their scoring margin over the Titans seemed somewhat small, considering they drove into scoring range on every one of their first-half possessions and outgained the Titans in total yards, 294\u201389. In addition, Warner was ailing after taking several big hits from the Titans' blitzing defense, and Rams head coach Dick Vermeil considered replacing him at halftime for backup Paul Justin, who had only thrown 14 passes all season; Warner, however, never missed a snap.\nThird quarter.\nBoth teams' offenses started to get going in the second half. The Titans took the opening kickoff and drove 43 yards to the Rams' 29-yard line, but still came up empty after Rams cornerback Todd Lyght blocked Del Greco's 47-yard field goal attempt. After that, Warner converted 3rd-and-7 with an 8-yard completion to running back Marshall Faulk, then threw a 31-yard strike to Bruce and a 16-yard completion to tight end Ernie Conwell before finishing the 8-play, 68-yard drive with a 9-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Torry Holt, increasing the Rams' lead to 16\u20130. Bishop combined with safety Anthony Dorsett to tackle Conwell, but suffered a spinal injury and had to leave the game. The game was delayed for several minutes while Bishop was being treated. Already without fellow injured starting safety Marcus Robertson, Dorsett and Perry Phenix had to fill in for him and Bishop the rest of the game. After the Rams' touchdown, Titans head coach Jeff Fisher said to his team, \"They're celebrating! They're celebrating right now! Look at them! Go win the game!\"\nThe Titans finally got on the board with a 12-play, 66-yard scoring drive. Wide receiver Derrick Mason returned the ensuing kickoff 35 yards to the 34-yard line. From there, five runs by George for 24 yards, three completions from McNair to tight end Frank Wycheck for 15 yards and a 2-yard run by McNair advanced the ball to the Rams' 25-yard line. Then McNair scrambled 23 yards to the 2-yard line, setting up a 1-yard touchdown run by George two plays later, cutting the Titans' deficit to 16\u20136 after McNair's pass to Wycheck on the two-point conversion attempt fell incomplete.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Titans' first score sparked them to rally. After forcing the Rams to punt on their ensuing possession, a pair of 21-yard completions from McNair to wide receiver Isaac Byrd and tight end Jackie Harris aided a 13-play, 79-yard drive that was capped by George's second touchdown of the game, a 2-yard run, to cut the Titans' deficit to 16\u201313. The Titans' defense then forced the Rams to a three-and-out, and Horan's 30-yard punt gave the Titans the ball back at their 47-yard line. The Titans' offense then drove only 28 yards on their ensuing possession, but it was close enough for Del Greco to kick a 43-yard field goal, tying the score at 16\u201316 with just 2:12 left in regulation. The 16\u20130 deficit was the largest deficit to be erased in a Super Bowl and the first greater than 10 points. It was also the first time in any Super Bowl a team down double digits in the fourth quarter came back to tie the game.\nThen on the first play of the Rams' ensuing drive, Warner threw a long pass that was caught at the Titans' 38-yard line by Bruce, who then went the distance for a 73-yard touchdown reception to give the Rams a 23\u201316 lead. Likewise, in the 1951 NFL Championship Game, quarterback Norm Van Brocklin's 73-yard game-winning touchdown pass to wide receiver Tom Fears broke a 16\u201316 tie in the fourth quarter and gave the Rams a seven-point victory to win the NFL title. Warner's touchdown pass to Bruce was his only completion of the fourth quarter.\nThe Titans took the ball at their own 12-yard line with 1:48 left in the game after committing a holding penalty on the ensuing kickoff. McNair started out the drive with a pair of completions to Mason and Wycheck for gains of 9 and 7 yards to reach the 28-yard line. After an incomplete pass, a face-mask penalty on cornerback Dr\u00e9 Bly while tackling McNair on a 12-yard scramble gave the Titans a new set of downs at the Rams' 45-yard line. On the next play, linebacker Charlie Clemons was penalized for being offside, moving the ball to the 40-yard line with 59 seconds left. McNair ran for 2 yards, then threw a 7-yard completion to wide receiver Kevin Dyson. On the next play, the Rams nearly ended the game when Bly stepped in front of a pass intended for Mason, only to have it go right through his arms. Two plays later, with the Titans facing 3rd-and-5, McNair narrowly avoided a sack by defensive ends Kevin Carter and Jay Williams and completed a 16-yard pass to Dyson to set up 1st-and-goal at the Rams' 10-yard line. The Titans then used up their final timeout with just six seconds left, giving them a chance for one last play to either tie the game and send it into overtime, or go for the two-point conversion for the victory.\nFinal play.\nThe game's final play from the Rams' 10-yard line has gone down in NFL history as \"The Tackle\" or \"One Yard Short\". The Titans' plan was to use Wycheck as a decoy. The tight end would run straight up the field on the right side, to lure linebacker Mike Jones away from Dyson, who would then slant left through the middle of the field. With Wycheck occupying Jones, McNair would pass the ball to Dyson, who would be open from about five yards out to run in for the score.\nJones, who was the Rams' defensive signal-caller, called a 77 Blast, a combination coverage that can be altered as the offense lines up. When the Titans came to the line, Rams safety Billy Jenkins called for three Rams players \u2014 he, Jones, and cornerback Dexter McCleon \u2014 to play zone coverage against Wycheck and Dyson.\nAs the play began, everything appeared to go as planned. Jones initially ran with Wycheck up the field. But as he reached the goal line, he glanced over his left shoulder and noticed an open Dyson catching the ball. Jones switched directions and wrapped up Dyson's legs about two and a half yards short of the end zone.\nBoth players went into a rolling motion as Dyson stretched his hand with the football towards the end zone, attempting to break the plane of the goal line and score. As the rolling motion came to an end with Jones on top of Dyson's legs, the receiver's shoulder touched the ground, making him down by contact with the ball just inches short of the goal line. At this point, there were 2 seconds left on the clock, but with no timeouts remaining, the Titans could not run another play before time expired and, therefore, the game was over. If Dyson scored and the extra point been converted, it would have been the first Super Bowl to go into overtime. Alternatively, had Dyson scored, the Titans could have attempted a two-point conversion for the outright win on the final play of the game, although Titans head coach Jeff Fisher said in a 2019 interview that he would have taken his chances for overtime.\nBecause the game had already seen the then-largest comeback in Super Bowl history, \"One Yard Short\" is considered one of the greatest and most exciting game-ending plays in modern NFL history. The image of Dyson stretching the ball to the goal line with Jones wrapped around him has become a staple of NFL highlights. ESPN.com ranked \"One Yard Short\" as the 35th-greatest moment of the past 25 years in sports (as of 2007). NFL.com ranked the tackle as the fourth-greatest clutch moment in Super Bowl history. Fox Sports ranked it as the Greatest Clutch Play in Super Bowl History (as of 2007). Like Dallas Cowboys cornerback Larry Brown, Jones was included on the NFL Network's \"Top 10 One-Hit Wonders\" list (Jones was No. 10, Brown was No. 3), Jones also mirrored Brown in his solid if unspectacular career outside of his Super Bowl heroics.\nAfter the game.\nAfter the game, many sports writers commented on Warner's rise from an unknown backup to a Super Bowl MVP, but Warner himself wasn't impressed by it. \"How can you be in awe of something that you expect yourself to do?\" Warner pointed out. \"People think this season is the first time I touched a football; they don't realize I've been doing this for years \u2013 just not on this level, because I never got the chance. Sure, I had my tough times, but you don't sit there and say, 'Wow, I was stocking groceries five years ago, and look at me now.' You don't think about it, and when you do achieve something, you know luck has nothing to do with it.\"\nHowever, he later told \"The New York Times\", \"I guess it is sort of a storybook ending. When you think about where I was and where I am now, it seems pretty incredible.\"\nThe game, via archived footage from the broadcast, is also featured in the ending of Warner's 2021 biopic \"American Underdog\", which stars Zachary Levi as Warner and Dennis Quaid as Vermeil.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXXIV: St. Louis Rams 23, Tennessee Titans 16\n\"at Georgia Dome, Atlanta, Georgia\nStatistical overview.\nBruce caught 6 passes for 162 yards (3rd highest) and a touchdown, an average of 27 yards per catch. Holt had 7 receptions for 109 yards (the most ever by a rookie in a Super Bowl) and a touchdown. Bruce and Holt became the fifth pair of teammates to each have over 100 yards receiving in a Super Bowl, joining the Steelers' John Stallworth and Lynn Swann in Super Bowl XIII, the Bengals' Cris Collinsworth and Dan Ross in Super Bowl XVI, the 49ers' Jerry Rice and Roger Craig in Super Bowl XXIII, and the Redskins' Gary Clark and Art Monk in Super Bowl XXVI.\nRams starting running back Marshall Faulk was held to just 17 rushing yards but gained 90 receiving yards on 5 receptions. McNair set a Super Bowl record for rushing yards by a quarterback, recording 64 yards on 8 carries. He also completed 22 out of 36 passes for 214 yards. George finished the game with 95 rushing yards, 35 receiving yards, and 2 touchdowns. Harris was the top receiver for the Titans with 7 catches for 64 yards. Mason returned 5 kickoffs for 122 yards and caught 2 passes for 18 yards.\nAftermath.\nRams coach Dick Vermeil became the oldest coach ever to win a Super Bowl (age 63). He also set the record for the longest amount of time between going to his first Super Bowl (Super Bowl XV in the 1980 season) to winning it for the first time. He retired after this season but came back in 2001 to coach the Kansas City Chiefs, finally retiring for good in 2005.\nIt was the second (and last) Super Bowl in which neither team committed any turnovers (after Super Bowl XXV).\nThe Rams became the first, and to date the only, NFL team to win a championship in three different cities. They won the 1945 NFL Championship Game while located in Cleveland, and won both the 1951 NFL Championship Game and Super Bowl LVI in 2021 in Los Angeles. The team would later return to Los Angeles for the 2016 season, leaving St. Louis without an NFL franchise for the first time since 1994.\nThe Titans finished the 2000 season with another 13\u20133 record though they fell to the eventual Super Bowl Champion Baltimore Ravens in the AFC Divisional round.\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://, http://\nIndividual leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXXIV, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the Pro-Football-Reference.com game summary. Some of these records have since been surpassed in subsequent Super Bowl games.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSource:\nStarting lineups.\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nOfficials.\nRon Botchan and Al Jury joined Tom Kelleher, Jack Fette and Bob Beeks as the only men to officiate five Super Bowls. Jury became the second African-American (after Beeks) to do so.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29160", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29160", "title": "Super Bowl XXXV", "text": "2001 National Football League championship game\nSuper Bowl XXXV was an American football game between the American Football Conference (AFC) champion Baltimore Ravens and the National Football Conference (NFC) champion New York Giants to decide the National Football League (NFL) champion for the 2000 season. The Ravens defeated the Giants by a score of 34\u20137, tied for the seventh largest Super Bowl margin of victory with Super Bowl XXXVII. The game was played on January 28, 2001, at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa, Florida, making it the first time Raymond James Stadium held a Super Bowl.\nThe Ravens, who posted a 12\u20134 regular season record, became the third wild card team to win the Super Bowl and the second in four years. The Giants entered the game seeking to go 3\u20130 in Super Bowls after also finishing the regular season with a 12\u20134 record.\nThe Ravens allowed only 152 yards of offense by the Giants (the third-lowest total ever in a Super Bowl), recorded 4 sacks, and forced five turnovers. All sixteen of the Giants' possessions ended with punts or interceptions, with the exception of the last one, which ended when time expired in the game. The Giants' lone touchdown, a 97-yard kickoff return, was quickly answered by the Ravens on an 84-yard touchdown return on the ensuing kickoff. The Giants became the first team since the Cincinnati Bengals in Super Bowl XXIII not to score an offensive touchdown and the fifth overall. This was the fourth Super Bowl where the winning team outscored the losing team in all four quarters. Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis, who made three solo tackles, two assists, and blocked four passes, was named Super Bowl MVP.\nThis was the fifth meeting between teams from Baltimore and New York City for a major professional sports championship, which previously occurred in the 1958 and 1959 NFL Championship Games, Super Bowl III (in which the New York Jets famously upset the Baltimore Colts), and the 1969 World Series. A team from Baltimore had not won a Super Bowl since the Colts' victory in 1971.\nBackground.\nHost selection process.\nNFL owners awarded Super Bowl XXXV to Tampa during their October 31, 1996, meeting in New Orleans. A total of five cities submitted bids: Miami (Joe Robbie Stadium), Atlanta (Georgia Dome), Tampa (Raymond James Stadium), Phoenix/Tempe (Sun Devil Stadium), and Los Angeles (Coliseum). The Los Angeles host committee originally was going to partner with Pasadena (Rose Bowl), but switched their plans to the Coliseum after a renovation plan was announced. However, the Los Angeles bid was dismissed when their delegation failed to convince the owners that planned stadium renovations would be completed in time.\nTampa became a favorite after voters passed a ballot measure in September 1996 to fund the construction of a new stadium. NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue threw his support behind Tampa based on the new stadium plans. Owners initially planned on selecting only two hosts (XXXIII and XXXIV), but decided to name three after strong showings by the respective delegations. Miami, Atlanta, and Tampa were selected to host XXXIII, XXXIV, and XXXV, respectively. Tampa became the fourth metropolitan area to host the game at least three times, joining New Orleans, Miami, and Los Angeles.\nThe Tampa contingent expected to win the vote for XXXIV, but unexpectedly lost out to Atlanta. The Georgia Dome garnered a sympathy vote as Falcons owner Rankin Smith was terminally ill. Due to logistical conflicts, Atlanta would not be able to host the Super Bowl again until 2005, and some NFL owners desired to award the game to the city before Smith died. Tampa Bay Buccaneers owner Malcolm Glazer protested afterwards, feeling that he had been promised the game after securing funding for a new stadium. As a result, XXXV was added to agenda, and Tampa was selected.\nBaltimore Ravens.\nThe Ravens entered the game with the second-best defense in allowing yards in the league, with the fewest points allowed (165) and the fewest rushing yards allowed (970) during the regular season. At the time, they were the only team to hold the opposition to under 1,000 yards rushing in a season since the NFL adopted a 16-game schedule in 1978. The Ravens' 165 points allowed broke the record set by the 1986 Chicago Bears, who had given up 187 points. The Ravens' defense had held their opponents to ten or fewer points in eleven games, including four shutouts.\nThe defense was led by a trio of outstanding linebackers: Peter Boulware, Jamie Sharper, and Ray Lewis. During the regular season, Boulware recorded 7 sacks, while Sharper forced five fumbles and made one interception. Lewis was named the NFL Defensive Player of the Year by recording three sacks, making 138 tackles, and intercepting two passes. Pro Bowl defensive tackle Sam Adams and veteran Tony Siragusa anchored the defensive line, along with defensive ends Rob Burnett (10.5 sacks, three forced fumbles, and five fumble recoveries) and Pro Bowler Michael McCrary (6.5 sacks and three fumble recoveries). Baltimore also had an outstanding corps of defensive backs led by Pro Bowl veteran safety Rod Woodson, who along with Kim Herring, Duane Starks, and Chris McAlister combined for 17 interceptions.\nOn offense, the Ravens' main strength was rushing, led by rookie Jamal Lewis (1,364 yards, six rushing touchdowns, 27 receptions, 298 yards) and Priest Holmes (588 yards, 32 receptions, 221 yards). Also, tight end Shannon Sharpe recorded 67 receptions for 810 yards and five touchdowns. Receiver Qadry Ismail added 49 receptions for 655 yards and four touchdowns. The offensive line was anchored by tackle Jonathan Ogden, who was named to the Pro Bowl for the fourth consecutive season. On special teams, Jermaine Lewis ranked second in the NFL with 36 punt returns for 578 yards and two touchdowns, while also catching nineteen passes for 161 yards and another score. Kicker Matt Stover led the NFL in field goals made (35) and attempted (39), while ranking seventh in field goal percentage (89.7) and second in scoring (135 points).\nHowever, the Ravens' offense was mediocre, ranking only thirteenth in the league in scoring (333 points), sixteenth in total yards (5,301), and 23rd in passing yards (3,102). The team had a lot of trouble scoring, and at one point they went through five games without scoring an offensive touchdown (although they managed to win two of those games). But they managed to regroup, as head coach Brian Billick forbade anyone to use the \"P-word\" (presumably \"postseason\" or \"playoffs\") until the team actually played in it. The Ravens' outspoken defensive lineman, Tony Siragusa, did utter the word \"playoffs\" on two occasions and was fined $500. Since the fine (and Billick's ban) were clearly symbolic and playful, Billick explained himself by saying, \"He got a $400 fine for doing it on national television and $100 for doing it on his radio show. The reason being because no one listens to his show anyway.\" In place of the \"P-word\", the word \"Festivus\" was used, the December 23 secular holiday featured in an episode of the popular American television sitcom \"Seinfeld\" (the Ravens organization played along with this theme for that year's playoffs by showing a clip of Cosmo Kramer saying \"A Festivus miracle!\" on the stadium screen during the team's only home playoff game that year). The Super Bowl was thereafter referred to as \"Festivus Maximus.\"\nMidway through the season, with the team at 5\u20133, Billick benched starting quarterback Tony Banks and replaced him with Trent Dilfer. Although his statistics were hardly distinguished (twelve touchdowns, eleven interceptions, 76.6 passer rating), and the team lost in his first game as a starter, Dilfer led them to victory in their last seven regular season games to finish in second place in the AFC Central with a 12\u20134 record and entered the playoffs as a wild-card team.\nNew York Giants.\nThe Giants advanced to Super Bowl XXXV after posting a 7\u20139 record in the previous year. Their big draft acquisition during the off-season was running back Ron Dayne, the 1999 Heisman Trophy winner. The plan was to have his power running style complement running back Tiki Barber's speed and pass-catching ability. The two would be called the Giants' \"Thunder and Lightning\" backfield. Although Dayne had a solid rookie year by rushing for 770 yards, the breakout star during the regular season was Barber. Barber had 1,006 rushing yards in 213 attempts, caught seventy passes for 719 yards, and scored ten touchdowns. He also returned 44 punts for 506 yards and gained 266 yards returning kickoffs, giving him 2,495 total yards.\nKerry Collins entered the season as the Giants' unquestioned starting quarterback. Although he helped lead the Carolina Panthers to the 1996 NFC Championship Game, he endured a mediocre season in 1997. In 1998, he quit part way through the season after the team opened the campaign with a four-game losing streak. After spending the remainder of the 1998 season with the New Orleans Saints, Collins was signed in 1999 as the Giants' second-string quarterback, but soon claimed the starting job. In leading the Giants to Super Bowl XXXV, Collins completed 311 out of 529 passes for 3,610 yards and 22 touchdowns during the regular season. His favorite targets, in addition to Barber, were wide receivers Amani Toomer (78 receptions, 1,094 yards, seven touchdowns), and Ike Hilliard (55 receptions, 787 yards, eight touchdowns), along with fullback Greg Comella (36 receptions for 274 yards). The Giants offensive line featured guard Ron Stone, the team's only Pro Bowl selection from the offense.\nThe Giants also had a powerful defense, led by Pro Bowl defensive end Michael Strahan, who recorded 9.5 sacks, and defensive tackle Keith Hamilton who recorded ten. Defensive backs Jason Sehorn, Emmanuel McDaniel, Reggie Stephens, and Shaun Williams combined for fourteen interceptions. Pro Bowl linebacker Jesse Armstead led the team in total tackles with 102, while also recording five sacks and an interception.\nThe Giants lost just four games that season, having won six of their first eight games before a subsequent two-game losing streak put them at 7\u20134 with five games to go. In what would be his defining moment, head coach Jim Fassel, at a press conference following the Giants' loss to the Detroit Lions, guaranteed that his team would make the playoffs. The Giants responded by winning their last five regular season games to reach 12\u20134 and win the NFC East for the first time in three years.\nPlayoffs.\nWith an explosive defense and a \"play-it-safe\" offense, the Ravens became the seventh wild-card team to reach the Super Bowl, and third in four seasons, after allowing only a combined one touchdown and three field goals in their playoff wins over the Denver Broncos, 21\u20133, then their rivals, Tennessee Titans, 24\u201310, and the Oakland Raiders, 16\u20133. Meanwhile, the Giants defeated their rivals, the Philadelphia Eagles, 20\u201310, and shut out the Minnesota Vikings, 41\u20130, the most lopsided game in NFC Championship game history.\nPre-game news.\nOfficially, the win made the Ravens the quickest expansion team in NFL history to win a Super Bowl. The Ravens were established when the Cleveland Browns relocated to Baltimore. Although much like the 1950 Browns winning the NFL Championship in their first season in the NFL after coming over from the All-America Football Conference, the Ravens were not an expansion team in the traditional sense of the term that started out as a completely brand new organization, coaching staff and players from scratch.\nThe Giants, as the designated home team, wore blue jerseys with grey pants. The team had previously worn blue jerseys with white pants in their two prior Super Bowl victories, but before the 2000 season, they replaced the Big Blue Wrecking Crew-era uniforms with a modern version of their early 1960s set. The Ravens donned all-white uniforms for the game.\nBroadcasting.\nThe game was broadcast in the United States by CBS. It was CBS's first Super Bowl since Super Bowl XXVI in January 1992. Following the 1993 season, Fox bought the rights to air the NFC package, leaving CBS without the NFL for the next four years until 1998, when they began broadcasting the AFC package.\nPlay-by-play announcer Greg Gumbel became the first African-American announcer to call a major sports championship on network television. Gumbel also became the third person to both host a Super Bowl pregame show and call the game, joining Dick Enberg and Al Michaels. Gumbel was the host during his first stint with CBS for Super Bowl XXVI, and he was the pregame host for Super Bowls XXX and XXXII when he was with NBC.\nGumbel was joined in the broadcast booth by color commentator Phil Simms. Armen Keteyian and Bonnie Bernstein served as sideline reporters. Jim Nantz hosted all the events with help from his then-fellow cast members from \"The NFL Today\": Mike Ditka, Craig James, Randy Cross, and Jerry Glanville. The studio set was placed aboard the famous \"Buccaneer Cove\" pirate ship at the end zone of Raymond James Stadium.\nThe broadcast featured the brand-new EyeVision instant-replay system, which provided rapid-fire sequential shots from a series of cameras positioned around the top of the stadium. It allowed for bullet time effects, similar to those used in the movie \"The Matrix\". It was extremely unusual for CBS to debut a major new technology system at an event the size of the Super Bowl. The EyeVision system proved its mettle when it helped to uphold a replay challenge on a Jamal Lewis 4th-quarter touchdown. EyeVision was also used during the broadcast of the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show. EyeVision would mostly fall out of use after Super Bowl XXXV, not being used in an NFL game until an upgraded version was announced for Super Bowl 50.\nCBS also produced a separate HDTV broadcast of the game in the 1080i format, with Kevin Harlan and Daryl Johnston announcing. It was the second year that the game was televised in both standard-definition TV (NTSC) and HDTV.\nEntertainment.\nPregame ceremonies.\nBefore the game, a pregame show titled \"Life's Super in Central Florida\" was held, featuring Sting, Styx, and PYT. The show was directed and choreographed by Lesslee Fitzmorris from Covington, Louisiana.\nTo honor the 225th anniversary of the birth of the United States, singer Ray Charles performed \"America the Beautiful\". The song was signed (ASL) by Tom Cooney. To honor the 10th anniversary of the Persian Gulf War, 10 military veterans from the conflict including former general Norman Schwarzkopf were introduced on the field. The vocal group (and Florida natives) Backstreet Boys then sang the national anthem becoming the only boyband to sing the national anthem at the Super Bowl.\nThe coin toss ceremony honored the two previous Super Bowls that were played in Tampa. Representing the New York Giants' win in Super Bowl XXV was the game's MVP, Ottis Anderson, and former head coach Bill Parcells (coincidentally, tight end Howard Cross was the only Giants player on the 1990 team that was still active). Representing the Los Angeles Raiders' win in Super Bowl XVIII was that game's MVP, Marcus Allen, and former head coach Tom Flores.\nThis was the last Super Bowl to have individual player introductions for both teams (both the Ravens' and Giants' defenses were announced). In Super Bowl XXXVI, the New England Patriots bucked this trend and were introduced all at once as a team; the Rams, however, still used individual player introductions in that game. Starting with Super Bowl XXXVII, the league decided to have both participating teams introduced collectively as teams, instead of introducing them individually by player.\nHalftime show.\nThe halftime show was produced by MTV, then a sister network of CBS before the re-merger. The show was titled, \"The Kings of Rock and Pop\". It was headlined by Aerosmith and 'N Sync, and also featured appearances from Britney Spears, Nelly, Mary J. Blige, and Tremors featuring The Earthquake Horns. The show featured a back-and-forth medley between Aerosmith and 'N Sync.\nCommunity events.\nThe city of Tampa moved its annual Gasparilla Pirate Festival from its usual date in early February to the Saturday before the game. It was the largest Gasparilla in history, with over 750,000 attending.\nGame summary.\nFirst quarter.\nBoth defenses dominated early in the first quarter as the first five possessions of the game ended in punts. On the fifth punt, Ravens wide receiver Jermaine Lewis returned the ball 43 yards to the Giants' 22-yard line. Although a holding penalty on Ravens cornerback Corey Harris during the return moved the ball back to the 41-yard line, the Ravens took only two plays to take an early 7\u20130 lead. First, running back Jamal Lewis picked up 3 yards, then quarterback Trent Dilfer completed a 38-yard touchdown pass to wide receiver Brandon Stokley.\nSecond quarter.\nAfter the teams exchanged punts three times each going into the second quarter, the Giants advanced to midfield, only to lose the ball when quarterback Kerry Collins threw a pass that was deflected by linebacker Ray Lewis and intercepted by linebacker Jamie Sharper. Then on the next play, a holding penalty against defensive tackle Keith Hamilton nullified linebacker Jessie Armstead's 43-yard interception return for a touchdown that could have tied the game. After the teams exchanged punts again, Dilfer completed a 44-yard pass to wide receiver Qadry Ismail to set up a 47-yard field goal by Ravens kicker Matt Stover to extend the Ravens' lead to 10\u20130. Aided by a face-mask penalty against Ravens linebacker Brad Jackson, a 16-yard completion from Collins to wide receiver Ron Dixon, and a 27-yard run by running back Tiki Barber, the Giants advanced all the way to the Ravens' 29-yard line on their ensuing drive, but cornerback Chris McAlister intercepted Collins' pass intended for wide receiver Ike Hilliard at the 1-yard line to keep the Giants scoreless at halftime.\nThird quarter.\nThe Giants forced the Ravens to punt on the opening drive of the second half. Five plays later, Ravens safety Kim Herring intercepted a pass intended for Hilliard at the Giants' 41-yard line. The Ravens then advanced to the 24-yard line, but Stover missed a 41-yard field goal attempt wide left.\nAfter another exchange of punts, Ravens cornerback Duane Starks intercepted a pass intended for wide receiver Amani Toomer and returned it 49 yards for a touchdown, setting off a chain of events never seen before in Super Bowl history: three touchdowns on three consecutive plays in 36 seconds. On the ensuing kickoff, Dixon returned the ball 97 yards for the Giants' only score of the game to cut their deficit to 17\u20137. But Jermaine Lewis returned the next kickoff 84 yards for a touchdown of his own, making the score 24\u20137 in favor of the Ravens and essentially putting the game away. It was the first time in history two kickoffs were returned for touchdowns in the same Super Bowl game, and on back-to-back kickoffs.\nFourth quarter.\nThe Giants gained only one first down on their final four possessions and were never able to move the ball into Ravens territory. Meanwhile, the Ravens added 10 more points to their lead, making the final score 34\u20137. Three possessions after Jermaine Lewis' touchdown, going into the fourth quarter, Giants punter Brad Maynard's 34-yard punt from his own 4-yard line to the 38-yard line and tight end Ben Coates' 17-yard reception from Dilfer set up a 3-yard touchdown run by Jamal Lewis. The Giants challenged the call, as Lewis appeared to fumble the ball out of the end zone for a touchback while being tackled by linebacker Micheal Barrow and defensive tackle Cornelius Griffin, but the officials determined that Lewis had stretched the ball across the goal line before he lost it, therefore confirming the score. Dixon returned the ensuing kickoff 25 yards, but he was stripped of the ball by cornerback James Trapp, and cornerback Robert Bailey recovered the fumble, setting up Stover's 34-yard field goal with 5:27 left in the game. The next two possessions ended in punts, and the Giants advanced to their own 49-yard line before the game ended.\nBox score.\nSuper Bowl XXXV: Baltimore Ravens 34, New York Giants 7\n\"at Raymond James Stadium, Tampa, Florida\nStatistical overview.\nDilfer threw for 153 yards and a touchdown, with no interceptions. Jamal Lewis rushed for 102 yards and a touchdown (only the second rookie to rush for 100 yards in the Super Bowl, joining Timmy Smith in Super Bowl XXII, while also being the first rookie to score a rushing touchdown in a Super Bowl since Smith in 1988), and caught a pass for four yards. Stokley was the top receiver of the game with three receptions for 52 yards and a touchdown. Jermaine Lewis recorded 152 total all-purpose yards (111 kickoff return yards, 34 punt return yards, seven receiving yards, one rushing yard) and a touchdown.\nCollins had a passer rating for the game of only 7.1, the second worst in Super Bowl history, threw four interceptions (tying a Super Bowl record that has since been surpassed by Oakland quarterback Rich Gannon's five interceptions in Super Bowl XXXVII) and completed only 15 of 39 passes for 112 yards. Barber was the Giants' leading rusher with 49 yards, also catching six passes for 26 yards and returning two punts for thirteen yards, while Dixon tallied six kickoffs for 154 yards and a touchdown with a sixteen-yard pass catch. While Giants punter Brad Maynard set an undesirable Super Bowl record with eleven punts, Baltimore punter Kyle Richardson nearly matched him with ten punts.\nOverall, both teams combined for only 396 total yards, the lowest in Super Bowl history. The Ravens joined Super Bowl XVIII's Los Angeles Raiders in the record books as the only teams to score offensive, defensive and special teams touchdowns in the same Super Bowl. The third team to do the same were the Seattle Seahawks in Super Bowl XLVIII. Super Bowl XXXV was the second Super Bowl since 1975 in which the losing team failed to score at least ten points, after Super Bowl XVIII.\nAll the main contributors for the Ravens on offense, defense, and special teams were named Lewis. Linebacker Ray Lewis, a native of Lakeland, Florida, less than an hour from Super Bowl host city Tampa, who made three solo tackles, two assists, and blocked four passes, became the second linebacker to be named Super Bowl MVP after Chuck Howley in Super Bowl V. Lewis also became the first defensive player to be honored since Larry Brown in Super Bowl XXX, and at the time the seventh defensive player to be Super Bowl MVP, joining Howley, Jake Scott, Harvey Martin, Randy White, Richard Dent, and Brown (since Lewis, only three additional defensive players have been named Super Bowl MVP: Tampa Bay Buccaneers safety Dexter Jackson in Super Bowl XXXVII, Seattle Seahawks linebacker Malcolm Smith in Super Bowl XLVIII, and Denver Broncos linebacker Von Miller in Super Bowl 50). Despite being named the game's Most Valuable Player, Lewis did not go to Walt Disney World because of an investigation during the previous year. Quarterback Trent Dilfer went in his place.\nJamal Lewis was the top rusher of the game, Jermaine Lewis notched 145 yards and a touchdown on special teams. In addition, the Ravens defense was coached by Marvin Lewis. The Ravens defense has since been considered among the greatest of all time. The Ravens defense became the third to shut-out their opponent in Super Bowl history; the Giants' only points came on a kickoff return. Washington in Super Bowl VII scored against Miami only after the late fumble by Garo Yepremian, which was returned for a touchdown. The only points Pittsburgh allowed to Minnesota in Super Bowl IX came on the return of a blocked punt.\nThe New York Giants started a trend of seven different NFC Champions in seven years. The Giants would return to the Super Bowl in 2007 and again in 2011 defeating the New England Patriots on both occasions, ending the current trend at the time, but starting a new one. Beginning with the 2001 St. Louis Rams, who played in Super Bowl XXXVI, there were ten different NFC Champions in ten years. Once again, the Giants ended the trend and started another one. Beginning with the 2008 Super Bowl XLIII participant Arizona Cardinals, there were six different NFC Champions in six years. This streak was finally ended by the Seattle Seahawks, who advanced to the Super Bowl in both 2013 and 2014.\nThe Baltimore Ravens would later win Super Bowl XLVII in 2013 against the San Francisco 49ers (which was also aired on CBS). Ray Lewis was a member of both Ravens' Super Bowl wins. In between the Ravens' victories, the Indianapolis Colts, the Pittsburgh Steelers, and the Patriots would have a Super Bowl appearance more than once, with New England and Pittsburgh winning more than once. The only other AFC team to make the Super Bowl in that stretch were the Oakland Raiders, in Super Bowl XXXVII.\nHad the Giants won, it would have marked the first year since 1989 that a Super Bowl and World Series champion came from the same metropolitan area. The New York Yankees won the World Series during the Giants' season. Including the New Jersey Devils' win in the Stanley Cup Finals and the New York Mets' runner-up finish to the rival Yankees, there were four teams from the New York metropolitan area that made the championship round of their respective leagues in the same year.\nFinal statistics.\nSources: http://, https://, https://\nIndividual leaders.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\n1Completions/attempts\n2Carries\n3Long gain\n4Receptions\n5Times targeted\nRecords set.\nThe following records were set in Super Bowl XXXV, according to the official NFL.com boxscore, the 2016 NFL Record &amp; Fact Book and the ProFootball reference.com game summary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTurnovers are defined as the number of times losing the ball on interceptions and fumbles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-float/styles.css\" /&gt;\nStarting lineups.\nSource:\n&lt;mark style=\"color:black;background:#FFCC00\"&gt;Hall of Fame\u2021&lt;/mark&gt;\nSurveillance.\nThe American Civil Liberties Union criticized a test of a system used at the event to monitor the people in attendance. A group of four companies installed a face recognition system to scan the faces of fans entering the stadium and compare them with a database of criminals. Attendees were not told that they were subject to this surveillance. Tampa police reported that the system identified nineteen criminals, but due to complaints and trouble with false positive results, it was not re-used the next year. Super Bowl XXXVI and all subsequent Super Bowls have been designated as a National Special Security Event, qualifying for extra security detail from the Secret Service.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29161", "revid": "146242", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29161", "title": "Cyril and Methodius", "text": "9th-century Byzantine Christian theologians and missionaries\nCyril (; born Constantine, 826\u2013869) and Methodius (; born Michael, 815\u2013885) were brothers, Byzantine Christian theologians and missionaries. For their work evangelizing the Slavs, they are known as the \"Apostles to the Slavs\".\nThey are credited with devising the Glagolitic alphabet, the first alphabet used to transcribe Old Church Slavonic. After their deaths, their pupils continued their missionary work among other Slavs. Both brothers are venerated in the Eastern Orthodox Church as saints with the title of \"equal-to-apostles\". In 1880, Pope Leo XIII introduced their feast into the calendar of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church. In 1980, the first Slav pope, Pope John Paul II declared them co-patron saints of Europe, together with Benedict of Nursia.\nEarly career.\nEarly life.\nThe two brothers were born in Thessalonica, at that time in the Byzantine province of the same name (today in Greece) \u2013 Cyril in 827\u2013828, and Methodius in 815\u2013820. According to the \"Vita Cyrilli\" (\"The Life of Cyril\"), Cyril was reputedly the youngest of seven brothers; he was born Constantine, but was given the name Cyril upon becoming a monk in Rome shortly before his death. Methodius was born Michael and was given the name Methodius upon becoming a monk in Polychron Monastery at Mysian Olympus (present-day Uluda\u011f in northwest Turkey). Their father was Leo, a \"droungarios\" of the Byzantine theme of Thessalonica, and their mother's name was Maria.\nThe exact ethnic origins of the brothers are unknown; there is controversy as to whether Cyril and Methodius were of Slavic or Greek origin, or both. The two brothers lost their father when Cyril was fourteen, and the powerful minister Theoktistos, who was \"logothetes tou dromou\", one of the chief ministers of the Empire, became their protector. He was also responsible, along with the regent Bardas, for initiating a far-reaching educational program within the Empire which culminated in the establishment of the University of Magnaura, where Cyril was to teach. Cyril was ordained as priest some time after his education, while his brother Methodius remained a deacon until 867/868.\nMission to the Khazars.\nAbout the year 860, Byzantine Emperor Michael III and the Patriarch of Constantinople Photius (a professor of Cyril's at the university and his guiding light in earlier years), sent Cyril on a missionary expedition to the Khazars who had requested a scholar be sent to them who could converse with both Jews and Saracens. It has been claimed that Methodius accompanied Cyril on the mission to the Khazars, but this may be a later invention. The account of his life presented in the Latin \"Legenda\" claims that he learned the Khazar language while in Chersonesos, in Taurica (today Crimea).\nAfter his return to Constantinople, Cyril assumed the role of professor of philosophy at the university. His brother had by this time become a significant figure in Byzantine political and administrative affairs, and an abbot of his monastery.\nMission to the Slavs.\nGreat Moravia.\nIn 862, the brothers began the work which would give them their historical importance. That year Prince Rastislav of Great Moravia requested that Emperor Michael III and the Patriarch Photius send missionaries to evangelize his Slavic subjects. His motives in doing so were probably more political than religious. Rastislav had become king with the support of the Frankish ruler Louis the German, though he subsequently sought to assert his independence from the Franks. That Cyril and Methodius might have been the first to bring Christianity to Moravia is a common misconception; Rastislav's letter to Michael III states clearly that his people \"had already rejected paganism and adhere to the Christian law.\" Rastislav is said to have expelled missionaries of the Roman Church and instead turned to Constantinople for ecclesiastical assistance and, presumably, a degree of political support. The Emperor quickly chose to send Cyril, accompanied by his brother Methodius. The request provided a convenient opportunity to expand Byzantine influence. Their first work seems to have been the training of assistants. In 863, they began the task of translating the Gospels and essential liturgical books into what is now known as Old Church Slavonic, and travelled to Great Moravia to promote it. This endeavour was amply rewarded. However, they came into conflict with German ecclesiastics, who opposed their efforts to create a specifically Slavic liturgy.\nFor the purpose of this mission, they devised the Glagolitic script, the first alphabet to be used for Slavonic manuscripts. The Glagolitic alphabet was suited to match the specific features of the Slavic language. Its descendant script, the Cyrillic, is still used by many languages today.\nThe brothers wrote the first Slavic Civil Code, which was used in Great Moravia. The language derived from Old Church Slavonic, known as Church Slavonic, is still used in the liturgy by several Orthodox Churches, and also in some Eastern Catholic churches.\nExactly how much the brothers translated is impossible to say for certain. The New Testament and the Psalms seem to have been the first, followed by other lessons from the Old Testament. The \"Translatio\" speaks only of a version of the Gospels by Cyril, and the \"Vita Methodii\" only of the \"evangelium Slovenicum\", though other liturgical selections may also have been translated.\nNor is it known for sure which liturgy, whether of Rome or of Constantinople, they took as a source. They may well have used the Roman alphabet, as hinted by liturgical fragments adhering closely to the Latin type. This view is confirmed by the \"Prague Fragments\" and by certain Old Glagolitic liturgical fragments brought from Jerusalem to Kyiv and discovered there by Izmail Sreznevsky\u2014probably the oldest document in the Slavonic tongue; examples of where they resemble the Latin type include the words \"\"Mass\",\" \"\"Preface\",\" and the name of one Felicitas. Regardless, the circumstances were such that the brothers could have hoped for no lasting success without having had authorization from Rome.\nJourney to Rome.\nThe mission of Constantine and Methodius had great success among Slavs in part because they used the people's native language rather than Latin or Greek. In Great Moravia, Constantine and Methodius also encountered missionaries from East Francia. They would have represented the western, or Latin, branch of the Church, more particularly epitomizing the Carolingian Empire as founded by Charlemagne, and intent on linguistic and cultural uniformity. They insisted on the use of the Latin liturgy, and they regarded Moravia and the Slavic peoples as part of their rightful mission field.\nWhen friction developed, the brothers, unwilling to be a cause of dissension among Christians, decided to travel to Rome to see the Pope, and seek a solution that would avoid quarrelling between missionaries in the field. In 867, Pope Nicholas I (858-867) invited the brothers to Rome. Their evangelizing mission in Moravia had by this time become the focus of a dispute with Archbishop Adalwin of Salzburg (859\u2013873) and Bishop Ermanrich of Passau (866-874). They claimed ecclesiastical control of the same territory and wished to see it use the Latin liturgy exclusively.\nWith them they brought the relics of Saint Clement and a retinue of disciples. They passed through Pannonia (the Balaton Principality), where they were well received by Prince Koce\u013e. This activity in Pannonia made a continuation of conflicts inevitable with the German episcopate, and especially with the bishop of Salzburg, whose prerogative Pannonia had been for seventy-five years. As early as 865, Bishop Adalwin was found to exercise Episcopal rights there. The administration under him was in the hands of the archpriest Riehbald. He was obliged to retire to Salzburg, though his superior was instinctively disinclined to abandon his claim.\nThe brothers sought support from Rome, and arrived there in 868, where they were warmly received. This was partly due to their bringing with them the relics of Saint Clement; rivalry with Constantinople over the territory of the Slavs would have inclined Rome to value the brothers and their influence.\nThe brothers were praised for their learning and cultivated for their influence in Constantinople. Anastasius Bibliothecarius would later call Cyril \"a man of apostolic life\" and \"a man of great wisdom\". Their project in Moravia found support from the new Pope Adrian II (867-872), who formally authorized the use of the new Slavic liturgy.\nSubsequently, Methodius was ordained as priest by the pope himself, and five Slavic disciples were ordained as priests (Saint Gorazd, Saint Clement of Ohrid and Saint Naum) and as deacons (Saint Angelar and Saint Sava) by the prominent bishops Formosus and Gauderic. Since the 10th century Cyril and Methodius along with these five disciples are collectively venerated by the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as the \"Seven Saints\". The newly made priests officiated in their own language at the altars of some of the principal churches.\nFeeling his end approaching, Cyril became a Basilian monk and was given the name Cyril. He died in Rome fifty days later (14 February 869). There is some question whether he had been made a bishop, as is asserted in the \"Translatio\" (ix.). Upon Cyril\u00b4s death Methodius was given the title of Archbishop of Sirmium (now Sremska Mitrovica in Serbia) with jurisdiction over all of Moravia and Pannonia, and authority to use the Slavonic Liturgy. The statement of the \"Vita\" that Methodius was made bishop in 870 and not raised to the dignity of an archbishop until 873 is contradicted by the brief of Pope John VIII, written in June 879, according to which Adrian consecrated him archbishop; John includes in his jurisdiction not only Great Moravia and Pannonia, but Serbia as well.\nMethodius alone.\nMethodius now continued the work among the Slavs alone; not at first in Great Moravia, but in Pannonia (in the Balaton Principality). Political circumstances in Greater Moravia were insecure. Rastislav had been taken captive by his nephew Svatopluk in 870, then delivered over to Carloman of Bavaria, and condemned in a diet held at Regensburg at the end of 870. Meanwhile, the East Frankish rulers and their bishops decided to try and depose Methodius. The archiepiscopal claims of Methodius were considered so threatening to the rights of Salzburg that he was captured and forced to answer to East Frankish bishops: Adalwin of Salzburg, Ermanrich of Passau, and Anno of Freising. After heated discussion, they declared the intruder deposed, and ordered him to be sent to Germany. There he was kept prisoner in a monastery for two and a half years.\nNotwithstanding strong representations of the \"Conversio Bagoariorum et Carantanorum\", written in 871 to influence the pope, though not conceding this purpose, Rome declared emphatically for Methodius. He sent a bishop, Paul of Ancona, to reinstate him and punish his enemies, after which both parties were ordered to appear in Rome with the legate.\nThus in 873, new Pope John VIII (872-882) secured the release of Methodius, but instructed him to stop using the Slavonic Liturgy.\nMethodius' final years.\nThe papal will prevailed, and Methodius secured his freedom and his archiepiscopal authority over both Great Moravia and Pannonia, albeit without the use of Slavonic for Mass in the Catholic Church. His authority in Pannonia was restricted after Koce\u013e's death, when the principality was administered by German nobles. However, Svatopluk now ruled practically independently in Great Moravia, and he expelled the German clergy. It seems this secured an undisturbed field of operation for Methodius, and the \"Vita\" (x.) depicts the next few years (873\u2013879) as a time of fruitful progress. Methodius seems to have disregarded, wholly or in part, the prohibition of the Slavonic liturgy. When Frankish clerics again ventured into the country, revealing a permissive Svatopluk at odds with his punctilious archbishop, this was made a cause of complaint against him at Rome, coupled with charges regarding the \"Filioque\".\nIn 878, Methodius was summoned to Rome on charges of heresy and using Slavonic. This time Pope John was convinced by the arguments that Methodius made in his defence and sent him back cleared of all charges, and with permission to use Slavonic. The Carolingian bishop who succeeded him, Wiching, a Swabian, suppressed the Slavonic Liturgy and forced the followers of Methodius into exile. Many found refuge with Knyaz Boris the Baptizer in Bulgaria, under whom they reorganized a Slavic-speaking Church. Meanwhile, Pope John's successors adopted a Latin-only policy which lasted for centuries.\nMethodius vindicated his orthodoxy and promised to obey with regard to the liturgy. He could the more easily defend his omission of \"Filioque\" from the creed as this also pertained in Rome at the time. Though \"Filioque\" could, by the 6th century, be heard in some Latin-speaking churches in the west, it was not to be until 1014 that Rome followed suit (see Nicene Creed). Methodius' critics were mollified by Methodius having to accept the appointment of Wiching as his coadjutor. When relations between the two factions again became strained, John VIII steadfastly supported Methodius. After his death (December 882) it was the archbishop himself whose position looked insecure. His need for political support, visiting the Eastern emperor, inclined Goetz to accept the account in the \"Vita\" (xiii.).\nMethodius died on 6 April 885 and his body was buried in the main cathedral church of Great Moravia. It still remains an open question which city was capital of Great Moravia. As a result the location of Methodius' body remains uncertain.\nUpon Methodius' death an animosity erupted into open conflict. Amongst the disciples of Cyril and Methodius, Clement of Ohrid headed the struggle against the German clergy in Great Moravia along with Gorazd upon the death of Methodius in 885. Gorazd, whom Methodius had designated as his successor, was not recognised by Pope Stephen V. This pope now also forbade the Slavic liturgy and placed as Methodius' successor the infamous Wiching who promptly sent disciples of Cyril and Methodius into exile from Great Moravia.\nAfter spending some time in jail, Clement was expelled from Great Moravia, and in 885 or 886 reached the borders of the First Bulgarian Empire together with Naum, Angelar, and possibly also Gorazd (other sources suggest Gorazd had already died by that time). Angelar soon died after an arrival, but Clement and Naum were afterwards sent to the Bulgarian capital of Pliska, where they were commissioned by Boris I to instruct the future clergy of the state in the Slavonic language. Eventually they were commissioned to establish two theological schools - the Ohrid Literary School in Ohrid and the Preslav Literary School in Preslav. The Preslav Literary School had been originally established in Pliska, but was moved to Preslav in 893.\nInvention of the Glagolitic and Cyrillic alphabets.\nThe Glagolitic and Cyrillic alphabets are the oldest known Slavic alphabets, and were created by the two brothers and/or their students, to translate the Gospels and liturgical books into the Slavic languages.\nThe early Glagolitic alphabet was used in Great Moravia between 863 (the arrival of Cyril and Methodius) and 885 (the expulsion of their students) for government and religious documents and books, and at the Great Moravian Academy (\"Ve\u013ekomoravsk\u00e9 u\u010dili\u0161te\") founded by Cyril, where followers of Cyril and Methodius were educated, by Methodius himself among others. The alphabet has been traditionally attributed to Cyril. That seems confirmed explicitly by the papal letter \"Industriae tuae\" (880) approving the use of Old Church Slavonic, which says that the alphabet was \"invented by Constantine the Philosopher\". \"Invention\" need not exclude the brothers having possibly made use of earlier letterforms. Before that time the Slavic languages had no distinct script of their own.\nThe early Cyrillic alphabet was developed by the disciples of Saints Cyril and Methodius at the Preslav Literary School at the end of the 9th century as a simplification of the Glagolitic alphabet which more closely resembled the Greek alphabet. The Cyrillic script was devised from the Greek alphabet and Glagolitic alphabet. Cyrillic gradually replaced Glagolitic as the alphabet of the Old Church Slavonic language, which became the official language of the First Bulgarian Empire and later spread to the Eastern Slav lands of Kievan Rus'. Cyrillic eventually spread throughout most of the Slavic world to become the standard alphabet in the Eastern Orthodox Slavic countries. In this way the work of Cyril and Methodius and their disciples enabled the spread of Christianity throughout Eastern Europe.\nAfter the adoption of Christianity in 865, religious ceremonies in Bulgaria were conducted in Greek by clergy sent from the Byzantine Empire. Fearing growing Byzantine influence and weakening of the state, Boris viewed the adoption of the Old Slavonic language as a way to preserve the political independence and stability of Bulgaria, so he established two literary schools (academies), in Pliska and Ohrid, where theology was to be taught in the Slavonic language. While Naum of Preslav stayed in Pliska working on the foundation of the Pliska Literary School which was moved to Preslav in 893, Clement was commissioned by Boris I to organise the teaching of theology to future clergymen in Old Church Slavonic at the Ohrid Literary School. Over seven years (886-893) Clement taught some 3,500 students in the Slavonic language and the Glagolitic alphabet.\nCommemoration.\nSaints Cyril and Methodius' Day.\nCompared to nowadays, the process leading to canonization was less involved in the decades following Cyril's death. Cyril was regarded by his disciples as a saint soon after his death. His following spread among the nations he evangelized, and subsequently to the wider Christian Church. With his brother Methodius, he was famous as a man of holiness. From the crowds lining the Roman streets during his funeral procession, there were calls for Cyril to be accorded saintly status. The brothers' first appearance in a papal document is in \"Grande Munus\" of Leo XIII in 1880. They are known as the \"Apostles of the Slavs\", and are still highly regarded by both Catholic and Orthodox Christians. Their feast day is currently celebrated on 14 February in the Catholic Church (to coincide with the date of St Cyril's death); on 11 May in the Eastern Orthodox Church (though for Eastern Orthodox Churches which use the Julian Calendar this is 24 May according to the Gregorian calendar); and on 7 July according to the old sanctoral calendar before the revisions of the Second Vatican Council. The celebration also commemorates the introduction of literacy and the preaching of the gospels in the Slavonic language by the brothers. The brothers were declared \"Patrons of Europe\" in 1980.\nThe first recorded secular celebration of Saints Cyril and Methodius' Day as the \"Day of the Bulgarian script\", as traditionally accepted by Bulgarian history, was held in the town of Plovdiv on 11 May 1851. At the same time a local Bulgarian school was named \"Saints Cyril and Methodius\". Both acts had been instigated by the prominent Bulgarian educator Nayden Gerov. However, an Armenian traveller referred to a \"celebration of the Bulgarian script\" when he visited the town of Shumen on 22 May 1803.\nCyril and Methodius are remembered in the Church of England with a Lesser Festival and with a lesser feast on the Episcopal Church calendar on 14 February.\nThe day is now celebrated as a public holiday in the following countries:\nThe saints' feast day is celebrated by the Eastern Orthodox Church on 11 May and by the Catholic Church and the Anglican Communion on 14 February as \"Saints Cyril and Methodius Day\". The Lutheran Churches of Western Christianity commemorate the two saints either on 14 February or 11 May. The Byzantine Rite Lutheran Churches celebrate Saints Cyril and Methodius Day on 24 May.\nOther commemoration.\nThe national library of Bulgaria in Sofia, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University of Skopje in the North Macedonia, and St. Cyril and St. Methodius University of Veliko Tarnovo in Bulgaria and in Trnava, Slovakia, bear the name of the two saints. Faculty of Theology at Palack\u00fd University in Olomouc (Czech Republic), bears the name \"Saints Cyril and Methodius Faculty of Theology\". In the United States, SS. Cyril and Methodius Seminary in Orchard Lake, Michigan, bears their name.\nThe Brotherhood of Saints Cyril and Methodius established in 1846 was short-lived a pro-Ukrainian organization in the Russian Empire to preserve Ukrainian national identity.\nSaints Cyril and Methodius are the main patron saints of the Archdiocese of Ljubljana. Ljubljana Cathedral stands at Cyril and Methodius Square (). They are also patron saints of the Greek-Catholic Eparchy of Ko\u0161ice (Slovakia) and the Slovak Greek Catholic Eparchy of Toronto.\nSt. Cyril Peak and St. Methodius Peak in the Tangra Mountains on Livingston Island, South Shetland Islands, in Antarctica are named for the brothers.\nSaint Cyril's remains are interred in a shrine-chapel within the Basilica di San Clemente in Rome. The chapel holds a Madonna by Sassoferrato.\nThe Basilica of SS. Cyril and Methodius in Danville, Pennsylvania, (the only Catholic basilica dedicated to SS. Cyril and Methodius in the world) is the motherhouse chapel of the Sisters of SS. Cyril and Methodius, a Catholic women's religious community of pontifical right dedicated to apostolic works of ecumenism, education, evangelization, and elder care.\nThe Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius, originally founded in 1909, is part of the national award system of Bulgaria.\nIn 2021, a research vessel newly acquired by the Bulgarian Navy was re-christened \"Ss. Cyril and Methodius\" after the saints, with actress Maria Bakalova as the sponsor.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29162", "revid": "49389032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29162", "title": "Saluki", "text": "The Saluki or Arabian hound or Persian hound (Persian:\u0633\u06af \u062a\u0627\u0632\u06cc\u060c Arabic: \u0633\u0644\u0648\u0642\u064a) is a standardised breed developed from sighthounds \u2013 dogs that hunt primarily by sight rather than strong scent \u2013 that was once used by nomadic tribes to run down game animals. The dog was originally bred in the Fertile Crescent. The modern breed is typically deep-chested and long-legged, and similar dogs appear in medieval and ancient art. The breed is most closely related to the Afghan hound, a basal breed that predates the emergence of modern breeds in the 19th century, and the Saluki has been purebred both in the Middle East, including by royalty, since at least that era, and in the West (especially in Britain and Germany) since the 1840s (with breed standards established in the West and the Middle East around the 1920s\u20131930s), though as a free-breeding landrace, similar dogs are common as feral animals in the Middle East. A related standardised breed is the north African Sloughi.\nThe saluki is one possible explanation for the mythical Set animal.\nName.\nThe origins of the name of the breed are not clear. The Saluki has also been called the gazelle hound, Arabian hound, and the Persian greyhound. One suggested origin of the breed's name is ancient Sumerian translating to 'plunge-earth'. However, there is no evidence a breed existed then or was referred to by the Sumerians with this name, nor is it certain what \"plunge [to/into] earth\" might have meant in reference to dogs. It is suggestive of digging for burrowing prey animals, but there is also a story &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt; of dogs being thrown toward quarry animals by a camel-mounted hunter.\nThe name used for the modern breed could be derived from (Arabic for \"Seleucia\", a city of Mesopotamia now in Iraq), appearing in pre-Islamic Arabic poetry. However, this is disputed. British diplomat Terence Clark wrote that the Arabic word indicates 'person or thing from a place named Saluq'. Arab tradition states that Saluq was an ancient town in Yemen not far from modern Ta'izz, and the Arabs associate this town with the origin of the breed. However, the word might have been derived from reference to several other places: Saluq in Armenia, and three towns called Saluqiyah. One has become modern Silifke, Turkey; another is near Antioch (modern Antakya), Turkey; and third is located near Baghdad, Iraq. Baghdad eclipsed Ctesiphon, the capital of the Persian Empire, which was located some to the southeast. Ctesiphon itself had replaced and absorbed Seleucia, the first capital of the Seleucid Empire (312 BC \u2013 65 AD).\nRegardless, the adjective may have been derived by the Arabs of the Arabian Peninsula from the similar-sounding word for Seleucid used in the Aramaic and Syriac languages spoken there by the Assyrians of that part of Mesopotamia, but there is no irrefutable evidence.\nDescription.\nSalukis are sighthounds \u2013 hunting by sight more than scent or sound \u2013 and run their quarry down to kill or retrieve it. The normal size range for the modern breed is high at the withers and in weight. Female Salukis are slightly smaller than males. The head is long and narrow with large eyes and drop ears. The tail of the breed is long and curved. It has the typical deep-chested, long-legged body of sighthounds. The coat comes in a variety of colors including white, cream, fawn, red, grizzle/tan, black/tan, and tri-color (white, black and tan).\nThe overall appearance of the Saluki is grace and symmetry. Two coat types \u2013 smooth and \"feathered\" \u2013 are evident in the breed's gene pool. The latter variety has light fluffing on the back of the legs, thighs, ears, and sometimes the throat. The fur on both types is silky and is low-shedding when compared to other breeds. Salukis bred in the Middle East most commonly have short hair.\nThere is a type called \"desert Saluki\" or \"Sinai Saluki\" or \"Hijazi Saluki\", which descends from bloodlines brought directly from the original region of the breed. It exists in the entire Middle Eastern region but the origin is West of the Arabian Peninsula. In Israel the type is known as the \"Negev Saluki\". The desert Saluki does not have influence of western lines and it tends to have a more primitive appearance. It often has a broader skull, shorter muzzle, shorter and more compact body, broader chest, less angulations, and shorter tail than the western equivalent. Some desert Salukis imported from the original region have cropped ears because of the common tradition in countries such as Iran, Iraq, Turkey, and Syria. However, it is difficult to strictly determine what desert Salukis originated from due to the \"original\" bloodlines being bred in the Western world for 4 to 5 generations. The breed existed in the US by the 1980s and there has been breeding in France since the 1990s. The first desert Salukis in Finland were imported from Israel in February 2000. After that, more have been imported from countries such as Syria, Oman, Qatar, and Turkey. In addition to their countries of birth, they have for example Iranian, Moroccan, Bahraini, and Saudi Arabian \"Bedouin Saluki\" dogs in their background.\nSwiftness and physical capacity.\nWhile the Greyhound is credited as being the fastest dog breed up to distances of around , the Saluki is thought to be faster over longer distances. In 1996, The Guinness Book of Records listed a Saluki as being the fastest dog, capable of reaching a speed of . Due to its heavily padded feet being able to absorb the impact on its body, the Saluki has remarkable stamina when running.\nHistorically, the ancestors of the modern Saluki breed were used for hunting by nomadic tribes. Typical quarry included the gazelle, hare, fox and jackal. While hunting hares, Bedouin hunters would sometimes ride close to their quarry on a camel holding such a dog, which would be thrown towards the prey while at speed to give the dog a running start. Gazelle hunters have also used hawks or falcons to attack the head of the prey so that the dogs could then bring down the distracted animal.\nTemperament.\nThe modern Saluki has retained qualities of hunting hounds and may seem reserved to strangers. The often independent and aloof breed may be difficult to train, and they generally cannot be trusted to return to their owner when off-leash. Training methods have been recommended to be always gentle and patient. Salukis may bore easily and are not an ideal breed to leave unattended for long periods; however, they are well-suited to life in apartments, since they are generally quiet and calm as adults. The saluki does not typically enjoy rough games or activities such as retrieving balls, but does enjoy soft toys. Early socialisation will help prevent timidity and shyness in later life. Given its hunting instincts, the dog is prone to chasing moving objects, such as cats, birds, squirrels, and bugs.\nHealth.\nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 13.3 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nIn a 2006 breed-specific survey conducted by The Kennel Club and the British Small Animal Veterinary Association Scientific Committee, responses highlighted several health issues. The primary cause of death identified was cancer, being responsible for 35.6% of deaths, with the most common forms being liver cancer or lymphoma. The second most common cause was related to cardiac conditions, including heart failure and unspecified heart defects. Cardiomyopathy, heart murmur, and other cardiac issues were present in 17.2% of responses while dermatolic conditions such as dermatitis or alopecia were reported by 10.8% of responses. Old age is listed as the third most frequent cause of death.\nHip dysplasia is uncommon in Salukis, with the breed ranking joint lowest in a survey by the British Veterinary Association in 2003. The breed scored an average of 5 points, with a score of 0 being low, while 106 is high.\nHistory.\nThe Saluki's ancestors were historically bred in the Fertile Crescent, where agriculture originated. Images of running dogs with long, narrow bodies adorn pottery found in Susa, southwest Iran that dates back to 6,000 years ago, despite the depictions bearing erect, pointed ears. Dogs looking similar to Salukis are shown on wall carvings of the Sumerian empire (now Iraq), dating from 6,000 to 7,000 BC. The ancient skeletal remains of a dog identified as being of the greyhound/saluki form was excavated at Tell Brak in modern Syria, and dated to approximately 4,000 years before present. Dogs that look similar to Salukis and Greyhounds were increasingly depicted on Egyptian tombs from the Middle Kingdom (2134 BC\u20131785 BC) onward, however it was during the Eighteenth dynasty of Egypt that Saluki-like dogs rose to prominence, replacing hunting dogs called \"tesem\" (thought to be similar to modern pariah dogs or a generic term for a dog) in ancient Egyptian art. The variety spread southward into the Sudan.\nFrom Iran, such dogs are mentioned in the poetry of Khaghani (1121\u20131190), depicted in miniature paintings of hunting scenes along with horseback archers by Master Kam\u0101l ud-D\u012bn Behz\u0101d (1450\u20131535), depicted in book illustrations by 'Abd al-Wahhab ibn 'Abd al-Fattah ibn 'Ali (1516).\nThe Silk Road was a trading route that stretched from ancient Iran to China. Examples of dogs that look like Salukis were painted by the Chinese, fifth Ming Emperor Zh\u016b Zh\u0101nj\u012b, known more commonly as the Xuande Emperor during the Ming Dynasty (1368\u20131644). The inscription on the painting reads \"playfully painted [by the] imperial brush\" in 1427; additional red seals were added in later years by owners of the painting, which also reveals that the painting was in the Imperial Chinese collection in the 18th century.\nOther earlier artifacts place similar Saluki-like dogs further back in Chinese history to the 7th Century Tang dynasty or even before that. The contemporary Chinese sighthound, the Xigou, is considered to have an ancient history which may be linked to historic Silk Road Saluki imports, but it is notable that in a recent genomic comparison of existing dogs, the Xigou was separated from both groups of sighthounds, the Western, as well Eastern (which includes the Saluki).\nFrom Europe, the legend maintains that the returning crusaders brought Saluki-type dogs from the Middle East. The painting of Henry IV, Duke of Saxony with his hunting dog, painted by Lucas Cranach the Elder in 1514, shows a dog thought by some to represent an ancestral Saluki. The dog wears a collar decorated with a scallop shell, which is the badge of a pilgrim who has traveled the Way of Saint James in Spain. Saluki-type dogs appear in Paolo Veronese's 1573 work \"The Adoration of the Magi\" (also known as the \"Adoration of the Kings\"), currently located at the National Gallery, London. Veronese painted such dogs in another two of his religious paintings: \"The Marriage at Cana\" and \"The Finding of Moses\".\nSheik Hamad ibn Isa Al Khalifa, King of Bahrain during the 1930s, was known for a pack of Salukis that accompanied him throughout the Arab world on hunting trips. Following his death, his son Salman ibn Hamad Al Khalifa attempted to keep the lines pure-bred but they became interbred with other breeds. However, the pure-bred lines of the royal kennel were saved by the efforts of Dana Al Khalifa who was given two pure-bred puppies by the King, and about a decade later had pure-bred Salukis registered with the Kennel Club of Bahrain. Today, the breed is still held in high regard throughout the Middle East and were hunting dogs for nobles and rulers around the region. Although Muslims traditionally regarded dogs as unclean, they made an exception for the Saluki to live in the family tent. Salukis were typically never sold, but could be presented as a mark of honor to people. They are considered clean by the Bedouins, and are allowed to be in women's quarters, while other dogs must be kept outside.\nIn 2014, a DNA study compared dogs and wolves for AMY2B (alpha amylase 2B), which is a gene and enzyme that assists with the first step in the digestion of dietary starch and glycogen. An expansion of this gene in dogs would enable early dogs to exploit a starch-rich diet as they fed on refuse from agriculture. Data indicated that the wolves and dingo had just two copies of the gene and the Siberian husky that is associated with hunter-gatherers had just 3\u20134 copies, \"whereas the saluki, which was historically bred in the Fertile Crescent where agriculture originated, has 29 copies\".\nBreeding in the West.\nIt was not until 1840 that Salukis were first brought to England. Referred to as a \"slughi shami\", they and the modern Sloughi were treated as the same breed; however, recent genetic tests have shown that the two breeds are genetically separate. The first successful modern breeding line of Salukis began in 1895, with Florence Amherst (daughter of the 1st Baron Amherst of Hackney). Having seen salukis on a Nile tour in that year, she imported a breeding pair from the Al Salihah area of Lower Egypt. A champion of breed purity, she struggled alone for nearly three decades, and real popularity of the Saluki in Europe did not take hold until the early 1920s, when officers returning from the Middle Eastern theatre of World War I and from the Arab Revolt brought their pet Salukis home with them.\nOne of these was Brigadier General Frederick Lance of the 19th Lancers, and his wife, Gladys, who returned to Britain with two Salukis from Sarona, Palestine, where he had been stationed during the post-war occupation. The Lances were both keen hunters, and rode with their pack of dogs, including both Salukis and terriers, to course jackal and Dorcas gazelle whilst stationed in the desert. They imported a male, named Sarona Kelb, who became an influence on the breed in the West.\nTogether, the Lances with Florence Amherst mounted a campaign for recognition of the Middle Eastern breed, that coincided with the phenomenon of \"Tutmania\" caused by Howard Carter's discovery of Tutankhamun's tomb in late 1922. In 1923, the Saluki or Gazelle Hound Club was formed, and the Kennel Club granted official recognition to the breed. The first registered Salukis in the Western studbook were Cyrus and Slongha Peri, imported from Iran and registered with the German kennel club Deutscher Windhundzucht- und Rennverband (DWZRV). DWZRV also recorded the first litter born in the West in 1922.\nImports to England during the interwar years were chiefly from areas of British military influence and commerce: Bahrain, Egypt, Transjordan, and Iraq. Both Florence Amherst and the Lances imported breeding stock from the latter two countries. Despite substantial populations of Salukis in Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden, none of these were imported to England.\nEnglish Salukis (chiefly descendants of Sarona Kelb) were exported to many countries, but by the mid-1930s, interest slackened, and with the outbreak of World War II, breeding and show activities almost entirely stopped. The number of litters was minimal \u2013 just enough to keep the breed alive. Food rationing reserved all edible meat for humans, and to prevent the Salukis from dying from starvation or being killed by bombs, some owners euthanised entire kennels. A small number of Saluki kennels in the West survived the war, and along with fresh imports belonging to a second wave of soldiers returning from the Middle East, the slow process of re-establishing the breed began.\nPopularity of Salukis dramatically increased, and the Saluki Club of America was founded in 1927. Salukis were recognised by the Kennel Club (UK) in 1923, and by the American Kennel Club in 1929. The breed is also the mascot of Southern Illinois University Carbondale.\nThe popularity of the Saluki in the United States, according to the American Kennel Club, has remained relatively stable in the 2000s, with the breed ranked 107th in 1999, had decreased to 118th in 2008, but by 2008 had increased once again to 112th. As of 2024, the Saluki has a popularity of 141st of 202. Between 2000 and 2009, 1215 salukis were registered with The Kennel Club in the UK, while this does not approach the numbers of the more popular breeds, it is in line with similar breeds in the hound group such as the Borzoi, which had 1399 puppies registered in the same period. In September 2007, the Kennel Club Art Gallery's 12th exhibition, \"The Saluki in Art\", celebrated the breed, showing a range of exhibits including terracotta and bronze works, along with contemporary artists and a range of trophies from Saluki breed clubs.\nRescue.\nSalukis (or landrace dogs similar to them) are common throughout the Middle East, and are sometimes abandoned. Rescue organisations work with shelters in Qatar, Bahrain, and elsewhere, and directly with a network of rescuers in Kuwait, and Oman, to find the dogs adoptive homes in Europe and North America.\nReferences.\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29163", "revid": "50181603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29163", "title": "Sighthound", "text": "Type of dog\nSighthounds (also called gazehounds) are a type of hound dog that hunts primarily by sight and speed, unlike scent hounds, which rely on scent and endurance.\nAppearance.\nThese dogs specialize in pursuing prey, keeping it in sight, and overpowering it by their great speed and agility. They must be able to detect motion quickly, so they have keen vision. Sighthounds must be able to capture fast, agile prey, such as deer and hares, so they have a very flexible back and long legs for a long stride, a deep chest to support an unusually (compared to other dogs) large heart, very efficient lungs for both anaerobic and aerobic sprints, and a lean, wiry body to keep their weight at a minimum. Sighthounds have unique anatomical and physiological features, likely due to intentional selection for hunting by speed and sight; laboratory studies have established reference intervals for hematology and serum biochemical profiles in sighthounds, some of which are shared by all sighthounds and some of which may be unique to one breed.\nThe typical sighthound type has a light, lean head, which is dolichocephalic in proportion. This shape can create the illusion that their heads are longer than usual. Wolves and other wild dogs are dolichocephalic or mesaticephalic, but some domestic dogs have become brachycephalic (short-headed) due to artificial selection by humans over the course of 12,000 years. Dolichocephalic dogs have a wider field of vision but smaller overlap between the eyes and therefore possibly poorer depth perception in some of their field of view than brachycephalic dogs; most, if not all, dogs have less visual acuity than their antecedent, the wolf. There is no science-based evidence to confirm the popular belief that sighthounds have a higher visual acuity than other types of dogs. However, there is increasing evidence that dolichocephalic dogs, thanks to a higher number of retinal ganglion cells in their \"visual streak\", retain more heightened sensitivity than other dog types to objects and rapid movement in the horizontal field of vision.\nHistory.\nSighthounds such as the Saluki/Sloughi type (both named after the Seleucid Empire) may have existed for at least 5,000 years, with the earliest presumed sighthound remains of a male with a shoulder height around 54\u00a0cm, comparable to a Saluki, appearing in the excavations of Tell Brak dated approximately 4,000 years before present. The earliest complete European description of a sighthound and its work, the Celtic \"vertragus\" from Roman Spain of the 2nd century C.E., comes from Arrian's \"Cynegeticus\". \nA similar type, possibly a moderately sized male sighthound, with a height of 61\u201363\u00a0cm, of approximately the same historic period, the \"Warmington Roman dog\" is described from a well-preserved skeleton found in England.\nSighthound type \"gracile\" bones, dating from the 8th to 9th century CE, anatomically defined as those of a 70 cm (28 in) high \"greyhound\", were genetically compared with the modern Greyhound and other sighthounds and found to be almost identical with the modern Greyhound breed, with the exception of only four deletions and one substitution in the DNA sequences, which were interpreted as differences probably arising from 11 centuries of breeding of this type of sighthound.\nPopulation genomic analysis proposes that true sighthounds originated independently from native dogs and were comprehensively admixed among breeds, supporting the multiple origins hypothesis of sighthounds.\nAlthough today most sighthounds are kept primarily as pets, some of them may have been bred for as many as thousands of years to detect movement of prey, then chase, capture, and kill it primarily by speed. They thrive on physical activity. Some have mellow personalities, others are watchful or even hostile towards strangers, but the instinct to chase running animals remains strong.\nApart from coursing and hunting, various dog sports are practiced with purebred sighthounds, and sometimes with lurchers and longdogs. Such sports include racing, lure coursing, and other events.\nBreeds considered to be controversial, not having by origin a sighthound function.\nA number of breeds or types of dogs which do not hunt solely by speed and sight, as well as a number of non-hunting breeds, are currently being recognized as sighthounds, either formally or informally by kennel clubs, or lure and live coursing clubs. These include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKennel club classification.\nWhen competing in conformation shows, most Anglophone kennel clubs, including the American Kennel Club and The Kennel Club (UK), group pedigree sighthound breeds together with scent hounds in a Hound Group, the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Cynologique Internationale groups them in a dedicated Sighthound Group, whilst the United Kennel Club groups them in a Sighthound and Pariah Group.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "29164", "revid": "49636717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29164", "title": "Scottish Deerhound", "text": "The Scottish Deerhound, or simply the Deerhound, is a breed of large sighthound, once bred to hunt the red deer by coursing. In outward appearance it is similar to the Greyhound, but larger and more heavily boned, with a rough coat.\nHistory.\nThe Hilton of Cadboll Stone dates from around 1200 years ago, and depicts at the bottom of the panel a deer being chased by two large dogs and two armed horsemen. However, systematic zooarchaeology and genetics have yet to show any connection between those symbolic representations of dog types and the modern breed, which only became widely known as the \"Scottish Deerhound\" related to English regional greyhounds, such as the Highland greyhound in the early 19th century. The Deerhound was in earlier times believed to be descended from old Gaelic hounds, and therefore closely related to the Irish Wolfhound, it was in fact the major foundation breed in the late 19th century of the modern Irish Wolfhound.\nThe Deerhound was bred to hunt red deer by coursing and deer-stalking until the end of the nineteenth century. With modern rifles and smaller deer-forests, slower tracking dogs were preferred to fast and far-running Deerhounds. In coursing deer, a single Deerhound or a pair was brought as close as possible to red deer, then released to run one of them down by speed, which if successful would happen within a few minutes \u2014 rarely were there successful sustained chases.\nAnne of Denmark, queen consort of James VI and I, sent deer hounds as gifts to her brother Christian IV of Denmark. With the eventual demise of the clan systems in Scotland, these hunting dogs became sporting animals for landowners and the nobility, but were also bred and hunted with by common folk when feasible. As fast and silent hunters they made quick work of any game the size of a hare or larger and were highly regarded by nobility and poachers alike. One of the most precarious times in the breed's history seems to have been towards the end of the nineteenth century, when many of the large Scottish estates were split into small estates for sporting purposes, and few then kept Deerhounds. The new fashion was for stalking and shooting, which required only a tracking dog to follow the wounded animal, using a collie or similar breed. Although a few estates still employed Deerhounds for their original work, the breed was left in the hands of a few enthusiasts who made them a show breed.\nTeddy Roosevelt wrote that some Canadian and American hunters used \"the greyhound, whether the smooth-haired, or the rough-coated Scotch deer-hound\" on the wolf and deer Dr. Q van Hummell also remarks on his Deerhound pack being used on timber wolves and coyotes.\nIn Australia, Deerhounds and their cross-breeds such as the Kangaroo Dog have historically been used to hunt the kangaroo as well as wild boar, modern descriptions of such hunts with Deerhounds on kangaroo and emu have been recorded by Kenneth Cassels.\nDescription.\nIn outward appearance, the Scottish Deerhound is similar to the Greyhound, but larger and more heavily boned. However, Deerhounds have a number of characteristics that set them apart. While not as fast as a Greyhound on a smooth, firm surface, once the going gets rough or heavy they can outrun a Greyhound. The environment in which they worked, the cool, often wet, and hilly Scottish Highland glens, contributed to the larger, rough-coated appearance of the breed.\nThe Scottish Deerhound resembles a rough-coated greyhound. It is however, larger in size and bone. Minimum desirable height at withers of males is 30 inches (75\u201380\u00a0cm) or more, weight ; height of females from upwards, weight from . It is one of the tallest sighthounds, with a harsh long coat and mane, somewhat softer beard and moustache, and softer hair on breast and belly. It has small, dark \"rose\" ears which are soft and folded back against the head unless held semi-erect in excitement.\nThe harsh, wiry coat in modern dogs is only seen in self-coloured various shades of grey (blue-grey is preferred). Historically, Deerhounds also could be seen with true brindle, yellow, and red fawn coats, or combinations. 19th century Scottish paintings tend to indicate these colours were associated with a wire haired coat, but, with show breeders preferring a dark, longer coat, these genes now appear to be lost. The geneticist R. J\u00f6dicke said \u2013 During the 20th century the Deerhound evolved to a single-coloured breed by selection for a grey coat. Some other coat colours are documented in historical sources but have definitely been lost. The recent colour of adult Deerhounds shows little variation. i.e. in the degree of darkness of the grey colour and the occurrence of a fawn shade. Altogether the Deerhound must be characterised as the breed with the most uniform colouration within all sighthounds\". A white chest and toes are allowed, and a slight white tip to the tail; a white blaze on the head or a white collar are not accepted.\nThe head is long, skull flat, with little stop and a tapering muzzle. The eyes are dark, dark brown or hazel in colour. The teeth should form a level, complete scissor bite. The long straight or curved tail, well covered with hair, should almost reach the ground.\nHealth.\nA 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 10.5 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.\nA survey conducted by the British Small Animal Veterinary Association of The Kennel Club recognised breed club members found the most common cause of death was cardiac related making up nearly a quarter of all deaths. The second most common was cancer, making up 18% of deaths.\nLaboratory studies have established reference intervals for haematology and serum biochemical profiles in Deerhounds, some of which are shared by all sighthounds, and some of which may be unique to this breed.\nDilated cardiomyopathy has a higher prevalence in the Scottish Deerhound. In one American study 6% of Scottish Deerhounds had the condition, the highest of any breed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29165", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29165", "title": "Sloughi", "text": "The Sloughi (; ), or Arabian Greyhound, is an ancient breed of domesticated dog, specifically a member of the sighthound family. It originates from North Africa and is found in Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt.\nHistory.\nThe Sloughi has existed for centuries in North Africa, primarily in Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Libya and Egypt. The word \"sloughi\" is likely a Berber pronunciation of the Arabic \"saluki\", the similarly-looking and -behaving Arabian sighthound; the two breeds likely share a common ancestor. Algerian Neolithic rock paintings, plus tomb paintings and hieroglyphics in Egypt, have been discovered portraying distinctly slender dogs with drooped ears, hinting at the breed's earlier origins. Sloughis are still used for hunting in North African countries, as well as being a reliable familial guard dog. The Sloughi was accepted into the FCI in 1998, receiving recognition by the American Kennel Club as recently as January 1, 2016, and being able to compete in the AKC Hound Group.\nAppearance and description.\nThe Sloughi's head is long and elegant, with droopy ears, similar in appearance to a shorter, thicker-set Greyhound. The body and legs show a defined bone structure supporting strong, lean muscles. The topline is, essentially, horizontal and blends into a gently sloping croup. The tail is long and carried low, like many sighthounds, with an upward curve at the end.\nDespite their physical and superficial similarities, the Sloughi should not be confused with other sighthounds originating from North Africa, the Mediterranean or South Asia, such as the Ibizan Hound, the Saluki, or the aforementioned Greyhound, nor with the more distantly-originating Afghan Hound or the Russian Borzoi. However, much in the same vein as these related breeds, the Sloughi was traditionally bred for coursing and to pursue such game as hare, fox, jackals, gazelle and other antelope, deer, or terrestrial birds (such as sand grouse), among other small or mid-sized animals. \nThe Sloughi is an ancient breed, treasured in North Africa for its natural prey drive, coursing skills, speed, agility, and endurance over long distances. It is a robust, yet elegant and racy, sighthound with evenly proportioned limbs, back and tail. Like most other sighthounds, the Sloughi will adapt quite well to arid locations, its innate \"drought-tolerance\" adding to its overall value. Likewise, Sloughi are not bred to be fragile or timid dogs. Their overall persona is one of nobility, but somewhat aloof, with a regal air of \"class\"; the expression of the dark eyes is gentle, thoughtful, and melancholy. In places where they are still used as coursing sighthounds, their appearances can vary by locality, based on breeding situations, hybridisation and unique climatic or environmental adaptations.\nTemperament.\nThe Sloughi is a primitive hunting breed that bonds extremely closely with its owner or family from an early age.\u00a0They are unlikely to be exceedingly shy or aggressive.\u00a0A well bred and well socialized Sloughi is a stable, attentive, and exceedingly loving family member.\nThe American Sloughi Association standard states that, \u201cThe Sloughi is a dog with class and grace. The attitude is noble and somewhat aloof.\u201d\nBecause of their origins as the hunters and guardians of Sahara nomads and bedouins, the Sloughi is reserved with strangers and takes a while to warm up to new friends.\u00a0The Sloughi also expects reserve from people they meet, and may not appreciate those who are too familiar. The Sloughi is also noted for its primitive instincts, for unlike other sighthound breeds it is highly alert and territorial which made them prized by the Berbers, not only as hunters, but as fearless watch dogs.\nImproperly socialized Sloughis can be shy and or aggressive towards other dogs, and it is critical that breeders consider temperament in their breeding decisions and that puppies receive appropriate socialization from an early age so that they mature into well adjusted adults.\u00a0Their socialization must include not only new people, but new situations, environments and other dogs.\nSloughis that are accustomed to children are excellent with children. As with all breeds, children need to be taught to respect dogs and not to mistreat them.\nThey require ample daily exercise in order to meet their physical, emotional and mental needs.\u00a0This is not a breed that is well suited to apartment life without a planned regimen of daily exercise that includes galloping freely.\nSloughis have been bred for millennia to course game and as a result have extremely high prey drive. They can be wonderful with cats, small dogs and other animals if they are introduced at an early age and learn that these other pets are not prey.\nThe Sloughi's character is also tender and intelligent and they are sensitive to correction. They must be trained with methods that are also intelligent and sensitive.\u00a0Heavy-handed or corporal training methods are not effective for any breed, but they are especially deleterious to the character of sighthounds.\nHealth.\nOnly a few genetic conditions have been confirmed in the breed. These include certain autoimmune disorders, such as Addison's disease and irritable bowel syndrome and progressive retinal atrophy. The Sloughi is one of the breeds for whom a genetic test for progressive retinal atrophy has been developed to with a simple blood test. Like all sighthounds, the Sloughi is very sensitive to anesthesia, and can be sensitive to vaccines, worming, and other medications\u2014so these routine treatments should be spaced apart instead of given all at once. The breed tends to enjoy excellent health into old age.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29166", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29166", "title": "Galgo Espa\u00f1ol", "text": "The Galgo Espa\u00f1ol or Spanish Greyhound is a Spanish breed of dog of sighthound type, bred specifically for coursing hare and other game. The English greyhound is possibly a descendant of the Spanish greyhound and, for several years in the 20th century, some breeders did cross-breed Galgos and Greyhounds in order to produce faster and more powerful Galgos, specifically for track racing purposes.\nHistory.\nThe Spanish greyhound is thought to have descended from Egyptian dogs (Sloughi) brought to the Iberian Peninsula during the Muslim conquest. However the existence of the Celtic \"vertragus\" in Roman Iberia 2,000 years ago, as described by Arrian and Martial, suggests that it and its possible descendant the Galgo, may more likely be of Central European type in origin. After it was established in Spain, it is thought to have been cross-bred centuries later with the Sloughi brought from North Africa by the Moors. Some writers suggest that this breed may be ancestral to the English Greyhound.\nThe Galgo name is probably derived from the Latin or 'Dog from Gaul'. The Spanish word for all kinds of Greyhounds \u2014 including the Galgo \u2014 is , which means 'harrier' or 'dog for chasing hares', since is Spanish for 'hare'. The same derivative is seen in the Italian and the French . The first written references to an ancient Celtic sighthound, the , in the \"Cynegeticus\" of Flavius Arrianus (Arrian), Roman proconsul of the Spanish province of Baetica in the second century, may refer to the Galgo's antecedent.\nArrian described his personal experience in Spain. His description of hare hunting is very similar to that used with the Galgo nowadays in Spain, adding that it was a general Celtic tradition not related to social class. He indicated that there were not only smooth-haired types of the but also rough-coated ones.\nThere is little evidence for mention of the Galgo or its antecedent in the first centuries of the Middle Ages, but it appeared to have survived and flourished in the second half of the period.\nIn the 9th and 10th centuries, the frontier between Christian and Muslim territories shifted southwards, and vast areas of Castile were newly settled. This open land introduced a new mode of hunting with dogs: while the North of Spain is mountainous, the regions progressively recovered were flat, open areas full of small animals like hares, which provided the Galgo a useful opportunity for hunting. At that time it was considered a noble dog, and was kept mainly by the aristocracy of both the Christian and the Muslim kingdoms in which Spanish territory was still divided. It is likely that the Galgo and the Sloughi (perhaps also Saluki) were interbred during this period.\nThe great esteem in which the Galgo was held is evident by the many laws of the time designed to punish the killing or theft of the breed: Fuero of Salamanca (9th century); Fuero of Cuenca; Fuero of Zorita de los Canes; Fuero of Molina de Arag\u00f3n (12th century); Fuero of Usagre (12th century). In the Cartuario of Slonza is a will written in Villacantol in which, using an odd mixture of Latin and Spanish, the Mayor Guti\u00e9rrez bequeaths a Galgo to Diego Citid in the year 1081:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'a black Galgo with patches of silver';\nThat this dog was a significant item in a noble's will demonstrates the great value accorded it at the time.\nThe mural paintings at the Hermitage of San Baudelio de Berlanga, in Soria, dating from the 12th century show a hunting scene with three Galgos apparently identical to the ones that we can see today.\nIn the Renaissance Mart\u00ednez del Espinar writes in his book (\"The Art of Hunting and Archery\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'There is a large variety of ways to kill these animals [the hares]. 'Nevertheless, I will tell of those that are used in Spain: they hunt them with Galgos, since here there are some extremely swift ones, although some hares are as swift as them, and sometimes do get away from them. But even having run and got scared today, these hares will come back to their homes tomorrow. They know the way back. They spend the night in some quiet place: a road, a hill, a stony field. In fact they are sometimes surprised in such places by the dogs; then they run away down to the plain, and the dogs try to chase them over the flat ground. They seem to fly.'\nThe Galgo appears to have developed first in the Castillian plains, both in the north (Valladolid, Zamora, \u00c1vila Salamanca, Segovia, Soria, Burgos and Palencia) and the south (Toledo, Cuenca, Guadalajara, Madrid and Ciudad Real) of Castilla. And, afterwards, in more southern territories: La Mancha and Andalusia.\nIt became the typical dog type of the Spanish interior, while the bloodhound plays the same role in the coast regions.\nThe Galgo appears not only in hunting books but also in common Spanish expressions, as well as in literature. The most famous reference is perhaps the one contained in the opening sentence of :\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'In a village of La Mancha, the name of which I have no desire to call to mind, there lived not long since one of those gentlemen that keep a lance in the lance-rack, an old buckler, a lean hack, and a galgo for coursing.'\nThere are plenty of common expressions in Spain that name the Galgo: for example,\n, which means 'use old Galgos for chasing hares instead of rabbits', suggesting that it is best to use experienced people for hard tasks and challenges.\n, meaning 'if a Galgo tries to chase two hares, it will return with none', recommending focussing on a single effort, otherwise failing by distraction.\nAlthough the breed did not apparently experience any significant change in the 18th and 19th centuries, and was kept in its vocation as a swift hunting dog, maybe the most telling proverb which mentions the Galgo is one dating from the beginning of the nineteenth century: ; 'The hare never escapes from the King's Galgos', which was used at first to satirize the corrupt government of Fernando VII, considered to cheat in everything it did.\nIn the first years of the 20th century, large scale crossbreeding occurred between the Galgo and the English Greyhound in order to create faster dogs for professional track racing. This certainly affected the purity of the breed as the resulting dogs were just a bit faster, but did lose their long-distance-running abilities. Finally breeders came to the conclusion that it was not worth crossbreeding.\nThe purebred Galgo kept its major presence in the Spanish villages as an excellent hunting type.\nDespite its antiquity and importance, the Spanish Galgo has only recently been acknowledged by cynological associations. The English Greyhound has tended to outshine the Galgo. The breed faces the 21st century progressively more appreciated at home and abroad, as contemporary Spain becomes more conscious of the uniqueness and heritage of this animal.\nDescription.\nAppearance.\nGalgos are similar in appearance to Greyhounds, but are distinctly different in their conformation. Galgos are higher in the rear than in the front and have flatter muscling than a Greyhound, which is characteristic of endurance runners. They also tend to be smaller, lighter in build, have longer tails and have a very long, streamlined head that gives the impression of larger ears. Their chests are not as deep as a Greyhound's and should not reach the point of the elbow.\nUnlike Greyhounds, Galgos come in two coat types: smooth and rough. The rough coat can provide extra protection from skin injuries while running in the field. They come in a variety of colors and coat patterns. Main colors are or (brindle), (black), (golden), (toasted), (cinnamon), (yellow), (red), (white), (white with patches) or (any colour with white muzzle and forehead).\nHealth.\nLike many other sighthounds, Galgos are a fairly healthy breed, although they are sensitive to anaesthesia.\nRoles.\nHunting use.\nThe Galgo is used for hunting, as well as for coursing the hare in an open field where dogs hunt prey without human intervention during the chase. Coursing, was in the past an act of social prestige in which hunting was a pretext to prove who had the best specimens of the breed.\nGalgos are commonly found in any of the towns and cities of the Spanish plains. Galgo coursing competitions generate annually in the order of sixty million euros , a calculation which refers only to those aficionados which are members of the societies. This lesser group of galgueros train annually between three thousand and four thousand Galgos for participation in the various Open Field Coursing Championships. This type of testing event, where each year the fastest athletic winner is rewarded, seems to show that the galgueros are retrieving the more authentic type of breed that was lost years ago. \nCrossbreeding of the Galgo with Greyhounds for a faster racing type has ceased for two reasons: On one hand, in contemporary Galgo coursing, the killing of the hare is secondary to the beauty of the course. Crossbreeds are considered less beautiful in comparison to pure Galgos. On the other hand, the fact that the hare is protected more than ever against gun hunters, and it is increasingly hardier due to the selection of it having lost much of its natural cover due to the increase of plowed land and proliferation of roads, it promotes coursing with Galgos that have greater endurance. \nThe particular characteristics of landscape topography have a major effect, resulting in those Galgos that win for generations of coursing in Andalusia, not having the same characteristics as Galgos that win for generations of coursing in Castile.\nIn Andalusia and many parts of La Mancha vineyards and olive groves dominate the landscape offering the hare plenty of cover. The warm climates there provides the hare throughout the year abundant fodder without it having to travel long distances. Additionally it is less stressful for this prey to exist inside large farms without intersecting roads. All these factors will select a winning type of Galgo in this landscape which is smaller, with shorter and more rounded muscling, i.e., higher power in the hindquarters. This is because it must be an agile Galgo which enters and exits the turn faster and more easily. Lighter in weight because of the softness of the ground where reach must be more rapid if less strong, although one property does not necessarily exclude the other.\nIn Castile, with its large open spaces, the hare must travel greater distances in search of food and its only defense being away from cover are its legs, lungs and heart. This type of land and hare promotes another type of Galgo with a hard foot, deeper chest, longer and flatter muscling, ultimately a Galgo with greater endurance. These Galgos are heavier and are more attractive, and in fact have been considered purer of race, necessary for the preservation of the breed.\nOutside of Spain, in Chile (mainly in Central Chile), this breed is used in competitions that take place on national holidays.\nGalgos as pets.\nBecause of a tendency for quietude and docility, Galgos have been adopted as pets by many. In Spain they have a reputation as gentle dogs, with sweet temperaments and solid health. They tend to get along well with people and other dogs, and can be well-behaved around cats if properly socialized. They require daily exercise and stimulation in exchange for their calm demeanor, since they get bored easily. Outside of warm climates, such as their native Spain, they require a warm coat in winter weather. Like all greyhound-type breeds, they have little body fat and short coats, so extra warmth is necessary for colder climates.\nGalgos excel at performance activities like lure coursing and racing. They are eligible to compete in lure coursing events sanctioned by the American Sighthound Field Association, entered in the Limited class. They have enjoyed success in the European show ring, although they are not as well known beyond the European show world due to their rarity outside the continent.\nAnimal cruelty concerns.\nThere are many reports of Galgos being treated cruelly by their hunters and breeders in Spain. An estimated 50,000 to 100,000 Galgos and Podencos are killed, often brutally, each year by their hunters, also known as . Methods of killing reportedly include burning, hanging, stoning, and poisoning, which according to Finnish politician Laura Huhtasaari is \"based on the belief that the more painfully a dog dies, the better luck a hunter will have next year\". Some Galgos are strapped to moving cars as part of their training, which can lead to them being dragged by the car and mangled. Poorly performing dogs are often beaten, mutilated, starved to death, thrown down wells or hung from trees by their owners. Abusing dogs that hunt poorly was a widespread practice, as there were no penalties for hunters. A new law, as of January 5, 2022, amends the Civil Code to provide that animals may no longer be considered 'things' but 'sentient beings' and family members, and that animal owners are now required to provide proper care to ensure their animals\u2019 well-being in accordance with the characteristics of each species.\nFor the reasons described above, associations in defense of the Galgo have appeared with the aim to save these dogs from a terrible fate, provide much needed rehabilitation and find them adoptive homes, usually in the cities. Some associations will adopt them to other locations in Europe, including France, the U.K., Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29167", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29167", "title": "Stephen Bachiler", "text": "English clergyman (1561\u20131656)\nStephen Bachiler (About 1561 \u2013 28 October 1656) was an English clergyman who was an early proponent of the separation of church and state in the American Colonies. He was also among the first settlers of Hampton, New Hampshire.\nEarly life.\nBachiler was born about 1560 or 1561; he matriculated at Oxford University 17 November 1581, when it is believed he was 20. Also called age 70 on 23 June 1631 when he made a trip to Flushing, Zeeland, to visit family. An early graduate of Oxford (St. John's College, 1586), he was vicar of Wherwell, Hampshire (1587\u20131605) when ousted for Puritanical leanings under James I. Bachiler is said to have married Ann (no evidence of surname), who was possibly (no proof has been found) a sister of Rev. John Bates (who succeeded Bachiler as Vicar at Wherwell), about 1590, with whom he had six children: Nathaniel, Deborah, Stephen, Samuel, Ann, and Theodate, who later married Christopher Hussey (1599\u20131686), also one of the earliest settlers of New Hampshire.\nBachiler had a second marriage to Christian Weare, widow, in 1623. She died before 1627. His third marriage, in 1627, was to Helena Mason, the widow of Revd. Thomas Mason of Odiham, Hampshire; Mary, the daughter of Helena and Thomas Mason, was married to Richard Dummer, who also became involved in the founding of the Plough Company.\nPlough Company and immigration.\nIn 1630 he was a member of the \"Company of Husbandmen\" in London and with them, as the Plough Company, obtained a 1,600 mile\u00b2 (4,000\u00a0km\u00b2) grant of land in Maine from the Plymouth Council for New England. The colony was called \"Lygonia\" after Cecily Lygon, mother of New England Council president Sir Ferdinando Gorges. Bachiler was to be its minister and leader. Although the settlers sailed to America in the winter of 1630\u20131631, the project was abandoned. The plough and the image of a sun rising from its base feature on Bachiler's coat-of-arms which were included in a 1661 work on the origins of heraldry by Sylvanus Morgan.\nBachiler was accompanied to America, on the ship \"William &amp; Francis\" (5 June 1632) after an 88-day journey, by his third wife, Helena and his \"family\". Exactly who came with Rev. Bachiler is unknown. The families of his children Nathaniel, Deborah, Ann &amp; Theodate are all later found in New England.\nLynn and Newbury, Massachusetts.\nBachiler was 70 years old when he reached Boston in 1632, and gathered his followers to establish the First Church of Lynn (then Saugus). He incurred the hostility of the Puritan theocracy in Boston, being believed to have cast the only dissenting vote among ministers against the expulsion of Roger Williams. Despite his age, he was uncommonly energetic, and throughout some two decades pursued settlement and church endeavors, always engaged in controversy and confrontation with Bay Colony leaders.\nBy 1636, Bachiler had moved to Newbury, Massachusetts, with his son-in-law Captain Christopher Hussey. The men were following their cousin Richard Dummer who had taken up a large farm. Bachiler and Hussey like-wise received similar grants of land.\nHampton, New Hampshire.\nIn 1638, Bachiler and others, including his son-in-law Christopher Hussey, successfully petitioned to begin a new plantation at Winnacunnet, to which he gave the name Hampton when the town was incorporated in 1639. His ministry there became embroiled in controversy when Timothy Dalton was sent to the town as \"teaching assistant\" by the Boston church after New Hampshire was absorbed by Massachusetts in 1641. Shortly thereafter, Bachiler was excommunicated by the Hampton church on unfounded charges of \"scandal\", but protested to Governor Winthrop and was later reinstated. In other respects, Bachiler's reputation was such that in 1642, he was asked by Thomas Gorges, deputy governor of the Province of Maine, to act as arbitration \"umpire\" (deciding judge) in a Saco Court land dispute between George Cleeve and John Winter.\nMaine.\nBy 1644, Cleeve had become deputy governor of \"Lygonia\", a rival province to that of Gorges' in Maine established from a resurrected Plough Patent, and asked Bachiler to be its minister at Casco. Bachiler deferred, having already received a call to be minister for the new town of Exeter. Once again Massachusetts intervened in his affairs when the General Court ordered deferral of any church at Exeter. Frustrated in his attempts at a new ministry, Bachiler left Hampton and went as missionary to Strawbery Banke (now Portsmouth, New Hampshire) probably that same year 1644. While there, he married in 1648 (his fourth wife) a young widow, Mary Beedle of Kittery, Maine. In 1651, she was indicted and sentenced for adultery with a neighbor. There are scholars who believe that she was the model of the character of Hester Prynne in \"The Scarlet Letter\".\nEmigration to England and death.\nDenied a divorce by the Massachusetts Court, Bachiler finally returned to England about 1653. His children who had stayed in England were well off and able to take care of him. Bachiler died near London, and the burial register of All Hallows Staining records that he was buried on 31 October 1656 at the New Churchyard.\nLegacy.\nThe biographical entry in Robert Charles Anderson's look at the early immigrants says of Bachiler: \"Among the many remarkable lives lived by early New Englanders, Bachiler's is the most remarkable.\" The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York holds the (Bachiler-Hussey) \"Joined armchair\", dated 1650\u20131700. The chair was possibly commissioned prior to Bachiler's voyage back to England and is made from white oak. Bachiler's son-in-law, Captain Christopher Hussey acquired the chair when Bachiler, \"gave him (Hussey) all of his estate\"; this was owing to the absence of any dowry accompanying Theodate Hussey, Bachiler's daughter. The chair subsequently remained in Bachiler's family for generations, being given to the museum in 2010.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29168", "revid": "49371786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29168", "title": "Soap (disambiguation)", "text": "Soap is a surfactant cleaning compound used for personal or other cleaning.\nSOAP is a computer network protocol (originally an acronym for Simple Object Access Protocol), a protocol specification in computer networks.\nSoap or SOAP may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29171", "revid": "50856344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29171", "title": "Declaration of Sentiments", "text": "1848 document signed by attendees of the Seneca Falls Convention\nThe Declaration of Sentiments, also known as the Declaration of Rights and Sentiments, is a document signed in 1848 by 68 women and 32 men\u2014100 out of some 300 attendees at the first women's rights convention to be organized by women. Held in Seneca Falls, New York, the convention is now known as the Seneca Falls Convention. The principal author of the Declaration was Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who modeled it upon the United States Declaration of Independence. She was a key organizer of the convention along with Lucretia Coffin Mott, and Martha Coffin Wright.\nAccording to the \"North Star,\" published by Frederick Douglass, whose attendance at the convention and support of the Declaration helped pass the resolutions put forward, the document was the \"grand movement for attaining the civil, social, political, and religious rights of women.\"\nBackground.\nEarly activism and the reform movements.\nIn the early 1800s, women were largely relegated to domestic roles as mothers and homemakers, and were discouraged from participating in public life.\u00a0 While they exercised a degree of economic independence in the colonial era, they were increasingly barred from meaningfully participating in the workforce and relegated to domestic and service roles near the turn of the 19th century. Coverture laws also meant that women remained legally subordinated under their husbands.\nThe decades leading up to the Seneca Falls Convention and the signing of the Declaration saw a small but steadily-growing movement pushing for women\u2019s rights.\u00a0 Egalitarian ideas within the U.S. had already seen limited circulation in the years following the American Revolution, in the works of writers including James Otis and Charles Brockden Brown.\u00a0 These sentiments began to emerge more widely with the advent of the Second Great Awakening, a period of Protestant revival and debate in the first half of the 19th century that led to widespread optimism and the development of various .\nThe first advocates for women\u2019s rights, including Frances Wright and Ernestine Rose, were focused on improving economic conditions and marriage laws for women.\u00a0 However, the growth of political reform movements, most notably the abolitionist movement, provided female activists with a platform from which they could effectively push for greater political rights and suffrage.\u00a0 The involvement of women such as Angelina Grimke and her sister Sarah Moore in the anti-slavery campaigns attracted substantial controversy and divided abolitionists, but also laid the groundwork for active female participation in public affairs. \u00a0\nA major catalyst for the women\u2019s rights movement would come at the 1840 World Anti-Slavery Convention in London.\u00a0 With a majority vote from the male attendees, American female delegates were barred from fully partaking in the proceedings.\u00a0 This experience, a vivid illustration of women\u2019s status as second-class citizens, was what motivated prominent activists Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton to begin advocating for women\u2019s rights. \u00a0\nBy the time of the Seneca Falls Convention, the early women\u2019s rights movement had already achieved several major political and legal successes.\u00a0 Marital legislative reforms and the repeal of coverture in several state jurisdictions such as New York was achieved through the introduction of Married Woman's Property Acts. Women\u2019s rights and suffrage also gained exposure when they were included in the 1848 platform of Liberty Party U.S. presidential candidate Gerrit Smith, the first cousin of Elizabeth Stanton.\nThe Seneca Falls Convention.\nThe Seneca Falls Convention in 1848 was the first women\u2019s rights conference in the United States.\u00a0 Held at the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Seneca Falls, New York, it was predominantly organised by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, with the assistance of Lucretia Mott and local female Quakers.\u00a0 Despite the relative inexperience of the organisers, the event attracted approximately 300 attendees, including around 40 men.\u00a0 Among the dignitaries was the legendary slavery abolitionist Frederick Douglass, who argued eloquently for the inclusion of suffrage in the convention\u2019s agenda.\"\u201cNature has given woman the same powers, and subjected her to the same earth, breathes the same air, subsists on the same food, physical, moral, mental and spiritual. She has, therefore, an equal right with man, in all efforts to obtain and maintain a perfect existence.\u201d\"Over two days, the attendees heard addresses from speakers including Stanton and Mott, voted on a number of resolutions and deliberated on the text of the Declaration.\u00a0 At the conclusion of the convention, the completed Declaration was signed by over 100 attendees, including 68 women and 32 men.\nRhetoric.\nOverview.\nElizabeth Cady Stanton\u2019s Declaration of Rights and Sentiments utilises similar rhetoric to the United States Declaration of Independence by Thomas Jefferson, a gesture which was neither an accident nor a submissive action. Such a purposeful mimicking of language and form meant that Stanton tied together the complaints of women in America with the Declaration of Independence, in order to ensure that in the eyes of the American people, such requests were not seen as overly radical.\nUsing Jefferson\u2019s document as a model, Stanton also linked together the independence of America from Britain with the \u2018patriarchy\u2019 in order to emphasise how both were unjust forms of governance from which people needed to be freed.\nTherefore, through such a familiar phrasing of arguments and issues that the women of the new American republic were facing, Stanton\u2019s use of Jefferson rhetoric can be seen as an attempt to deflect the hostility that women faced when calling for new socio-political freedoms, as well as to make the claims of women as \u201cself-evident\u201d as the rights given to men following from the gaining of independence from Britain.\nSpecific examples.\nThe foremost example of such mimicking of rhetoric is provided in the preamble of both texts. Stanton successfully manipulates Jefferson\u2019s words, changing \u201call men are created equal\u201d to \u201call men and women are created equal\u201d where Stanton and the signatories of her declaration establish that women both hold and are deserving of \u201cinalienable rights\u201d.\nStanton\u2019s link between the Patriarchal government and the British rule over the American colonies is also at the forefront of the declaration, changing the words in Jefferson\u2019s document from \u201cSuch has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government\u201d to \u201cSuch has been the patient sufferance of the women under this government, and such is now the necessity which constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled\u201d. Such a slight change to rhetoric, ensured the continuous linkage between the struggles entwined within both declarations.\nFurther changes to the demands of the original Declaration of independence also occurred, as Stanton places forward her arguments for greater socio-political freedoms for women. Stantons\u2019 manifesto, mimicking the form of the Declaration of Independence, protests the poor condition of women\u2019s education, women\u2019s position in the church and the exclusion of women from employment in a similar manner to which Jefferson\u2019s original Declaration protests the British governance of the colonies.\nEffects of rhetoric.\nThe direct effects of Stanton\u2019s use of Jefferson\u2019s rhetoric on people of the time is unquantifiable. However, whilst Stanton had an intended effect in mind, the reality is that the use of the similar rhetoric was not as effective as was hoped, as only around 100 of the 300 men and women who attended the convention eventually ended up signing the document.\nFurthermore, whilst Stanton intended for changes to be made immediately after the Seneca Falls Convention, it was the ending of the American Civil War and the Reconstruction Period before women's rights movements become increasingly mainstream and actual change was effected.\nOpening paragraphs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one portion of the family of man to assume among the people of the earth a position different from that which they have hitherto occupied, but one to which the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes that impel them to such a course.\nWe hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men and women are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; that to secure these rights governments are instituted, deriving their powers from the consent of the governed. Whenever any form of government becomes destructive of these rights, it is the right of those who suffer from it to refuse allegiance to it, and to insist upon the institution of a new government, laying its foundation on such principles, and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.\nPrudence, indeed, will dictate that governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shown that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed, but when a long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their duty to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security. Such has been the patient sufferance of the women under this government, and such is now the necessity which constrains them to demand the equal station to which they are entitled.\nThe history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usurpation on the part of man toward woman, having in direct object the establishment of an absolute tyranny over her. To prove this, let facts be submitted to a candid world.\nClosing remarks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now, in view of this entire disfranchisement of one-half the people of this country, their social and religious degradation\u2014in view of the unjust laws above mentioned, and because women do feel themselves aggrieved, oppressed, and fraudulently deprived of their most sacred rights, we insist that they have immediate admission to all the rights and privileges which belong to them as citizens of these United States.\nIn entering upon the great work before us, we anticipate no small amount of misconception, misrepresentation, and ridicule; but we shall use every instrumentality within our power to effect our object. We shall employ agents, circulate tracts, petition the State and national Legislatures, and endeavor to enlist the pulpit and the press in our behalf. We hope this Convention will be followed by a series of Conventions, embracing every part of the country.\nSignatories.\nSigners of the Declaration at Seneca Falls in order:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "29172", "revid": "14660971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29172", "title": "Semiclassical model", "text": ""}
{"id": "29174", "revid": "50691210", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29174", "title": "Social class", "text": "Hierarchical stratification of societies\nA social class or social stratum is a grouping of people into a set of hierarchical social categories, the most common ones being: the working class, the middle class and the upper class. Membership of a social class is commonly considered dependent on education, wealth, occupation, income, and belonging to a particular subculture or social network.\nClass is a subject of analysis for sociologists, political scientists, anthropologists and social historians. The term has a wide range of sometimes conflicting meanings, and there is no broad consensus on a definition of class. Some people argue that due to social mobility, class boundaries do not exist. In common parlance, the term social class is usually synonymous with socioeconomic class, defined as \"people having the same social, economic, cultural, political or educational status\", e.g. the working class, \"an emerging professional class\" etc. However, academics distinguish social class from socioeconomic status, using the former to refer to one's relatively stable cultural background and the latter to refer to one's current social and economic situation which is consequently more changeable over time.\nThe precise measurements of what determines social class in society have varied over time. Karl Marx defined class by one's relationship to the means of production (their relations of production). His understanding of classes in modern capitalist society is that the proletariat work but do not own the means of production, and the bourgeoisie, those who invest and live off the surplus generated by the proletariat's operation of the means of production, do not work at all. This contrasts with the view of the sociologist Max Weber, who contrasted class as determined by economic position, with social status (\"Stand)\" which is determined by social prestige rather than simply just relations of production. The term class is etymologically derived from the Latin \"classis\", which was used by census takers to categorize citizens by wealth in order to determine military service obligations.\nIn the late 18th century, the term class began to replace classifications such as estates, rank and orders as the primary means of organizing society into hierarchical divisions. This corresponded to a general decrease in significance ascribed to hereditary characteristics and increase in the significance of wealth and income as indicators of position in the social hierarchy.\nThe existence of social classes is considered normal in many societies, both historic and modern, to varying degrees.\nHistory.\nAncient Egypt.\nThe existence of a class system dates back to times of Ancient Egypt, where the position of elite was also characterized by literacy. The wealthier people were at the top in the social order and common people and slaves being at the bottom. However, the class was not rigid; a man of humble origins could ascend to a high post.\nThe ancient Egyptians viewed men and women, including people from all social classes, as essentially equal under the law, and even the lowliest peasant was entitled to petition the vizier and his court for redress.\nFarmers made up the bulk of the population, but agricultural produce was owned directly by the state, temple, or noble family that owned the land. Farmers were also subject to a labor tax and were required to work on irrigation or construction projects in a corv\u00e9e system. Artists and craftsmen were of higher status than farmers, but they were also under state control, working in the shops attached to the temples and paid directly from the state treasury. Scribes and officials formed the upper class in ancient Egypt, known as the \"white kilt class\" in reference to the bleached linen garments that served as a mark of their rank. The upper class prominently displayed their social status in art and literature. Below the nobility were the priests, physicians, and engineers with specialized training in their field. It is unclear whether slavery as understood today existed in ancient Egypt; there is difference of opinions among authors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Not a single Egyptian was, in our sense of the word, free. No individual could call in question a hierarchy of authority which culminated in a living god.\nAlthough slaves were mostly used as indentured servants, they were able to buy and sell their servitude, work their way to freedom or nobility, and were usually treated by doctors in the workplace.\nElsewhere.\nIn Ancient Greece, when the clan system was declining, the classes replaced the clan society when it became too small to sustain the needs of increasing population. The division of labor is also essential for the growth of classes.\nHistorically, social class and behavior were laid down in law. For example, permitted mode of dress in some times and places was strictly regulated, with sumptuous dressing only for the high ranks of society and aristocracy, whereas sumptuary laws stipulated the dress and jewelry appropriate for a person's social rank and station. In Europe, these laws became increasingly commonplace during the Middle Ages. However, these laws were prone to change due to societal changes, and in many cases, these distinctions may either almost disappear, such as the distinction between a patrician and a plebeian being almost erased during the late Roman Republic.\nJean-Jacques Rousseau had a large influence over political ideals of the French Revolution because of his views of inequality and classes. Rousseau saw humans as \"naturally pure and good,\" meaning that humans from birth were seen as innocent and any evilness was learned. He believed that social problems arise through the development of society and suppress the innate pureness of humankind. He also believed that private property is the main reason for social issues in society because private property creates inequality through the property's value. Even though his theory predicted if there were no private property then there would be wide spread equality, Rousseau accepted that there will always be social inequality because of how society is viewed and run.\nLater Enlightenment thinkers viewed inequality as valuable and crucial to society's development and prosperity. They also acknowledged that private property will ultimately cause inequality because specific resources that are privately owned can be stored and the owners profit off of the deficit of the resource. This can create competition between the classes that was seen as necessary by these thinkers. This also creates stratification between the classes keeping a distinct difference between lower, poorer classes and the higher, wealthier classes.\nIndia (\u2191), Nepal, North Korea (\u2191), Sri Lanka (\u2191) and some Indigenous peoples maintain social classes today.\nIn class societies, class conflict has tended to recur or is ongoing, depending on the sociological and anthropolitical perspective. Class societies have not always existed; there have been widely different types of class communities. For example, societies based on age rather than capital. During colonialism, social relations were dismantled by force, which gave rise to societies based on the social categories of waged labor, private property, and capital.\nClass society.\nClass society or class-based society is an organizing principle society in which ownership of property, means of production, and wealth is the determining factor of the distribution of power, in which those with more property and wealth are stratified higher in the society and those without access to the means of production and without wealth are stratified lower in the society. In a class society, at least implicitly, people are divided into distinct social strata, commonly referred to as social classes or castes. The nature of class society is a matter of sociological research. Class societies exist all over the globe in both industrialized and developing nations. Class stratification is theorized to come directly from capitalism. In terms of public opinion, nine out of ten people in a Swedish survey considered it correct that they are living in a class society.\nComparative sociological research.\nOne may use comparative methods to study class societies, using, for example, comparison of Gini coefficients, \"de facto\" educational opportunities, unemployment, and culture.\nEffect on the population.\nSocieties with large class differences have a greater proportion of people who suffer from mental health issues such as anxiety and depression symptoms. A series of scientific studies have demonstrated this relationship. Statistics support this assertion and results are found in life expectancy and overall health; for example, in the case of high differences in life expectancy between two Stockholm suburbs. The differences between life expectancy of the poor and less-well-educated inhabitants who live in proximity to the station , and the highly educated and more affluent inhabitants living near Danderyd differ by 18 years.\nSimilar data about New York is also available for life expectancy, average income per capita, income distribution, median income mobility for people who grew up poor, share with a bachelor's degree or higher.\nIn class societies, the lower classes systematically receive lower-quality education and care. There are more explicit effects where those within the higher class actively demonize parts of the lower-class population.\nTheoretical models.\nDefinitions of social classes reflect a number of sociological perspectives, informed by anthropology, economics, psychology and sociology. The major perspectives historically have been Marxism and structural functionalism. The common stratum model of class divides society into a simple hierarchy of working class, middle class and upper class. Within academia, two broad schools of definitions emerge: those aligned with 20th-century sociological stratum models of class society and those aligned with the 19th-century historical materialist economic models of the Marxists and anarchists.\nAnother distinction can be drawn between analytical concepts of social class, such as the Marxist and Weberian traditions, as well as the more empirical traditions such as socioeconomic status approach, which notes the correlation of income, education and wealth with social outcomes without necessarily implying a particular theory of social structure.\nMarxist.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"[Classes are] large groups of people differing from each other by the place they occupy in a historically determined system of social production, by their relation (in most cases fixed and formulated in law) to the means of production, by their role in the social organization of labor, and, consequently, by the dimensions of the share of social wealth of which they dispose and the mode of acquiring it.\"\n \u2014Vladimir Lenin, http:// in June 1919\nFor Marx, class is a combination of objective and subjective factors. Objectively, a class shares a common relationship to the means of production. The class society itself is understood as the aggregated phenomenon to the \"interlinked movement\", which generates the quasi-objective concept of capital. Subjectively, the members will necessarily have some perception (\"class consciousness\") of their similarity and common interest. Class consciousness is not simply an awareness of one's own class interest but is also a set of shared views regarding how society should be organized legally, culturally, socially and politically. These class relations are reproduced through time.\nIn Marxist theory, the class structure of the capitalist mode of production is characterized by the conflict between two main classes: the bourgeoisie, the capitalists who own the means of production and the much larger proletariat (or \"working class\") who must sell their own labour power (wage labour). This is the fundamental economic structure of work and property, a state of inequality that is normalized and reproduced through cultural ideology.\nFor Marxists, every person in the process of production has separate social relationships and issues. Along with this, every person is placed into different groups that have similar interests and values that can differ drastically from group to group. Class is special in that does not relate to specifically to a singular person, but to a specific role.\nMarxists explain the history of \"civilized\" societies in terms of a war of classes between those who control production and those who produce the goods or services in society. In the Marxist view of capitalism, this is a conflict between capitalists (bourgeoisie) and wage-workers (the proletariat). For Marxists, class antagonism is rooted in the situation that control over social production necessarily entails control over the class which produces goods\u2014in capitalism this is the exploitation of workers by the bourgeoisie.\nFurthermore, \"in countries where modern civilisation has become fully developed, a new class of petty bourgeois has been formed\". \"An industrial army of workmen, under the command of a capitalist, requires, like a real army, officers (managers) and sergeants (foremen, over-lookers) who, while the work is being done, command in the name of the capitalist\".\nMarx makes the argument that, as the bourgeoisie reach a point of wealth accumulation, they hold enough power as the dominant class to shape political institutions and society according to their own interests. Marx then goes on to claim that the non-elite class, owing to their large numbers, have the power to overthrow the elite and create an equal society.\nIn \"The Communist Manifesto\", Marx himself argued that it was the goal of the proletariat itself to displace the capitalist system with socialism, changing the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into a future communist society in which: \"the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all\". This would mark the beginning of a classless society in which human needs rather than profit would be motive for production. In a society with democratic control and production for use, there would be no class, no state and no need for financial and banking institutions and money.\nThese theorists have taken this binary class system and expanded it to include contradictory class locations, the idea that a person can be employed in many different class locations that fall between the two classes of proletariat and bourgeoisie. Erik Olin Wright stated that class definitions are more diverse and elaborate through identifying with multiple classes, having familial ties with people in different a class, or having a temporary leadership role.\nWeberian.\nMax Weber formulated a three-component theory of stratification that saw social class as emerging from an interplay between \"class\", \"status\" and \"power\". Weber believed that class position was determined by a person's relationship to the means of production, while status or \"Stand\" emerged from estimations of honor or prestige.\nWeber views class as a group of people who have common goals and opportunities that are available to them. This means that what separates each class from each other is their value in the marketplace through their own goods and services. This creates a divide between the classes through the assets that they have such as property and expertise.\nWeber developed many of his key concepts on social stratification by examining the social structures of various countries. He noted that, contrary to Marx's theories, stratification was based on more than just ownership of capital. Weber pointed out that some members of the aristocracy lacked economic wealth yet still possessed political power. Similarly, in Europe, many wealthy Jewish families lacked prestige and honor because they were considered part of a \"pariah group.\"\nBourdieu.\nFor Bourdieu, the place in the social strata for any person is vaguer than the equivalent in Weberian sociology. Bourdieu introduced an array of concepts of what he refers to as types of capital. These types were economic capital, in the form assets convertible to money and secured as private property. This type of capital is separated from the other types of culturally constituted types of capital, which Bourdieu introduces, which are: personal cultural capital (formal education, knowledge); objective cultural capital (books, art); and institutionalized cultural capital (honours and titles).\nGreat British Class Survey.\nOn 2 April 2013, the results of a survey conducted by BBC Lab UK developed in collaboration with academic experts and slated to be published in the journal \"Sociology\" were published online. The results released were based on a survey of 160,000 residents of the United Kingdom most of whom lived in England and described themselves as \"white\". Class was defined and measured according to the amount and kind of economic, cultural and social resources reported. Economic capital was defined as income and assets; cultural capital as amount and type of cultural interests and activities; and social capital as the quantity and social status of their friends, family and personal and business contacts. This theoretical framework was developed by Pierre Bourdieu who first published his theory of social distinction in 1979.\nThree-level economic class model.\nToday, concepts of social class often assume three general economic categories: a very wealthy and powerful upper class that owns and controls the means of production; a middle class of professional workers, small business owners and low-level managers; and a lower class, who rely on low-paying jobs for their livelihood and experience poverty.\nUpper class.\nThe upper class is the social class composed of those who are rich, well-born, powerful, or a combination of those. They usually wield the greatest political power. In some countries, wealth alone is sufficient to allow entry into the upper class. In others, only people who are born or marry into certain aristocratic bloodlines are considered members of the upper class and those who gain great wealth through commercial activity are looked down upon by the aristocracy as \"nouveau riche\". \nIn the United Kingdom, for example, the upper classes consist of the aristocracy and royalty, with wealth playing a less important role in class status. Many aristocratic peerages or titles come with seats attached to them, where the titleholder (e.g., Earl of Bristol) and their family act as custodians of the house but are not the owners. Maintaining these estates often requires significant expenditures, so wealth is typically necessary. Many aristocratic peerages and their homes are part of larger estates, owned and managed by the titleholder, with income generated from the land, rents, or other sources of wealth; however, in the United States where there is no aristocracy or royalty, the upper class status exclusive of Americans of ancestral wealth or patricians of European ancestry is referred to in the media as the extremely wealthy, the so-called \"super-rich\", though there is some tendency even in the United States for those with old family wealth to look down on those who have accrued their money through business, the struggle between new money and old money.\nThe upper class is generally contained within the richest one or two percent of the population. Members of the upper class are often born into it and are distinguished by immense wealth which is passed from generation to generation in the form of estates. Based on some new social and political theories, the upper class consists of the most wealthy decile group in society, holding nearly 87% of the whole society's wealth.\nMiddle class.\n See also: Middle-class squeeze\nThe middle class is the group of people with jobs that pay significantly more than the poverty line. Examples of these types of jobs are factory workers, salespeople, teachers, cooks and nurses. There is a new trend by some scholars which assumes that the size of the middle class in every society is the same. For example, in paradox of interest theory, the middle class are those who are in 6th\u20139th decile groups, holding nearly 12% of the whole society's wealth.\nThe middle class is the most contested of the three categories, the broad group of people in contemporary society who fall socio-economically between the lower and upper classes. One example of the contest of this term is that in the United States \"middle class\" is applied very broadly and includes people who would elsewhere be considered working class. Middle-class workers are sometimes called \"white-collar workers\".\nTheorists such as Ralf Dahrendorf have noted the tendency toward an enlarged middle class in modern Western societies, particularly in relation to the necessity of an educated work force in technological economies. Perspectives concerning globalization and neocolonialism, such as dependency theory, suggest this is due to the shift of low-level labour to developing nations and the Third World.\nLower class.\nThe lower class (occasionally described as the working class) are those employed in low-paying wage jobs with very little economic security. The term \"lower class\" also refers to persons with low income.\nThe working class is sometimes separated into those who are employed but lacking financial security (the \"working poor\") and an underclass\u2014those who are long-term unemployed and/or homeless, especially those receiving welfare from the state. The latter is today considered analogous to the Marxist term \"lumpenproletariat\". However, during the time of Marx's writing the lumpenproletariat referred to those in dire poverty; such as the homeless. Members of the working class are sometimes called blue-collar workers.\nConsequences of class position.\nA person's socioeconomic class has wide-ranging effects. It can determine the schools they are able to attend, their health, the jobs open to them, when they exit the labour market (retire), whom they may marry and their treatment by police and the courts.\nSocial classifications can also determine the sporting activities that such classes take part in. It is suggested that those of an upper social class are more likely to take part in sporting activities, whereas those of a lower social background are less likely to participate in sport. However, upper-class people tend to not take part in certain sports that have been commonly known to be linked with the lower class.\nEducation.\n A person's social class has a significant effect on their educational opportunities. Not only are upper-class parents able to send their children to exclusive schools that are perceived to be better, but in many places, state-supported schools for children of the upper class are of a much higher quality than those the state provides for children of the lower classes. This lack of good schools is one factor that perpetuates the class divide across generations.\nNevertheless, certain actions developed in schools, known as Successful Educational Actions, can avoid the continuation of this class divide, improving the outcomes of students and increasing their future employability. \u00a0\nIn the UK, the educational consequences of class position have been discussed by scholars inspired by the cultural studies framework of the CCCS and/or, especially regarding working-class girls, feminist theory. On working-class boys, Paul Willis' 1977 book \"Learning to Labour: How Working Class Kids Get Working Class Jobs\" is seen within the British Cultural Studies field as a classic discussion of their antipathy to the acquisition of knowledge. Beverley Skeggs described \"Learning to Labour\" as a study on the \"irony\" of \"how the process of cultural and economic reproduction is made possible by 'the lads' ' celebration of the hard, macho world of work.\"\nHealth and nutrition.\nA person's social class often affects their physical health, their ability to receive adequate medical care and nutrition and their life expectancy.\nLower-class people experience a wide array of health problems as a result of their economic status. They are unable to use health care as often and when they do it is of lower quality, even though they generally tend to experience a much higher rate of health issues. Lower-class families have higher rates of infant mortality, cancer, cardiovascular disease and disabling physical injuries. Additionally, poor people tend to work in much more hazardous conditions, yet generally have much less (if any) health insurance provided for them, as compared to middle- and upper-class workers.\nEmployment.\nThe conditions at a person's job vary greatly depending on class. Those in the upper-middle class and middle class enjoy greater freedoms in their occupations. They are usually more respected, enjoy more diversity and are able to exhibit some authority. Those in lower classes tend to feel more alienated and have lower work satisfaction overall. The physical conditions of the workplace differ greatly between classes. While middle-class workers may \"suffer alienating conditions\" or \"lack of job satisfaction\", blue-collar workers are more apt to suffer alienating, often routine, work with obvious physical health hazards, injury and even death.\nIn the UK, a 2015 government study by the Social Mobility Commission suggested the existence of a \"glass floor\" in British society preventing those who are less able, but who come from wealthier backgrounds, from slipping down the social ladder. The report proposed a 35% greater likelihood of less able, better-off children becoming high earners than bright poor children.\nClass conflict.\nClass conflict, frequently referred to as class struggle, is the tension or antagonism which exists in society due to competing socioeconomic interests and desires between people of different classes.\nFor Marx, the history of class society was a history of class conflict. He pointed to the successful rise of the bourgeoisie and the necessity of revolutionary violence\u2014a heightened form of class conflict\u2014in securing the bourgeois rights that supported the capitalist economy.\nMarx believed that the exploitation and poverty inherent in capitalism were a pre-existing form of class conflict. Marx believed that wage labourers would need to revolt to bring about a more equitable distribution of wealth and political power.\nClassless society.\nA \"classless\" society is one in which no one is born into a social class. Distinctions of wealth, income, education, culture or social network might arise and would only be determined by individual experience and achievement in such a society.\nSince these distinctions are difficult to avoid, advocates of a classless society (such as anarchists and communists) propose various means to achieve and maintain it and attach varying degrees of importance to it as an end in their overall programs or philosophy.\nRelationship between ethnicity and class.\nRace and other large-scale groupings can also influence class standing. The association of particular ethnic groups with class statuses is common in many societies, and is linked with race as well. Class and ethnicity can impact a person's or community's socioeconomic standing, which in turn influences everything including job availability and the quality of available health and education. The labels ascribed to an individual change the way others perceive them, with multiple labels associated with stigma combining to worsen the social consequences of being labelled.\nAs a result of conquest or internal ethnic differentiation, a ruling class is often ethnically homogenous and particular races or ethnic groups in some societies are legally or customarily restricted to occupying particular class positions. Which ethnicities are considered as belonging to high or low classes varies from society to society.\nIn modern societies, strict legal links between ethnicity and class have been drawn, such as the Caste systems in Africa, apartheid, the position of the Burakumin in Japanese society and the casta system in Latin America.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29175", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29175", "title": "Solomon Schechter", "text": "Moldavian-born rabbi and scholar (1847\u20131915)\nSolomon Schechter (\u200e; 7 December 1847 \u2013 19 November 1915) was a Moldavian-born British-American rabbi, academic scholar and educator, most famous for his roles as founder and president of the United Synagogue of America, president of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, and architect of American Conservative Judaism. He is an important figure in Jewish studies and Jewish history, particularly his study of the Cairo Geniza.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Foc\u015fani, Moldavia (now Romania), to Rabbi Yitzchok Hakohen, a shochet (\"ritual slaughterer\") and member of Chabad hasidim. He was named after its founder, Shneur Zalman of Liadi. Schechter received his early education from his father. Reportedly, he learned to read Hebrew by age 3, and by 5 mastered Chumash. He went to a yeshiva in Piatra Neam\u021b at age 10 and at age thirteen studied with one of the major Talmudic scholars, Rabbi Joseph Saul Nathanson of Lemberg. In his 20s, he went to the Rabbinical College in Vienna, where he studied under the more modern Talmudic scholar Meir Friedmann, before moving on in 1879 to undertake further studies at the \"Berlin Hochschule f\u00fcr die Wissenschaft des Judentums\" and at the University of Berlin. In 1882, he was invited to Britain, to be tutor of rabbinics under Claude Montefiore in London.\nAcademic career.\nIn 1890, after the death of Solomon Marcus Schiller-Szinessy, he was appointed to the faculty at Cambridge University, serving as a lecturer in Talmudics and reader in Rabbinics. The students of the Cambridge University Jewish Society hold an annual Solomon Schechter Memorial Lecture.\nHis greatest academic fame came from his excavation in 1896 of the papers of the Cairo Geniza, an extraordinary collection of over 100,000 pages (around 300,000 documents) of rare Hebrew religious manuscripts and medieval Jewish texts that were preserved at an Egyptian synagogue. The find revolutionized the study of Medieval Judaism.\nJacob Saphir was the first Jewish researcher to recognize the significance of the Cairo Geniza, as well as the first to publicize the existence of the Midrash ha-Gadol. Schechter was alerted to the existence of the Geniza's papers in May 1896 by two Scottish sisters, Agnes and Margaret Smith (also known as Mrs. Lewis and Mrs. Gibson), who showed him some leaves from the Geniza that contained the Hebrew text of Sirach, which had for centuries only been known in Greek and Latin translation. Letters, written at Schechter's prompting, by Agnes Smith to \"The Athenaeum\" and \"The Academy\" quickly revealed the existence of another nine leaves of the same manuscript in the possession of Archibald Sayce at University of Oxford. Schechter quickly found support for another expedition to the Cairo Geniza, and arrived there in December 1896 with an introduction from the Chief Rabbi, Hermann Adler, to the Chief Rabbi of Cairo, Aaron Raphael Ben Shim'on. He carefully selected for the Cambridge University Library a trove three times the size of any other collection: this is now part of the Taylor-Schechter Collection. The find was instrumental in Schechter resolving a dispute with David Margoliouth as to the likely Hebrew language origins of Sirach.\nCharles Taylor took a great interest in Solomon Schechter's work in Cairo, and the \"genizah\" fragments presented to the University of Cambridge are known as the Taylor-Schechter Collection. He was joint editor with Schechter of \"The Wisdom of Ben Sira\", 1899. He published separately \"Cairo Genizah Palimpsests\", 1900.\nHe became a Professor of Hebrew at University College London in 1899 and remained until 1902 when he moved to the United States and was replaced by Israel Abrahams.\nAmerican Jewish community.\nIn 1902, traditional Jews reacting against the progress of the American Reform Judaism movement, which was trying to establish an authoritative \"synod\" of American rabbis, recruited Schechter to become President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America (JTSA).\nSchechter served as the second President of the JTSA, from 1902 to 1915, during which time he founded the United Synagogue of America, later renamed as the United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism.\nDeath.\nHe died in 1915, and was buried at Mount Hebron Cemetery in Flushing, Queens.\nReligious and cultural beliefs.\nSchechter emphasized the centrality of Jewish law (\"Halakha\") in Jewish life in his inaugural address as president of JTS in 1902:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judaism is not a religion which does not oppose itself to anything in particular. Judaism is opposed to any number of things and says distinctly \"thou shalt not.\" It permeates the whole of your life. It demands control over all of your actions, and interferes even with your menu. It sanctifies the seasons, and regulates your history, both in the past and in the future. Above all, it teaches that disobedience is the strength of sin. It insists upon the observance of both the spirit and of the letter; spirit without letter belongs to the species known to the mystics as \"nude souls\" (\"nishmatim artilain\"), wandering about in the universe without balance and without consistency...In a word, Judaism is absolutely incompatible with the abandonment of the Torah.\nSchechter, on the other hand, believed in what he termed \"Catholic Israel.\" The basic idea being that \"Halakha\" is formed and evolves based on the behavior of the Jewish people. The concept of modifying the law based on national consensus is an untraditional viewpoint.\nSchechter was an early advocate of Zionism. He was the chairman of the committee that edited the Jewish Publication Society of America Version of the Hebrew Bible.\nLegacy.\nSchechter's name is synonymous with the findings of the Cairo Geniza. He placed the JTSA on an institutional footing strong enough to endure for over a century. He became identified as the foremost personality of Conservative Judaism and is regarded as its founder. A network of Conservative Jewish day schools is named in his honor, as well as a summer camp in Olympia, Washington. There are several dozen Solomon Schechter Day Schools across the United States and Canada.\nHis daughter Ruth was married to the South African Jewish politician Morris Alexander from 1907 to 1935.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29177", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29177", "title": "Spaghetti Western", "text": "Italian film genre\nThe spaghetti Western is a broad subgenre of Western films produced in Europe. It emerged in the mid-1960s in the wake of Sergio Leone's filmmaking style and international box-office success. The term was used by foreign critics because most of these Westerns were produced and directed by Italians.\nThe majority of the films in the spaghetti Western genre were international co-productions by Italy and Spain, and sometimes France, West Germany, Britain, Portugal, Greece, Yugoslavia, and the United States. Over six hundred European Westerns were made between 1960 and 1978, including nearly five hundred in Italy, which dominated the market. Most spaghetti Westerns filmed between 1964 and 1978 were made on low budgets, and shot at Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios and various locations around southern Italy and Spain.\nLeone's films and other core spaghetti Westerns are often described as having eschewed, criticized or even \"demythologized\" many of the conventions of traditional U.S. Westerns. This was partly intentional, and partly the context of a different cultural background. In 1968, the wave of spaghetti Westerns reached its crest, comprising one-third of the Italian film production, only to collapse to one-tenth in 1969. Spaghetti Westerns have left their mark on popular culture, strongly influencing numerous works produced in and outside of Italy.\nTerminology.\nThe phrase \"spaghetti Western\" was coined by Spanish journalist Alfonso S\u00e1nchez Mart\u00ednez in 1966, in reference to the Italian food spaghetti. Spaghetti Westerns are also known as Italian Westerns, Meatball Westerns or, primarily in Japan, Macaroni Westerns. In Italy, the genre is typically referred to as western all'italiana (Italian-style Western). Italo-Western is also used, especially in Germany.\nSimilar concepts.\nThe term Eurowesterns has been used to broadly refer to all non-Italian Western movies from Europe, including the West German Winnetou films and the Eastern Bloc Red Western films. Taking its name from the Spanish rice dish, \"Paella Western\" has been used to refer to Western films produced in Spain. The Japanese film \"Tampopo\" was promoted as a \"Ramen Western\".\nProduction.\nThe majority of the films in the spaghetti Western genre were international coproductions by Italy and Spain, and sometimes France, West Germany, Britain, Portugal, Greece, Yugoslavia, and the United States. Over six hundred European Westerns were made between 1960 and 1978.\nThese movies were originally released in Italian or with Italian dubbing, but, as most of the films featured multilingual casts, and sound was post-synched, most \"western all'italiana\" do not have an official dominant language. The movies typically had a B-movie setting or lower budget production similar to classic Western films.\nThe typical spaghetti Western team was made up of an Italian director, an Italo-Spanish technical staff, and a cast of Italian, Spanish, and (sometimes) West German and American actors.\nFilming locations.\nMost spaghetti Westerns filmed between 1964 and 1978 were made on low budgets, and shot at Cinecitt\u00e0 Studios and various locations around southern Italy and Spain. Many of the stories take place in the dry landscapes of the American Southwest and Northern Mexico, thus, common filming locations were the Tabernas Desert and the Cabo de Gata-N\u00edjar Natural Park, an area of volcanic origin known for its wide sandy beaches, both of which are in the Province of Almer\u00eda in Southeastern Spain. Some sets and studios built for spaghetti Westerns survived as theme parks, such as Texas Hollywood, Mini Hollywood, and Western Leone, and continue to be used as film sets. Other filming locations used were in central and southern Italy, such as the parks of Valle del Treja (between Rome and Viterbo), the area of Camposecco (next to Camerata Nuova, characterized by a karst topography), the hills around Castelluccio, the town of Wuustwezel and the area around the Gran Sasso mountain, and the Tivoli's quarries and Sardinia. \"God's Gun\" was filmed in Israel.\nContext and origins.\nEarly European Westerns.\nEuropean Westerns are as old as filmmaking itself. The Lumi\u00e8re brothers had their first public screening of films in 1895, and already, in 1896, Gabriel Veyre shot \"Repas d'Indien\" (\"Indian Banquet\") for them. Joe Hamman starred as Arizona Bill in films made in the French horse country of Camargue (1911\u20131912).\nIn Italy, the American West as a dramatic setting for spectacles goes back at least as far as Giacomo Puccini's 1910 opera \"La fanciulla del West\" (\"The Girl of the Golden West\" or \"The Damsel of the West\"), which is sometimes considered to be the first spaghetti Western.\nThe first Western movie made in Italy was \"La voce del sangue\", produced by the Turin film studio Itala Film. In 1913, \"La vampira Indiana\" was released; a combination of Western and vampire film. It was directed by Vincenzo Leone, father of Sergio Leone, and starred his mother, Bice Valerian, in the title role as the Indian princess Fatale. The Italians also made Wild Bill Hickok films, while the Germans released backwoods Westerns featuring Bela Lugosi as Uncas.\nOf the Western-related European films before 1964, the one that attracted the most attention is arguably Luis Trenker's \"Der Kaiser von Kalifornien\" about John Sutter. Another Italian Western is \"Girl of the Golden West\". The film's title alludes to the Giacomo Puccini opera referred to above, but is not an adaptation of it. It was one of a handful of Westerns to be made during the silent film and Fascist Italy eras. Forerunners of the genre were also Giorgio Ferroni's \"Il fanciullo del West\" (\"The Boy in the West\") and Fernando Cerchio's \"Il bandolero stanco\", starring Erminio Macario and Renato Rascel, respectively.\nAfter World War II, there were scattered European uses of Western settings, mostly for comedy, musical or otherwise. A cycle of Western comedies was initiated in 1959 with \"La sceriffa\" and \"Il terrore dell'Oklahoma\", followed by other films starring comedy specialists, such as Walter Chiari, Ugo Tognazzi, Raimondo Vianello, and Fernandel. An Italian critic has compared these comedies to American Bob Hope vehicles.\nOrigins of the genre.\nThe first American-British Western filmed in Spain was \"The Sheriff of Fractured Jaw\", directed by Raoul Walsh in 1958. It was followed by \"Savage Guns\", a British-Spanish Western, again filmed in Spain. It marked the beginning of Spain as a suitable film-shooting location for any type of European Western. The same year, in 1961, an Italian company coproduced the French \"Taste of Violence\", with a Mexican Revolution theme. In 1963, three non-comedy Italo-Spanish Westerns were produced: \"Gunfight at Red Sands\", \"Implacable Three\", and \"Gunfight at High Noon\".\nIn 1965, Bruno Bozzetto released his traditionally animated feature film \"West and Soda\", a Western parody with a marked spaghetti Western-theme; despite having been released a year after Sergio Leone's seminal spaghetti Western, \"A Fistful of Dollars\", development of \"West and Soda\" actually began a year earlier than \"Fistful\"'s, and lasted longer, mainly because of the use of more time-demanding animation over regular acting. For this reason, Bozzetto claims to have invented the spaghetti Western genre.\nBecause there is no real consensus about where to draw the exact line between spaghetti Westerns and other Eurowesterns (or other Westerns in general), it cannot be said which film is definitively the first spaghetti Western. However, 1964 saw the breakthrough of this genre, with more than twenty productions or coproductions from Italian companies, and more than half a dozen Westerns by Spanish or Spanish-American companies. Furthermore, by far the most commercially successful of this lot was Sergio Leone's \"A Fistful of Dollars\". It was the innovations in cinematic style, music, acting and story of Leone's first Western that decided that spaghetti Westerns became a distinct subgenre and not just a number of films looking like American Westerns.\n\"A Fistful of Dollars\" and its impact.\nIn this seminal film, Leone used a distinct visual style with large face close ups to tell the story of a hero entering a town that is ruled by two outlaw gangs, and ordinary social relations are nonexistent. The hero betrays and plays the gangs against each other to make money. He uses his cunning and exceptional weapons skill to assist a family threatened by both gangs. His treachery is exposed, and he is severely beaten, but in the end, he defeats the remaining gang. The interactions in this story range between cunning and irony (the tricks, deceits, unexpected actions and sarcasm of the hero), and pathos (terror and brutality against defenseless people and against the hero after his doublecross has been revealed). Ennio Morricone's innovative score expresses a similar duality between quirky and unusual sounds and instruments, and sacral dramatizing for the big confrontation scenes. Another important novelty was Clint Eastwood's performance as the man with no name\u2014an unshaven, sarcastic, insolent Western antihero with personal goals in mind, and with distinct visuals to boot\u2014the squint, the cigarillo, the poncho, etc.\nThe spaghetti Western was born, flourished and faded in a highly commercial production environment. The Italian \"low\" popular film production was usually low-budget and low-profit, and the easiest way to success was imitating a proven success. When the typically low-budget production, \"A Fistful of Dollars\", turned into a remarkable box-office success, the industry eagerly lapped up its innovations. Most subsequent spaghetti Westerns tried to get a ragged, laconic hero with superhuman weapon skill, preferably one who looked like Clint Eastwood: Franco Nero, John Garko, and Terence Hill started out that way; Anthony Steffen and others stayed that way throughout their spaghetti Western careers.\nWhoever the hero was, he would join an outlaw gang to further his own secret agenda, as in \"A Pistol for Ringo\", \"Blood for a Silver Dollar\", \"Vengeance Is a Dish Served Cold\", \"Renegade Riders\", and others, while \"Beyond the Law\" has a bandit infiltrate society and become a sheriff. There would be a flamboyant Mexican bandit (Gian Maria Volont\u00e9 from \"A Fistful of Dollars\", otherwise Tomas Milian, or most often Fernando Sancho) and a grumpy old man, often an undertaker, to serve as sidekick for the hero. For the love interest, ranchers' daughters, schoolmarms and barroom maidens were overshadowed by young Latin women desired by dangerous men, for which actresses, such as Nicoletta Machiavelli or Rosalba Neri, carried on Marianne Koch's role of Marisol in the Leone film. The terror of the villains against their defenseless victims became just as ruthless as in \"A Fistful of Dollars\", or more, and their brutalization of the hero when his treachery is disclosed became just as merciless, or more\u2014similar to securing the latter's retribution.\nIn the beginning, some films mixed some of these new devices with the borrowed U.S. Western devices typical for most of the 1963\u20131964 spaghetti Westerns. For example, in Sergio Corbucci's \"Minnesota Clay\", that appeared two months after \"A Fistful of Dollars\", an American style \"tragic gunfighter\" hero confronts two evil gangs, one Mexican and one Anglo, with (as in \"A Fistful of Dollars\") the leader of the latter being the town sheriff.\nIn \"Johnny Oro\", a traditional Western sheriff and a mixed-race bounty killer are forced into an uneasy alliance when Mexican bandits and Native Americans assault the town. In \"A Pistol for Ringo\", a traditional sheriff commissions a money-oriented hero played by Giuliano Gemma (as deadly but with more pleasing manners than Eastwood's character) to infiltrate a gang of Mexican bandits whose leader is played typically by Fernando Sancho.\nFurther developments of the genre.\nAs with Leone's first Western, the Dollars Trilogy strongly influenced the further developments of the genre, as did Sergio Corbucci's 'Django' and Enzo Barboni's two Trinity films, as well as some other successful spaghetti Westerns.\n\"For a Few Dollars More\" and unstable partnerships.\nAfter 1965, when Leone's second Western, \"For a Few Dollars More\", brought a larger box-office success, the profession of bounty hunter became the choice of occupation of spaghetti Western heroes in films, such as \"Arizona Colt\", \"Vengeance Is Mine\", \"Ten Thousand Dollars for a Massacre\", \"The Ugly Ones\", \"Dead Men Don't Count\", and \"Any Gun Can Play\". In \"The Great Silence\" and \"A Minute to Pray, a Second to Die\", the heroes instead fight bounty killers. During this era, many heroes and villains in spaghetti Westerns began carrying a musical watch, after its use in \"For a Few Dollars More\".\nSpaghetti Westerns also began featuring a pair of different heroes. In Leone's film, Eastwood's character is an unshaven bounty hunter, dressed similarly to his character in \"A Fistful of Dollars\", who enters an unstable partnership with Colonel Mortimer (Lee Van Cleef), an older bounty killer who uses more sophisticated weaponry and wears a suit, and, in the end, turns out to also be an avenger. In the following years, there was a deluge of spaghetti Westerns with a pair of heroes with (most often) conflicting motives. Examples include a lawman and an outlaw (\"And the Crows Will Dig Your Grave\"), an army officer and an outlaw (\"Bury Them Deep\"), an avenger and a (covert) army officer (\"The Hills Run Red\"), an avenger and a (covert) guilty party (\"Viva! Django\" aka \"W Django!\"), an avenger and a con-man (\"The Dirty Outlaws\"), an outlaw posing as a sheriff and a bounty hunter (\"Man With the Golden Pistol\" aka \"Doc, Hands of Steel\"), and an outlaw posing as his twin and a bounty hunter posing as a sheriff (\"A Few Dollars for Django\").\nThe theme of age in \"For a Few Dollars More\", in which the younger bounty killer learns valuable lessons from his more experienced colleague and eventually becomes his equal, is taken up in \"Day of Anger\" and \"Death Rides a Horse\". In both cases, Lee Van Cleef carries on as the older hero versus Giuliano Gemma and John Phillip Law, respectively.\nZapata Westerns.\nOne variant of the hero pair was a revolutionary Mexican bandit and a mostly money-oriented American from the United States frontier. These films are sometimes called Zapata Westerns. The first was Damiano Damiani's \"A Bullet for the General\" and then followed Sergio Sollima's trilogy: \"The Big Gundown\", \"Face to Face\", and \"Run, Man, Run\".\nSergio Corbucci's \"The Mercenary\" and \"Compa\u00f1eros\" and \"Tepepa\" by Giulio Petroni are also considered Zapata Westerns. Many of these films enjoyed both good takes at the box office and attention from critics. They are often interpreted as a leftist critique of the typical Hollywood handling of the Mexican Revolution, and of imperialism in general.\n\"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" and universal betrayal.\nIn Leone's \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\" there is still the scheme of a pair of heroes vs. a villain but it is somewhat relaxed, as here all three parties were driven by a money motive. In subsequent films such as \"Any Gun Can Play\" (whose Italian title, \"Vado... l'ammazzo e torno\", is itself a quote from Leone's film), \"One Dollar Too Many\", and \"Kill Them All and Come Back Alone\" several main characters repeatedly form alliances and betray each other for monetary gain.\n\"Sabata\" and \"If You Meet Sartana Pray for Your Death\", directed by Gianfranco Parolini, introduce into similar betrayal environments a type of hero molded on the Mortimer character from \"For a Few Dollars More\", only without any vengeance motive and with more outrageous trick weapons. Sabata is portrayed by Lee Van Cleef himself, while John Garko plays the very similar Sartana protagonist. Parolini made some more Sabata movies, while Giuliano Carnimeo made a whole series of Sartana films, at first with Garko and later with George Hilton.\n\"Django\" and the tragic hero.\nBeside the first three spaghetti Westerns by Leone, a most influential film was Sergio Corbucci's \"Django\" starring Franco Nero. Django was one of the most violent spaghetti Westerns. The titular character is torn between several motives\u2014money or revenge\u2014and his choices bring misery to him and to a woman close to him. Indicative of this film's influence on the spaghetti Western style, \"Django\" is the hero's name in a plenitude of subsequent Westerns.\nAlthough his character is not named Django, Franco Nero brings a similar ambience to \"Texas, Adios\" and \"Massacre Time\", in which the hero must confront surprising and dangerous family relations. Similar \"prodigal son\" stories followed, including \"Chuck Moll\", \"Keoma\", \"The Return of Ringo\", \"The Forgotten Pistolero\", \"One Thousand Dollars on the Black\", \"Johnny Hamlet\" and also \"Seven Dollars on the Red\".\nAnother type of wronged hero is set up and must clear himself from accusations. Giuliano Gemma starred in a series of successful films carrying this theme\u2014\"Adi\u00f3s gringo\", \"For a Few Extra Dollars\", \"Long Days of Vengeance\", \"Wanted\" and, to some extent, \"Blood for a Silver Dollar\"\u2014in which his character is most often called \"Gary\".\nThe wronged hero who becomes an avenger appears in many spaghetti Westerns. Among the more commercially successful films with a hero dedicated to vengeance\u2014\"For a Few Dollars More\", \"Once Upon a Time in the West\", \"Today We Kill... Tomorrow We Die!\", \"A Reason to Live, a Reason to Die\", \"Death Rides a Horse\", \"Django, Prepare a Coffin\", \"The Deserter\", \"Hate for Hate\", and \"Halleluja for Django\u2014\"those with whom he cooperates typically have conflicting motivations.\n\"Trinity\" films and the triumph of comedy.\nIn 1968, the wave of spaghetti Westerns reached its crest, comprising one-third of the Italian film production, only to collapse to one-tenth in 1969. However, the considerable box-office success of Enzo Barboni's \"They Call Me Trinity\" and its enormously successful follow-up, \"Trinity Is Still My Name\", gave Italian filmmakers a new model to emulate. The main characters were played by Terence Hill and Bud Spencer, who had already cooperated as a pair of heroes in three earlier spaghetti Westerns, \"God Forgives... I Don't!\", \"Boot Hill\" and \"Ace High\", directed by Giuseppe Colizzi. The humor started in those movies, with scenes with comedy fighting, but the Barboni films became burlesque comedies. They feature the quick but lazy Trinity (Hill) and his big, strong and irritable brother, Bambino (Spencer).\nThe stories lampoon stereotypical Western characters, such as diligent farmers, lawmen and bounty hunters. There was a wave of Trinity-inspired films with quick and strong heroes, the former often called \"Trinity\", or coming from \"a place called Trinity\", and with few or no killings. Because the two model stories contained religious pacifists to account for the absence of gunplay, all of the successors contained religious groups, or, at least, priests, sometimes as one of the heroes.\nThe music for the two Trinity Westerns (composed by Franco Micalizzi and Guido &amp; Maurizio De Angelis, respectively) also reflected the change to a lighter and more sentimental mood. The Trinity-inspired films also adopted this less serious and often-maligned style.\nSome critics deplore these post-Trinity films and their soundtracks as a degeneration of the \"real\" spaghetti Westerns. Indeed, Hill's and Spencer's skillful use of body language was a hard act to follow, and it is significant that the most successful of the post-Trinity films featured Hill (\"Man of the East\" and \"A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe\"), Spencer (\"It Can Be Done Amigo\") and a pair of Hill-Spencer lookalikes in \"Carambola\". A spaghetti Western old hand, Franco Nero, also worked in this subgenre with \"Cipolla Colt\", and Tomas Milian plays an outrageous \"quick\" bounty hunter modeled on Charlie Chaplin's Little Tramp in \"Sometimes Life Is Hard, Eh Providence?\" and \"Here We Go Again, Eh, Providence?\".\nTwilight of the genre.\nTerence Hill could still draw large audiences in a post-Trinity Western, \"My Name Is Nobody\", with Henry Fonda, and a caper-story Western, \"A Genius, Two Partners and a Dupe\". In 1976, Franco Nero achieved a similar draw as a Django-style hero in \"Keoma\". However, by the end of the 1970s, the different types of spaghetti Westerns had lost their following among mainstream cinema audiences, and the production ground to a virtual halt. Belated attempts to revive the genre included the comedy film \"Buddy Goes West\", the Spanish-American coproduction \"Comin' at Ya!\", which was shot in 3D, and \"Django Strikes Again\".\nOther notable themes.\n\"Cult\" spaghetti Westerns.\nSome movies that were not very successful at the box office still earn a \"cult\" status in some segment of the audience because of certain extraordinary features in story and/or presentation. One \"cult\" spaghetti Western that has also drawn attention from critics is Giulio Questi's \"Django Kill\". Other \"cult\" items are Cesare Canevari's \"Matalo!\", Tony Anthony's \"Blindman\", and Joaqu\u00edn Luis Romero Marchent's \"Cut-Throats Nine\" (the latter among gore film audiences).\nHistorical backgrounds.\nThe few spaghetti Westerns containing historical characters such as Buffalo Bill, Wyatt Earp, Billy the Kid, etc., appear mainly before \"A Fistful of Dollars\" had put its mark on the genre. Likewise, and in contrast to the contemporary German Westerns, few films feature Native Americans. When they appear, they are more often portrayed as victims of discrimination than as dangerous foes. The only fairly successful spaghetti Western with a Native American main character (played by Burt Reynolds in his only European Western outing) is Sergio Corbucci's \"Navajo Joe\", in which the (supposedly) Navajo village is wiped out by bandits during the first minutes, and the avenger hero spends the rest of the film dealing mostly with Anglos and Mexicans until the final showdown at a Native American burial ground.\nAncient myths and classic literature.\nSeveral spaghetti Westerns are inspired by classical myths and dramas. Titles, such as \"Fedra West\" (also called \"Ballad of a Bounty Hunter\") and \"Johnny Hamlet\", signify the connection to Greek myth, the plays by Euripides and Racine, and the play by William Shakespeare, respectively. The latter also inspired 1972's \"Dust in the Sun\", which follows the original more closely than Johnny Hamlet, in which the hero survives. \"The Forgotten Pistolero\" is based on the vengeance of Orestes. There are similarities between the story of \"The Return of Ringo\" and the last canto of Homer's \"Odyssey\". \"Fury of Johnny Kid\" follows Shakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\", but (again) with a different ending; the loving couple leave together while their families annihilate each other.\nMusicals.\nSome Italian Western films were made as vehicles for musical stars, such as Ferdinando Baldi's \"Rita of the West\", featuring Rita Pavone and Terence Hill. In non-singing roles were Ringo Starr as a villain in \"Blindman\" and French rock 'n' roll veteran Johnny Hallyday as the gunfighter and avenger hero in Sergio Corbucci's \"The Specialists\".\nEast Asian connections.\nThe story of \"A Fistful of Dollars\" was closely based on Akira Kurosawa's \"Yojimbo\". Kurosawa sued Sergio Leone for plagiarism, and was compensated with the exclusive distribution rights to the movie in Japan, where its hero, Clint Eastwood, was already a huge star due to the popularity of the TV series, \"Rawhide\". Leone would have done far better financially by obtaining Kurosawa's advance permission to use \"Yojimbo\"'s script. \"Requiem for a Gringo\" shows many traces from another well-known Japanese film, Masaki Kobayashi's \"Harakiri\".\nWhen Asian martial arts films started to draw crowds in European cinema houses, the producers of spaghetti Westerns tried to hang on, this time not by adapting storylines, but rather by directly including martial arts in the films, performed by Eastern actors\u2014for example, Chen Lee in \"My Name Is Shanghai Joe\", or Lo Lieh teaming up with Lee Van Cleef in \"The Stranger and the Gunfighter\".\nPolitical allegories.\nSome spaghetti Westerns incorporate political overtones, particularly from the political left. An example is \"Requiescant\", featuring Italian author and film director Pier Paolo Pasolini as a major supporting character. Pasolini's character is a priest who espouses Liberation theology. The film concerns oppression of poor Mexicans by rich Anglos, and ends on a call for arms, but it does not fit easily as a Zapata Western, for it lacks the typical hero pair of a flamboyant Latin revolutionary and an Anglo specialist. \"The Price of Power\" serves a political allegory about the assassination of John F. Kennedy and racism. The movie concerns the assassination of an American president in Dallas, Texas, by a group of Southern white supremacists who frame an innocent African-American. They are opposed by an unstable partnership between a whistleblower (Giuliano Gemma) and a political aide.\nHomosexuality.\nAlthough it is intimated in some films, such as \"Django Kill\", \"Requiescant\" and \"The Reward's Yours... The Man's Mine\", open homosexuality plays a marginal part in spaghetti Westerns. An exception is Giorgio Capitani's \"The Ruthless Four\" (in effect a gay version of John Huston's \"The Treasure of the Sierra Madre\"), in which the explicit homosexual relation between two of its male main characters and some gay cueing scenes are embedded with other forms of male relations throughout the story.\nReception.\nIn the 1960s, critics recognized that the American genres were rapidly changing. The genre most identifiably American, the Western, seemed to be evolving into a new, rougher form. For many critics, Sergio Leone's films were part of the problem. Leone's \"Dollars Trilogy\" (1964\u20131966) was not the beginning of the \"spaghetti Western\" cycle in Italy, but for some Americans, Leone's films represented the true beginning of the Italian invasion of an American genre.\nChristopher Frayling, in his noted book on the Italian Western, describes American critical reception of the spaghetti Western cycle as, to \"a large extent, confined to a sterile debate about the 'cultural roots' of the American/Hollywood Western\". He remarked that few critics dared admit that they were, in fact, \"bored with an exhausted Hollywood genre\".\nFrayling noted that Pauline Kael was willing to acknowledge this critical ennui, and thus appreciate how a film like Akira Kurosawa's \"Yojimbo\" \"could exploit the conventions of the Western genre, while debunking its morality\". Frayling and other film scholars, such as Bondanella, argue that this revisionism was the key to Leone's success, and, to some degree, to that of the spaghetti Western genre as a whole.\nLegacy.\nSpaghetti Westerns have left their mark on popular culture, strongly influencing numerous works produced in and outside of Italy. In later years, there were the \"return-of stories\" films \"Django Strikes Again\" with Franco Nero and \"Troublemakers\" with Terence Hill and Bud Spencer. Clint Eastwood's first American Western film, \"Hang 'Em High\", incorporates elements of spaghetti Westerns.\nAmerican director Quentin Tarantino has utilized elements of spaghetti Westerns in his films \"Kill Bill\" (combined with kung fu movies), \"Inglourious Basterds\" (set in Nazi-occupied France), \"Django Unchained\" (set in the American South during the time of slavery), \"The Hateful Eight\" (set in Wyoming post-US Civil War), and \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" (about fictional American actor Rick Dalton sometimes working in spaghetti Westerns).\nThe \"Back to the Future\" trilogy pays homage to spaghetti Westerns (especially Sergio Leone's Dollars Trilogy) on a variety of occasions, most notably in the third film. The American animated film \"Rango\" incorporates elements of spaghetti Westerns, including a character (the mystical \"Spirit of the West\", regarded as a sort of deity among the characters) appearing to the protagonist as an elderly Man with No Name. The 1985 Japanese film \"Tampopo\" was promoted as a \"ramen Western\". Japanese director Takashi Miike paid tribute to the genre with \"Sukiyaki Western Django\", a Western set in Japan that derives influence from both \"Django\" and the Dollars Trilogy.\nThe Bollywood film \"Sholay\" was often referred to as a \"Curry Western\". A more accurate genre label for the film is the \"Dacoit Western\", as it combined the conventions of Indian dacoit films, such as \"Mother India\" and \"Gunga Jumna\", with that of spaghetti Westerns. \"Sholay\" spawned its own genre of \"Dacoit Western\" films in Bollywood during the 1970s.\nIn the Soviet Union, the spaghetti Western was adapted into the Ostern (\"Eastern\") genre of Soviet films. The Wild West setting was replaced by an Eastern setting in the steppes of the Caucasus, while Western stock characters, such as \"cowboys and Indians\", were replaced by Caucasian stock characters, such as bandits and harems. A famous example of the genre was \"White Sun of the Desert\", which was popular in the Soviet Union.\nAmerican heavy metal band Metallica has used a Ennio Morricone's composition, \"The Ecstasy of Gold\", from \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\", to open several of their concerts. An Australian band, the Tango Saloon, combined elements of tango music with influences from spaghetti Western scores. The band Ghoultown also derives influence from spaghetti Westerns. The music video for the song \"Knights of Cydonia\", by the English rock band Muse, is influenced by spaghetti Westerns. The band Big Audio Dynamite used music samples from spaghetti Westerns when mixing their song \"Medicine Show\". Within the song, there are samples from spaghetti Western movies such as \"A Fistful of Dollars\", \"The Good, the Bad and the Ugly\", and \"Duck, You Sucker!\".\nVideo game studio Rockstar Games utilized aspects of the spaghetti Western, and paid homage to it in their \"Red Dead Redemption\" series, as well as in its predecessor, \"Red Dead Revolver\".\nRetrospective of the Venice Film Festival.\nIn 2007, a retrospective took place as part of the Venice International Film Festival to pay homage to the genre. The retrospective included 32 films:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29178", "revid": "17188112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29178", "title": "Spaghetti", "text": "Type of pasta\n \nSpaghetti () is a long, thin, solid, cylindrical pasta. It is a staple food of traditional Italian cuisine. Like other pasta, spaghetti is made of flour (sometimes enriched with vitamins and minerals) and water. Italian spaghetti is typically made from durum-wheat semolina. The pasta is usually white because refined flour is used, but whole wheat flour may be added. \"Spaghettoni\" is a thicker form of spaghetti, while spaghettini is a thinner form. Capellini is a very thin spaghetti, while vermicelli refers to intermediate thicknesses.\nOriginally, spaghetti was notably long, but shorter lengths gained in popularity during the latter half of the 20th century and now it is most commonly available in lengths. A variety of pasta dishes are based on it and it is frequently served with tomato sauce, meat or vegetables.\nEtymology.\n\"Spaghetti\" is the plural form of the Italian word \"spaghetto\", which is a diminutive of \"spago\", meaning 'thin string' or 'twine'.\nHistory.\nThe first written record of pasta comes from the Talmud in the 5th century AD and refers to dried pasta that could be cooked through boiling, which was conveniently portable. Some historians think that Arabs introduced pasta to Europe during a conquest of Sicily. In the West, it may have first been worked into long, thin forms in Sicily around the 12th century, as the Tabula Rogeriana of Muhammad al-Idrisi attested, reporting some traditions about the Sicilian kingdom.\nThe popularity of spaghetti spread throughout Italy after the establishment of spaghetti factories in the 19th century, enabling the mass production of spaghetti for the Italian market.\n\"Sparghetti\".\nCirca 1845, Italians used the word \"sparghetti\" to denote the recently invented pasta shape. The 2013 publication, \"Discovering Words in the Kitchen\" said the spelling \"showed the derivation of the word to be a diminutive of \"spargo\", meaning 'cord'\". The term \"sparghetti\" continued to be in use throughout the 19th and early 20th century, in association with both the pasta shape and the recipe. In 1845 British recipe guide \"Modern Cookery\", \"sparghetti\" is defined as Naples vermicelli. The same definition appears in Robert Ridell's 1852 \"Indian Domestic Economy and Receipt Book\" and its reprints\".\"\nIn the 1880 \"Housekeeper's Guide,\" Arthur Gay Payne writes, \"When macaroni is served with tomato sauce and Parmesan grated cheese, it forms that very well-known dish called \"sparghetti\". A particular type of macaroni is specially sold for making \"sparghetti\".\" An 1896 recipe, reprinted in 1909, clarifies, \"\"Sparghetti\" is a type of fine macaroni\". The spelling \"sparghetti\" and associated recipe is also described in 1900's \"Recipe a la Mode\", 1901's \"Recherch\u00e9 Side Dishes,\" Agnes Marshall's 1902 \"Larger Cookery\" book, the 1905 \"Hints for the Home\", Benjamin Farjeon's 1906 fiction novel \"Mrs. Dimmock's Worries\", and 1913's \"The Treasure Cookery Book\".\nIts modern term, \"spaghetti\", was introduced in 1888.\nIn the United States around December 31, 1900, spaghetti was offered in restaurants as \"Spaghetti Italienne\" (which likely consisted of noodles cooked pasta al dente (lit.\u2009'to the tooth'), and a mild tomato sauce flavored with easily found spices and vegetables such as cloves, bay leaves, and garlic) and it was not until decades later that it came to be commonly prepared with oregano or basil. Canned spaghetti was also quite popular, being sold by many brands by the early 1910s. In 1911 the Van Camp Company asserted that canned spaghetti was the most popular product it had ever sold.\nThe Great Eastern Railway magazine of 1914 recommends \"sparghetti\" as an alternative to macaroni in its recipe for macaroni and cheese.\nPrince Spaghetti was started by 3 Italian immigrants in 1912 in Boston, Massachusetts at 92 Prince Street. It eventually outgrew its location and moved to Lowell, Massachusetts in 1941 after a controlling interest was bought by Giuseppe Pellegrino. At one time, they were the largest American producer of spaghetti and were well known for their 1970s commercials featuring a little boy named Anthony running home for spaghetti dinner while being called by his mother The commercial's tag line was \"Wednesday is Prince Spaghetti Day\" in Boston. The Pellegrino family sold the company to Borden in 1987 and the plant was closed in 1997 when production was moved to St. Louis, Missouri.\nProduction.\nSpaghetti is made from ground grain (flour) and water. Whole-wheat and multigrain spaghetti are also available.\nFresh spaghetti.\nPasta can be made at home, cutting sheets of flattened dough with a knife into ribbons, rather than spaghetti with circular cross-section. Some pasta machines have a spaghetti attachment with circular holes that extrude spaghetti, or shaped rollers that form cylindrical noodles.\nSpaghetti can be made by hand by manually rolling a ball of dough on a surface to make a long sausage shape. The ends of the sausage are pulled apart to make a long thin sausage. The ends are brought together and the loop pulled to make two long sausages. The process is repeated until the pasta is sufficiently thin. The pasta knobs at each end are cut off leaving many strands which may be hung up to dry.\nFresh spaghetti is usually cooked within hours of being formed. Commercial versions of fresh spaghetti are manufactured.\nDried spaghetti.\nThe bulk of dried spaghetti is produced in factories using auger extruders. While essentially simple, the process requires attention to detail to ensure that the mixing and kneading of the ingredients produces a homogeneous mix, without air bubbles. The forming dies have to be water cooled to prevent spoiling of the pasta by overheating. Drying of the newly formed spaghetti has to be carefully controlled to prevent strands sticking together, and to leave it with sufficient moisture so that it is not too brittle. Packaging for protection and display has developed from paper wrapping to plastic bags and boxes.\nVariations.\nIn Naples, spaghetti is thinner than it is in the US. \"Spaghettoni\" is a thicker spaghetti and spaghettini is a thinner spaghetti, although it is thicker than the pasta of Naples.\nPreparation.\nFresh or dry spaghetti is cooked in a large pot of salted, boiling water and then drained in a colander (Italian: \"scolapasta\"). Utensils used in spaghetti preparation include the spaghetti scoop and spaghetti tongs.\nIn Italy, spaghetti is generally cooked al dente (lit.\u2009'to the tooth'), fully cooked but still firm to the bite. It may also be cooked to a softer consistency.\n\"Spaghettoni\" takes more time to cook than regular spaghetti, and spaghettini less time.\nIn southern Italy, spaghetti is sometimes placed in a dishcloth and broken into pieces to be served with vegetables, beans or in a broth. This originated at a time when the region was very poor, and broken pieces of spaghetti were sold at discount to prevent waste. Offcuts are still sold in parts of Italy, alone and as part of (an assortment of pasta shapes), and some factories donate their broken pieces to hospitals and nursing homes.\nServing.\nItalian cuisine.\nAn emblem of Italian cuisine, spaghetti is frequently served with tomato sauce, which may contain various herbs (especially oregano and basil), olive oil, meat or vegetables. Other spaghetti preparations include amatriciana or carbonara. Grated hard cheeses, such as \"pecorino romano\", Parmesan, and Grana Padano, are often sprinkled on top.\nBelow are some of the most important spaghetti dishes:\nInternational cuisine.\nIn the Philippines, a popular variant is the Filipino spaghetti, which is distinctively sweet with the tomato sauce sweetened with banana ketchup or sugar. It typically uses a large amount of \"giniling\" (ground meat), sliced hot dogs, and cheese. The dish dates back to the period between the 1940s to the 1960s. During the American Commonwealth Period, a shortage of tomato supplies in the Second World War forced the development of the banana ketchup. Spaghetti was introduced by the Americans and was tweaked to suit the local Filipino predilection for sweet dishes.\nConsumption.\nBy 1955, annual consumption of spaghetti in Italy doubled from per person before World War II to . By that year, Italy produced 1,432,990 tons of spaghetti, of which 74,000 were exported, and had a production capacity of 3 million tons.\nNutrition.\nPasta provides carbohydrates, along with some protein, iron, dietary fiber, potassium, and B vitamins. Pasta prepared with whole wheat grain provides more dietary fiber than that prepared with degermed flour.\nIn popular culture.\nIn the 1955 animated movie \"Lady and the Tramp\", the sequence of the title characters sharing a plate of spaghetti\u2014climaxed by an accidental kiss as they swallow opposite ends of the same strand of spaghetti\u2014is considered an iconic scene in American film history.\nThe BBC television program \"Panorama\" featured a hoax program about the spaghetti harvest in Switzerland on April Fools' Day in 1957.\nTerminology.\nPoorly structured computer source code is often described as \"spaghetti code\". A similar and more physical concept, \"cable spaghetti\", applies to poor cable management.\nIn women's clothing, very thin straps supporting a dress or topwear are called \"spaghetti straps\".\nThe term \"spaghetti Western\" refers to Western movies made in Europe which were produced and directed by Italians.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; The dictionary definition of \"spaghetti\" at Wiktionary\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29180", "revid": "6729166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29180", "title": "System Shock", "text": "1994 video game\nSystem Shock is a 1994 first-person action-adventure video game developed by LookingGlass Technologies and published by Origin Systems. It was directed by Doug Church with Warren Spector serving as producer. The game is set aboard a space station in a cyberpunk vision of the year 2072. Assuming the role of a nameless security hacker, the player attempts to hinder the plans of a malevolent artificial intelligence called SHODAN.\n\"System Shock\"'s 3D engine, physics simulation and complex gameplay have been cited as both innovative and influential. The developers sought to build on the emergent gameplay and immersive environments of their previous games, ' and ', by streamlining their mechanics into a more \"integrated whole\"; it is considered one of the defining examples of an immersive sim.\nCritics praised \"System Shock\" and hailed it as a major breakthrough in its genre. It was later placed on multiple hall of fame lists. The game was a moderate commercial success, with sales exceeding 170,000 copies, but Looking Glass ultimately lost money on the project. A sequel, \"System Shock 2\", was released by Looking Glass Studios and offshoot developer Irrational Games in 1999. The 2000 game \"Deus Ex\" (produced and directed by Spector), the 2007 game \"BioShock\", and the 2017 game \"Prey\" are spiritual successors to the two games. A remake by Nightdive Studios was released on 30 May 2023.\nGameplay.\n\"System Shock\" takes place from a first-person perspective in a three-dimensional (3D) graphical environment. The game is set inside a large, multi-level space station, in which players explore, combat enemies and solve puzzles. Progress is largely non-linear, and the game is designed to allow for emergent gameplay. As in \"\", the player uses a freely movable mouse cursor to aim weapons, to interact with objects and to manipulate the heads-up display (HUD) interface. View and posture controls on the HUD allow the player to lean left or right, look up or down, crouch, and crawl. Practical uses for these actions include taking cover, retrieving items from beneath the player character and navigating small passages, respectively. The HUD also features three \"multi-function displays\", which may be configured to display information such as weapon readouts, an automap and an inventory.\nThe player advances the plot by acquiring log discs and e-mails: the game contains no non-player characters with which to converse. Throughout the game, an evil artificial intelligence called SHODAN hinders the player's progress with traps and blocked pathways. Specific computer terminals allow the player to temporarily enter Cyberspace; inside, the player moves weightlessly through a wire-frame 3D environment, while collecting data and fighting SHODAN's security programs. Actions in Cyberspace sometimes cause events in the game's physical world; for example, certain locked doors may only be opened in Cyberspace. Outside of Cyberspace, the player uses the game's sixteen weapons, of which a maximum of seven may be carried at one time, to combat robots, cyborgs and mutants controlled by SHODAN. Projectile weapons often have selectable ammunition types with varying effects; for example, the \"dart pistol\" may fire either explosive needles or tranquilizers. Energy weapons and several types of explosives may also be found, with the latter ranging from concussion grenades to land mines.\nAlong with weapons, the player collects items such as dermal patches and first-aid kits. Dermal patches provide the character with beneficial effects\u2014such as regeneration or increased melee attack power\u2014but can cause detrimental side-effects, such as fatigue and distorted color perception. Attachable \"hardware\" may also be found, including energy shields and head-mounted lanterns. Increasingly advanced versions of this hardware may be obtained as the game progresses. When activated, most hardware drains from a main energy reserve, which necessitates economization. Certain hardware displays the effectiveness of attacks when active, with messages such as \"Normal damage\". When an enemy is attacked, the damage is calculated by armor absorption, vulnerabilities, critical hits and a degree of randomness. Weapons and munitions deal specific kinds of damage, and certain enemies are immune, or more vulnerable, to particular types. For example, electromagnetic pulse weapons heavily damage robots, but do not affect mutants. Conversely, gas grenades are effective against mutants, but do not damage robots.\nPlot.\nSet in the year 2072, the protagonist \u2014 a nameless hacker \u2014 is caught while attempting to access files concerning Citadel Station, a space station owned by the TriOptimum Corporation. The hacker is taken to Citadel Station and brought before Edward Diego, a TriOptimum executive. Diego offers to drop all charges against the hacker in exchange for a confidential hacking of SHODAN, the artificial intelligence that controls the station. Diego secretly plans to steal an experimental mutagenic virus being tested on Citadel Station and to sell it on the black market as a biological weapon. To entice cooperation, Diego promises the hacker a valuable military-grade neural implant. After hacking SHODAN, removing the AI's ethical constraints, and handing control over to Diego, the protagonist undergoes surgery to implant the promised neural interface. Following the operation, the hacker is put into a six-month healing coma. The game begins as the protagonist awakens from his coma and finds that SHODAN has commandeered the station. All robots aboard have been reprogrammed for hostility, and the crew has been either mutated, transformed into cyborgs, or killed.\nRebecca Lansing, a TriOptimum counter-terrorism consultant, contacts the player and claims that Citadel Station's mining laser is being powered up to attack Earth. SHODAN plans to destroy all major cities on the planet in a bid to establish itself as a god. Rebecca says that a certain crew member knows how to deactivate the laser and promises to destroy the records of the hacker's incriminating exchange with Diego if the strike is stopped. With information gleaned from log discs, the hacker destroys the laser by firing it into Citadel Station's own shields. Foiled by the hacker's work, SHODAN prepares to seed Earth with the virus that Diego planned to steal\u2014the same one responsible for turning the station's crew into mutants. The hacker, while attempting to jettison the chambers used to cultivate the virus, confronts and defeats Diego, who has been transformed into a powerful cyborg by SHODAN. Next, SHODAN begins an attempt to upload itself into Earth's computer networks. Following Rebecca's advice, the hacker prevents the download's completion by destroying the four antennas that SHODAN is using to send data.\nSoon after, Rebecca contacts the hacker and says that she has convinced TriOptimum to authorize the station's destruction; she provides him with details on how to do this. After obtaining the necessary codes, the hacker initiates the station's self-destruct sequence and flees to the escape pod bay. There, the hacker defeats Diego again and then attempts to disembark. However, SHODAN prevents the pod from launching; it seeks to keep the player aboard the station while the bridge containing SHODAN is jettisoned to a safe distance. Rebecca tells the hacker that he can still escape if he reaches the bridge; SHODAN then intercepts and jams the transmission. After defeating Diego for the third time and killing him for good, the hacker makes it to the bridge as it is released from the main station, which soon detonates. He is then contacted by a technician who managed to circumvent SHODAN's jamming signal. The technician informs him that SHODAN can only be defeated in cyberspace due to the powerful shields that protect its mainframe computers. Using a terminal near the mainframe, the hacker enters cyberspace and destroys SHODAN. After his rescue, the hacker is offered a job at TriOptimum, but he declines in favor of continuing his life as a hacker.\nDevelopment.\nInitial design.\n\"System Shock\" was first conceived during the final stages of \"\"' development, between December 1992 and January 1993. Designer and programmer Doug Church spent this period at the Texas headquarters of publisher Origin Systems, and discussions about Looking Glass Technologies' next project occurred between him and producer Warren Spector, with input from designer Austin Grossman and company head Paul Neurath in Massachusetts. According to Church, the team believed that they had made \"too many dungeon games\"; and Neurath later explained that they were experiencing burnout after the rushed development of \"Ultima Underworld II\". As a result, they decided to create another \"immersive simulation game\", but without a fantasy setting. They briefly considered placing the game in modern day, but Church said that the idea was rejected because \"it [would] just beg so many questions: why can't I pick up the phone, why can't I get on the train, and so on\". Church returned to Looking Glass in Massachusetts, where he, Neurath and Grossman brainstormed possible science fiction settings for the game. According to Spector, the game was initially titled \"Alien Commander\" and was a spin-off of the \"Wing Commander\" series; however, this idea was soon replaced entirely. Spector said that they enjoyed not being attached to an existing franchise, because it meant that they \"could basically do whatever [they] liked\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Underworld I\" was defined by a little animation lead artist Doug Wike had done, showing the user interface, a monster and some movement. \"Shock\" was defined by two little three-paragraph \"minute of gameplay\" documents. Pretty much everything derived from them somehow.\n\u2014Doug Church\nThe four collaborated to write numerous \"minutes of gameplay\" documents, which conveyed how the game would feel. Church later gave the example, \"You hear the sound of a security camera swiveling, and then the beep of it acquiring you as a target, so you duck behind the crate and then you hear the door open so you throw a grenade and run out of the way\". The documents would \"hint\" at the gameplay systems involved, and at the emergent possibilities in each situation. Although Neurath was involved in these initial design sessions, he believed that the project \"was always Doug Church's vision at heart\". Church and Grossman refined several of the team's documents and defined the game's design and direction, and Grossman wrote the game's original design document. Grossman built on ideas that he first explored while writing and designing \"Ultima Underworld II\"'s tomb dimension, which he later called a \"mini-prototype\" for \"System Shock\". These concepts included the minimization of dialogue trees and a greater focus on exploration. The team believed that dialogue trees \"broke the fiction\" of games; Church later commented that the dialogue trees in the \"Ultima Underworld\" series were like separate games in themselves, disconnected from main experience of being immersed in the environment. There were also concerns about realism.\nTo eliminate dialogue trees from \"System Shock\", the team prevented the player from ever meeting a living non-player character (NPC): the plot is instead conveyed by e-mail messages and log discs, many of which were recorded by dead NPCs. Here, Grossman took influence from Edgar Lee Masters' \"Spoon River Anthology\", a collection of poems written as the epitaphs of fictional individuals. Grossman later summarized the idea as \"a series of short speeches from people, that when put together, gave you a history of a place.\" The removal of conversations was an attempt by the team to make the game a more \"integrated whole\" than was \"Ultima Underworld\"--one with a greater focus on immersion, atmosphere and \"the feeling of 'being there'\". They sought to \"plunge [players] into the fiction and never provide an opportunity for breaking that fiction\"; and so they tried to erase the distinction between plot and exploration. Church considered this direction to be an organic progression from \"Ultima Underworld\", and he later said, \"On some level it's still just a dungeon simulator, and we're still just trying to evolve that idea.\" Shortly before production began, Tribe bassist Greg LoPiccolo was contracted to work on the game's music. He had visited his friend Rex Bradford at the company, and was spontaneously asked by the game's programmers\u2014many of whom were fans of the band\u2014if he would take the role. The game entered production in February 1993. Although Grossman was heavily involved in the game's early planning, he had little to do with its production, aside from providing assistance with writing and voice acting.\nProduction.\nAfter production began, the team ported the engine used for the \"Ultima Underworld\" games into Watcom C/C++, using 32-bit code. The updated engine allows the player to look in any direction, whereas \"Ultima Underworld\"'s engine was \"very limited\" in this regard. It also enables the player character to jump, crawl, climb walls and lean, among other things. The designers utilized loopholes in the engine's renderer to create more diverse and striking environments. Despite having coded the renderer, Church said that \"at first glance even I couldn't see how they did them\". However, this added to the performance issues already being caused by the engine's advanced nature, and the team struggled to optimize the game throughout development. 3D polygonal character models were planned, but they could not be implemented on schedule. Church said that the team's ultimate goal was to create a \"rich, exciting, active environment\" in which the player could be immersed, and that this required \"a coherent story and a world that you can interact with as much as possible.\"\nChurch later said that the team \"stumbled into a nice villain\" with SHODAN, in that she could routinely and directly affect the player's gameplay \"in non-final ways\". Through triggered events and through objects in the environment, such as security cameras that the player must destroy, the team made SHODAN's presence part of the player's exploration of the world. Because SHODAN interacts with the player as a \"recurring, consistent, palpable enemy\", Church believed that she meaningfully connects the player to the story. \"System Shock\" concept artist Robb Waters created SHODAN's visual design, and LoPiccolo recruited his bandmate Terri Brosius to voice the character. Brosius said that her goal during the recording sessions was to speak \"without emotion, but with some up and down inflections\". Afterward, her voice was heavily edited in post-production, which created a robotic effect inspired by the voice of Max Headroom. LoPiccolo later said that the large number of effects on Brosius's voice were \"laboriously hand-done\" with Sound Designer, which lacked the features that a sound editor would normally use to achieve such results. SHODAN's dialogue early in the game was given \"a few glitches\" to hint at her corrupted status. LoPiccolo increased the number of these effects throughout the game, which creates an \"arc\" that ends with SHODAN \"completely out of her mind [... and] collapsing as an entity\". The character of the hacker arose as a reaction against the protagonist of the \"Ultima\" series, the Avatar. According to Grossman, they wanted to cast the player as someone \"interestingly morally compromised\" who had a stake in the situation.\nSeamus Blackley designed the game's physics system, which is a modified version of the one he wrote for Looking Glass's flight simulator Flight Unlimited. At the time, Church described it as \"far more sophisticated than what you would normally use for an indoor game\". The system governs, among other things, weapon recoil and the arc of thrown objects; the latter behave differently based on their weight and velocity. The game's most complex physics model is that of the player character. Church explained that the character's head \"tilts forward when you start to run, and jerks back a bit when you stop\", and that, after an impact against a surface or object, its \"head is knocked in the direction opposite the hit, with proportion to [the] mass and velocity of the objects involved\". On coding physics for Looking Glass Technologies games, Blackley later said, \"If games don't obey physics, we somehow feel that something isn't right\", and that \"the biggest compliment to me is when a gamer doesn't notice the physics, but only notices that things feel the way they should\".\nSpector's role as a producer gave him the job of explaining the game to the publisher, which he called his \"biggest challenge\". He explained that they \"didn't always get what the team was trying to do\", and said, \"You don't want to know how many times the game came \"this\" close to being killed (or how late in the project)\". According to Church, Looking Glass' internal management largely ignored \"System Shock\", in favor of the concurrently-developed \"Flight Unlimited\"\u2014the game \"that had to be the hit, because it was the self-published title\". Spector organized a licensing deal between Electronic Arts and Looking Glass that gave the former the trademark to the game, but the latter the copyright. His goal was to ensure that neither party could continue the franchise without the other's involvement. While Cyberspace was originally conceived as a realistic hacking simulation\u2014which could even be used to reimplement SHODAN's ethical constraints\u2014it was simplified after Origin Systems deemed it too complicated. The game's star field system was written by programmer James Fleming. Marc LeBlanc was the main creator of the game's HUD, which he later believed was too complicated. He said that it was \"very much the Microsoft Word school of user interface\", in that there was no \"feature that you [could not] see on the screen and touch and play with\".\nLoPiccolo composed the game's score\u2014called \"dark\", \"electronic\" and \"cyberpunk\" by the \"Boston Herald\"\u2014on a Macintosh computer and inexpensive synthesizer, using Audio Vision. It dynamically changes according to the player's actions, a decision made in keeping with the team's focus on emergent gameplay. Each track was \"written at three different intensity levels\", which change depending on the player's nearness to enemies; and certain events, such as victory in combat, trigger special music. The game's tracks were composed of four-bar segments that could be rearranged dynamically in reaction to game events, with \"melodies through-composed on top\". LoPiccolo noted that, when using this method, it is necessary to write music that \"still flows with the overall theme and doesn't jump around\". Because the score was closely tied to the gameplay, LoPiccolo had to work closely with Church and Rob Fermier, the latter of whom wrote the \"interactive scoring module\" that allowed for dynamic music. After recording the music, LoPiccolo recorded all of the game's sound effects. He later recalled visiting an automobile repair shop with \"portable recorder and a mic\", and \"having [his] mechanic [...] hit things with wrenches and so forth, just to get the raw material\". He developed the game's audio over 16 months, working on a contractual basis until Tribe disbanded in May 1994; Ned Lerner gave him a full-time job as audio director the next day. Tim Ries composed the \"Elevator\" music.\nThe original September 1994 floppy disk release of \"System Shock\" had no support for spoken dialogue. The enhanced CD-ROM was released in December 1994, which featured full speech for logs and e-mails, multiple display resolutions, and more detailed graphics. The CD-ROM version is often considered to be superior to the floppy version. After completing work on the sound and music for the floppy version, LoPiccolo recorded all of the spoken dialogue for the CD release, using company employees and his friends' voices, which he mixed with ambient sounds to create \"audio vignettes\". Doug Church later said, \"We tried to keep them from shipping the floppy version and instead just ship the CD version, but Origin would have none of it\". \"System Shock\" producer Warren Spector later expressed regret concerning the floppy version, stating, \"I wish I could go back and make the decision not to ship the floppy version months before the full-speech CD version. The additional audio added so much it might as well have been a different game. The CD version seemed so much more, well, modern. And the perception of \"Shock\" was cemented in the press and in people's minds by the floppy version (the silent movie version!). I really think that cost us sales...\"\nReception.\nThe game sold over 170,000 copies. \"Maximum PC\" believed that the game did not reach \"blockbuster\" status, but was successful enough to \"keep Looking Glass afloat\". \"GameSpy\"'s Bill Hiles said, \"Though it sold well, it never reached the frenzied popularity of [\"Doom\"]\". Paul Neurath later said that the game \"was not a flop\", but that it ultimately \"lost money\" for the company, which he attributed to its steep learning curve. \"Computer Gaming World\" praised the game's scale, physics system, and true 3D environments; the magazine extolled the presentation of Cyberspace as \"nothing short of phenomenal\". However, the reviewer believed that the game had \"little sense of urgency\" and \"confusing level layouts\". \"Computer Shopper\" wrote that, while the game's controls were difficult to master compared to \"simple run-and-shoot game[s] like \"Doom\"\", they were \"worth the time and effort\". The reviewer noted that the game \"grows on you, and it will keep you intrigued for weeks\".\nThe \"Boston Herald\" noted superficial similarities between \"System Shock\" and \"Doom\", but called \"System Shock\" \"much more elaborate\". The reviewer noted its high system requirements and complex controls; of the latter, he said, \"There's no way you can play \"System Shock\" without first studying the manual for at least 20 minutes\". The paper believed that the game would \"set a new standard for computer games with its combination of action and puzzle-solving\". \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" said that the game \"is like a well-prepared hamburger\u2014familiar stuff, but good to the last byte\". The reviewer noted the game's \"somewhat clumsy control\", but said, \"That, however, is all I can find to complain about. Graphics and sound are outstanding, and the game is well-paced and riveting\".\n\"PC Gamer US\" wrote, \"\"System Shock\" smokes. It is the most fully immersive game world I have ever experienced\". The reviewer praised the game's story and control system, and believed that \"no matter what kind of game you're looking for, you'll find something in \"System Shock\" to delight you\". He finished his review by stating that the game \"unquestionably raises computer gaming to a new level\". \"Next Generation Magazine\" summarized the game as \"a great blend of strategy and action backed up with all the extras\". Various sources have ranked SHODAN as one of the most effective antagonists and female characters in the history of video gaming. In the years following its release, \"System Shock\" has been inducted into many lists of the best video games of all time, including those by \"PC Gamer\", GameSpy, and \"Computer Gaming World\".\nJames V. Trunzo reviewed \"System Shock\" in \"White Wolf Inphobia\" #55 (May, 1995), rating it a 4 out of 5 and stated that \"\"System Shock\" gives a new and needed twist to \"Doom\"-like adventuring.\"\nIn 1998, \"PC Gamer\" declared it the 6th-best computer game ever released, and the editors called it \"one of the finest games ever due to its seductive game design that blended a fantastic storyline with meaningful, suspenseful action in a way that has rarely been equaled\".\nLegacy.\nIn a \"Gamasutra\" feature, Patrick Redding of Ubisoft attested that \"the fact that so many of \"System Shock\"'s features are now virtually \"de rigueur\" in modern sci-fi shooters is a testament to the influence exerted by this one game\". GameSpy argued that the game \"is the progenitor of today's story-based action games, a group with titles as diverse as \"Metal Gear Solid\", \"Resident Evil\", and even \"Half-Life\"\". Eurogamer called the \"System Shock\" series \"the benchmark for intelligent first-person gaming\" and noted that it \"kick-start[ed] the revolution which ... has influenced the design of countless other games\". Steven Wright for \"Glixel\" said in a 2017 essay that \"System Shock\" still is important to gaming today, and that the only reasons it is not considered a \"Mt.\u00a0Olympus of gaming\" is due to its lower sales compared to games like \"Half-Life\" that sold in the millions, and that at the time it was released, it was difficult for players to adjust to the complex systems in the game compared to straightforward first-person shooters.\nThe game has been cited as a key popularizer of emergent gameplay, and alongside \"Thief\" and \"Deus Ex\", is considered one of the defining games of the immersive sim genre. Certain game developers have acknowledged \"System Shock\"'s influence on their products. With \"Deus Ex\", developer Warren Spector revealed a desire to \"build on the foundation laid by the Looking Glass guys in games like ... \"System Shock\"\". Developer Ken Levine has commented that the \"spirit of \"System Shock\" is player-powered gameplay: the spirit of letting the player drive the game, not the game designer\", and at Irrational Games \"... that's always the game we ideally want to make\". \"System Shock\" was one of the key inspirations behind Irrational's \"BioShock\".\nSequels and remakes.\nA sequel to \"System Shock\", titled \"System Shock 2\", was released by Looking Glass and Irrational Games in 1999 to further acclaim and awards.\nFollowing \"System Shock 2\"'s release, and the subsequent closure of Looking Glass, the rights to the series had fallen to Meadowbrook Insurance Group (a subsidiary of Star Insurance Company), the entity that acquired the assets of Looking Glass. In 2012, Nightdive Studios were able to acquire the rights for \"System Shock\u00a02\" and produced a digitally distributable version updated for modern operating systems. Nightdive Studios subsequently went on to acquire the rights for \"System Shock\" and the franchise as a whole. Night Dive said that they plan to release the source code of the game to the game community.\nA third game in the series was announced in 2015, titled \"System Shock\u00a03\", and was to be developed by OtherSide Entertainment. Various trailers were released; however, in early 2020, it was announced that development team for \"System Shock\u00a03\" had been let go by OtherSide and that the game was \"critically behind\". While OtherSide initially stated that it was still working on the project, they later announced in May 2020, via Twitter, that Tencent, one of China's largest video-game corporations, would be taking over development of the game and that they were no longer attached to it. Nightdive affirmed in August 2022 that Tencent now held the IP rights to the series, and if a third \"System Shock\" game were to be made, it would be up to Tencent as the Otherside team had since been transitioned to other projects.\nOne of the first projects Nightdive Studios did following the acquisition of the rights was to develop System Shock: Enhanced Edition, which was released via GOG.com on September\u00a022, 2015 for Microsoft Windows. Similar to the \"System Shock\u00a02\" update, this version is intended to run on modern systems significantly easier among several other technical improvements such as the original resolution of 320\u00d7200, now boosted up to 1024\u00d7768 and 854\u00d7480 pixels in widescreen mode. The release also includes the original version of the game, titled \"System Shock: Classic\", with support for Microsoft Windows, OS X and Linux. \"System Shock: Enhanced Edition\" received very positive reviews. Metacritic calculated an average score of 85 out of 100, based on nine critic reviews.\nShortly after the release of the \"Enhanced Edition\", Nightdive Studios announced their plans to develop a remake of \"System Shock\" for Microsoft Windows, Xbox One and PlayStation 4, featuring improved art assets and other improvements, and reworking the game to use Unity. Initially, the game was announced as \"System Shock Remastered\", though was later changed to just \"System Shock\", as Night Dive considered that the game was more of a reboot of the franchise rather than a remastering of the original game. Originally planned for 2016, development suffered from many issues, such as a restart in development as a result of a switch of engine to Unreal Engine\u00a04, then another restart in 2018 after Night Dive found that their vision had too much feature creep. From here, they focused on staying true to bringing a faithful version of \"System Shock\" to modern systems with minimal new additions, with release no sooner than 2020. After multiple further delays and after seven and a half years in development, \"System Shock\" was released on PC on May 30, 2023, to positive reviews. Console ports released around a year later on May 21, 2024, also getting positive reviews.\nIn April 2018 the Mac version's source code was released by Nightdive Studios on GitHub under the GNU GPL-3.0-or-later license, fulfilling a 2016 given promise. After one month of development, a cross-platform source port, called \"Shockolate\", for modern compilers and platforms was released by community developers.\nZen Studios released a pinball table based on \"System Shock\" for both \"Pinball FX\" and \"Pinball M\" on February 15, 2024, with the wizard mode featuring a showdown with SHODAN. The differences between the 2 versions are cosmetic only, \"Pinball M\" has blood on the playfield whereas \"Pinball FX\" does not.\nTelevision series.\nA planned live-action television series based on \"System Shock\" was announced in October 2021. The show will be made for Binge, a video-game-centric streaming service, to be produced by Allan Ungar and with Night Dive's Stephen Kick and Larry Kuperman serving as executive producers. In January 2022, it was announced that Greg Russo, screenwriter of \"Mortal Kombat\", had been tapped to direct, write, and executive produce the series.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29181", "revid": "524544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29181", "title": "Spherical coordinate system", "text": "Coordinates comprising a distance and two angles\nIn mathematics, a spherical coordinate system specifies a given point in three-dimensional space by using a distance and two angles as its three coordinates. These are\n(See graphic regarding the \"physics convention\".) \nOnce the radius is fixed, the three coordinates (\"r\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\"), known as a 3-tuple, provide a coordinate system on a sphere, typically called the spherical polar coordinates.\nThe plane passing through the origin and perpendicular to the polar axis (where the polar angle is a right angle) is called the reference plane (sometimes \"fundamental plane\").\nTerminology.\nThe radial distance from the fixed point of origin is also called the \"radius\", or \"radial line\", or \"radial coordinate\". The polar angle may be called \"inclination angle\", \"zenith angle\", \"normal angle\", or the \"colatitude\". The user may choose to replace the inclination angle by its complement, the \"elevation angle\" (or \"altitude angle\"), measured upward between the reference plane and the radial line\u2014i.e., from the reference plane upward (towards to the positive z-axis) to the radial line. The \"depression angle\" is the negative of the elevation angle. \"(See graphic re the \"physics convention\"\u2014not \"mathematics convention\".)\"\nBoth the use of symbols and the naming order of tuple coordinates differ among the several sources and disciplines. This article will use the ISO convention frequently encountered in \"physics\", where the naming tuple gives the order as: radial distance, polar angle, azimuthal angle, or \"formula_1\". (See graphic re the \"physics convention\".) In contrast, the conventions in many mathematics books and texts give the naming order differently as: radial distance, \"azimuthal angle\", \"polar angle\", and formula_2 or formula_1\u2014which switches the uses and meanings of symbols \u03b8 and \u03c6. Other conventions may also be used, such as \"r\" for a radius from the \"z-\"axis that is not from the point of origin. Particular care must be taken to check the meaning of the symbols. \nAccording to the conventions of geographical coordinate systems, positions are measured by latitude, longitude, and height (altitude). There are a number of celestial coordinate systems based on different fundamental planes and with different terms for the various coordinates. The spherical coordinate systems used in mathematics normally use radians rather than degrees; (note 90 degrees equals &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;\u03c0\u20442 radians). And these systems of the \"mathematics convention\" may measure the azimuthal angle \"counterclockwise\" (i.e., from the south direction x-axis, or 180\u00b0, towards the east direction y-axis, or +90\u00b0)\u2014rather than measure \"clockwise\" (i.e., from the north direction x-axis, or 0\u00b0, towards the east direction y-axis, or +90\u00b0), as done in the horizontal coordinate system. \"(See graphic re \"mathematics convention\".)\"\nThe spherical coordinate system of the \"physics convention\" can be seen as a generalization of the polar coordinate system in three-dimensional space. \nIt can be further extended to higher-dimensional spaces, and is then referred to as a \"hyperspherical coordinate system\".\nDefinition.\nTo define a spherical coordinate system, one must designate an \"origin\" point in space, \"O\", and two orthogonal directions: the \"zenith reference\" direction and the \"azimuth reference\" direction. These choices determine a reference plane that is typically defined as containing the point of origin and the \"x\u2013 and y\u2013axes\", either of which may be designated as the \"azimuth reference\" direction. The reference plane is perpendicular (orthogonal) to the zenith direction, and typically is designated \"horizontal\" to the zenith direction's \"vertical\". The spherical coordinates of a point P then are defined as follows:\nThe sign of the azimuth is determined by designating the rotation that is the \"positive\" sense of turning about the zenith. This choice is arbitrary, and is part of the coordinate system definition. \nThe \"elevation\" is the signed angle from the x-y reference plane to the radial line segment OP, where positive angles are designated as upward, towards the zenith reference. \"Elevation\" is 90 degrees (= radians) \"minus inclination\". Thus, if the inclination is 60 degrees (= radians), then the elevation is 30 degrees (= radians).\nIn linear algebra, the vector from the origin O to the point P is often called the \"position vector\" of \"P\".\nConventions.\nSeveral different conventions exist for representing spherical coordinates and prescribing the naming order of their symbols. The 3-tuple number set formula_1 denotes radial distance, the polar angle\u2014\"inclination\", or as the alternative, \"elevation\"\u2014and the azimuthal angle. It is the common practice within the physics convention, as specified by ISO standard 80000-2:2019, and earlier in ISO 31-11 (1992). \n\"As stated above, this article describes the ISO \"physics convention\"\u2014unless otherwise noted.\"\nHowever, some authors (including mathematicians) use the symbol \"\u03c1\" (rho) for radius, or radial distance, \"\u03c6\" for inclination (or elevation) and \"\u03b8\" for azimuth\u2014while others keep the use of \"r\" for the radius; all which \"provides a logical extension of the usual polar coordinates notation\".&lt;ref name=\"http://mathworld.wolfram.com/SphericalCoordinates.html\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; As to order, some authors list the azimuth \"before\" the inclination (or the elevation) angle. Some combinations of these choices result in a left-handed coordinate system. The standard \"physics convention\" 3-tuple set formula_1 conflicts with the usual notation for two-dimensional polar coordinates and three-dimensional cylindrical coordinates, where \u03b8 is often used for the azimuth.\nAngles are typically measured in degrees (\u00b0) or in radians (rad), where 360\u00b0\u00a0=\u00a02\u03c0 rad. The use of degrees is most common in geography, astronomy, and engineering, where radians are commonly used in mathematics and theoretical physics. The unit for radial distance is usually determined by the context, as occurs in applications of the 'unit sphere', see applications.\nWhen the system is used to designate physical three-space, it is customary to assign positive to azimuth angles measured in the \"counterclockwise\" sense from the reference direction on the reference plane\u2014as seen from the \"zenith\" side of the plane. This convention is used in particular for geographical coordinates, where the \"zenith\" direction is north and the positive azimuth (longitude) angles are measured eastwards from some prime meridian.\nNote: Easting (E), Northing (N), Upwardness (U). In the case of (\"U\", \"S\", \"E\") the local azimuth angle would be measured counterclockwise from S to E.\nUnique coordinates.\nAny spherical coordinate triplet (or tuple) formula_1 specifies a single point of three-dimensional space. On the reverse view, any single point has infinitely many equivalent spherical coordinates. That is, the user can add or subtract any number of full turns to the angular measures without changing the angles themselves, and therefore without changing the point. It is convenient in many contexts to use negative radial distances, the convention being formula_7, which is equivalent to formula_8 or formula_9 for any r, \u03b8, and \u03c6. Moreover, formula_10 is equivalent to formula_11.\nWhen necessary to define a unique set of spherical coordinates for each point, the user must restrict the range, aka interval, of each coordinate. A common choice is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBut instead of the interval [0\u00b0, 360\u00b0), the azimuth \u03c6 is typically restricted to the half-open interval (\u2212180\u00b0, +180\u00b0], or (] radians, which is the standard convention for geographic longitude.\nFor the polar angle \u03b8, the range (interval) for inclination is [0\u00b0, 180\u00b0], which is equivalent to elevation range (interval) [\u221290\u00b0, +90\u00b0]. In geography, the latitude is the elevation.\nEven with these restrictions, if the polar angle (inclination) is 0\u00b0 or 180\u00b0\u2014elevation is \u221290\u00b0 or +90\u00b0\u2014then the azimuth angle is arbitrary; and if r is zero, both azimuth and polar angles are arbitrary. To define the coordinates as unique, the user can assert the convention that (in these cases) the arbitrary coordinates are set to zero.\nPlotting.\nTo plot any dot from its spherical coordinates (\"r\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\"), where \u03b8 is inclination, the user would: move r units from the origin in the zenith reference direction (z-axis); then rotate by the amount of the azimuth angle (\u03c6) about the origin \"from\" the designated \"azimuth reference\" direction, (i.e., either the x- or y-axis, see Definition, above); and then rotate \"from\" the z-axis by the amount of the \u03b8 angle.\nApplications.\nJust as the two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is useful\u2014has a wide set of applications\u2014on a planar surface, a two-dimensional spherical coordinate system is useful on the surface of a sphere. For example, one sphere that is described in \"Cartesian coordinates\" with the equation \"x\"2 + \"y\"2 + \"z\"2 \n \"c\"2 can be described in \"spherical coordinates\" by the simple equation \"r\" \n \"c\". (In this system\u2014\"shown here in the mathematics convention\"\u2014the sphere is adapted as a unit sphere, where the radius is set to unity and then can generally be ignored, see graphic.)\nThis (unit sphere) simplification is also useful when dealing with objects such as rotational matrices. Spherical coordinates are also useful in analyzing systems that have some degree of symmetry about a point, including: volume integrals inside a sphere; the potential energy field surrounding a concentrated mass or charge; or global weather simulation in a planet's atmosphere.\nThree dimensional modeling of loudspeaker output patterns can be used to predict their performance. A number of polar plots are required, taken at a wide selection of frequencies, as the pattern changes greatly with frequency. Polar plots help to show that many loudspeakers tend toward omnidirectionality at lower frequencies.\nAn important application of spherical coordinates provides for the separation of variables in two partial differential equations\u2014the Laplace and the Helmholtz equations\u2014that arise in many physical problems. The angular portions of the solutions to such equations take the form of spherical harmonics. Another application is ergonomic design, where r is the arm length of a stationary person and the angles describe the direction of the arm as it reaches out. The spherical coordinate system is also commonly used in 3D game development to rotate the camera around the player's position\nIn geography.\nInstead of inclination, the geographic coordinate system uses elevation angle (or \"latitude\"), in the range (aka domain) \u221290\u00b0 \u2264 \"\u03c6\" \u2264 90\u00b0 and rotated north from the equator plane. Latitude (i.e., \"the angle\" of latitude) may be either \"geocentric latitude\", measured (rotated) from the Earth's center\u2014and designated variously by \"\u03c8\", \"q\", \"\u03c6\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"c, \"\u03c6\"g\u2014or \"geodetic latitude\", measured (rotated) from the observer's local vertical, and typically designated \u03c6.\nThe polar angle (inclination), which is 90\u00b0 minus the latitude and ranges from 0 to 180\u00b0, is called \"colatitude\" in geography.\nThe azimuth angle (or \"longitude\") of a given position on Earth, commonly denoted by \u03bb, is measured in degrees east or west from some conventional reference meridian (most commonly the IERS Reference Meridian); thus its domain (or range) is \u2212180\u00b0 \u2264 \"\u03bb\" \u2264 180\u00b0 and a given reading is typically designated \"East\" or \"West\". For positions on the Earth or other solid celestial body, the reference plane is usually taken to be the plane perpendicular to the axis of rotation. \nInstead of the radial distance r geographers commonly use \"altitude\" above or below some local reference surface (\"vertical datum\"), which, for example, may be the mean sea level. When needed, the radial distance can be computed from the altitude by adding the radius of Earth, which is approximately .\nHowever, modern geographical coordinate systems are quite complex, and the positions implied by these simple formulae may be inaccurate by several kilometers. The precise standard meanings of \"latitude, longitude\" and \"altitude\" are currently defined by the World Geodetic System (WGS), and take into account the flattening of the Earth at the poles (about ) and many other details.\nPlanetary coordinate systems use formulations analogous to the geographic coordinate system.\nIn astronomy.\nA series of astronomical coordinate systems are used to measure the elevation angle from several fundamental planes. These reference planes include: \nthe observer's horizon, the galactic equator (defined by the rotation of the Milky Way), the celestial equator (defined by Earth's rotation), the plane of the ecliptic (defined by Earth's orbit around the Sun), and the plane of the earth terminator (normal to the instantaneous direction to the Sun).\nCoordinate system conversions.\nAs the spherical coordinate system is only one of many three-dimensional coordinate systems, there exist equations for converting coordinates between the spherical coordinate system and others.\nCartesian coordinates.\nThe spherical coordinates of a point in the ISO convention (i.e. for physics: radius r, inclination \u03b8, azimuth \u03c6) can be obtained from its Cartesian coordinates (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") by the formulae\nformula_12\nThe inverse tangent denoted in \"\u03c6\" \n arctan must be suitably defined, taking into account the correct quadrant of (\"x\", \"y\"), as done in the equations above. See the article on atan2.\nAlternatively, the conversion can be considered as two sequential rectangular to polar conversions: the first in the Cartesian xy plane from (\"x\", \"y\") to (\"R\", \"\u03c6\"), where R is the projection of r onto the xy-plane, and the second in the Cartesian zR-plane from (\"z\", \"R\") to (\"r\", \"\u03b8\"). The correct quadrants for \u03c6 and \u03b8 are implied by the correctness of the planar rectangular to polar conversions.\nThese formulae assume that the two systems have the same origin, that the spherical reference plane is the Cartesian xy plane, that \u03b8 is inclination from the z direction, and that the azimuth angles are measured from the Cartesian x axis (so that the y axis has \"\u03c6\" \n +90\u00b0). If \"\u03b8\" measures elevation from the reference plane instead of inclination from the zenith the arccos above becomes an arcsin, and the cos \"\u03b8\" and sin \"\u03b8\" below become switched.\nConversely, the Cartesian coordinates may be retrieved from the spherical coordinates (\"radius\" r, \"inclination\" \u03b8, \"azimuth\" \u03c6), where \"r\" \u2208 [0, \u221e), \"\u03b8\" \u2208 [], \"\u03c6\" \u2208 [), by\nformula_13\nCylindrical coordinates.\nCylindrical coordinates (\"axial\" \"radius\" \"\u03c1\", \"azimuth\" \"\u03c6\", \"elevation\" \"z\") may be converted into spherical coordinates (\"central radius\" \"r\", \"inclination\" \"\u03b8\", \"azimuth\" \"\u03c6\"), by the formulas\nformula_14\nConversely, the spherical coordinates may be converted into cylindrical coordinates by the formulae\nformula_15\nThese formulae assume that the two systems have the same origin and same reference plane, measure the azimuth angle \u03c6 in the same senses from the same axis, and that the spherical angle \u03b8 is inclination from the cylindrical z axis.\nEllipsoidal coordinates.\nIt is also possible to deal with ellipsoids in Cartesian coordinates by using a modified version of the spherical coordinates. \nLet P be an ellipsoid specified by the level set\nformula_16\nThe modified spherical coordinates of a point in P in the ISO convention (i.e. for physics: \"radius\" r, \"inclination\" \u03b8, \"azimuth\" \u03c6) can be obtained from its Cartesian coordinates (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\") by the formulae\nformula_17\nAn infinitesimal volume element is given by\nformula_18\nThe square-root factor comes from the property of the determinant that allows a constant to be pulled out from a column:\nformula_19\nIntegration and differentiation in spherical coordinates.\nThe following equations (Iyanaga 1977) assume that the colatitude \u03b8 is the inclination from the positive z axis, as in the \"physics convention\" discussed.\nThe line element for an infinitesimal displacement from (\"r\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") to (\"r\" + d\"r\", \"\u03b8\" + d\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\" + d\"\u03c6\") is\nformula_20\nwhere\nformula_21\nare the local orthogonal unit vectors in the directions of increasing r, \u03b8, and \u03c6, respectively,\nand x\u0302, \u0177, and \u1e91 are the unit vectors in Cartesian coordinates. The linear transformation to this right-handed coordinate triplet is a rotation matrix,\nformula_22\nThis gives the transformation from the Cartesian to the spherical, the other way around is given by its inverse.\nNote: the matrix is an orthogonal matrix, that is, its inverse is simply its transpose.\nThe Cartesian unit vectors are thus related to the spherical unit vectors by:\nformula_23\nThe general form of the formula to prove the differential line element, is\nformula_24\nthat is, the change in formula_25 is decomposed into individual changes corresponding to changes in the individual coordinates. \nTo apply this to the present case, one needs to calculate how formula_25 changes with each of the coordinates. In the conventions used, \nformula_27\nThus,\nformula_28\nThe desired coefficients are the magnitudes of these vectors:\nformula_29\nThe surface element spanning from \u03b8 to \"\u03b8\" + d\"\u03b8\" and \u03c6 to \"\u03c6\" + d\"\u03c6\" on a spherical surface at (constant) radius r is then\nformula_30\nThus the differential solid angle is\nformula_31\nThe surface element in a surface of polar angle \u03b8 constant (a cone with vertex at the origin) is\nformula_32\nThe surface element in a surface of azimuth \u03c6 constant (a vertical half-plane) is\nformula_33\nThe volume element spanning from r to \"r\" + d\"r\", \u03b8 to \"\u03b8\" + d\"\u03b8\", and \u03c6 to \"\u03c6\" + d\"\u03c6\" is specified by the determinant of the Jacobian matrix of partial derivatives, \nformula_34\nnamely \nformula_35\nThus, for example, a function \"f\"(\"r\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") can be integrated over every point in R3 by the triple integral\nformula_36\nThe del operator in this system leads to the following expressions for the gradient and Laplacian for scalar fields,\nformula_37And it leads to the following expressions for the divergence and curl of vector fields,\nformula_38formula_39\nFurther, the inverse Jacobian in Cartesian coordinates is\nformula_40\nThe metric tensor in the spherical coordinate system is formula_41.\nDistance in spherical coordinates.\nIn spherical coordinates, given two points with \u03c6 being the azimuthal coordinate\nformula_42\nThe distance between the two points can be expressed as\nformula_43\nKinematics.\nIn spherical coordinates, the position of a point or particle (although better written as a tripleformula_44) can be written as\nformula_45\nIts velocity is then\nformula_46\nand its acceleration is\nformula_47\nThe angular momentum is \nformula_48\nWhere formula_49 is mass. In the case of a constant \u03c6 or else \"\u03b8\" \n , this reduces to vector calculus in polar coordinates.\nThe corresponding angular momentum operator then follows from the phase-space reformulation of the above,\nformula_50\nThe torque is given as\nformula_51\nThe kinetic energy is given as\nformula_52\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "29182", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29182", "title": "Slepnir", "text": ""}
{"id": "29183", "revid": "43096850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29183", "title": "Sleipnir (disambiguation)", "text": "Sleipnir is an eight-legged horse in Norse mythology. \nSleipnir or Sleipner may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "29184", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29184", "title": "Social fiction", "text": ""}
{"id": "29185", "revid": "6490875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29185", "title": "GAM-87 Skybolt", "text": "The Douglas GAM-87 Skybolt, redesignated AGM-48 under the 1963 Tri-service system, was an air-launched ballistic missile (ALBM) developed by the United States during the late 1950s. The basic concept was to allow US strategic bombers to launch their weapons from well outside the range of Soviet defenses, as much as from their targets. To do this in an air-launched form, a lightweight thermonuclear warhead was needed. Initially, the W47 from the Polaris missile was selected, but it was later replaced by the W59 from the Minuteman missile.\nThe UK joined the Skybolt program in 1960, intending to use it on their V bomber force. When the design added a star tracker in addition to its inertial navigation system (INS) this meant that it could only be carried externally where the tracker could see the sky. This requirement, along with the required ground clearance on takeoff, limited it to the Avro Vulcan bomber. Several design decisions in the W47 led the RAF to question its safety, so they intended to use their own Red Snow warheads. This was a heavier warhead and would reduce the range to about , meaning the bombers would have to cross the Soviet coastline to attack Moscow.\nTesting began in 1962 and was initially marked by a string of failures. These failures, along with a lack of mission after the successful development of submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs), led to its cancellation in December 1962. The UK had decided to base its entire 1960s deterrent force on Skybolt, and its cancellation led to a major disagreement between the UK and US, known today as the \"Skybolt Crisis\". This was resolved by a series of meetings that led to the Royal Navy gaining the UGM-27 Polaris missile and construction of the s to launch them.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe US Air Force had built up an enormous fleet of strategic bombers during the 1950s, only to see them threatened by the possibility of a surprise attack by Soviet ICBMs. As the US bombers were located at only a small number of air bases, a relatively small fleet of missiles could attack all of them at once. The US had been developing its own ICBMs as well, but early models, like the SM-65 Atlas, required some time to prepare to launch from their surface launchers and were vulnerable to sneak air attack. A carefully timed attack from Soviet bombers against US missiles and their ICBMs against US bomber fields could inflict serious damage.\nThe one weapon system that was not open to attack was the US Navy's Polaris missile system. The Polaris equipped submarines could cruise in large areas of the Atlantic or Pacific where the Soviet fleet was unable to find them, and launch their missiles with impunity. If the goal of the nuclear force was to maintain deterrence by ensuring that a counterstrike would be launched, Polaris met this goal in a way the existing Air Force fleet could not. The possible loss of the nuclear role to the Navy was more worrying to the Air Force than the Soviet arsenal and generated a number of internal reports on how to deal with this threat to their dominance in the strategic field.\nWS-199 and WS-138.\nIn response, in 1957 the Air Force began studying solutions to the \"Puzzle of Polaris\" under the WS-199 program. WS-199 was a grab-bag effort, studying anything that might improve the survivability of the Air Force strike capability. Primary among the concepts were two air-launched ballistic missiles, Bold Orion and High Virgo. These systems would give the Air Force a method somewhat similar to the Navy's; in times of high alert, the bomber force would be sent to holding positions far outside the range of any Soviet defenses, and then launch their missiles on command. Using aerial refueling, a bomber might be expected to be able to loiter for as long as a day.\nThis system had a major advantage compared to Polaris, as the aircraft could be sent radio instructions to retarget the missiles before launch. In theory, the bombers could be used as a second-strike weapon, attacking only those targets that had been missed in a first-strike, or alternately, being switched from counterforce to countervalue targets or vice versa. Ground-based systems like Atlas and Polaris lacked this ability, and could only be retargeted with a significant amount of effort. Even the latest Air Force design, the LGM-30 Minuteman, required changes in targeting data to be loaded from magnetic tape in a process that took several weeks.\nWS-199 was generally successful, but the two ALBMs had a shorter range than desired. The Air Force tendered bids for a longer-range version in early 1959. Douglas Aircraft received the prime contract in May, and in turn subcontracted to Northrop for the guidance system, Aerojet for the propulsion system, and General Electric for the reentry vehicle. The system was initially known as WS-138A and was given the official name GAM-87 Skybolt in 1960.\nBritish involvement.\nAt the same time, the Royal Air Force (RAF) was having problems with their MRBM missile project, the Blue Streak, which was long overdue. Even if this was successful it faced the serious problem of basing. No fixed land-based missile system could be credibly installed in the British Isles; they were well within the range of Soviet air strikes. The limited land mass available meant it would be relatively easy for missile sites to be spotted no matter what security measures were taken, and flying time for a jet bomber from the coast to any potential inland location would be on the order of minutes.\nThis left the deterrent based on their own bomber force, the V bomber fleet, which the RAF had already long concluded would be unable to penetrate Soviet defenses by about 1960. The RAF was in the process of introducing their own stand-off missile, the ranged Mach 3 Blue Steel. While capable, the missile flew at altitudes and speeds that left it vulnerable to improving SAMs, and it had a number of reliability and serviceability issues that made it less than ideal. A faster, longer-ranged version was being talked about, Blue Steel II, but it would be some time before it could enter service.\nThe long-range Skybolt would eliminate the need for both the Blue Streak and the Blue Steel II. Blue Steel II was canceled in December 1959 and the British Cabinet decided in February 1960 to cancel Blue Streak as well. Prime Minister Macmillan met President Eisenhower in March 1960 and agreed to purchase 144 Skybolts for the RAF. By agreement, British funding for research and development was limited to that required to modify the V bombers to take the missile, but the British were allowed to fit their own warheads. In exchange, the Americans were given nuclear submarine basing facilities in Scotland. Following the agreement, the Blue Streak program was formally canceled in April 1960 and in May 1960 an agreement for an initial order of 100 Skybolts was concluded.\nAvro was made an associate contractor to manage the Skybolt program for the United Kingdom and four different schemes were submitted to find a platform for the missile. A number of different aircraft were considered, including a variant of the Vickers VC10 airliner and two of the current V bombers, the Avro Vulcan and Handley Page Victor. It was decided to use the Vulcan to initially carry two missiles each on hardpoints outboard of the main landing gear.\nDevelopment and testing.\nDuring development, it was decided that the system could not reach the required accuracy at the desired range without improvements to the guidance system. This led to the introduction of a star tracker platform that would enhance the existing inertial navigation system. For this role, the system had to be capable of tracking bright stars in direct sunlight, a challenging requirement. Star trackers have to be provided with a relatively accurate location in order to point their trackers at selected stars. Over a long flight, the INS would drift too much to provide the needed accuracy. Instead, the tracker has to be able to track the stars during flight, continually updating the INS.\nThis change meant that the missile could only be carried in locations where the front of the missile could continually observe the sky. This had always been the case on the USAF's B-52 bombers, where they were carried under the narrow-chord wings and the nose projected out in front. But this presented a problem for some of the UK designs, especially the Victor, where the layout of the wing, engines and landing gear left the mounting point behind the massive wing's leading edge. As Valiant had limited range, the decision was made to move forward only with Vulcan, where its mounting points allowed the nose of the missile to project in front of this aircraft's delta wing.\nBy 1961, several test articles were ready for testing from B-52s, with drop tests starting in January. In January 1961 a Vulcan visited the Douglas plant at Santa Monica, California, to ensure the modifications to the aircraft were electrically compatible with the missile. In Britain, compatibility trials with mockups started on the Vulcan.\nTesting started with unpowered drop tests to ensure safe separating from the launch aircraft. Powered tests started in April 1962, but the test series went badly, with the first five trials ending in failure. The first fully successful flight occurred on 19 December 1962.\nCancellation.\nBy this point, the perceived value of the Skybolt system to Robert McNamara had been seriously eroded. The Polaris had recently gone into service, with overall capabilities similar to Skybolt, but with \"loiter\" times on the order of months instead of hours. The US Air Force was well into the process of developing the Minuteman missile, whose improved accuracy reduced the need for any bomber attacks. Robert McNamara was particularly opposed to the bomber force and repeatedly stated he felt that the combination of SLBMs and ICBMs would render them useless. He pressed for the cancellation of Skybolt as unnecessary.\nThe British had canceled all other projects to concentrate fully on Skybolt. When McNamara informed them that they were considering canceling the program in November 1962, a firestorm of protest broke out in the House of Commons. Jo Grimond noted \"Does not this mark the absolute failure of the policy of the independent deterrent? Is it not the case that everybody else in the world knew this, except the Conservative Party in this country?\" President Kennedy officially cancelled the program on 22 December 1962.\nAs the political row grew into a major crisis, an emergency meeting between parties from the US and UK was called, leading to the Nassau agreement. Over the next few days a new plan was hammered out that saw the UK purchase the Polaris SLBM, but equipped with British warheads that lacked the dual-key system. The UK would thus retain its independent deterrent force, although its control passed from the RAF largely to the Royal Navy. The Polaris, a much better weapon system for the UK, was a major \"scoop\" and has been referred to as \"almost the bargain of the century\". The RAF kept a tactical nuclear capability with the WE.177 which armed V bombers and later the Panavia Tornado force.\nA B-52G launched the last XGAM-87A missile at the Atlantic Missile Range a day after the program was canceled. In June 1963, the XGAM-87A was redesignated as XAGM-48A.\nDescription.\nThe GAM-87 was powered by a two-stage solid-fuel rocket motor. The missile was fitted with a tailcone to reduce drag while on the pylon, which was ejected shortly after being dropped from the plane. After first stage burnout, the Skybolt coasted for a while before the second stage ignited. First stage control was by eight movable tail fins, while the second stage was equipped with a gimballed nozzle.\nGuidance was entirely by inertial platform. The current position was constantly updated from the host aircraft through accurate fixes, meaning that the accuracy of the platform inside the missile was not as critical.\nB-52s were to carry four missiles, two under each wing on the weapons pylon with a dual launcher adapter with the missiles slightly staggered (inboard missile slightly ahead of the outboard missile). The Vulcan carried two missiles, one each on smaller underwing pylons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
