{"id": "21384", "revid": "37005538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21384", "title": "History of Nigeria", "text": "The history of Nigeria can be traced to the earliest inhabitants whose date remains at least 13,000 BC through the early civilizations such as the Nok culture which began around 1500 BC. Numerous ancient African civilizations settled in the region that is known today as Nigeria, such as the Kingdom of Nri, the Benin Kingdom, and the Oyo Empire. Islam reached Nigeria through the Bornu Empire between (1068 AD) and Hausa Kingdom during the 11th century, while Christianity came to Nigeria in the 15th century through Augustinian and Capuchin monks from Portugal to the Kingdom of Warri. The Songhai Empire also occupied part of the region. Through contact with Europeans, early harbour towns such as Calabar, Badagry, and Bonny emerged along the coast after 1480, which did business in the transatlantic slave trade, among other things. Conflicts in the hinterland, such as the civil war in the Oyo Empire, meant that new enslaved people were constantly being \"supplied\".\nAfter 1804, Usman dan Fodio unified an immense territory in his jihad against the superior but quarrelling Hausa states of the north, which was stabilised by his successors as the \"Caliphate of Sokoto\".\nIn its initial endeavour to stop the slave trade in West Africa, the United Kingdom gradually expanded its sphere of influence after 1851, starting from the tiny island of Lagos (3\u00a0km2) and the port city of Calabar. The British followed expansive trading companies such as the RNC and missionaries such as Mary Slessor, who advanced into the hinterland, preached and founded missionary schools, but also took action against local customs such as the religiously induced killing of twins or servants of deceased village elders and against the Trial by ordeal as a means of establishing the legal truth. At the Berlin Congo Conference in 1885, the European powers demarcated their spheres of interest in Africa without regard to ethnic or linguistic boundaries and without giving those affected a say. Thereafter, the British made increasing advances in the Niger region, which they had negotiated in Berlin, and ultimately defeated the Sokoto Caliphate. From 1903, Great Britain controlled almost the entire present-day territory of Nigeria, which was united under a single administration in 1914 (in 1919, a border strip of the former German colony of Cameroon was added to the territory of Nigeria).\nUnder the British colonial administration, purchasing cartels (of companies such as Unilever, Nestl\u00e9 and Cadbury) kept the prices of cocoa, palm oil and peanuts artificially low, thereby damaging Nigerian agriculture, but on the other hand ports and an extensive railway network were also built. Newspapers, political parties, trade unions and higher education institutions were established - rather against the wishes of the colonial rulers in order to control the oversized colony. In the East African campaign of 1941, Nigerian regiments achieved the first major success against the Axis powers with the fastest military advance in history at the time. In 1956, oil fields were discovered in Nigeria. Since then, vandalism, oil theft and illegal, unprofessional refining by local residents have caused the contamination of the Niger Delta with crude and heavy oil, particularly around disused exploratory boreholes.\nNigeria became independent in 1960. From 1967 to 1970, the \"Biafra War\" raged in the south-east - one of the worst humanitarian disasters of modern times. After three decades mostly of increasingly restrictive military dictatorships, Nigeria became a democratic federal republic based on the US model in 1999. Quadrennial elections are criticised as \"non-transparent\". Nevertheless, changes of power in the presidential villa at Aso Rock took place peacefully in 2007, 2010, 2015 and 2023, making Nigeria one of the few stable democracies in the region - despite its shortcomings. The Boko Haram revolt of 2014, which received much attention in the West, fell apart due to infighting and the united approach of Nigeria and its neighbours. The spread of the Ebola epidemic to the slums of Lagos in the same year was prevented by professional crisis management. Recent years have seen the rise of the Nigerian music and film industry and success in software programming with five out of seven African tech unicorns. With large new refineries, the country attempts since January 2024 to process the extracted domestic crude oil on its own and in a professional manner in the future (meaning without heavy oil as a waste product).\nThe biggest security problem is the numerous kidnappings, 38% of Nigerians personally know a kidnap victim. Due to the abrupt economic turnaround in 2023, 64% of Nigerians are hungry or cannot finance basic needs. 78% rate the work of President Tinubu as \u2018poor\u2019 or \u2018very poor\u2019.\nPrehistory.\nAcheulean tool-using archaic humans may have dwelled throughout West Africa since at least between 780,000 BP and 126,000 BP (Middle Pleistocene).\nBy at least 61,000 BP, Middle Stone Age West Africans may have begun to migrate south of the West Sudanian savanna, and, by at least 25,000 BP, may have begun to dwell near the coast of West Africa.\nAn excessively dry Ogolian period occurred, spanning from 20,000 BP to 12,000 BP. By 15,000 BP, the number of settlements made by Middle Stone Age West Africans decreased as there was an increase in humid conditions, expansion of the West African forest, and increase in the number of settlements made by Late Stone Age West African hunter-gatherers. Iwo Eleru people persisted at Iwo Eleru, in Nigeria, as late as 13,000 BP.\nMacrolith-using late Middle Stone Age peoples, who dwelled in Central Africa, to western Central Africa, to West Africa, were displaced by microlith-using Late Stone Age Africans as they migrated from Central Africa into West Africa. After having persisted as late as 1000 BP, or some period of time after 1500 AD, remaining West African hunter-gatherers were ultimately acculturated and admixed into the larger groups of West African agriculturalists.\nThe Dufuna canoe, a dugout canoe found in Yobe State in northeastern Nigeria has been dated to around 6300 BC, making it the oldest known boat in Africa, and the second oldest worldwide.\nIron Age.\nArchaeological sites containing iron smelting furnaces and slag have been excavated at sites in the Nsukka region of southeast Nigeria in what is now Igboland: dating to 2000 BC at the site of Lejja (Eze-Uzomaka 2009) and to 750 BC and at the site of Opi (Holl 2009). Iron metallurgy may have been independently developed in the Nok culture between the 9th century BC and 550 BC. More recently, Bandama and Babalola (2023) have indicated that iron metallurgical development occurred 2631 BC \u2013 2458 BC at Lejja, in Nigeria.\nDaima, an archaeological tell site located near Lake Chad in Borno State, has a history of human occupation spanning approximately 1800 years, from 550 BC to 1150 AD. The sequence of occupation is divided into three phases: Daima I (800 BC\u2014500 AD) represents an occupation of a people without metalwork; Daima II (500 BC\u2014800 AD) represents the earliest iron-using people of the site; and Daima III (800 BC\u20141100/1300 AD) a more \"advanced\" iron-using people.\nNok culture.\nNok culture may have emerged in 1500 BC and continued to persist until 1 BC. Nok people developed terracotta sculptures through large-scale economic production, as part of a complex funerary culture. Iron metallurgy may have been independently developed in the Nok culture between the 9th century BC and 550 BC. As each share cultural and artistic similarity with the Nok culture, the Niger-Congo-speaking Yoruba, Jukun, or Dakakari peoples may be descendants of the Nok peoples. Based on stylistic similarities with the Nok terracottas, the bronze figurines of the Yoruba Ife Empire and the Bini kingdom of Benin may also be continuations of the traditions of the earlier Nok culture.\nIgbo-Ukwu.\nIgbo-Ukwu, an archaeological site in southeastern Nigeria, gained prominence for its remarkable discoveries dating back to the 9th century AD. The excavations revealed a complex of burial sites containing a stunning array of bronze and copper artifacts, showcasing advanced metalworking skills. Among the findings were intricately crafted ceremonial vessels, ornaments, and tools, challenging previous assumptions about the technological and artistic sophistication of ancient sub-Saharan Africa. The artifacts highlight a sophisticated society with a high level of craftsmanship and organizational complexity, providing crucial insights into the rich cultural traditions of the Igbo people.\nThe significance of Igbo-Ukwu lies in its contribution to reshaping the understanding of early African cultures. The site's discoveries not only demonstrated the Igbo people's ability to create aesthetically pleasing objects but also challenged misconceptions about the historical achievements of the continent. Igbo-Ukwu stands as a testament to the advanced metallurgical practices and cultural richness of the people who inhabited the region, leaving a lasting legacy in the study of African archaeology.\nEarly states before 1500.\nAdvance of Islam in the north, the 14 Hausa states.\nWith the spread of Islam from the 7th century AD, the area became known as Sudan or Bilad Al Sudan (\u201cLand of the Blacks\u201d, Arabic: \u0628\u0644\u0627\u062f \u0627\u0644\u0633\u0648\u062f\u0627\u0646). Around the eighth century, Arab documents mention that Muslims crossed the Sahara to West Africa for trade purposes. Several factors contributed to the growth of the Muslim class in non-Muslim kingdoms. Islam facilitated long-distance trade by providing merchants with useful tools such as contract law, credit (e.g. mudaraba) and information networks. Muslim merchants also played an important role as advisors and scribes. They had the ability to use letter-based writing (instead of hieroglyphics), which was helpful in the administration of kingdoms. Arithmetic in a decimal system (Arabic numerals) was also introduced to West Africa through Islam.\nA system of Hausa city-states had existed in northern Nigeria since the 11th century. These city-states were mainly subject to tribute to large empires such as Kanem on Lake Chad. In the 14th century, all the ruling elites of Hausaland were Muslims, although the majority of the population did not convert until the eighteenth century.\nFrom 1400 onwards, Nigeria's first written documents with letters were produced in the north of the country. They were part of the Islamic missionary work and were written in Ajami - a script based on Arabic, but supplemented by special letters for local languages (Hausa, Fula, Yoruba). The Hausa also began to write history. In the Kano Chronicle, the history of the Hausa state is traced back to 999 AD.\nNorthern kingdoms of the Sahel.\nAfter the collapse of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464\u20131492) founded the Songhai Empire in the Middle Niger region and took control of the trans-Saharan trade. Sonni Ali conquered Timbuktu in 1468 and Djenn\u00e9 in 1473 and built his regime on trade revenues and cooperation with Muslim merchants. His successor Askia Muhammad Ture (1493\u20131528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques and brought Muslim scholars to Gao, including al-Maghili (d. 1504).\nThroughout the 16th century, much of northern Nigeria paid homage to the Songhai Empire in the west or the rival Borno Empire in the east.\nKanem\u2013Bornu Empire.\nKanem became an empire in the Lake Chad Basin in the 13th century. The Mai (king) of Kanem and his court adopted Islam in the 11th century. The first ruler of Kanem was Saif and his dynasty, the Sayfawa, ruled the empire for a millennium (800 AD to 1846 AD).74 The first Muslim ruler of Kanem was Mai Umme Jilmi (r. 1085\u20131097), who died on his way to Mecca in Egypt. Due to the growing influence of Kanem in North Africa and the territorial expansion it achieved in the 12th and 13th centuries, the empire became very well known in the Islamic world of the time.75\nThe civil war that shattered Kanem in the second half of the 14th century led to the independence of Bornu. The Sayfawa moved to Bornu. Mai Ali Ghaji (r. 1470\u20131508) established a large capital there called Birnin N'gazargamu. He carried out government reforms and ended the civil unrest. With a reinvigorated army, he extended Bornu's influence to the neighboring regions and demanded tribute from some Hausa states. He also re-established diplomatic and trade relations with North Africa. Ali's successors continued to rule Kanem and kept it as a province of Bornu until the 19th century.\u200a\nThe most prosperous period in the history of the empire was the reign of Idris Alauma (1571\u20131603). His troops carried out far-reaching campaigns: in the north from southern Libya to northern Niger; in the east from eastern Chad to northern Cameroon; in the south he put down the rebellion of a Marghi prince and in the west he subdued Kano. He also carried out administrative reforms. He replaced customary law with Shari'a law and appointed qadis (judges). He built several mosques, which were constructed from baked bricks instead of reeds. He also undertook the pilgrimage to Mecca and financed the construction of a hostel for the Bornu pilgrims there.\nBorno's economy was dominated by the Trans-Sudanese slave trade and the desert trade in salt and livestock. The court and mosques of Borno retained a reputation as centers of Islamic culture and scholarship.\nDevelopment and formation of Ife.\nArchaeological evidence points to settlements in Ile-Ife dating back as early as the 10th to 6th century BCE. The city gradually transitioned into a more urban center around the 4th to 7th centuries CE. By the 8th century, a powerful city-state had formed, laying the foundation for the eventual rise of the Ife Empire (circa 1200\u20131420). Under figures like the Now defied figures such as Oduduwa, revered as the first divine king of the Yoruba, the Ife Empire grew. Ile-Ife, its capital, rose to prominence, its influence extending across a vast area of what is now southwestern Nigeria.\nThe period between 1200 and 1400 is often referred to as the \"golden age\" of Ile-Ife, marked by exceptional artistic production, economic prosperity, and urban development. The Ife Empire's strategic location facilitated its participation in extensive trade networks that spanned West Africa. Of note is the evidence of a thriving glass bead industry in Ile-Ife. Archaeological excavations have unearthed numerous glass beads, indicating local production and pointing to the existence of specialized knowledge and technology. These beads, particularly the dichroic beads known for their iridescent qualities, were highly sought-after trade items, found as far afield as the Sahel region, demonstrating the far-reaching commercial connections of the Ife Empire.\nThe wealth generated through trade fueled the remarkable urban development witnessed in Ile-Ife. Archaeological evidence points to a well-planned city with impressive infrastructure, including paved roads and sophisticated drainage systems, a distinctive feature of Ife urban planning was the use of potsherd pavements. These pavements, created using fragments of broken pottery. The Ife Empire declined around the 15th century.\nOyo and Benin.\nDuring the 15th century, Oyo and Benin surpassed Ife as political and economic powers, although Ife preserved its status as a religious center. Respect for the priestly functions of the \"ooni\" of Ife was a crucial factor in the evolution of Yoruba culture. The Ife model of government was adapted at Oyo, where a member of its ruling dynasty controlled several smaller city-states. A state council (the \"Oyo Mesi\") named the \"Alaafin\" (king) and acted as a check on his authority. Their capital city was situated about 100\u00a0km north of present-day Oyo. Unlike the forest-bound Yoruba kingdoms, Oyo was in the savanna and drew its military strength from its cavalry forces, which established hegemony over the adjacent Nupe and the Borgu kingdoms and thereby developed trade routes farther to the north.\nThe Benin Empire (1440\u20131897; called \"Bini\" by locals) was a pre-colonial African state in what is now modern Nigeria. It should not be confused with the modern-day country called Benin, formerly called Dahomey.\nThe Igala are an ethnic group of Nigeria. Their homeland, the former Igala Kingdom, is an approximately triangular area of about in the angle formed by the Benue and Niger rivers. The area was formerly the Igala Division of Kabba province and is now part of Kogi State. The capital is Idah in Kogi state. Igala people are majorly found in Kogi state. They can be found in Idah, Igalamela/Odolu, Ajaka, Ofu, Olamaboro, Dekina, Bassa, Ankpa, omala, Lokoja, Ibaji, Ajaokuta, Lokoja and kotonkarfe Local government all in Kogi state. Other states where Igalas can be found are Anambra, Delta and Benue states.\nThe royal stool of Olu of Warri was founded by an Igala prince.\nYoruba.\nHistorically, the Yoruba people have been the dominant group on the west bank of the Niger. Their nearest linguistic relatives are the Igala who live on the opposite side of the Niger's divergence from the Benue, and from whom they are believed to have split about 2,000 years ago. The Yoruba were organized in mostly patrilineal groups that occupied village communities and subsisted on agriculture. From approximately the 8th century, adjacent village compounds called \"il\u00e9\" coalesced into numerous territorial city-states in which clan loyalties became subordinate to dynastic chieftains. Urbanisation was accompanied by high levels of artistic achievement, particularly in terracotta and ivory sculpture and in the sophisticated metal casting produced at Ife.\nThe Yoruba are especially known for the Oyo Empire that dominated the region. The Oyo Empire held supremacy over other Yoruba nations like the Egba Kingdom, Awori Kingdom, and the Egbado. In its prime, they also dominated the Kingdom of Dahomey (now located in the modern day Republic of Benin).\nThe Yoruba pay tribute to a pantheon composed of a Supreme Deity, Olorun and the Orisha. The Olorun is now called God in the Yoruba language. There are 400 deities called Orisha who perform various tasks. According to the Yoruba, Oduduwa is regarded as the ancestor of the Yoruba kings. According to one of the various myths about him, he founded Ife and dispatched his sons and daughters to establish similar kingdoms in other parts of what is today known as Yorubaland. The Yorubaland now consists of different tribes from different states which are located in the Southwestern part of the country, states like Lagos State, Oyo State, Ondo State, Osun State, Ekiti State and Ogun State, among others.\nIgbo Kingdoms.\nNri Kingdom.\nThe Kingdom of Nri is considered to be the foundation of Igbo culture and the oldest Kingdom in Nigeria. Nri and Aguleri, where the Igbo creation myth originates, are in the territory of the Umueri clan, who trace their lineages back to the patriarchal king-figure, Eri. Eri's origins are unclear, though he has been described as a \"sky being\" sent by Chukwu (God). He has been characterized as having first given societal order to the people of Anambra.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that Nri hegemony in Igboland may go back as far as the 9th century, and royal burials have been unearthed dating to at least the 10th century. Eri, the god-like founder of Nri, is believed to have settled in the region around 948 with other related Igbo cultures following in the 13th century. The first Eze Nri (King of Nri), \u00ccfiku\u00e1nim, followed directly after him. According to Igbo oral tradition, his reign started in 1043. At least one historian puts \u00ccfiku\u00e1nim's reign much later, around 1225.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Each king traces his origin back to the founding ancestor, Eri. Each king is a ritual reproduction of Eri. The initiation rite of a new king shows that the ritual process of becoming Ezenri (Nri priest-king) follows closely the path traced by the hero in establishing the Nri kingdom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Nri and Aguleri and part of the Umueri clan, a cluster of Igbo village groups which traces its origins to a sky being called Eri and significantly, includes (from the viewpoint of its Igbo members) the neighbouring kingdom of Igala.\u2014\u200a\nThe Kingdom of Nri was a religio-polity, a sort of theocratic state, that developed in the central heartland of the Igbo region. The Nri had a taboo symbolic code with six types. These included human (such as the birth of twins), animal (such as killing or eating of pythons), object, temporal, behavioral, speech and place taboos. The rules regarding these taboos were used to educate and govern Nri's subjects. This meant that, while certain Igbo may have lived under different formal administrations, all followers of the Igbo religion had to abide by the rules of the faith and obey its representative on earth, the Eze Nri.\nWith the decline of Nri kingdom in the 15th to 17th centuries, several states once under their influence, became powerful economic oracular oligarchies and large commercial states that dominated Igboland. The neighboring Awka city-state rose in power as a result of their powerful Agbala oracle and metalworking expertise. The Onitsha Kingdom, which was originally inhabited by Igbos from east of the Niger, was founded in the 16th century by migrants from Anioma (Western Igboland). Later groups like the Igala traders from the hinterland settled in Onitsha in the 18th century. Kingdoms west of the River Niger like Aboh (Abo), which was significantly populated by Igbos among other tribes, dominated trade along the lower River Niger area from the 17th century until European explorations into the Niger delta. The Umunoha state in the Owerri area used the \"Igwe ka Ala\" oracle at their advantage. However, the Cross River Igbo state like the Aro had the greatest influence in Igboland and adjacent areas after the decline of Nri.\nThe Arochukwu kingdom emerged after the Aro-Ibibio Wars from 1630 to 1720, and went on to form the Aro Confederacy which economically dominated Eastern Nigerian hinterland. The source of the Aro Confederacy's economic dominance was based on the judicial oracle of Ibini Ukpabi (\"Long Juju\") and their military forces which included powerful allies such as Ohafia, Abam, Ezza, and other related neighboring states. The Abiriba and Aro are Brothers whose migration is traced to the Ekpa Kingdom, East of Cross River, their exact take of location was at Ekpa (Mkpa) east of the Cross River. They crossed the river to Urupkam (Usukpam) west of the Cross River and founded two settlements: Ena Uda and Ena Ofia in present-day Erai. Aro and Abiriba cooperated to become a powerful economic force.\nThe Igbo-Igala Wars were a series of conflicts between the Igbo people and the Igala people in pre-colonial Nigeria. The wars occurred in the 18th and 19th centuries and were primarily driven by territorial disputes, competition for resources, and political power struggles between the two ethnic groups. The Igbo and Igala engaged in military confrontations, with both sides vying for control over strategic territories. These wars were part of the complex dynamics and inter-ethnic relations that characterized the region during that historical period. The outcomes of specific battles and the overall impact of the Igbo-Igala Wars varied, and the conflicts eventually contributed to shaping the socio-political landscape of the region.\nIgbo gods were numerous, but their relationship to one another and human beings was essentially egalitarian, reflecting Igbo society as a whole. A number of oracles and local cults attracted devotees while the central deity, the earth mother and fertility figure Ala, was venerated at shrines throughout Igboland.\nThe Kingdom of Benin had influence on the western Igbo, who adopted many of the political structures familiar to the Yoruba-Benin region, but Asaba and its immediate neighbours, such as Ibusa, Ogwashi-Ukwu, Okpanam, Issele-Azagba and Issele-Ukwu, were much closer to the Kingdom of Nri. Ofega was the queen for the Onitsha Igbo.\nAkwa Akpa.\nThe modern city of Calabar was founded in 1786 by Efik families who had left Creek Town, farther up the Calabar river, settling on the east bank in a position where they were able to dominate traffic with European vessels that anchored in the river, and soon becoming the most powerful in the region extending from now Calabar down to Bakassi in the East and Oron Nation in the West. Akwa Akpa (named Calabar by the Spanish) became a center of the Atlantic slave trade, where African slaves were sold in exchange for European manufactured goods. Igbo people formed the majority of enslaved Africans sold as slaves from Calabar, despite forming a minority among the ethnic groups in the region. From 1725 until 1750, roughly 17,000 enslaved Africans were sold from Calabar to European slave traders; from 1772 to 1775, the number soared to over 62,000.\nWith the suppression of the slave trade, palm oil and palm kernels became the main exports. The chiefs of Akwa Akpa placed themselves under British protection in 1884. From 1884 until 1906 Old Calabar was the headquarters of the Niger Coast Protectorate, after which Lagos became the main center.\nNow called Calabar, the city remained an important port shipping ivory, timber, beeswax, and palm produce until 1916, when the railway terminus was opened at Port Harcourt, 145\u00a0km to the west.\nFirst contact with colonial powers, Nigeria as a \"slave coast\".\nTrade in ivory, gold and slaves.\nThe first encounters between the inhabitants of the coast and Europeans, the Portuguese, took place around 1472. The Portuguese began to trade extensively, particularly with the kingdom of Benin. The Portuguese traded European products, especially weapons, for ivory and palm oil and increasingly for slaves. The manillas that the Portuguese used to pay their Nigerian suppliers were melted down again in the Kingdom of Benin to create the bronze artworks that adorned the royal palace as a sign of affluence.\nIn 1553, the first English expedition arrived in Benin. From then on, European merchant ships regularly anchored on the West African coast, albeit at a safe distance from the mainland due to the mosquitoes in the lagoons and the tropical diseases they spread. Locals came to these ships on barques and conducted their business. The Europeans named the coasts of West Africa after the products that were of interest to them there. The \"Ivory Coast\" still exists today. The western coast of Nigeria became the slave coast. In contrast to the Gold Coast further west (today's Ghana), the Europeans did not establish any fortified bases here until the middle of the 19th century.\nThe harbour of Calabar on the historic Bay of Biafra became one of the largest slave trading centres in West Africa. Other important slave harbours in Nigeria were located in Badagry, Lagos in the Bay of Benin and Bonny Island. Most of the enslaved people brought to these harbours were captured in raids and wars. The most \"prolific\" slave-trading kingdoms were the Edo Empire of Benin in the south, the Oyo Empire in the south-west and the Aro Confederacy in the south-east.\nCaliphate of Sokoto (1804 to 1903).\nIn the north, the incessant fighting between the Hausa city-states and the decline of the Bornu Empire led to the Fulani gaining a foothold in the region. Originally, the Fulani mainly travelled with cattle through the semi-desert region of Sahel in northern Sudan, avoiding trade and mixing with the Sudanese peoples. At the beginning of the 19th century, Usman dan Fodio led a successful jihad against the Hausa kingdoms and founded the centralised caliphate of Sokoto. The empire, with Arabic as its official language, grew rapidly under his rule and that of his descendants, who sent invading armies in all directions. The vast landlocked empire linked the east with western Sudan and penetrated the south, conquering parts of the Oyo kingdom and advancing into the Yoruba heartland of Ibadan. The territory controlled by the empire included much of what is now northern and central Nigeria. The Sultan sent emirs to establish suzerainty over the conquered territories and to promote Islamic civilisation; the emirs in turn grew richer and more powerful through trade and slavery.\nBy the 1890s, the largest slave population in the world, about two million, was concentrated in the Sokoto Caliphate. Slaves were used on a large scale, especially in agriculture. When the Sokoto Caliphate disintegrated into various European colonies in 1903 from conflicts such as the Adamawa Wars, it was one of the largest pre-colonial African states.\nExpeditions along the Niger and in northern Nigeria.\nAround 1829, Hugh Clapperton's expedition to Europe made it known that and where the Niger flows into the Atlantic. (He himself did not survive the journey, but died of malaria and dysentery. His documents were published by his servant Richard Lander). After this, there were numerous privately funded forays into the interior, such as the Niger Expedition of 1841 (in which a large number of the European participants quickly died of tropical diseases and which is reported in the diary of fellow traveller Samuel Ajayi Crowther, mentioned again in the next chapter).\nAround 1850, the explorer Heinrich Barth travelled through northern Nigeria as part of a British expedition. Through his travels, Barth acquired special merits in the unprejudiced and respectful study of peoples and languages (he himself had the ability to learn African languages very quickly - he spoke and wrote Arabic fluently), as well as in African history. Barth also developed the hypothesis of a primeval wet phase in northern Africa.\nBritish ban on the slave trade (from 1807).\nAround 1750, British merchant ships shipped European goods to Africa, and slaves were taken to American plantations. Products from America, such as tobacco, were then taken to Europe. However, from 1787 and increasingly from 1791, following reports of a slave revolt in Saint Domingue, the British Parliament debated the abolition of the slave trade.\nWith the prohibition of the slave trade (not slavery) by Britain in 1807, British interest in Nigeria shifted to palm oil for use in soaps and as a lubricant for machinery. However, abolition in Britain was one-sided, and many other countries took its place. European companies and smugglers continued to operate the Atlantic slave trade. The British West Africa Squadron attempted to intercept the smugglers at sea. The rescued slaves were taken to Freetown, a colony in West Africa originally founded by Lieutenant John Clarkson for the resettlement of slaves freed by Britain after the American Revolutionary War in North America.\nBritish colonial rule.\nCrown Colony of Lagos (since 1861).\nBritain's West Africa squadron was tenacious in concluding anti-slavery treaties with coastal chiefdoms along the West African coast from Sierra Leone through the Niger Delta to the south of the Congo. However, the Nigerian coast proved difficult to control with its countless bays, meandering channels and rampant tropical diseases. Badagry, Lagos, Bonny and Calabar therefore remained lively centres of the slave trade. The fight against the slave trade by the British plunged the kingdom of Oyo into a crisis that ultimately led to civil war within the Yoruba region. It became a constant source of prisoners of war for the slave markets.\nThe consulate era.\nIn 1841, Oba Akitoye ascended the throne of Lagos and tried to put an end to the slave trade. Some Lagos merchants resisted the ban, deposed the king and replaced him with his nephew Kosoko. Britain intervened in this power struggle within the Lagos royalty by bombarding Lagos with the Royal Navy in 1851. The British thus replaced Kosoko with Akitoye again. In 1852, Akitoye and the British consul John Beecroft signed a treaty to free the slaves and grant the British permanent trade access to Lagos. However, Akitoye had difficulties implementing these resolutions. The situation therefore remained unsatisfactory for Britain.\nThe Royal Navy originally used the harbour of the island of Fernando Po (now Bioko, Equatorial Guinea) off Nigeria as a base of operations. In 1855, Spain claimed this harbour for itself. The Royal Navy therefore had to look for another naval base and chose the island of Lagos, which at 9\u00a0km2 was roughly the same size as the Orkney island of Papa Westray resp. five times the size of Coney Island or one seventh of Lower Manhattan and flooded several times per year, for this purpose. King Akitoye had died in the meantime. His brother Kosoko then threatened to take back control of Lagos with the help of French colonial troops. The American Civil War, which centred on the issue of slavery, made the power struggle for Lagos particularly urgent. As a result, Lord Palmerston (British Prime Minister) made the decision that it was expedient \"losing no time in assuming the formal protectorate of Lagos\". William McCoskry, the acting consul in Lagos, together with Commander Bedingfield, convened a meeting with King Dosunmu, Akitoye's successor, on board HMS Prometheus on 30 July 1861, at which the British intentions were explained. Dosunmu resisted the terms of the treaty, but under the threat of having Commander Bedingfield bombard Lagos, he relented and signed the Lagos Cession Treaty.\nColonial beginnings, cocoa farming.\nLagos proved to be strategically useful and became a major trading centre as traders could count on the protection of the Royal Navy to protect them from pirates, for example. British missionaries penetrated further inland. Brazilian freedmen settled in Lagos.\nThe British government introduced English laws in Lagos in 1862. There was the Court of Civil and Criminal Justice and the West African Court of Appeal. A Supreme Court was established in 1876. English common law, equity law and British law applied.\nIn the very early colonial period, persons of colour had better opportunities for advancement in Nigeria's colonial administration than in subsequent decades. Examples: Charles Pike, the son of a British man and a Saro woman, led the colonial administration in Lagos as deputy governor in 1885 and 1886 (the Lagos colony did not have its own governor yet); he had previously headed the customs and treasury departments. A.C. Willoughby was chief of police in colonial Lagos from 1881 to at least 1886. John Augustus Otunba Payne was Chief Registrar of the Supreme Court of Lagos and Sheriff. Nash A. Williams was a Crown prosecutor. W.T.G. Lawson was a leading surveyor, and his maps from this period have been preserved. \u2013 However, from 1898 onwards, the British Colonial Office under Joseph Chamberlain ensured that local colonial officials above the position of \u2018chief clerk\u2019 were replaced by white people. By 1900, only Henry Carr, as inspector of schools and assistant colonial secretary, held a higher position in the British colonial administration of Nigeria. After Carr's departure in 1928, the senior colonial administration of Nigeria was a purely Caucasian affair until independence in 1960 \u2013 even when Nigeria's independence took shape in the 1950s, the higher civil service ranks remained reserved for light-skinned people. The British did not raise any local senior administrative officials until they left in 1960, which led to difficulties after independence.\nIn 1891, Andrew Wilkinson Thomas ended his career as a civil servant in the colonial administration due to racial discrimination and became an auctioneer. He became very wealthy in 1914 through the auctioning of German possessions and built the first three-storey house in Nigeria, the \u1eb8b\u00f9n house. His commitment to an independent Nigeria was taken over by his youngest son, politician Bode Thomas.\nJames Pinson Labulo Davies was the son of Saro parents. He had joined the Royal Navy and participated as a lieutenant in the bombardment of Lagos, during which he was wounded. He then rose to the rank of captain in the British merchant navy. In 1880, he acquired cocoa beans and established a cocoa plantation at the gates of Lagos, which made him the richest man in West Africa at the time. He shared his knowledge and cocoa beans with other locals such as Jacob Coker, turning the land of the Yor\u00f9b\u00e1 \u2013 south-western Nigeria \u2013 into a global hotspot for cocoa cultivation and making it quite prosperous. Davies and Coker also ensured that, unlike elsewhere in colonial Africa, the most important agricultural products were not controlled by European plantation owners, but by tens of thousands of small local family businesses.\nPush into the hinterland.\nAfter its experiences in the American War of Independence, Great Britain had limited itself to maintaining strategically placed bases around the world - such as Lagos - and avoided colonising regions far from the coast. This changed in the 1860s, when European powers embarked on the \"Scramble for Africa\". Up until this point, European trade with the natives was conducted by ships that anchored off the coast and travelled on once the business was concluded. As tropical lagoons - unlike the open sea - offer favourable conditions for mosquitoes, which pass on tropical diseases, Europeans avoided going ashore. Because of the \"sleeping sickness\", West Africa was nicknamed \"The white man's grave\" until around 1850. The industrial production of quinine from the 1820s and its use as a prophylactic against malaria on a large scale changed the situation. The European naval powers were now able to establish permanent settlements in the tropics.\nBritish missionaries penetrated the interior of the country. In south-eastern Nigeria, Hope Wadell and Mary Slessor fought against the customary killing of newborn twins, against the trial by ordeal in legal disputes and against the killing of the servants of deceased village elders (in order to be able to serve them in the afterlife) from 1845 onwards. Missionaries founded schools and enabled the careers of Eyo Ita, the first dark-skinned professor, and Nnamdi Azikiwe, the first Nigerian president, for example. In 1864, Samuel Ajayi Crowther became the first African bishop of the Anglican Church.\nThe Royal Niger Company, the monopolist on the Niger.\nThe first years of European colonialism in Africa were characterised by the Austrian school of economics and the marginal utility theory it advocated, according to which the value of products manufactured in Europe was higher in markets that were not yet saturated, such as Africa (marginal utility), and trade with colonies was therefore more profitable than in one's own country, for example. (The lower demand or purchasing power in the unsaturated market was not taken into account).\nWith the prospect of such high profits, various private trading companies promoted European influence in West Africa. One of them was the United Africa Company, founded by George Goldie in 1879, which was granted concessions for the entire area around the Niger Basin by the British government in 1886 under the name Royal Niger Company. The RNC marked out its territory as if it were a state in its own right and also negotiated treaties with the northern states, the Sokoto Caliphate, Nupe and Gwandu. It was also authorised to administer justice in its territories.\nThe RNC's more than 400 contracts with local leaders obliged the natives to trade exclusively with or through the company's agents. High tariffs and royalties drove competing companies out of the territory. When King Jaja of Opobo organised his own trading network and even began routing his own palm oil shipments to Britain, he was lured onto a British warship and exiled to St Vincent on charges of 'breach of treaty' and 'obstruction of trade'.\nThe RNC, which traded mainly in liquor and arms along the Niger, soon gained a bad reputation. This culminated in the case of the Brass. They had no arable land of their own and traditionally lived from barter along the Niger. With the advent of the RCN, they had to pay license fees for imports and exports, which they could not afford. The Brass tried unsuccessfully to find alternative trade routes and began to starve. On December 29, 1894, they attacked the RNC headquarters in Akassa, looting much of the company's property and destroying the warehouses and machinery. They even kidnapped several of the company's employees, whom they later ritually ate as part of a spiritual ceremony, which they hoped would protect them against the rampant smallpox epidemic. The Colonial Office, which had been under the imperialist leadership of Joseph Chamberlain since 1895, increasingly wondered whether it would not be better to place the monopolist's territory under direct colonial rule.\nAfter the Berlin Congo Conference.\nThe Berlin Congo Conference of 1885 defined the spheres of interest of the European colonial powers in Africa - without regard to ethnic or cultural conditions and without the participation of the people in the affected regions. For example, the territory of the Yoruba and that of the Hausa was divided by the demarcation between the British and the French. This fragmentation naturally made it easier for the colonial rulers to dominate the indigenous people. The conference also encouraged military advances by Europeans in Africa - with devastating consequences for the \"natives\". This was due to the fact that a colonial power's demarcated territories were only valid if that colonial power actually brought the area under its control (rather than another power first).\nConquest of Ijebu (1892) and Oyo (1895).\nThe United Kingdom now took military action wherever British traders or missionaries saw their fields of activity restricted. In 1892, the British conquered the Ijebu Empire on the outskirts of Lagos, an empire that had previously seceded from the Oyo Empire and refused to engage in trade with the British. Machine guns (of the Maxim type) were used for the first time. One Captain Lugard (see below) noted: \"On the West Coast, in the 'Jebu' war, undertaken by Government, I have been told 'several thousands' were mowed down by the Maxim.\"\nIn 1895, it was now not the British traders who called for military action, but missionaries in the Oyo Empire 50\u00a0km north of Lagos - which, even after its decline, was still one of the most powerful native states in present-day Nigeria and restricted the activities of the missionaries. The British bombed the capital Ibadan after Christian missionaries had brought their parishioners to safety. After the bombardment, the missionaries had a \"fair\" talk with the elector-king (Alaafin) of Ibadan and convinced him to submit to British protection. Anglican Christianity became the \"state religion\" in Oyo.\nThe conquered territory was administered as the British \"Protectorate of Yorubaland\", while Lagos remained a colony. Residents of a colony were direct subjects of the Crown and could, for example, initiate legal proceedings against the colonial rulers. Residents of a protectorate did not have these rights.\nThe punitive expedition to the Kingdom of Benin in 1897.\nBenin was a slave-owning state 150 kilometres east of Lagos and was one of the four largest kingdoms in what is now Nigeria. As early as 1862, there were reports of human sacrifices being made in Benin in times of need. Consul Burton described the kingdom as \"gratuitous barbarity which stinks of death\".\nIn 1892, Great Britain concluded a contract with King (Oba) Ov\u1ecdnramw\u1eb9n of Benin for the supply of palm oil. The latter signed reluctantly and shortly afterwards made additional financial demands. In 1896, Vice-Consul Phillips travelled to Ov\u1ecdnramw\u1eb9n with 18 officials, 180 porters and 60 local workers to renegotiate the contract. He sent a delegate ahead with gifts to announce his visit - but the king sent word that he did not wish to receive the visit for the time being (King Ov\u1ecdnramw\u1eb9n was aware of the fate of King Jaja of Opobo (see above), which could explain his lack of hospitality). Phillips nevertheless set off, but was ambushed, from which only two of his fellow travellers escaped alive, albeit seriously injured.\nIn February 1897, a punitive expedition was set up under Admiral Rawson. The Colonial Office in London ruled: \"It is imperative that a most severe lesson be given the Kings, Chiefs, and JuJu men of all surrounding countries, that white men cannot be killed with impunity...\" 5,000 British soldiers and sailors invaded the Kingdom of Benin, which barely defended itself but made the above-mentioned human sacrifices in its misery. The British forces encountered shocking scenes.\nThe Kingdom of Benin was incorporated into the British dominion. The British burnt down the royal palace of Benin and looted the bronze sculptures there, which are now a World Heritage Site. These were later auctioned off in Europe to finance the punitive expedition.\nThe West African Frontier Force.\nIn 1897, Captain Lugard, who had already established and stabilised British colonial rule in Malawi and Uganda, was commissioned to set up an indigenous Nigerian force to protect British interests in the hinterland of the colony of Lagos and Nigeria against French attacks. In August 1897, Lugard organised the West African Frontier Force and commanded it until the end of December 1899. By September 1898, Britain and France had already settled their colonial disputes in the Fashoda Crisis and concluded the Entente cordiale in 1904, thus depriving the WAFF of its original purpose (However, the WAFF was to play a crucial role in the liberation of East Africa from (fascist) Italian rule during the Second World War in 1941. Colonel Lugard would significantly determine Nigeria's development over the next 22 years.\nFirst railway line.\nThe first railway line in West and Central Africa - between Lagos and Abeokuta - was opened in Nigeria in 1898 (However, it was followed shortly afterwards by the British colony of Gold Coast/Ghana (1901), the German colonies of Cameroon (1901) and Togo (1905) and the French colonies of Dahomey (1906) and Ivory Coast (1907)). Forced labour was also (or mainly) used in the construction work. The staff of the railway company soon organised themselves and organised Nigeria's first strike in 1904.\nSouthern Nigeria (since 1900).\nThe Royal Niger Company sells its land.\nThe RNC's concession was revoked in 1899, and on 1 January 1900 it ceded its territories to the British government for the sum of \u00a3865,000. The ceded territory was merged with the small Niger Coast Protectorate, which had been under British control since 1884, to form the Southern Nigeria Protectorate, and the remaining RNC territory of around 1.3 million square kilometres became the Northern Nigeria Protectorate. 1,000 British soldiers were stationed in the Protectorate of Southern Nigeria, 2,500 in the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria and 700 in Lagos. The RNC was taken over by Lever Brothers in 1920 and became part of the Unilever Group in 1929. In 1939, the latter still controlled 80 per cent of Nigerian exports, mainly cocoa, palm oil and rubber.\nThe south-east.\nDue to the complex coastline in the Niger Delta, there were no closed dominions in south-east Nigeria until 1900, but rather a conglomerate of city-states that focussed on trade along the coast and inland along the Niger and Benue rivers. These city-states, which were united in the \"Aro Confederacy\", had a religious centre in Arochukwu, the \"Juju Oracle\". The form of decision-making in the city-states can be described as \"pre-democratic\". In this region, which later became sadly known as \"Biafra\", feudal rule was just as difficult to enforce as British colonial rule. (The later Biafra War of 1966 to 1970 was, among other things, a conflict between the democratic instincts of the south-eastern Igbo population and the authoritarian structures in the rest of Nigeria). The British defeated the Aro Confederacy in the Anglo-Aro War (1901\u20131902) and spread their influence along the coast to the south-east as far as German Cameroon. However, control of the Niger Delta remained an unsolved problem both for the British colonial rulers and later for independent Nigeria. Pirates, marauders, self-proclaimed freedom fighters and (since 1957) oil thieves still find enough nooks and crannies in the confusing landscape and under the jungle canopy to evade police action.\nAfter 1902.\nIn 1906, the crown colony of Lagos was incorporated into the protectorate of Southern Nigeria.\nIn Lekki, near Lagos, the Nigerian Bitumen Corporation under businessman John Simon Bergheim discovered crude oil during test drilling in 1908. However, engineers were unable to prevent large quantities of water from being extracted as well. Oil production could therefore not be made profitable without additional investment. Bergheim's fatal car accident in 1912 put an end to further exploration of Nigeria's oil reserves for the time being.\nIn 1909, coal deposits were discovered and extracted in the south-east of Nigeria, in Enugu Two years later, this region, the Nti Kingdom, was placed directly under British colonial administration.\nDespite the consecration of Samuel Ajayi Crowther as a bishop - or perhaps because of it - European and North American churches refused to accept dark-skinned clergymen, while the mainly Protestant missionary work in southern Nigeria was quite successful. This led to countless evangelistic and Pentecostal free churches, which are still omnipresent in the south today.\nNigeria's first trade union, the Nigeria Civil Service Union, was formed in 1912, but would not be recognised until 1938, until which time its members were subjected to harassment.\nNorthern Nigeria (since 1900).\nIn 1900, Colonel Lugard was appointed High Commissioner of the newly created Protectorate of Northern Nigeria. He read the proclamation at Mount Patti in Lokoja that established the protectorate on 1 January 1900, but at this time the part of northern Nigeria that was actually under British control was still small.\nNorth-east.\nIn 1893, Rabih az-Zubayr, a Sudanese warlord, conquered the Kingdom of Bornu. The British recognised Rabih as \"Sultan of Borno\" until the French killed Rabih at the Battle of Kouss\u00e9ri on 22 April 1900. The colonial powers of Great Britain, France and Germany divided up his territory, with the British receiving what is now north-east Nigeria. They formally restituted the Borno Empire under British rule before the conquest in 1893 and appointed a scion of the ruling family of the time, Abubakar Garbai, as \"Shehu\" (Sheikh).\nNorthwest.\nIn 1902, the British advanced north-westwards into the Sokoto Caliphate. In 1903, victory at the Battle of Kano gave the British a logistical advantage in pacifying the heartland of the Sokoto Caliphate and parts of the former Borno Empire. On 13 March 1903, the last vizier of the caliphate surrendered. By 1906, resistance to British rule had ended, and there would be no more war within Nigeria's borders for the next 60 years. When Lugard resigned as commissioner in 1906, the entire region of present-day Nigeria was administered under British supervision.\nThe Protectorate of Northern Nigeria, the \u2018Indirect Rule\u2019.\nAfter the British trauma of the siege of Khartoum, the colonial office favoured a more subtle approach in Islamic northern Nigeria. Lugard developed the concept of \u2018Indirect Rule\u2019, in which the colonial rulers left the traditional social structures intact. The Sokoto Caliphate was formally allowed to continue and a new caliph, Attahiru II, was appointed in 1903. Murray Last therefore refers to the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria as the \u2018Colonial Caliphate\u2019. The British governor could depose emirs and Lugard did this ten times in 1906 alone.\nThe emirs carried out British instructions (such as drafting recruits during the world wars) and presided over a court that spoke Islamic Maliki law but, following the opinion of the orientalist Joseph Schacht, took British law into \u2018supplementary\u2019 consideration. Within an emirate, the emir was therefore the employer of the judges (Alkali / Qadi) he appointed. Each emir was officially \u2018advised\u2019 by a (British) \u2018resident\u2019. The British prevented torture as a method of interrogation, the cutting off of body parts for theft and stoning to death for adultery, for example. As the Maliki school of Islamic law makes no distinction between, for example, murder and involuntary manslaughter or the (criminal) offence of vandalism and (civil) damage to property, the British introduced the principle of malice intent. Death sentences had to be authorised by the Resident and children of slaves were now considered freeborn.\nThe emirs also collected taxes. Taxes such as the land tax kharaj and the poll tax jizyah no longer went to the emirs. Instead, each emir could retain 25 per cent of the taxes he collected for his \u2018administration.\u2019 The emirs thus had a financial and disciplinary motivation to be loyal to the British. Over the next few decades, Islamic law in northern Nigeria was continually restricted and by the 1940s only applied to family and inheritance law.\nUnification into \"Crown Colony and Protectorate\" 1914, Governor Lugard.\nIn 1912, after an interlude in Hong Kong, Lugard returned as governor of the two Nigerian protectorates. He merged the two colonies into one.\nIn the same year, Lugard, who found the inhabitants of Lagos rebellious, had a new seaport built in the south-east as a rival to Lagos and named it Port Harcourt after his superior in the Colonial Office. This seaport soon received a railway line to Enugu and shipped the coal mined there (from 1958 also crude oil) overseas.\nUnification and yet separation.\nLugard became the first governor of All Nigeria. The unification of Nigeria helped to give Nigeria common telegraphs, railways, customs and excise duties, uniform time, a common currency and a common civil service. Lugard thus introduced what was needed for the infrastructure of a modern state. However, the north and south remained as two separate countries with separate administrations.\nIn the south, English was the official language and was taught in schools, in the north Hausa. Southern Nigerians thus had access to English-language literature - from scientific literature to novels; their compatriots in the north had to make do with the much less comprehensive Hausa literature, which mainly dealt with philosophical and practical questions about Islam. (This imbalance can still be found today. In 2024, for example, there are 6.8 million articles in English and 101 articles in Hausa on Wikipedia.) Southern Nigerians also began to engage in literary endeavours. Since 1950, there has been an independent and dynamic Nigerian literary scene, in which the German-Jewish professor at the University of Ibadan Ulli Beier played a major role.\nThe protectorate in the south financed itself with \u00a31,933,235 in tax revenue (1912). The larger but underdeveloped Northern Protectorate collected \u00a3274,989 in the same year and had to be subsidised by the British to the tune of \u00a3250,000 annually. (This economic structure basically exists to this day.)\nRegional differences in access to modern education soon became pronounced. Some children of the southern elite went to Britain for higher education. The imbalance between North and South was also reflected in Nigeria's political life. For example, slavery was not banned in northern Nigeria until 1936, while it was abolished in other parts of Nigeria around 1885. Northern Nigeria still had between 1 million and 2.5 million slaves around 1900.\nThe attempt to enforce this system in the south also met with varying degrees of success. In the Yoruba region of the south-west, the British were able to tie in with existing or formerly existing kingdoms and their borders. However, as there were no hierarchical or even feudal structures in the south-east through which the British could indirectly rule, they appointed \"Warrant Chiefs\" with powers to act as local representatives of the British administration among their people. However, the British did not realise that in some parts of Africa the concept of \"chiefs\" or \"kings\" was not known. Among the Igbo, for example, decisions were made through lengthy debates and general consensus. The new powers vested in the Warrant Chiefs and reinforced by the native court system led to an exercise of power and authority unprecedented in pre-colonial times. The Warrant Chiefs also used their power to amass wealth at the expense of their subjects. The Warrant Chiefs were corrupt, arrogant and accordingly hated.\nGovernors were authorised to enact laws, otherwise English law applied. There was a Supreme Court, provincial courts and cantonal courts. Decisions of the Supreme Court could be appealed to the West African Court of Appeal. The provincial courts did not allow legal representation by lawyers and were staffed by administrative rather than judicial personnel.\nRacial approaches in the army.\nFrom the outset, British colonial rule utilised - and reinforced - the differences between the ethnic groups present in order to offer itself to each side as a power-preserving factor and to be able to control the oversized colony with relatively little military expenditure (4,200 British soldiers). In the south, education, economy and civilisational achievements dominated, while in the north the military, feudalism and Islamic traditions were deliberately reinforced by the British. While officer positions were filled with British, enlisted men, non-commissioned officers and higher non-commissioned officer positions (sergeant majors) were exclusively filled with northern Nigerians, as these were regarded as \"warrior peoples\" in accordance with a popular doctrine practised in India since 1857 (e.g. Sikhs, Brahmins). Nigeria thus remained divided in many respects into the northern and southern protectorates and the colony of Lagos.\nOn Lugard, historian K. B. C. Onwubiko says: \"His system of Indirect Rule, his hostility towards educated Nigerians in the South, and his system of education for the North which aimed at training only the sons of the chiefs and emirs as clerks and interpreters show him as one of Britain's arch-imperialists\".\nFirst World War.\nIn August 1914, a British-Nigerian military unit attacked Cameroon. After 18 months, the German Imperial Schutztruppe surrendered to a superior force of British, Nigerians, Belgians and French. Some German units were able to escape to the Spanish and thus neutral Rio Muni (today's Equatorial Guinea).\nTime between the world wars.\nIn the Treaty of Versailles, the German colony of Cameroon was divided up between the British and French as a League of Nations trust territory. In 1920, the western part of the former German colony of Cameroon was administratively annexed to British Nigeria as a League of Nations mandate territory under the name British Cameroons.\nLugard's successor (1919\u20131925), Sir Hugh Clifford, was an avowed opponent of Lugard's views and saw his role not in the efficient running of an apparatus of power, but in the development of the country. He intensified educational efforts in the south and repeatedly suggested to the Colonial Office in London that the power of the absolutist emirs ruling in the north should be limited - which was rejected. This further deepened the de facto division of the country into a northern, south-western and south-eastern part. In the north, the indirect rule aimed at preserving feudal rule continued to apply. In the south, an educated elite based on the European model emerged.\nIn 1922, Clifford established the Legislative Council. The four elected members were from Lagos (3) and Calabar (1). The Legislative Council enacted laws for the colony and the protectorate of Southern Nigeria. It also approved the annual budget for the entire country. The four elected members were the first Africans to be elected to a parliamentary body in British West Africa. The Clifford Constitution accordingly led to the formation of political parties in Nigeria. Herbert Macaulay, a newspaper owner and grandson of Samuel Ajayi Crowther (see above), founded the first Nigerian political party - the Nigeria National Democratic Party - in 1923. It remained the strongest party in the elections until 1939.\nNigeria's (and the Commonwealth's) contact with Great Britain was mainly maintained by mail ships of the Elder Dempster Lines. Until the end of 1967, such a mail ship sailed from Liverpool to Lagos every second Friday, alternating between the MS Apapa, the MS Accra and the MV Aureol. The journey took 13 days.\nThe railway company paid very well due to the activities of the well-organised railway workers' union, but also due to competing employers - who were happy to poach skilled workers.\nIn the meantime, it had become clear that colonies were not as profitable as hoped. The new governor Graeme Thomson therefore introduced harsh austerity measures in 1925, including massive redundancies and the introduction of direct taxation. The planned tax on women market traders, Graeme Thomson's undiplomatic manner and the unpopular Warrant Chief system (see above) led to the \"Women's War\" of 1929 among the Igbo. The women farmers destroyed ten native courts by December 1929, when the troops restored order in the region. In addition, the houses of chiefs and employees of the native courts were attacked, European factories looted, prisons attacked, and prisoners released. The women demanded the removal of the Warrant Chiefs and their replacement by native clan chiefs appointed by the people and not by the British. 55 women were killed by the colonial troops. Nevertheless, the Women's War of 1929 led to fundamental reforms in the British colonial administration. The British abolished the system of \"Warrant Chiefs\" and reviewed the nature of colonial rule over the natives of Nigeria. Several colonial administrators condemned the prevailing administrative system and agreed to the call for urgent reforms based on the indigenous system. In place of the old Warrant Chief system, tribunals were introduced that took into account the indigenous system of government that had prevailed before colonial rule.\nIn 1933, the Lagos Youth Movement - later the Nigerian Youth Movement - was founded and took a more strident stance in favour of independence than the NNDP. In 1938, the NYM called for Nigeria to be granted British Dominion status, putting it on a par with Australia or Canada. In 1937, it was joined by Nnamdi Azikiwe, who had been exiled from Ghana/Gold Coast for seditious activities and who became publisher and editor-in-chief of the West African Pilot and father of Nigerian popular journalism. In 1938, the NYM protested against the cocoa cartel, which kept the purchase prices from farmers artificially low. In 1939, the NYM became the strongest party in the elections in Lagos and Calabar (no elections were held elsewhere).\nIn 1934, the Warrant Chiefs were abolished.\nIn 1935, the railway network reached its maximum expansion after the last investment projects were completed. It comprised 2,851\u00a0km of track with a gauge of 106.7\u00a0cm (\"Cape gauge\") and 214\u00a0km with a gauge of 76.2\u00a0cm. This made the Nigerian railway network the longest and most complex in West and Central Africa. In 1916, a railway bridge over the Niger River and in 1934 a bridge over the Benue River connected the regional railway networks. 179 mainline and 54 shunting locomotives were in use in 1934. Two maintenance and repair workshops in Lagos and Enugu employed about 2,000 locals. Rail transport was efficiently synchronised with maritime traffic. Travellers from mail steamers could board the \"Boat Express\" waiting right next to it at the port of Apapa in Lagos and reach Kano in the far north of Nigeria within 43 hours in sleeping and dining cars.\nIn 1931, the influential Nigerian Union of Teachers was founded under its president O. R. Kuti (the father of Fela Kuti). Nigeria's first industrial union, the railway workers' union, was also founded in 1931 by lathe operator Michael Imoudu. In 1939, trade unions were permitted by decree by the colonial administration, but Imoudu was arrested in 1943. The railway workers' union was considered the most militant workers' union in Nigeria. Imoudu remained under house arrest until 1945.\nGovernor Cameron standardised the administration of the Northern and Southern Provinces in the 1930s by introducing a native appellate court system, High Courts and Magistrate Courts.\nBernard Bourdillon became governor of Nigeria in 1935 and remained so for eight years. He maintained close contact with local politicians, especially the NYM. Bourdillon, who always opposed any form of racism, was presumably the only governor in Nigeria who saw himself as a representative of the country's interests - especially against prevailing views in the mother country. In the Colonial Office, he succeeded in 1938 in ensuring that the purchasing cartel for West African products such as cocoa, palm oil and peanuts was no longer supported by the British government. (The cartel included companies such as Unilever, Nestl\u00e9, Cadbury, Fry's, Swiss African Trading Co, CFAO/Verminck, Union Trading Co/Basler Mission, G.B. Ollivant, Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 commerciale de l'Ouest africain (SCOA), PZ Cussons/Zochonis, and others.) He involved the backward north more closely in political processes by creating a \"Central Council\".\nSecond World War.\nSinking of both mail ships to Nigeria.\nOn 26 July 1940, one of the two mail ships connecting Nigeria with the colonial power, the MS Accra, was sunk off Ireland by the U-34 submarine. 24 people died.\nOn 15 November 1940, the sister ship on the same route, the MS Apapa, was sunk by a German FW 200 Condor on its way home off Ireland. 26 people lost their lives. An identical ship was given the same name and took over the same route service (see picture above).\nOperation Postmaster.\nIn 1942, Nigeria played a role in \"Operation Postmaster\". In an adventurous manner, British special agents from Lagos captured Italian and German supply ships for submarines in the South Atlantic on the nearby but Spanish and therefore neutral island of Bioko and brought them to the home port of Lagos. The incident - in which no shots were fired - almost led to Franco's Spain entering the war alongside the Third Reich and fascist Italy.\nRationing, price control, agricultural damage, education offensive.\nAs early as 1939, the Nigeria Supply Board was set up to promote the production of rubber and palm oil, which were considered important for the war effort, at the expense of food production. The import of agricultural products was restricted.\nFrom 1942, farmers were only allowed to sell rice, maize, beans etc. to government agencies and at a very low price under the \"Pullen Scheme\" so that the British Isles, which were cut off from the continent, could be supplied with food at low cost. However, this price control motivated farmers to either not sell their products at all or to sell them on the black market. Others may have resorted to growing unregulated, i.e. inedible, produce. Nigeria's agriculture, which had already suffered from the European purchasing cartels (especially Unilever) and the Great Depression, was once again hampered in its development. In December 1942, consumer goods were rationed. (Rationing would last until 1948.) The transport of rice from Abeokuta to nearby Lagos was criminalised.\nAs a \"positive\" effect of the Second World War, the colonial administration trained war-critical skilled labour such as technicians, electricians, nurses, carpenters and clerks on a large scale during this period. New harbours and - for the first time - airports were built.\nFrom October 1941 to January 1945, the 44th British General Hospital was stationed in Abeokuta, not far from Lagos. Soldiers, airmen and sailors could recover from their injuries here. There was also the 46th British General Hospital in Kaduna in 1942 and 1943.\nNigerian regiments, advance in Somaliland and Ethiopia.\nThroughout the war, 45,000 Nigerian soldiers served in the British forces in Africa and South-East Asia. Nigerian regiments formed the majority of the British Army's 81st and 82nd West African Divisions. These divisions fought in Palestine, Morocco, Sicily and Burma. Nigerian soldiers also fought in India.\nThree battalions of the Nigeria Regiment fought in the Ethiopian campaign against fascist Italy. In Kenya, four brigades from the 11th (African) Division and the 12th (African) Division formed the 23rd (Nigerian) Brigade, which was attached to the 1st (African) Division. On 10 February 1941, this Nigerian Brigade began Operation Canvas with the Battle of the Juba. The Indian Ocean port of Kismayu was quickly captured by 14 February. It was realized that the Italians had no depth to their defence, so the 23rd Nigerian Brigade was ordered to rapidly advance 275 miles to the capital of Italian Somaliland, Mogadishu, which was achieved in just three days. By early March most of Italian Somaliland had been captured and on 1 March Winston Churchill sent the following via Generals Wavell and Cunningham.\n\"Hearty congratulations on the brilliant result of the campaign in Italian Somaliland. ... vigorous, daring, and highly successful operations ... conducted..., [by a] well-trained, well-organised army. ...convey this message to [the] troops.\" The advance continued through Ethiopia towards the ultimate objective, Addis Ababa. On 10 March 1941, the Brigade quickly advanced to Degehabur, about south of Jijiga, and captured the city days later without resistance, before it participated in the reoccupation of British Somaliland later in the year. On 26 March 1941, two motorised companies of the Nigeria Regiment advanced 930\u00a0km from Kenya to Daghabur within 10 days in Mussolini-controlled Ethiopia. On 26 March, the Nigeria Regiment captured Harar near Djibouti after an advance of 1,600\u00a0km in 32 days. At the time, this was the fastest military advance in world history. The advance also divided the fascist sphere of control in East Africa. In their hasty retreat, the Italian forces also left behind important ammunition and food depots. Addis Ababa was conquered by the Allies on 6 April. The Ethiopian campaign became the Allies' first major success against the Axis powers, not least due to the \"Blitzkrieg\" of the Nigeria regiment. With East Africa (1.9 million km2), Italy lost an area in a few days that was larger than today's Poland, Belarus, Ukraine and the Baltic states combined (1.3 million km2).\nIdeas from India on independence.\nFighting for the Allies were 600,000 volunteers from Africa, who had been promised equal brotherhood in arms with their Caucasian fellow soldiers. Nevertheless, they received less pay than their European or Asian counterparts. Corporal punishment (flogging) was also still a disciplinary punishment exclusively for black soldiers. In northern Nigeria, it is not necessarily possible to speak of \"voluntary\" recruits, as the local tribal chiefs were prescribed contingents of \"volunteers\" as part of the Indirect Rule. The absolutist rulers did not necessarily take into account the voluntary nature of the troops when providing them for service at the front. During the war, none of the commanding officers of the Nigerian Corps came from Nigeria. (The first Nigerian officers received their licences at the end of the war).\nThe Nigerian soldiers can hardly have been unaware of the contradiction between their reality and the propagated British interpretation of wanting to protect Africa from German and Italian colonisation. In addition, the Nigerian troops had been fighting alongside their Indian comrades for several years and there was already a strong and media-effective independence movement against British colonial rule in the latter's homeland under Mahatma Gandhi and other prominent independence activists. (India became independent just 22 months after the Second World War.) The exchange of ideas with the Indians striving for independence almost certainly contributed to the fact that Nigerian soldiers returned home from Burma in January 1946 with completely new ideas about an independent Nigeria, but with less patience.\nIn his victory speech, the commander of the troops in Burma, Sir William Slim, did not mention the Nigerian \"brothers in arms\" at all.\nPost-war period, the road to independence.\nDuring the Second World War, the number of Nigerian trade union members had increased sixfold to 30,000. A general strike by railway workers for higher wages and for the release of imprisoned trade unionists such as Michael Imoudu (see above) made it clear in 1945 that the previous colonial administration had to be replaced by a new, national form of government. \nThe new governor of Nigeria, Richards, like Graeme Thomson and Bourdillon an \u2018Oxford man\u2019, introduced a constitution in 1946 that turned the country into a federation consisting of three states with uninspiring names such as \u2018Northern/Western/Eastern Region\u2019 and their own parliaments, governments and constitutions (the East had one house of parliament, the West and North a bicameral system). These would establish a central government for customs matters, common foreign policy and defence.\nIn retrospect, the Richards Constitution must be viewed critically and it was also viewed critically by Nigerians at the time. Money was collected in a campaign to enable the three most respected compatriots (newspaper publisher Macaulay, trade union leader Imoudu and journalist Azikiwe) to travel to London to present their views (ultimately unsuccessfully) to the Attlee government there. The British government in faraway London was apparently of the opinion that it knew better what was good for Nigerians than Nigerians themselves. After all, the constitution was slightly modified in 1951 and 1954; the last version, finally adopted by and named after the colonial minister Oliver Lyttelton, the son of the 4th Baron Lyttleton and later himself 1st Viscount Chandos, was the constitution with which Nigeria would become independent in 1960. Although there had been two conferences on the subject (one in London, the other in Lagos), these only had an advisory function: the constitution of independent Nigeria of 1960 was not the result of a constituent assembly of Nigerians, but a creation of British colonial ministers and governors, among whom (both) English aristocrats and Oxford graduates were still predominant at the time - representatives of the British upper class.\nIn this federation of just three federal states, the political process naturally became more of a conflict than a co-operation. Accordingly, the dominant political parties were organised along ethnic lines:\nIn 1952, the regional parliaments were elected; for the Northern State, this was the first free election in its history. As expected, all three parties won a majority in their respective states and ethnic groups, with Bello, Azikiwe and Awolowo becoming prime ministers of their respective states. The governments of the North, South-West and South-East each constitutionally sent three ministers to the central government in Lagos. Accordingly, state revenues were also distributed according to a population proportion determined in Nigeria's first census in 1953 (previously there had only been estimates). The precarious balance only lasted with the British as the \"tip of the scales\", but for the nascent nation of Nigeria, without the British, it was only a preliminary stage that would last until one of the three ethnic groups no longer felt sufficiently represented in the federation. The main candidate for this was northern Nigeria and during the Kano riots of May 1953 secession was a distinct possibility. Many Hausa and Fulani favoured a separate, Muslim-majority state over the planned all-Nigeria. This was also due to the jurisprudence in the north. In the 1950s, civil and criminal law was still administered in northern Nigeria by emirs (i.e. by hereditary nobility, not by trained lawyers) in accordance with Sharia law. For northern Nigerians, it was hardly acceptable that this legal system should in future be given a higher instance in the form of the Supreme Court, in which non-Muslims and academically trained experts without a noble title would also be represented.\nOn the other hand, the south of Nigeria had co-financed the \"poor\" north in every fiscal year since 1914 (this has not changed until 2023) and even the most ardent advocates of a northern state did not dare to make the necessary tax increases palatable to their supporters. The funding dilemma initially delayed further endeavours for such a separate northern state and ultimately prevented it.\nDiscovery of oil in the south-south.\nIn January 1956, the first oil field in Nigeria, the Olobiri Oilfield in the south-south of the country, was discovered.\nThe new Conservative government in the United Kingdom under Harold Macmillan had been advocating rapid decolonisation in the British Empire since 10 January 1957, following the debacle in the Suez Crisis and in view of the high costs of the loss-making colonial system. In just a few years, Great Britain granted independence to a good dozen African colonies. However, unlike nearby Ghana, for example, Nigeria had not fought for its independence; Nigerian sovereignty had virtually slipped out of Britain's faint hand, exhausted by the Second World War, and fallen into the lap of the unprepared colony. The Nigerian independence movement lacked both the unifying experience of a struggle for freedom and the confirmation of a joint success against the former colonial power.\nOn 30 August 1957, the former transport minister Abubakar Tafawa Balewa became the first prime minister of Nigeria's (weak) central government.\nLate farewell to racial ideas.\nFrom 1958 onwards, the Nigerian army no longer recruited men exclusively from the north, as before, but from all over the country. In the following years, this meant that officer candidates from the south predominantly occupied the numerous positions of the outgoing British officers, as they were generally highly educated. This clashed with the older officers and sergeant majors, who had been taught that their people (Hausa, Fulani, Kanuri) belonged to the \"warrior peoples.\" and that representatives of the southern ethnic groups Yoruba and Igbo were not entitled to the new positions. This conflict was to trigger the Biafra War in 1966.\nThe first all-Nigerian parliament was elected at the end of 1959. The parties, which saw themselves primarily as representatives of ethnic groups or regions, won according to their population strength. The Northern Peoples Congress won 148 of the 312 seats in the House of Representatives and formed a coalition with several minor parties to gain an absolute majority. In order to keep the \"Giant of Africa\" under control and partly because of racial ideology, the British colonial government treated the ethnic and social groups in the country very unequally for decades. In the north, absolutist-feudal systems, and until 1936 even slave-owning systems, had been supported financially and militarily, while in the south conditions had been created that at least did not appear too alien to the Europeans there. In addition, as in francophone countries, an upper class educated in the mother country had been brought up, which only looked down on other compatriots. In just a few years, this \"development split\" would undo all colonial investments and development efforts in the now independent Nigeria.\nEnd of British colonial rule.\nOn October 1, 1960, Nigeria was granted independence by an act of the British Parliament and admitted to the United Nations.\nAt first glance, the balance sheet of British colonial rule in Nigeria appears quite positive. The British put an end to human sacrifice, slavery, cannibalism, trials by ordeal and the killing of newborn twins and servants of the deceased in their colony. Islamic courts were forbidden to use torture for finding out the truth or stoning and mutilation as punishment. For the first time, intent of malice was taken into account in court proceedings. British missionaries founded schools, hospitals and libraries. British colonial officials created an efficient administration, a postal and telegraph network, paved roads and built ports and an extensive rail network. The colonial administration forced the Nigerians into the unavoidable cash economy with poll taxes. Unlike other colonial powers, it allowed a free press, political parties, trade unions, retail trade associations and women's organizations. - The socio-political activist Deji Adeyanju therefore claimed in 2022 that Nigeria was better off under the colonial masters than under the new indigenous politicians. Like Adeyanju, some Nigerians today see the colonial era as a Belle \u00c9poque (beautiful era) in which righteous colonial officials administered the country, foreigners invested in Nigeria and money was still worth something.\nHowever, the achievements listed above came from an autocratic system of rule that ran counter to traditional British achievements such as parliamentarianism or the rule of law and would never be accepted in the mother country. - The British only dared to introduce democracy for the whole of Nigeria when they realized that they themselves would soon be leaving. The governor enacted laws and even a constitution in 1946 without the participation of an elected parliament, without responsible ministers and against the justified protest of the most respected Nigerians (such an absolutist form of rule had already been abolished in Great Britain in 1688 with the Glorious Revolution). The lowest court instance did not allow representation by lawyers - a circumstance that the British had already abolished in their own country in 1275 and which denied the simpler Nigerians legal recourse from the outset. For Nigerians who grew up colonially, it must have seemed that civilizational progress was only possible under autocratic rule. Later Nigerian dictators from Agulyi-Ironsi to Abacha learned from the British governors and imitated them.\nAfter 1960, however, Nigerians would have to experience that dictatorships of native officers who had acquired their education in the barracks of the British colonial army - unlike the autocratic administration by Oxford-educated British colonial civil servants with aristocratic pedigree - would not bring progress, but would lead to arbitrary rule, war and genocide.\nThe British-induced development gap between North and South, the British failure to exemplify democracy, the racial segregation practised by the British and the internal Nigerian racism reinforced by the British would in a few years undo all colonial investments and development efforts in the now independent Nigeria.\nIndependence, First Republic (1960/1963\u20131966).\nOn 1 October 1960, Nigeria gained full independence from the United Kingdom on the basis of a federal constitution, with three large states having a weak central government over them. NCNC Chairman Nnamdi Azikiwe replaced the colonial Governor-General James Wilson Robertson in November 1960 and Elizabeth II remained head of state for the time being.\nThe NPC and NCNC remained the governing parties, with the AG now in opposition. In this AG, the Yoruba party, there was a bitter power struggle between Obefemi Awolowo, who advocated a socialist course and sought to close ranks with the Soviet Union, and the conservative Prime Minister of the South-West, Samuel Ak\u00ednt\u1ecd\u0301l\u00e1, who wanted to improve co-operation with the Northern Party (NPC). This internal party dispute became so heated that the central government under Balewa had to impose a state of emergency on the south-west in May 1962. Ak\u00ednt\u1ecd\u0301l\u00e1 eventually founded a new party, the NNDP, which would win the disputed 1964 elections in an electoral alliance with the NPC. From then on, Ak\u00ednt\u1ecd\u0301l\u00e1 was seen in his region as a vicarious agent of the backward and feudal north, which would cost him his life in 1966.\nOn 1 June 1961, Nigeria received the \"North Cameroons\", a Muslim-dominated strip of land on the border with Cameroon, following a referendum. The predominantly Christian inhabitants of the South Cameroons (bordering Biafra) decided against the Muslim-dominated and unstable Nigeria and in favour of belonging to Christian-dominated Cameroon. Both \"Cameroons\" were previously under UN administration; the Bakassi peninsula remained disputed.\nNigeria received a new constitution in 1963. Nigeria became a republic. The British system of government was retained. Abubakar Tafawa Balewa remained Prime Minister and British Queen's Governor Nnamdi Azikiwe became president.\nIn 1964, a new House of Representatives was elected. The NPC and NNDP electoral alliance won 198 of the 312 seats The Yoruba and Igbo (who generated the lion's share of tax revenue) now sat in opposition, while the Hausa/Fulani dominated politics and the lower ranks of the army up to the sergeant major ranks. Their northern state was larger than would have been suggested by the border between the three main ethnic groups or between the predominant denominations of Islam and Christianity. The Northern Region therefore included not only Muslim Hausa and Fulbe (for whom it was politically in favour, but who made up barely more than a quarter of the population), but also considerable minorities of Christians, followers of natural religions, Yoruba, Igbo and other minorities such as the Tiv. When the politically and militarily dominant Northern Region, which was chronically short of funds, wanted to impose a special tax, the Jizya, on the predominantly Christian Tiv in the same year, riots broke out in the affected region. 4,000 people were killed. One had to wonder how many lives would be lost if, for example, the much more numerous Igbo were to rise up and it was not about a special tax, but about the lucrative oil business in Igboland.\nIn the south-west, the unrest worsened in 1965 because the election results had apparently been falsified or were the result of intimidation and the government had halved the state-guaranteed producer prices for cocoa immediately after the election. There was arson and looting. Dozens of political opponents were tracked down in places like Ekiti or Ijebu-Ode (both not far from Lagos), doused with petrol and set on fire (\"Operation Wetie\"). Thugs controlled the streets. By the end of 1965, the south-west was in a state of complete anarchy.\nOn 1 May 1965, Sir Christopher Welby-Everard, the Chief of the General Staff of Nigeria and the last British officer from colonial times, retired. He was succeeded by Johnson Agulyi-Ironsi, an experienced officer, former military attach\u00e9 in London and commander of the UN protection force in the Congo in 1964.\nDictatorship and War.\nThe January Coup, dictatorship Agulyi-Ironsi (1966).\nOn 15 January 1966, six majors led by Patrick C. Nzeogwu (an intelligence officer), including five Igbo. The officers had received their commission in the UK in 1959\u201361 with honours at Sandhurst and Aldershot and recognised, not without some justification, the mismanagement and anarchy of the country they were returning to. The conspirators assassinated, among others, Head of Government Balewa and the Prime Ministers of the North and West, Bello and Ak\u00ednt\u1ecd\u0301l\u00e1. That the coup plotters also murdered the wives, secretaries and drivers of their originally intended victims at the same time casts a telling light on the perpetrators. Three of the conspirators, Nzeogwu, Ifeajuna and Onwuatuegwu, also found enough time in the hectic hours of their attempted coup to locate and kill their superiors, Colonel Shodeinde, Brigadier General Maimalari and Brigadier General Ademulegun respectively, suggesting private revenge. Non-commissioned officer Daramola Oyegoke, who protested against this, was also murdered. Among the conspirators was Don Okafor, who, as commander of the head of government's guard force, was personally responsible for his protection and was on \u2018first name terms\u2019 with him; his part in the murder of Balewa, whose body was left by the roadside, shows a particular perfidy. Among the 22 victims was only one Igbo.\nFollowing the violent death of Prime Minister Balewa, Parliamentary President Orizu, an Igbo, transferred government power to the army chief Agulyi-Ironsi, also an Igbo. With his first decree, he abolished the constitution and freedom of the press and dissolved parliament. Remaining ministers were forced to resign, and from then on, the head of state ruled by means of directives issued by his staff. Ironsi abolished the three federal states and made Nigeria a unitary state for the first time: a country in which all laws, all taxes etc. applied equally everywhere, without regional variations. Nigeria was to be forced to progress by directive, so to speak. This was inevitably viewed badly in the backward north. In addition, the military government was reluctant to take action against Igbo involved in the coup. Ironsi was Igbo himself and used the more highly educated Igbo in the north to implement the supposedly progressive decisions of the central government on the ground. For other ethnic groups, it must have seemed as if the Igbo wanted to take over the country.\nAnother coup, dictatorship Gowon, Biafra (1966\u20131975).\nIt should be remembered that the previously murdered Ahmadu Bello was not only the Prime Minister of the northern state, but also a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad and of the \u2018black Napoleon\u2019 dan Fodio, as well as Sardauna (crown prince) of the Sokoto Caliphate, a dynastic and religious title. For Muslims in the north, the complete clarification and rigorous atonement of the highly outrageous act was absolutely non-negotiable. From their point of view, the monstrosity of Bello's murder authorised a hitherto unknown level of revenge and violence. Ironsi, however, did not distance himself from Bello's killers (some of whom were from his personal work environment) and allowed investigations into them to fizzle out. Ironsi's omission was to cost him dearly.\nOn 29 July 1966, soldiers staged a coup in Abeokuta in the south-west and captured Agulyi-Ironsi, who was visiting nearby Ibadan. When he refused to answer questions from lower-ranking officers about his role in Bello's murder, he was taken to a forest near Lalupon by Major Danjuma's subordinates and shot. Theophilus Danjuma's co-conspirators included Murtala Muhammed, Bukar Dimka, Shehu Yar'Adua, Muhammadu Buhari, Ibrahim Babangida and Sani Abacha, a list of future dictators of Nigeria (and those who wanted to become such) - at that time still mostly 1st and 2nd class lieutenants. Pogroms against the Igbo broke out across the country, with sources claiming 30,000 victims, mostly children. In this situation, the coup plotters appointed Lieutenant Colonel Yakubu (\"Jack\") Gowon as the new military and state leader and reintroduced federalism. Gowon did not belong to any of the three predominant ethnic groups and was confronted with the task of keeping the three divergent parts of his country and ethnic groups together and putting an end to the pogroms. Under these circumstances, it seemed unlikely that Yakubu Gowon's rule would last comparatively long - nine years. However, one of the worst humanitarian disasters of modern times occurred during this period: the Biafra War.\nIn September 1966, the pogroms against the Igbo reached their peak. An estimated 1 million Igbo fled from all over the country to the south-east, where they believed they were safe.\nIn May 1967, the governor of the eastern region, Lieutenant Colonel Emeka Ojukwu, proclaimed it an independent state, the \"Republic of Biafra.\" Following this declaration of independence, the remaining Nigerian forces attacked Biafra at Garkem on 6 July 1967. Nigeria was ill-prepared for this situation due to the liquidation of leading officers during the previous coups. As a result, the Biafran forces were able to advance westwards to Benin City in August 1967. Biafra was besieged and cut off from trade without either side being able to make decisive military movements. It was not until December 1969 that Colonel Obasanjo advanced to Umuahia with 30,000 troops, splitting Biafra in two. This decided the war. The hostilities finally ended after 30 months in January 1970.\nThe Biafra region, which had already had to cope with an unprecedented wave of refugees, was no longer able to feed its inhabitants due to the trade blockade. Estimates of the number of deaths caused by hunger and acts of war during the civil war range from one to three million. Photographs of starving children in Biafra went around the world and characterised the image of post-colonial Africa.\nIn addition to acts of war and hunger, genocides against unarmed civilians claimed numerous victims. These include, for example, the massacre of Asaba. When Nigerian troops conquered the Igbo-majority town in the Midwest in October 1967, the citizens were ordered to attend an ordered celebration in the town's central square. The 4,000 unarmed civilians who were gullible enough to comply were separated by gender; the men were murdered on the spot in front of the women and children.\nJohn Martin, caterer on a mail steamer and British citizen, remembers terrible events in September 1967: \"Arriving in Lagos and before the ship could \u2018clear\u2019, the army came on board and assembled all the Africans on board, passengers and crew in the Dining Saloon. They started to segregate them with an officer identifying nationality and Nigerian tribal affiliations \u2013 even by cheek scarring. Our Master-at-Arms was recruited to help. The Master-at-Arms was a Nigerian who travelled between Lagos and Freetown and return, overseeing the deck passengers who we picked up along the coast from Freetown \u2013 and those travelling back from Lagos. In effect he was the security officer ensuring these passengers had bonafide tickets and they didn't stray into other passenger areas of the ship. (...) Despite the efforts of Captain Hutchinson insisting the crew were under his protection, claiming the authority of the British Flag, those identified as Igbo's, the last being the Master-at-Arms himself, were taken off the ship under armed escort. The last we saw of them was being taken round back of the sheds. Gunfire was heard. Bodies were seen floating in the lagoon on an outgoing tide.\"\nThe federal government was only able to defeat the insurgents in Biafra with great difficulty. The fact that they succeeded in the end was mainly due to the officers Murtala Muhammed and Olusegun Obasanjo, who themselves became dictators a few years later after Gowon's overthrow.\nGowon had increased the number of federal states in Nigeria to 12 in 1967. With this strategic move, he blocked the realistic opportunity for both the south-east and the north to establish their own state, won over the minorities (to which he himself belonged and which make up 30% of the Nigerian population) and, by skilfully drawing the borders of the federal states, deprived the Igbo of control over both the oil wells and the seaports. This fundamentally changed the federal character of Nigeria, but it remained federal.\nNigeria joined OPEC in 1971. It experienced a dynamic economic boom during the 1974 oil crisis, which mainly triggered inflation, and was confronted with declining demand and mass unemployment in 1975. During these years, the north also experienced the worst drought since 1914. Dictator Gowon's 1972 nationalisation decree closed many sectors of the Nigerian economy to all foreign investment and banned foreign participation beyond a minority stake in several other areas. This decree proved detrimental to investment in the Nigerian economy.\nOn 1 October 1974, in contradiction to earlier statements, Gowon declared that Nigeria was not ready for civilian rule until 1976, and he postponed the handover date indefinitely.\nUnder Gowon, perceived corruption increased, especially among military government officials. Although Gowon himself was never implicated in the corrupt practices, he was often accused of turning a blind eye to the activities of his associates and acquaintances. Newspapers reported on bribery and nepotism. Theft and embezzlement in hospitals and orphanages outraged the Nigerian public. Medicines imported by officials at full price, which had long expired, showed that those involved were also indifferent to human lives.\nIn addition, the formerly efficient administration became bloated and was overburdened even with simpler tasks. The mismanagement in Gowon's administration culminated in the infamous \"cement armada\" in the summer of 1975, when the port of Lagos was overcrowded with hundreds of ships trying to unload cement. Representatives of the Nigerian government had signed contracts with 68 different international suppliers to deliver a total of 20 million tonnes of cement to Lagos in one year, even though the port could only take one million tonnes of cargo per year. The poorly drafted cement contracts contained demurrage clauses that were very favourable to the suppliers, so that the bill would skyrocket as the ships waited in port to unload (or even as they waited in their home ports for permission to leave for Nigeria). The Nigerian government only realised the extent of its mistake when the port of Lagos became so congested that basic supplies could no longer be guaranteed. Their attempts to cancel the cement contracts and impose an emergency embargo on all incoming ships kept the country busy with litigation around the world for many years, including a 1983 U.S. Supreme Court decision.\nDue to the turmoil of the Second World War and Nigeria's looming independence, the infrastructure, e.g. the railway network, was no longer expanded and was no longer maintained after the outbreak of the Biafra War in 1966. Nigeria's railway system became increasingly dilapidated (this also applies to the railway networks of other West African countries after their independence). As a result, by the 1990s, Nigeria's railway system had deteriorated to the point where it was almost completely non-functional. Large sections of track were missing or unusable, locomotives and rolling stock were in an advanced state of disrepair, and the system could no longer provide reliable service. Expertise was lost, training institutions no longer received funding and ceased operations. (It was not until 2009 that Nigeria began to renovate and lay new tracks again for billions of euros with Chinese aid (see Nigerian Railway Corporation), but the country will still be operating barely more than the colonial line length in 2023).\nScandals and the obvious mismanagement caused dissatisfaction within the army. On 29 July 1975, when Gowon attended an OAU summit in Kampala, a group of officers led by Colonel Joe Nanven Garba announced his overthrow.\nDictatorship Murtala Muhammed (1975\u20131976).\nOn 29 July 1975, General Yakubu Gowon was overthrown while attending the 12th summit of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) in Kampala, Uganda.\nMurtala Muhammed assumed power as the new military head of state. He was considered brilliant and bold, but also unpredictable and impetuous.\nMurtala Muhammed also took control of the two largest newspapers in the country - Daily Times and New Nigerian; all media in Nigeria were now under state control. He also took control of the remaining state universities.\nIn a short time, Murtala Muhammed's policies gained wide popular support and his determination made him a popular hero. However, his highly popular but impulsive style of governance and often televised speeches with the frequent addition of \"with immediate effect\" also earned him criticism among the country's top officials. His ad hoc declarations often left his officials unprepared, lacking details and lacking the financial resources to implement his ideas.\nShortly after taking power, Muhammed realised that state revenues were falling due to low oil production. Global demand for oil had collapsed, spare parts had become more expensive and labour costs had risen. As a result, the military government lacked the funds to fulfil the Nigerian development plan for 1975.\nMurtala Muhammed then carried out a dramatic downsizing of the bloated and inefficient civil service (\"Operation Deadwood\"). More than 10,000 government employees were dismissed without transitional benefits. Numerous civil servants were tried for corruption and a military governor was executed for gross abuse of office However, due to the drastic nature of the purge, accusations were made that personal scores were also settled in the process of streamlining the civil service.\nOn 13 February 1976, Muhammed was driving to work in his unarmoured Mercedes-Benz 230.6, unaccompanied by bodyguards or the like. Shortly after 8 a.m., his car was driving slowly through the notorious Lagos traffic when a group of soldiers emerged from a neighbouring petrol station, ambushed the vehicle and murdered the unarmed Muhammed. This was part of an attempted coup d'\u00e9tat by Lieutenant Colonel Dimka, who was executed on 15 May 1976 for treason. Muhammed's successor was the Chief of Staff of the Supreme Headquarters, Olusegun Obasanjo, who had escaped assassination through a case of mistaken identity. The Murtala Muhammed International Airport in Lagos is named after the still popular military ruler, who is also referred to as the \"Nigerian Kennedy\".\nDictatorship Obasanjo (1976\u20131979).\nOlusegun Obasanjo formed a triumvirate with two other generals and increased general repression. The most famous example is probably the raid on the home of musician Fela Kuti, during which female family members were raped and his mother was thrown out of a window, suffering fatal injuries. Trade union activities were restricted. Dimka and 37 of his comrades-in-arms were executed.\nObasanjo swiftly convened a committee to draft a new constitution, modelling it on the US system. Even before a result was achieved, Obasanjo increased the number of federal states to 19. The draft of the new constitution was very similar to today's Nigerian constitution and summarised the position of the head of state and the head of government. The powerful position of the president was balanced by two chambers. The constitution was promulgated in September 1978. The five parties that ran their own presidential candidates in the 1979 election showed less vision than the above committee and focussed - as in the First Republic, but against Obasanjo's express wishes - primarily on representing ethnic groups. Despite the past 20 years and a survived civil war, the new party landscape was to a certain extent a copy of the old one:\nAccordingly, each party won by over 80 per cent in the state where it represented the majority of the population. The ethnic group that had the largest share of Nigeria's population - still Northern Nigerians - won the election with its party and provided the new president, Alhaji Shehu Shagari. So before it had begun, the Second Republic was already suffering from the same problem as the First Republic: a party landscape that had been formed along ethnic lines rather than ideological or programmatic standpoints.\nThe Second Republic (1979\u20131983), President Shagari.\nOn 1 October 1979, Shehu Shagari was sworn in as the first President and Commander-in-Chief of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. As his party, the NPN, had barely more than 35% of the seats in the Senate and the House of Representatives, Shagari formed a coalition with the NPP, which had become the third strongest party in the parliamentary elections. This coalition had a slim majority in both chambers.\nShagari relied on large-scale industry and, in agriculture, on the \"Green Revolution\" that corresponded to the current state of science at the time: preference for large farms, intensive use of fertilisers and pesticides, use of machinery, drilling of deep groundwater, etc. The Green Revolution is viewed rather critically today (2023).\nLaying of the foundation stone for the Ajaokuta steelworks.\nIn 1980, Shagari laid the foundation stone for the Ajaokuta steelworks, which was to be built by a Soviet state-owned company near the Niger River and the Itakpe ore mine. By 1991, 98% of the steelworks, which was to be built to Soviet standards, i.e. on a very large scale, had been constructed. However, by 1991 the Soviet Union had dissolved, world demand for steel had changed unfavourably and technology had developed further. The steelworks was not completed and had still not started operations in 1994 - which, according to Russian Wikipedia articles on the subject, was entirely due to Nigeria. Ajaokuta was seen as a prime example of failed development aid in West Africa. However, by 2017, 40 of the 43 plants were gradually able to start operations. In 2023, Ajaokuta Steel produced around one sixth of the amount of steel produced by the UK. Three other Shagari-era steel plants in Jos, Oshogbo and Katsina appear to no longer be active.\nConstruction of social housing.\nShagari began the construction of 200,000 social housing units across the country, of which 25,000 were completed during his term of office. A 2017 study by Nnamdi Azikiwe University in Awka criticised the lack of planning (the completed flats were not connected to water, electricity, sewerage or transport or were located in an area with no demand for new flats). The new flats were often never occupied, were not managed and soon fell into disrepair. Shagari's successors did not pursue the completion of the remaining flats, which also fell into disrepair.\nDeportation of West African immigrants.\nIn January 1983, Shagari decided to deport West African immigrants under the slogan \"Ghana must go!\" in the face of an economic slump. An estimated 2 million Ghanaians had to leave the country suddenly and with malice, leaving most of their belongings behind. Provisional bags and suitcases became the symbol of the forced exodus (they are still called \"Ghana bags\" today). It is not without a certain irony that social and economic development in Ghana after 1983 was to be much more favourable than in Nigeria and that Nigerians, for their part, would look for work and income in Ghana.\nEconomic isolationism.\nShagari reacted to falling oil prices and the resulting economic downturn by restricting import licences and increasing customs duties. He rejected cooperation with the International Monetary Fund[165].\nEducation, women's emancipation, environmental issues.\nUnder Shagari, the education system in Nigeria improved. For example, a number of universities were founded. He also promoted the inclusion of women in political life. He filled many offices with women.\nRe-election.\nSimilar to the First Republic, the Northern Party won an absolute majority in parliament after a few years in government and no longer needed coalition partners.\nShagari's fight against corruption, General Buhari.\nAlthough Shehu Shagari is cleared of personal involvement in corrupt practices, the Second Republic was plagued by allegations of corruption, including allegations of electoral fraud in the 1983 elections. In his second term, Shagari made attempts to curb corruption through the new Ministry of National Guidance under Yusuf Maitama Sule, which was created solely for this purpose. A new programme called Ethical Revolution was introduced, one of whose initiatives was the famous \"war against indiscipline\" launched under General Muhammadu Buhari. The ministry was only in office for three months before a coup d'\u00e9tat in 1983 made Buhari the sole ruler.\nBuhari (1983\u20131985) and Babangida (1985\u20131992), two unequal dictators.\nThe military coup on 31 December 1983 was coordinated by leading officers of the Nigerian military and led to the overthrow of the government and the installation of Major General Muhammadu Buhari as head of state. The inauguration of Muhammadu Buhari was generally seen as a positive development Buhari promised reforms, but his government performed little better than that of his predecessor. General Buhari was overthrown in 1985 by a military coup led by General Ibrahim Babangida. Buhari would be elected president 30 years later, in the Fourth Republic and now democratically purged.\nBabangida was more far-sighted than Nigeria's previous military leaders, loosening state control over the press and releasing a number of prisoners. However, he faced the same economic problems that Buhari had faced and the same discontent in the country.\nBabangida soon gained a reputation as a clever politician. He asked the Nigerian people whether their country should accept a financial aid package worth billions from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). When, as he had expected, the Nigerian people refused to accept the package, Babangida suspended talks with the IMF. He then offered Nigerians his own economic recovery programme - which included many of the harsh measures proposed by the IMF - and convinced Nigerians to accept it. As a result of this programme, Nigeria received loans from banks and gained economic credibility in Western countries.\nAccording to Forbes, shortly before the Second Gulf War, Babangida diverted twelve billion US dollars in unplanned income (\"oil windfall\") into his own pocket (the oil price jumped from 15 to US$41.15/barrel within weeks in 1990 and then plummeted to the old value). However, these funds could never be found. Nevertheless, the additional profit of US$12 billion calculated by Forbes could only have been realised if Nigeria had sold the entire annual production volume of 630 million barrels on the world market exactly on 27 September 1990 at the annual high price of US$41/barrel - 19 more than the officially stated annual average of US$22/barrel (630 million barrels \u00d7 US$19/barrel = US$11.97 billion). This is unlikely given the sluggishness of the state oil company NNPC and the lack of ex post information for those involved. Babangida commented in 2022 on the above allegations that he and his associates were \"saints.\" This account should be evaluated as cautiously as Forbes' calculation.In December 1991, the centrally located Abuja became the capital.\nThe Babangida regime ensured the establishment of a state security apparatus; it survived two coup attempts. General Mamman Vatsa and Major Gideon Orkar were executed, and the critical journalist Dele Giwa was murdered. In 1989, Babangida promised the transition to the Third Nigerian Republic. Babangida survived the 1990 coup attempt and postponed the promised return to democracy until 1992.\nBabangida's intelligence cannot be denied and his foreign and economic policies benefited Nigeria. The security apparatus and secret service he set up may be understandable in view of the fate of military ruler Murtala Mohammed - who was shot unarmed and without bodyguards in an unarmoured limousine in 1976 - but it went beyond the vital protection of the president and did not shy away from political murder. Babangida thus created the instruments with which his successor Abacha led Nigeria into its darkest epoch after the civil war.\nThe Abortive Third Republic.\nHead of State Babangida promised to return the country to civilian rule by 1990 which was later extended until January 1993. In early 1989, a constituent assembly completed a constitution and in the spring of 1989 political activity was again permitted. In October 1989, the government established two parties, the National Republican Convention (NRC) and the Social Democratic Party (SDP); other parties were not allowed to register.\nIn April 1990, mid-level officers attempted unsuccessfully to overthrow the government and 69 accused plotters were executed after secret trials before military tribunals. In December 1990, the first stage of partisan elections was held at the local government level. Despite the low turnout, there was no violence and both parties demonstrated strength in all regions of the country, with the SDP winning control of a majority of local government councils.\nIn December 1991, state legislative elections were held and Babangida decreed that previously banned politicians could contest in primaries scheduled for August. These were cancelled due to fraud and subsequent primaries scheduled for September also were cancelled. All announced candidates were disqualified from standing for president once a new election format was selected. The presidential election was finally held on 12 June 1993, with the inauguration of the new president scheduled to take place 27 August 1993, the eighth anniversary of President Babangida's coming to power.\nIn the historic 12 June 1993 presidential elections, which most observers deemed to be Nigeria's fairest, early returns indicated that wealthy Yoruba businessman M. K. O. Abiola won a decisive victory. However, on 23 June, Babangida, using several pending lawsuits as a pretence, annulled the election, throwing Nigeria into turmoil. More than 100 were killed in riots before Babangida agreed to hand power to an interim government on 26 August 1993. He later attempted to renege on this decision, but without popular and military support, he was forced to hand over to Ernest Shonekan, a prominent nonpartisan businessman. Shonekan was to rule until elections scheduled for February 1994. Although he had led Babangida's Transitional Council since 1993, Shonekan was unable to reverse Nigeria's economic problems or to defuse lingering political tension.\nDictatorship Abacha (1993\u20131998).\nShonekan's transitional government, the shortest in the country's political history, was overthrown in 1993 by a coup d'\u00e9tat led by General Sani Abacha. This was the seventh Nigerian coup d'\u00e9tat in less than 30 years and also (as of 2023) the last military coup in the country.\nAbsolute power, reign of terror.\nUnlike previous military dictators in Nigeria such as Gowon, Murtala, Obasanjo or Buhari, Abacha can only be described as a reign of terror.\nAfter dissolving the government and parliament in November 1993, he also made himself chief justice in September 1994 and thus gained absolute power. Abacha put together a personal security force of 3,000 men trained in North Korea. Nigerian police forces were retrained on a large scale. The state ruthlessly cracked down on perceived political opponents.\nIn 1995, the writer and civil rights activist Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other defendants (the Ogoni Nine) were executed in Port Harcourt after a spectacular show trial that sparked violent international protests. Nigeria was expelled from the Commonwealth of Nations with immediate effect. The winner of the 1993 presidential election, Moshood Abiola, was arrested and died in unexplained circumstances, in any case due to lack of medical care after four years in prison. Former army chief of staff Shehu Musa Yar'Adua was also arrested - he also died in prison. Former military ruler Olusegun Obasanjo was also arrested for treason and accused of planning a coup d'\u00e9tat together with General Oladipo Diya. The Nobel Prize winner Wole Soyinka was charged in absentia with high treason. Even the fatal plane crash of Sani Abacha's eldest son Ibrahim on 17 January 1996 and the subsequent assassinations of relatives of the 14 other accident victims were allegedly carried out on the dictator's orders; these rumours were strengthened by the fact that Abacha did not release the 15 bodies.\nDescent into a narco-state.\nDuring his five years in office, Abacha's lack of co-operation in anti-narcotics operations led to the repeated revocation of US certification to combat drugs under Section 481 of the Foreign Assistance Act (FAA). This officially made Nigeria a narco-state. The US voted against Nigeria in six multilateral development banks and refused to provide any assistance to Nigeria under the FAA and the Arms Control Export Act. Direct flights from the US to Nigeria remained banned due to security concerns.\nEmbezzlement of state funds, the \"Abacha loot\".\nUnder Abacha, the misappropriation of public funds reached epic proportions and is known as the \"Abacha loot.\" Abacha's National Security Adviser, Alhaji Ismaila Gwarzo, submitted fake funding requests for national security, which Abacha approved. The funds were usually sent in cash or travellers cheques from the Central Bank of Nigeria to Gwarzo, who brought them to Abacha's house. An estimated $1.4 billion in cash was handed over in this way.\nIn a list of the ten most self-enriching heads of state, Abacha and his family rank fourth. They are alleged to have embezzled between 1 and 5 billion dollars.\nOn 7 August 2014, the US Department of Justice announced that $480 million had been seized from the Nigerian government, the largest amount in the country's history. Jersey's Civil Asset Recovery Fund discovered more than $267 million in funds allegedly laundered through the US banking system and deposited into an account in Jersey (\u00a3210 million). The US Department of Justice, the Jersey courts and the Nigerian government made a civil forfeiture of the funds, which will be divided between these countries.\nEnd of petrol production for 28 years.\nDue to poor maintenance, incompetent management and the exodus of skilled labour, the last of Nigeria's four (state-owned) oil refineries ended its production of petrol in 1996. By September 2024 (when the privately owned Dangote refinery began operations), the country had to import 100% of its refined fuels in exchange for hard currency despite its vast oil reserves, not counting the production of a few thousand very small and extremely dirty illegal refineries in the Niger Delta.\nDemocratisation and federalism in 1998.\nAbacha died of heart failure on 8 June 1998 and was replaced by General Abdulsalami Abubakar. The military Provisional Ruling Council (PRC) under Abubakar commuted the sentences of those accused in the alleged coup during the Abacha regime and released almost all known civilian political detainees. Pending the promulgation of the constitution written in 1995, the government observed some provisions of the 1979 and 1989 constitutions. Neither Abacha nor Abubakar lifted the decree suspending the 1979 constitution, and the 1989 constitution was not implemented. The judiciary system continued to be hampered by corruption and lack of resources after Abacha's death. In an attempt to alleviate such problems Abubakar's government implemented a civil service pay raise and other reforms.\nIn August 1998, Abubakar appointed the Independent National Electoral Commission (INEC) to conduct elections for local government councils, state legislatures and governors, the national assembly, and president. The NEC successfully held elections on 5 December 1998, 9 January 1999, 20 February, and 27 February 1999, respectively. For local elections, nine parties were granted provisional registration with three fulfilling the requirements to contest the following elections. These parties were the People's Democratic Party (PDP), the All People's Party (APP), and the predominantly Yoruba Alliance for Democracy (AD). The former military head of state Olusegun Obasanjo, freed from prison by Abubakar, ran as a civilian candidate and won the presidential election. The PRC promulgated a new constitution based largely on the suspended 1979 constitution, before the 29 May 1999 inauguration of the new civilian president. The constitution includes provisions for a bicameral legislature, the National Assembly consisting of a 360-member House of Representatives and a 109-member Senate.\nFourth Republic.\nPresidency Obasanjo (1999\u20132007).\nThe emergence of democracy in Nigeria in May 1999 ended 39 years of coups, countercoups and short-lived democracies. Olusegun Obasanjo inherited a country suffering economic stagnation and the deterioration of most democratic institutions. Obasanjo had an adventurous life that also reflected the first 40 years of independent Nigeria: During the civil war, he was a colonel and organised the decisive strike against the Republic of Biafra, as Chief of Staff he escaped an attempt on his life through mistaken identity and was subsequently, between 1977 and 1979, military ruler (without having aspired to this), led Nigeria back to democracy, served time in prison under Abacha and during this time awaited his execution for alleged high treason.\nFirst term in office.\nSecuring power.\nIn the first months of his presidency, Obasanjo retired some 200 military officers, including all 93 who held political office, making a coup by senior officers less likely. He also moved the Ministry of Defence from Lagos to Abuja and ensured that it was placed under more direct government control.\nActive foreign policy.\nThe IV. Republic was able to repair the damage caused by the Abacha dictatorship through an active foreign policy. In October 2001, Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo, South African President Thabo Mbeki and Algerian President Abd al-Aziz Bouteflika established the New Partnership for Africa's Development, or NEPAD, which aims to strengthen Africa's growth, development and participation in the global economy. During Obasanjo's first term in office, Nigerians' freedoms increased; freedom of the press allowed for the first time to criticise the president again.\nCommunal violence.\nCommunal violence has plagued the Obasanjo government since its inception. In May 1999, violence erupted in Kaduna State over the succession of an Emir resulting in more than 100 deaths. In November 1999, the army destroyed the town of Odi, Bayelsa State and killed scores of civilians in retaliation for the murder of 12 policemen by a local gang. In Kaduna in February\u2013May 2000, over 1,000 people died in rioting over the introduction of criminal Shar'ia in the State. Hundreds of ethnic Hausa were killed in reprisal attacks in south-eastern Nigeria. In September 2001, over 2,000 people were killed in inter-religious rioting in Jos. In October 2001, hundreds were killed, and thousands displaced in communal violence that spread across the states of Benue, Taraba, and Nasarawa. On 1 October 2001, Obasanjo announced the formation of a National Security Commission to address the issue of communal violence. Obasanjo was reelected in 2003.\nSecond term in office.\nObasanjo was re-elected in 2003 in a tumultuous election with violent ethnic and religious undertones.\nIn his second term, Obasanjo ensured the expansion of the Nigerian police force.\nIn October 2005, the Obasanjo government repaid all its debts (in exchange for a reduction) under the Paris Club.\nDispute over the Bakassi Peninsula.\nObasanjo was also faced with resolving an ongoing border dispute with neighbouring Cameroon over the ownership of the Bakassi Peninsula, an oil-rich area with close cultural ties to both countries. According to a 2002 ruling by the International Court of Justice, the region was recognised as belonging to Cameroon. Despite domestic protests, Obasanjo followed the court's decision in 2006, renounced his claims to the peninsula and withdrew his troops.\nOn 12 June 2006, Obasanjo signed the Greentree Agreement with Cameroonian President Paul Biya, which formally ended the border dispute over the Bakassi Peninsula. Even when the Nigerian Senate passed a resolution declaring the withdrawal of Nigerian troops from the Bakassi Peninsula illegal, Obasanjo gave the order to proceed with it as planned. On 14 August 2008, the peninsula was fully handed over to Cameroon.\nConflict in the Niger Delta.\nDemonstrations against the government's oil policy and high petrol prices had been on the agenda in Nigeria for some time. The inhabitants of the Niger Delta also protested against the activities of the oil companies in their area, which they felt were exploiting the country and giving back too little of their profits. The protests turned into coordinated militant actions in 2006: Oil company employees were kidnapped and refineries and pipelines were damaged. Rebels tried to disrupt oil production and thus cause economic damage to the companies. The most active of these militant groups was the Movement for the Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND). The movement announced a unilateral ceasefire in 2008 and accepted an amnesty programme proposed by the government in 2009.\nEthnic violence over control of the oil-producing Niger Delta region and an insurgency in the north-east continued. Conflicts between Muslims and Christians in Plateau state prompted Obasanjo to declare a state of emergency in May 2004, suspend the state government and install a six-month military government. Obasanjo was able to largely repair the diplomatic damage caused by the Abacha dictatorship through an active foreign policy (for example, by rejoining the Commonwealth).\nPlans for a third term in office.\nObasanjo tried to amend the constitution to allow him a third term in office - a process that often heralds the transition to another dictatorship in other African countries in the region. This led to tensions with the parliament and with Vice President Atiku Abubakar. An autobiography by Condoleezza Rice claims that the then US President George W. Bush ultimately convinced Obasanjo to abandon these plans. Today (2023), Obasanjo comments on Nigerian politics in an idiosyncratic way.\nConclusion.\nAlthough the elections that brought Obasanjo to power and allowed him to run for a second term were condemned as unfree and unfair, Nigeria made significant progress in democratisation. The fact that the National Assembly was able to successfully deny the president a third term despite his influence on the army and security forces is evidence of the checks and balances in the Nigerian Government after 2000.\nThe federalist structure of the 1999 constitution with 36 federal states(and one Federal Capital Territory, FCT) of roughly equal size, a Senate with three senators from each state, as well as a blocking minority of at least 13 states in the presidential election must be considered a stroke of luck in view of the numerous ethnic groups and the religious division of the country. Since then, every presidential candidate has emphasised in their own interest that they represent not only their own ethnic group/religion, but all Nigerians. Nigerian parties now differentiate themselves primarily in terms of their programmes and no longer according to ethnic affiliations.\nPresidency Yar'Adua (2007\u20132010).\nAs Obasanjo was no longer allowed to run in the 2007 presidential election, Umaru Yar'Adua entered the race as the Muslim candidate for the PDP. Umaru Yar'Adua was the brother of Obasanjo's deputy during his time as military dictator.\nUmaru Yar'Adua won with a clear majority and was sworn in as the new president on 29 May 2007. International observers strongly condemned the election, which was marred by irregularities and vote rigging. The international community, which had observed the Nigerian elections to promote a free and fair process, condemned these elections as seriously flawed. Outgoing President Olusegun Obasanjo acknowledged fraud and other \"shortcomings\" in the elections, but stated that the result was in line with the opinion polls. In a nationally televised address in 2007, he added that if Nigerians did not like the victory of his hand-picked successor, they had the option of voting again in four years' time. However, Yar'Adua's health would soon render this option moot.\nIn 2009, Yar'Adua's term of office saw the out-of-court settlement of lawsuits under the US Alien Tort Statute against Royal Dutch Shell and Brian Anderson, the head of Shell's Nigerian subsidiary. Shell continues to deny liability.\nPresidency Jonathan (2010\u20132015).\nYar'Adua died on 5 May 2010. 3 months earlier, Vice President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan had already been sworn in as the successor to Yar'Adua, who was seriously ill and receiving treatment abroad.\nFor the remainder of his term in office, his priorities were to solve the country's energy problems and to continue peace negotiations with the rebels in the Niger Delta.\nJonathan emerged victorious from the presidential elections. Second place went to former General and Head of State Muhammadu Buhari, who received 32 per cent of the vote. The international media reported that the elections went smoothly, unlike previous elections.\nSuccesses against Ebola and in the entertainment industry.\nJonathan's time in office saw the successful fight against Ebola and an economic recovery that made Nigeria the leading economic power in Africa. The Jonathan administration's film promotion for high-quality productions created its own commercially successful film industry (\"Nollywood\"), which can only be compared to the US and India (\"Bollywood\").\nFight against Boko Haram.\nOn the debit side of the balance sheet, on the other hand, is the wave of terror by Boko Haram, which kidnapped 200 schoolgirls in Chibok in 2014 and highlighted the impotence of the Nigerian state (around 100 of the girls are still missing in 2022).\nJonathan, who was criticised during the 2014 election campaign for not having done enough to combat Boko Haram, asked the neighbouring countries of Benin, Cameroon, Chad and Niger for support. A regional army was set up with troops from Nigeria and the aforementioned countries and an offensive was launched against the terrorists. The fight against Boko Haram made significant progress, with armed forces recapturing large areas previously held by the terrorist group.\nLaw against queer people.\nThe Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act, signed by Jonathan in 2014, is one of the most repressive laws in the world against LGBT people and those who may be considered by the Nigerian judiciary as their \"sponsors\". The law is also supported by the general Nigerian population. They even went on to praise him for ensuring that the law had been passed and signed.https://\nEmbezzlement of state funds, deselection.\nAbove all, however, Jonathan's time in office is characterised by embezzlement in office - the misappropriation of state funds. The Nigerian state is said to have lost 20 billion US dollars as a result. The high level of corruption was a decisive factor in the 2015 presidential election, from which opposition candidate Muhammadu Buhari emerged victorious. The elections were originally scheduled for mid-February, but were then postponed by the Nigerian electoral commission by six weeks, as the level of violence emanating from Boko Haram at the time was an obstacle to the elections in the north-east.\nJonathan's ouster is (as of 2023) the only case in the IV Republic in which Nigerian voters refused to re-elect an incumbent president. Jonathan's party, the PDP, lost power after 16 years in power. At least it can be said of Jonathan that he conceded his electoral defeat without complaint.\nPresidency Buhari (2015\u20132023).\nSince the Second Republic, Buhari has been seen as the clean man of Nigerian politics, as frugal, but also as a representative of northern interests. His party, the \"All Progressives\", was only formed shortly before his election in 2015 from a merger of four opposition parties. The election, in which the then 72-year-old Buhari won on his fourth attempt, was described by observers as fair. In 2019, Buhari was elected for a second and final term in office and the Progressives remain the ruling party to this day (November 2024). During Buhari's two terms in office, they were able to gradually increase the number of deputies, senators and governors. The Buhari era (as of January 2023) is characterised by a dynamic structural policy, economic diversification, successes against Boko Haram and a decreasing perception of corruption, but also by a rapid increase in armed crime and police attacks. While the COVID-19 pandemic played no role in the young Nigerian population from 2020, in 2022 Nigeria, as the world's largest wheat importer, was hit particularly hard by the wheat shortage caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the resulting rise in bread prices.\nAnti-corruption measures.\nOne of Buhari's anti-corruption measures promised in the 2015 election was the suspension of the Chief Justice of Nigeria, Walter Onnoghen. Investigations by the Code of Conduct Bureau (CCB, a kind of ethics council) and complaints by a citizens' initiative had revealed that Onnoghen held secret accounts and did not declare incoming income. After Onnoghen failed to appear on two CCB summonses in January 2019, he was suspended by Buhari. Onnoghen avoided impeachment by the Nigerian Senate (similar to the German Federal Council) by resigning. In December 2019, the Attorney General, Mohammed Bello Adoke, was convicted of corruption in absentia and later extradited from neighbouring Niger. In July 2020 - not without irony - the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry against Corruption EFCC, Ibrahim Magu, was arrested for corruption. In December 2020, he was followed by the Chairman of the Pension Taskforce, Abdulrasheed Maina, and a senator - Since corruption takes place in secret and is an emotionally charged issue, an objective assessment is difficult. However, unlike in the 2015 election, Nigerians no longer see corruption as the most important political issue in the 2022 polls, but place it behind \"fighting crime\", \"economy\" and \"power supply\". This improvement is not reflected in the Corruption Perception Index (CPI) - instead, this assessment of Nigeria by 11 international NGOs has worsened by several points since 2015.\nInfrastructure policy with Chinese help.\nThe Buhari administration has renovated and rebuilt roads, harbours, bridges and railways like no previous government. The construction and profitable operation of the Lagos-Ibadan standard gauge railway since May 2021 as well as the Second Niger Bridge near Onitsha and the Lekki Super Post-Panamax container port, both of which were completed in December 2022, deserve special mention. The Buhari administration has been able to attract or set up processing industries for commodities such as crude oil and rice (e.g. Dangote refinery, Imota rice mill). Major Nigerian entrepreneurs such as Aliko Dangote (cement), Innocent Chukwuma (Innoson, vehicle manufacturing) and Stella Chinyelu Okoli (Emzor Pharma) no longer take their assets abroad, but invest them at home. - Initially, most of the structural improvements were financed and implemented as PPP projects as part of the People's Republic of China's increased involvement in Africa via the state-owned companies CCECC and CHEC, while Western countries hardly participated in such projects. However, when the Nigerian-Chinese negotiations on further projects failed in 2021, Construction Minister Fashola was able to arrange financing for two new rail projects in a short time via the British Standard Chartered Bank. Nigeria is the only sub-Saharan country that operates more kilometres of rail track in 2023 than in colonial times, and one of the few countries in the world that is expanding its rail network every year instead of closing tracks.\nSuccesses against Boko Haram.\nBuhari's strategy against Boko Haram was effective despite some setbacks. The terrorist militia was driven out of the most important cities in the afflicted north as early as 2016 (see chapter \"Boko Haram\"). The situation eased at the beginning of 2022, when Boko Haram, whose militias had terrorised Nigeria's north for years and devastated entire regions, was largely disbanded. 40,000 Boko Haram fighters surrendered. However, the splinter group ISWAP remains active. In addition, Nigeria has been hit by a wave of crime and rampant police violence since 2019.\nDespite the political stability, the security situation in Nigeria was considered inadequate. 68% of Nigerians felt \"not safe\" in their country according to a survey by the NOI-Polls opinion research institute in May 2022. 77% do not know a helpline number for emergencies.\nAccording to the above survey, Nigerians fear being robbed (24%) or kidnapped (also 24%), falling victim to armed bandits or being robbed (both 8%) or being harmed in the herdsmen-farmers conflict (also 8%). This is followed by \"ritual murders\" (4%) and \"Boko Haram\" (3.5%).\nMilitant groups in the Niger Delta.\nThe Buhari administration was able to temporarily appease militant groups in the Niger Delta through \"guard contracts\" and the associated payments. Critics see this as a modern-day indulgence trade or the subsidisation of criminals. See the relevant chapter.\nForeign policy.\nIn November 2022, the US State Department removed Nigeria (and India) from the list of Countries of Particular Concern. This was done at the recommendation of the US Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) with reference to attacks by criminals against Christian missionaries in the Islamic north of Nigeria. Nigeria was placed on the aforementioned list in 2020 by then President Trump and his Secretary of State Pompeo.\nPresidency Tinubu (since 2023).\nThe ruling All Progressives Congress (APC) candidate, Bola Tinubu, won the February 2023 presidential 2023 Nigerian presidential election to succeed Muhammadu Buhari as the next president of Nigeria. However, the opposition levelled accusations of electoral fraud in polls and challenged it in court. The supreme Court however upheld the victory of President Bola Tinubu till date he remains the Current Elected president of Nigeria. On 29 May 2023, Bola Tinubu was sworn in as Nigeria's president to succeed Buhari.\nIn his inaugural speech, Tinubu announced the abolition of state subsidies for fuel, and three weeks later he ended state support for the national currency, which subsequently plummeted to a quarter of its value. The situation since then has been described in the Nigerian media as \u2018economic hardship\u2019. According to an opinion poll conducted by API on 29 May 2024, 49% of Nigerians surveyed rate Tinubu's work after one year in office as \u2018very bad\u2019, 29% as \u2018bad\u2019 and only 4% as \u2018good\u2019. The biggest personal challenge cited by 36% of respondents was \u2018hunger\u2019, 28% were unable to finance \u2018basic needs\u2019, 13% were unable to find a job and 9% criticised the poor security situation (multiple answers were not permitted).\nThe rise in kidnappings is also likely to be a consequence of \u2018economic hardship\u2019. According to NOIPolls, 38% of Nigerians personally know a kidnap victim (as of May 2024). Of these 38%, 78% state that the victim was released and 57% that a ransom was paid. 5% of victims were killed. 56% of Nigerians believe that the government is not doing enough to combat the numerous kidnappings. Creating jobs (37%) and improving the security forces (22%) are cited as suitable countermeasures.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21385", "revid": "60840", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21385", "title": "Geography of Nigeria", "text": " \nNigeria is a country in West Africa. It shares land borders with the Republic of Benin to the west, Chad and Cameroon to the east, and Niger to the north. Its coast lies on the Gulf of Guinea in the south and it borders Lake Chad to the northeast. Notable geographical features in Nigeria include the Adamawa Plateau, Mambilla Plateau, Jos Plateau, Obudu Plateau, Niger River, Benue River, and Niger Delta.\nNigeria is in the tropics, where the climate is very humid and seasonally wet. Nigeria has majorly four climate types; these climate types are generally gradated from south to north. Nigeria's principal streams are the Niger, from which it got its name, and the Benue, the primary tributary of the Niger. The country's most elevated point is Chappal Waddi (or Gangirwal) at , situated in the Adamawa mountains in the Gashaka-Gumti Public Park, Taraba State, on the border with Cameroon.\nThe capital of Nigeria is Abuja, situated in the centre of the country, while Lagos is the country's major port, monetary center and largest city. Communicated in dialects are English (official), Hausa, Igbo, and Yoruba. It is assessed that Nigeria has around 250 different ethno-etymological gatherings.\n* Total: \n**\"country rank in the world:\" 31st\n* Land: \n* Water: \n* Australia comparative: slightly smaller than South Australia\n* Canada comparative: slightly smaller than British Columbia\n* United States comparative: slightly less than three times the size of New Mexico\nClimate.\nThe tropical monsoon climate, designated by the K\u00f6ppen climate classification as \"Am\", is found in the southern part of the country. This climate is influenced by the monsoons originating from the South Atlantic Ocean, which are brought into the country by the (maritime tropical) MT air mass, a warm moist sea-to-land seasonal wind. Its warmth and high humidity gives it a strong tendency to ascend and produce copious rainfall, which is a result of the condensation of water vapour in the rapidly rising air. The tropical monsoon climate has a very small temperature range. The temperature ranges are almost constant throughout the year; for example, Warri in the southern part of Nigeria records a maximum of for its hottest month while its lowest temperature is in its coldest month.\nThe southern part of Nigeria experiences heavy and abundant rainfall. These storms are usually convectional in nature because of the region's proximity to the equatorial belt. The annual rainfall received in this region is very high. Parts of the Niger Delta receives over of annual rainfall, while the southeast receives between . The southern region of Nigeria experiences a double rainfall maxima with two high peaks. The first rainy season starts in March, ending in June. The August break, a short dry season, follows, followed by a short rainy season in September and a long dry season in October.\nThe tropical savanna climate, characterized by distinct rainy and dry seasons, dominates western to central Nigeria. It has a single peak in the summer and consistently high temperatures above . Abuja, Nigeria's capital, experiences a temperature range of . The dry season occurs from December to March and is hot and dry with the Harmattan wind, a continental tropical (CT) air mass laden with dust from the Sahara, prevailing throughout this period.\nWith the Intertropical Convergence Zone swinging northward over West Africa from the Southern Hemisphere in April, heavy showers coming from pre-monsoonal convective clouds mainly in the form of squall lines also known as the north easterlies formed mainly as a result of the interactions of the two dominant airmasses in Nigeria known as the maritime tropical (south westerlies) and the continental tropical (north easterlies), begins in central Nigeria while monsoons arrive in July, bringing with it high humidity, heavy cloud cover and heavy rainfall lasting until September when the monsoons gradually begin retreating southward to the southern part of Nigeria. Rainfall totals in central Nigeria varies from in the lowlands to over along the south western escarpment of the Jos Plateau.\nA hot semi-arid climate (\"BSh\") is predominant within the Sahel in the northern part of Nigeria. Annual rainfall totals are low. The rainy season in the northern part of Nigeria lasts for three to four months (June to September). The rest of the year is hot and dry with temperatures climbing as high as . Potiskum, Yobe State in the northeast of Nigeria recorded Nigeria's lowest ever temperature of .\nHighland climates are found on highlands regions in Nigeria. Highlands over above sea level are cool enough to reach the temperate climate line in the tropics thereby giving the highlands, mountains and the plateau regions standing above this height, a cool mountain climate.\nAnnual rainfall.\nRainfall in the coastal belt of the Niger Delta is heavy due to the closeness of the Delta region to the equator. Annual rainfall totals vary from at Port Harcourt to as much as at Forcados, a coastal town in the Niger Delta, at Bonny, and in Calabar, the rainiest city with over one million people in Nigeria. As one moves northward and eastward, annual rainfall declines steadily to around at Sokoto in the northwest and as low as in the extreme north of Yobe and Borno States, which under the sweltering conditions that prevail is dry enough to be a hot arid climate (K\u00f6ppen \"BWh\").\nTrade winds.\nTropical maritime air mass.\nThe tropical maritime air mass (MT) is responsible for Nigeria's rainy season. This wind begins in February in the southern part of Nigeria while it takes longer for the wind to fully cover the whole of the country, reaching the northern part of Nigeria in June. Its presence a result of the northward retreat of the Harmattan. The northward retreat of the tropical continental air mass (CT) is caused by the sun's northward shift from the tropic of capricorn in the southern hemisphere to the tropic of cancer in the northern hemisphere. This shift begins from February and ends in June, when the sun is fully overhead at the tropic of cancer. During this northward migration of the sun as a result of the earth tilting along its axis, the sun crosses the equator (around March), moving over West Africa. West Africa comes directly under the sun at this time. The whole of West Africa is heated intensely as result of the increased insolation. Temperatures can climb as high as over West Africa during this time. Temperatures in the northern part of Nigeria can go as high as in cities like Maiduguri.\nHigh temperatures and increased insolation cause low pressure in West Africa and Nigeria between March and May. The Saharan continental air mass weakens due to land surface overheating, causing the atmosphere to expand and become lighter. The air mass retreats, and the sun's rays enter Nigeria's atmosphere more intensely than during Harmattan. The heating of the West Africa land mass creates a low pressure region over West Africa. This low pressure zone aid in the development of the tropical maritime air mass from the south Atlantic.\nThe tropical maritime air mass is a warm, humid and unstable trade wind. Convection currents form within the airmass whenever there is little instability in the airmass as a result of a slight to a very high orographic uplift in mountainous regions like the Obudu Plateau or the heating of the land which can trigger the formation of cumulonimbus cloud leading to thunderstorms within the air mass. During the dominance of the tropical maritime air mass, mornings are bright and sunny, the sun's heating of the land in the mornings and afternoons sets up convectional currents, these currents rise vertically, cumulonimbus clouds are formed, and torrential downpours can occur in the afternoon.\nThe African easterly wave is another major contributor of rainfall during the summer monsoons months of May to September. The nature of this wave changes at about 15 degrees north latitude. The waves that pass south of this latitude carry moisture and create convection that leads to rain clouds. Nigeria's location in the wetter part of the easterly waves south of the 15 degrees north latitude creates wetter climatic conditions for Nigeria, especially during the monsoons.\nTropical continental air mass.\nThe tropical continental air mass, locally known as the Harmattan, is a wind originating from North Africa which crosses the Sahara into West Africa. Nigeria's dry season from December to March is dominated by a dusty tropical continental air mass, which creates a haze and hinders visibility. Originating near the equator, it generates dust rather than precipitation. Despite its impact on transportation, the low humidity helps farmers dry their crops.\nTemperature.\nNigeria's seasons and temperature variance are determined by rainfall with rainy season and dry season being the major seasons in Nigeria. The rainy season of Nigeria brings in slightly cooler weather to the country as a result of an increased cloud cover that acts as a blockage of the intense sunshine of the tropics by blocking much of the Sun's rays in the rainy season (and trapping some heat in the ground, making it not too cold); this in turn cools the land, and the winds above the ground remain cool thereby making for cooler temperatures during the rainy season. Despite the temperatures being cooler in the rainy season, the rainy season also has an increased temperature at night compared to the dry season. Also afternoons in the rainy season can be hot and humid. In the rainy season it is damp, and the rainfalls are usually abundant.\nThe dry season of Nigeria is a period of less cloud cover in the southern part of Nigeria to virtually no cloud cover in the northern part of Nigeria. The Sun shines through the atmosphere with little obstructions from the clear skies making the dry season in Nigeria a period of warmer weather conditions. In the middle of the dry season around December, the dust brought in by the Harmattan partially blocks the sun's rays, which lowers temperatures. But with the withdrawal of this wind around March to April following the onset of the rainy season, temperatures can go as high as in some parts of Nigeria.\nSemi-temperate weather conditions prevail on the highlands in central Nigeria above above sea level, namely the Jos Plateau. Temperatures on the Jos plateau ranges between which are cool all year round. Temperate weather conditions occur on the highlands along the Nigeria Cameroon border, in the eastern part of Nigeria. Highlands in these region attain an average height of more than to some standing above above sea level. The climate on these highlands is temperate all year round. The major highlands in this region are the Obudu Plateau above , Mambilla Plateau above and Mt. Chappal Waddi above .\nTopography.\nNigeria's most expansive topographical region is that of the Niger and Benue River valleys, which merge into each other and form a \"y\" shaped confluence at Lokoja. Plains rise to the north of the valleys. To the southwest of the Niger there is \"rugged\" highland, and to the southeast of the Benue hills and mountains are found all the way to the border with Cameroon. Coastal plains are found in both the southwest and the southeast.\nNiger Delta.\nThe Niger Delta is located in the southern part of Nigeria. It is one of the world's largest arcuate fan-shaped river deltas. The riverine area of the Niger Delta is a coastal belt of swamps bordering the Atlantic. The mangrove swamps are vegetated tidal flats formed by a reticulate pattern of interconnected meandering creeks and tributaries of the Niger River. About 70% of Nigeria's crude oil and gas production is from the area. A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were of tidal flats in Nigeria, making it the 27th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.\nVegetation.\nNigeria is covered by three types of vegetation: forests (where there is significant tree cover), savannahs (insignificant tree cover, with grasses and flowers located between trees), and montane land (least common and mainly found in the mountains near the Cameroon border). Both the forest zone and the savannah zone are divided into three parts.\nSome of the forest zone's most southerly portion, especially around the Niger River and Cross River deltas, is mangrove swamp. North of this is fresh water swamp, containing different vegetation from the salt water mangrove swamps, and north of that is rain forest.\nThe savannah zone's three categories are divided into Guinean forest-savanna mosaic, made up of plains of tall grass which are interrupted by trees, the most common across the country; Sudan savannah, with short grasses and short trees; and Sahel savannah patches of grass and sand, found in the northeast.\nPlant ecology.\nNigeria has numerous tree species, of which the majority of them are native while few are exotic. A high percentage of man-made forests in the country is dominated by exotic species. This culminated from the assumption that exotic trees are fast-growing. However, studies have also investigated the growth of indigenous trees in with that of exotic species. Due to overexploitation, the remaining natural ecosystems and primary forests in Nigeria are restricted to the protected areas which include one biosphere reserve, seven national parks, one World Heritage site, 12 Strict Nature Reserves (SNRs), 32 game reserves/wildlife sanctuaries, and hundreds of forest reserves. These are in addition to several ex-situ conservation sites such as arboreta, botanical gardens, zoological gardens, and gene banks managed by several tertiary and research institutions\nMany countries in Africa are affected by Invasive Alien Species (IAS). In 2004, the IUCN\u2013World Conservation Union identified 81 IAS in South Africa, 49 in Mauritius, 37 in Algeria and Madagascar, 35 in Kenya, 28 in Egypt, 26 in Ghana and Zimbabwe, and 22 in Ethiopia. However, very little is known about IAS in Nigeria, with most technical reports and literature reporting fewer than 10 invasive plants in the country. Aside from plant invaders, \"Rattus rattus\" and Avian influenza virus were also considered IAS in Nigeria. The initial entry of IAS into Nigeria was mainly through exotic plant introductions by the colonial rulers either for forest tree plantations or for ornamental purposes. The entry of exotic plants into Nigeria during the post-independence era was encouraged by increasing economic activity, the commencement of commercial oil explorations, the introduction through ships, and the introduction of ornamental plants by commercial floriculturists.\nIn the semi-arid and dry sub-humid savannas of West Africa, including Nigeria, numerous species of herbaceous dicots especially from the genera \"Crotalaria\", \"Alysicarpus\", \"Cassia\" and \"Ipomea\" are known to be widely used in livestock production. Quite often they are plucked or cut and fed either as fresh or conserved fodders. The utilization of these and many other herbs growing naturally within the farm environment is opportunistic.\nMany other species native to Nigeria, including soybean and its varieties, serve as an important source of oil and protein in this region. There are also many plants with medicinal purposes that are used to aid the therapy in many organs. Some of these vegetations include \"Euphorbiaceae\", which serve the purpose of aiding malaria, gastrointestinal disorders respectively and many other infections. Different stress factors such as droughts, low soil nutrients and susceptibility to pests have contributed to Maize plantations being an integral part of agriculture in this region.\nAs industrialization has increased, it has also put species of trees in the forest at risk of air pollution and studies have shown that in certain parts of Nigeria, trees have shown tolerance and grow in areas that have a significant amount of air pollution\nNatural resources and land use.\nNigeria's natural resources include but are not limited to petroleum, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal, limestone, lead, zinc, natural gas, hydropower, and arable land.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Nigeria, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21386", "revid": "50649502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21386", "title": "Demographics of Nigeria", "text": "Nigeria is the most populous country in Africa and the sixth most populous in the world. Nigeria is also one of the most densely populated countries in Africa, with approximately 218.5\u00a0million people in an area of .\n54.3% of Nigerians are urban dwellers, with the annual rate of urbanisation being estimated at 3.92%. Nigeria is home to 371 ethnic groups speaking over 500 languages and the variety of customs and traditions among them gives the country great cultural diversity. The three largest ethnic groups, namely the Hausas, Yorubas, and Igbos constitute more than 60% of the population. The Ijaw, Efik, Ibibio, Annang, Ogoni, Tiv, Urhobo-Isoko, Edo and Itsekiri are some of the other sizeable ethnic groups. Over 1.2 million people living in Nigeria (0.5% of its total population, or 1 in every 200 people living in Nigeria) are from a continent other than Africa. There are 100,000 people from the United States, 75,000 are from Lebanon, 60,000 are from China and 16,000 are from the United Kingdom.\nNigeria has a young population overall, with 42.54% of inhabitants between the ages of 0\u201314. There is also a very high dependency ratio at 88.2 dependents per 100 non-dependents. The three main religious groups are Muslims (estimated to be 53.5% of the total population), Christians (estimated at 45.9%), and adherents of indigenous religions (estimated at 0.6%). The predominantly Christian Igbo are found in the south-east. Roman Catholicism is the largest Christian denomination in Igboland, but Anglicanism is also strong, as are Pentecostalism and other Evangelical denominations.\nPersons of different ethnic backgrounds most commonly communicate in English, although knowledge of two or more Nigerian languages is widespread. Hausa, Igbo and Yoruba are the most widely used Nigerian languages. Nigerian Pidgin is used widely as an unofficial medium of communication, especially in the Nigerian cities of Warri, Sapele, Ughelli, Benin, and Port Harcourt.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNigeria's population has been increasing rapidly for at least the last 5 decades due to very high birth rates, quadrupling its population during this time. Growth was fastest in the 1980s, after child mortality dropped rapidly. It has slowed slightly since then as both the birth rate and total fertility, rate have declined marginally since a 1978 peak. According to the 2017 revision of the World Population Prospects the total population was 191 million in 2016, compared to only 38 million in 1950. Fertility rates turned out to be lower than expected in Nigeria, with double-digit decreases.\nThe proportion of children under the age of 15 in 2010 was 44.0%, 53.2% were between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.7% were 65 years or older. There is a large degree of population momentum, with 3.2 per cent growth leading to the projected population of 546 million by 2100.\nThe federal government has not elected to implement the type of controversial family planning programs that have reduced population growth of other developing nations, a result of low political support for these programs and a cultural preference for large families as well as high levels of social instability. Rising educational levels and health care improvements may enable future parents to plan for smaller families.\nThe former Nigeria's chairman of National Population Commission, Eze Duruiheoma, delivering Nigeria's statement in New York City on sustainable cities, human mobility and international migration in the 51st session of Commission on Population and Development, said that \"Nigeria remains the most populous in Africa, the seventh globally with an estimated population of over 198 million. The World Population Prospects predicts that by 2050, Nigeria will become the third most populated country in the world. Over the last 50 years, Nigeria's urban population has grown at an average annual growth rate of more than 6.5% without commensurate increases in social amenities and infrastructure.\" He also stated that the population \"grew substantially from 17.3% in 1967 to 49.4% in 2017.\"\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nPopulation by sex and age.\nPopulation by sex and age group (Census 21.III.2006)\nPopulation by age group (estimates 1.VII.2016) (Data are projections based on the 2006 Population Census.)\nPopulation by age group (estimates 1.VII.2020) (Source: National Population Commission.)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Household population by age and sex (DHD 2024): \nPopulation projections.\nThe total population in sub-Saharan Africa is projected to increase to almost one billion people, making it the most populated region outside of South-Central Asia. According to the United Nations, the population of Nigeria will reach 375 million by 2050. Nigeria might then be the 3rd most populous country in the world. In 2100, the population of Nigeria may reach 541\u00a0million. While the overall population is expected to increase, the growth rate is estimated to decrease from 1.2 per cent per year in 2010 to 0.4 per cent per year in 2050. The birth rate is also projected to decrease from 20.7 to 13.7, while the death rate is projected to increase from 8.5 in 2010 to 9.8 in 2050. By 2050, 69.6% of the population is estimated to be living in urban areas compared to 50.6% in 2010.\nVital statistics.\nRegistration of vital events in Nigeria is not complete. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates (\"UN World Population Prospects 2022\").\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) (Wanted TFR) and crude birth rate (CBR):\nFertility data as of 2013 (DHS Program):\nSource: Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)\nFertility rate by state.\n\u2217 MICS surveys\nContraceptive prevalence.\n\u2217 UNICEFs state of the worlds children and child info, United Nations population divisions world contraceptive use, household surveys including demographic and health surveys and multiple indicator cluster surveys.\nLife expectancy at birth.\nLife expectancy from 1950 to 2015 (\"UN World Population Prospects\"):\nEmigration.\nToday millions of ethnic Nigerians live abroad, the largest communities can be found in the United Kingdom (500,000\u20133,000,000) and the United States (600,000\u20131,000,000 Nigerians), other countries that followed closely are South Africa, Gambia, and Canada respectively. There are also large groups in Ireland, Portugal and many other countries.\nInspiration for emigration is based heavily on socio-economical issues such as warfare, insecurity, economical instability and civil unrest.\nBetween 1400 and 1900, of 1.4\u00a0million of 2 million emigrants were slaves sent to the Americas with the other 600,000 being sent to other destinations via the trans-Saharan, Red Sea and Indian Ocean routes. This is due to the fact that the land now known as Nigeria was a central point for 4 slave trades during the 19th century. Though bondage represented a great deal, an estimated 30,000 Nigerian inhabitants would relocate to Kano City and Gambia to take advantage of financial opportunities afforded by fertile land and available natural resources. What's more, the presence of gold mines and rail lines along the Gold Coast, present-day Ghana, attracted an estimated 6,500 Nigerian citizens to attain financial gain and opportunity. The population of Nigerians in Ghana rose to roughly 149,000 before the 1969 alien expulsion order would displace nearly the entire population to surrounding countries.\nReligion.\nAccording to Pew Research Center, the population in 2015 was 50% Muslim, 48.1% Christian and approximately 2% other.\nNigeria is nearly equally divided between Islam and Christianity. The majority of Nigerian Muslims are Sunni and mostly live in the northern, central and south-western states of the country, while Christians dominate in some central states (especially Plateau and Benue states), and the south-east and south-south regions. Other religions practised in Nigeria include African Traditional Religion, Hinduism, Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, Judaism, The Grail Movement, and the Reformed \u00d2gb\u00f3ni Fraternity, one of the traditional socio-religious institutions of the Yor\u00f9b\u00e1 people and their \u00d2r\u00ec\u1e63\u00e0 religion known as \u1eb8\u0300s\u00ecn \u00d2r\u00ec\u1e63\u00e0 \u00ccb\u00edl\u1eb9\u0300 in the Yor\u00f9b\u00e1 language.\nAccording to a 2009 Pew survey, 50.4% of Nigeria's population were Muslims. A later Pew study in 2011 calculated that Christians now formed 50.8% of the population. Adherents of other religions made up 1% of the population.\nThe shift of population balance between Muslims and Christians is a result of northern and southern Nigeria being in different stages of demographic transition. The Muslim-dominated north is in an earlier stage of the demographic transition with much higher fertility rates than the south, whose split Christian/Muslim population is further along in the transition, and whose fertility rates are declining. Decreasing fertility can be linked to more access to education, use of contraceptives, and differing beliefs regarding family planning.\nThe 1999 introduction of Sharia law in twelve northern Nigerian states led to massive violence and unrest and caused an ethnic and religious rift between Sharia and Non-Sharia states, a divide that has deepened with time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21387", "revid": "1314881650", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21387", "title": "Politics of Nigeria", "text": "The federal government of Nigeria is composed of three distinct arms: the executive, the legislative, and the judicial, whose powers are vested and bestowed upon by the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. One of the primary functions of the constitution is that it provides for separation and balance of powers among the three branches and aims to prevent the repetition of past mistakes made by the government. Other functions of the constitution include a division of power between the federal government and the states, and protection of various individual liberties of the nation's citizens.\nNigerian politics take place within a framework of a federal and presidential republic and a representative democracy, in which the president holds executive power. Legislative power is held by the federal government and the two chambers of the legislature: the House of Representatives and the Senate. The legislative arm of Nigeria is responsible for and possesses powers to legislate laws. Together, the two chambers form the law-making body in Nigeria, called the National Assembly, which serves as a check on the executive arm of government. The National Assembly of Nigeria (NASS) is the democratically elected body that represents the interests of the Federal Republic of Nigeria and its people, makes laws for Nigeria, and holds the Government of Nigeria to account. The National Assembly (NASS) is the nation's highest legislature, whose power to make laws is summarized in chapter one, section four of the 1999 Nigerian Constitution. Sections 47\u201349 of the 1999 Constitution state, among other things, that \"There shall be a National Assembly (NASS) for the federation which shall consist of two chambers: the Senate and the House of Representatives.\" The Economist Intelligence Unit rated Nigeria a \"hybrid regime\" in 2019. The federal government, state, and local governments of Nigeria aim to work cooperatively to govern the nation and its people. Nigeria became a member of the British Commonwealth upon its independence from British colonial rule on 1 October 1960.\nLegal system.\nThe law of Nigeria is based on the rule of law, the independence of the judiciary, and British common law (due to the long history of British colonial influence). The common law in the legal system is similar to common-law systems used in England and Wales and other Commonwealth countries. The constitutional framework for the legal system is provided by the Constitution of Nigeria.\nThe major influences on Nigeria's legal system are:\nLegislation as a source of Nigerian law.\nThe two fundamental sources of Nigerian law through legislation are:\n(1) Acts of British parliament, popularly referred to as statutes of general application during the period before independence.\n(2) Local legislation (comprising enactments of the Nigerian legislatures from colonial period to date). There were other sources which, though subsumed in Nigerian legislations, were distinctly imported into the Nigerian legal systems. They are called the \"criminal and penal codes\" of Nigeria.\nNigerian statutes as sources of Nigerian law.\nNigerian legislation may be classified as follows: \"The colonial era until 1960, post-independence legislation 1960\u20131966, the military era 1966\u20131999\".\nPost-independence legislation 1960\u20131966.\nThe grant of independence to Nigeria was a milestone in the political history of the country. This period witnessed the consolidation of political gains made during the colonial era. Politicians genuinely focused their lapses on the polity. It achieved for herself a republican status by shaking off the last vestiges of colonial authority. However, despite the violent violation of its provisions, the constitution remained the subsequent administrations (military or otherwise).\nMilitary regime, 1966\u20131999.\nThe Armed Forces of Nigeria assumed the rulership of Nigeria from 1966\u20131979 and 1983\u20131999. The breakdown of law and order which occurred in the period under review would not be attributed to any defect in the Nigerian legal system. Corrupt practices both in the body politics and all aspects of Nigerian life eroded efficiency and progress. There were eight coups generally; five were successful and three were unsuccessful.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected through universal suffrage which is regarded as more than a privilege extended by the state to its citizenry, and it is rather thought of as an inalienable right that inheres to every adult citizen by virtue of citizenship. In democracies it is the primary means of ensuring that governments are responsible to the governed. The president is head of both the state and government, and heads the cabinet of Nigeria, the Federal Executive Council. The constitution also sanctions the president's status as commander-in-chief of the armed forces in Section 130. The constitution of 1999 vests all the executive powers of the federation in the person of the president which can be exercised directly by him or his vice president or members of his cabinet. Section 5(1)(b) provides that the executive powers of the president extends to the maintenance of the provisions of the constitution, acts of the national assembly and on items on which the national assembly has power for the time being to make law. The president is elected to see that the Nigerian Constitution is enacted and that the legislation is applied to the people. The elected president is also in charge of the nation's armed forces and can serve no more than two four-year elected terms. The current president of Nigeria is Bola Tinubu, who was elected in 2023, and the current vice president is Kashim Shettima.\nThe executive branch is divided into Federal Ministries, each headed by a minister appointed by the president, Federal Ministries are those civil service departments which were made responsible for delivering various types of government service and each ministry is headed by a permanent secretary who reports to a minister in the Federal Cabinet. Nigeria has 24 Federal Ministries. The president must include at least one member from each of the 36 states in his cabinet. The president's appointments are confirmed by the Senate of Nigeria. In some cases, a federal minister is responsible for more than one ministry (for example, Environment and Housing may be combined), or a minister may be assisted by one or more ministers of state. Each ministry also has a permanent secretary, who is a senior civil servant.\nThe ministries are responsible for various parastatals (government-owned corporations), such as universities, the National Broadcasting Commission, and the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation. However, some parastatals are the responsibility of the Office of the Presidency, such as the Independent National Electoral Commission, the Economic and Financial Crimes Commission and the Federal Civil Service Commission.\nLegislative branch.\nThe legislature is said to be the first among the three arms of government \u2013 the legislature, executive, and the judiciary. These arms are characterized by the principle of separation of power as each is supposed to be independent of the other. The legislature derives its powers from the 1999 Constitution (as amended) in Sections 4(1) and 4(2). The legislature is vested with the powers to make laws for the peace, order and good governance of the Federation.\n\u201cIt is also vested with investigatory powers, financial powers, confirmation and impeachment powers. The Legislature is the symbol of democracy all over the world. Under Section 4 (1) of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria (as amended) (the \"Constitution\"), the National Assembly of Nigeria often called NASS is vested with the legislative powers of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. That is the power to make laws for the peace, order, and good government of the Federation with respect to any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative List and the Concurrent List \u2013 a list of 12 items that both NASS and states' house of assembly can legislate on. This legislative power is typically exercised through bills passed by the NASS which are assented to by the president. Bills generally come in two forms \u2013 either a private bill which affects private citizens, corporate entities and/or a particular class of people or public bills which affect the general public. A bill can be introduced in either chamber of the NASS by members of the respective chambers or the executive arm of government. The National Assembly of Nigeria has two chambers: the House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives is the lower chamber of Nigeria's bicameral National Assembly and is presided over by the speaker of the House of Representatives. It has 360 members each of the federal constituencies of the country, who are elected for four-year terms in single-seat constituencies. The Senate, which has 109 members, is presided over by the president of the Senate. A total of 108 members are elected for four-year terms in 36 three-seat constituencies, which correspond to the country's 36 states. One member is selected in the single-seat constituency of the federal capital.\nThe legislators are elected to either the House of Representatives or the Senate to be representatives of their constituencies and to pass legislation to benefit the public. The legislative process consists of bills being drafted and presented in either of the two chambers. These bills can only become national law once they are approved by the president of Nigeria who can veto bills.\nThe current president of the Senate is Godswill Akpabio, who was first elected to the senate in 2015, and the speaker of the House is Tajudeen Abbas, he was first elected into the Nigerian House of Representatives in 2011, and was elected speaker in 2023. Each member of the National Assembly of Nigeria can be elected to more than two four-year terms. Recently, the legislative branch has been misusing its position as a check on the power of the president and his cabinet. Legislators have been known to utilize their power for not only law-making, but as a means of political intimidation and a tool to promote individual monetary success.\nSenators are paid a salary equivalent to over $2,200 USD a month, supplemented by expenses of $37,500 USD a month (2018 figures).\nJudicial branch.\nThe judicial branch is made up of the Supreme Court of Nigeria, the Court of Appeals, the high courts, and other trial courts such as the magistrates', customary, Sharia and other specialized courts. The National Judicial Council serves as an independent executive body, insulating the judiciary from the executive arm of government. According to the 1999 constitution, the Supreme Court has both original and appellate jurisdictions (the power to reverse, modify and change a decision or ruling made by a lower court). Appellate jurisdiction exists for both the civil law and criminal law, the supreme court has the sole authority and jurisdiction to entertain appeals from Court of Appeal, having appellate jurisdiction over all lower federal courts and highest state courts. Decisions and rulings by the court are binding and absolute on all courts in Nigeria except the Supreme Court itself. The Supreme Court is composed of the chief justice of Nigeria and other justices not more than 21 including the chief justice, appointed by the president of Nigeria on the recommendation of the National Judicial Council. These justices are subject to confirmation by the Senate.\nThe judicial branch of the Nigerian government is the only one of the three branches of government in which its members are not elected but are appointed. The judiciary, and the Supreme Court in particular, are intended to uphold the principles and laws of the nation's constitution that was written in 1999. Its goal is to protect the basic rights of the citizens. The current chief justice of the Supreme Court is Kudirat Kekere-Ekun.\nDemocracy in Nigeria.\nAfter achieving its independence and republican status, in 1960, (becoming the fourth largest democratic country in the world) and 1963 respectively, Nigeria experienced its first military coup, in 1966, followed by a civil war, which lasted until 1970. It was made possible to bring back the democratic ideal for a few of years in the year 1978. Though this period of democratic ideal did not last very long, and was over by 1983, as a result of military rulers who came into power via coup d'\u00e9tat, promising to return the country to democracy.\nNevertheless, only General Abdulsalami Abubakar took the control of the nation after the death of Sani Abacha and stuck to his word. The country's modern Constitution became official in 1999. The elections in 1999 were more successful, compared to that of the previous military ruler. The newly emerged President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, put a stop to the military regimes that kept switching one after the other for almost 30 years. The end of the military rule culminated in a new era of regular elections as well as the return of civil liberties, a free press, and an end to arbitrary arrests and maltreatment, although human rights violations still occur regularly. Nigeria democratized in 1999 with the start of the Fourth Republic, but has suffered some setbacks to becoming fully democratic. Elites in Nigeria have been found to have more power and influence than average citizens, and as a consequence of this, there has been a great deal of corruption in Nigerian politics and general life. A good sign of democracy in Nigeria is the fact that elections are becoming less fraudulent and there is more party competition. Another indicator of a strong democracy is the presence of a civil society in which citizens have the right to act and speak freely in concert with a strong use of media for everyday life. Furthermore, Nigeria has seen a heightened use of media within the realm of political issues, particularly with the recent [Special Anti-Robbery Squad] SARS protest, indicating a sense of freedom for the public to voice their opinions to the government and the world.\nLevel of freedom.\nAccording to the 2024 World Press Freedom Index, Nigeria is the 112th out of 180 countries for press freedom. It has been noted as a nation with perpetuating violence against freedom of speech and press. Nigeria has been found to be a vulnerable nation, both at risk of modern slavery and corruption. The nation is vulnerable due to the effects of inner conflict and governance issues. Freedom House has rated Nigeria as a \"partly free\" nation. In the last presidential election, the process was tainted by violence, intimidation and vote buying, which have been prevalent in many of the recent elections within Nigeria. Similarly, in the most recent legislative elections, citizens claimed the process was also characterized by intimidation and other inconsistencies. The electoral process and related laws are thought to be enacted in a mostly fair fashion, but there have been instances of intentionally complicating voting and effecting turnout. The people of Nigeria feel as though there is more freedom in their right to have different political parties to represent their opinions. This is exemplified by the vast number of legitimate parties seen in elections. Similarly, Nigerian opposition parties have a legitimate chance to participate in politics and win official positions. In regards to freedom of political expression, Freedom House indicates that opinions and institutions are often heavily influenced by non-governmental, external entities or individuals. In Nigeria, all ethnic groups and religious backgrounds have an equal opportunity to participate in politics, however, there is a lack of women elected into the government, and same-sex relationships were criminalized in 2014. The Nigerian federal government's officials like the president and legislators are elected to enact policy and laws, and are usually allowed to do so without interruption, but in recent years, their ability to legislate has been marred by corruption and instability. Corruption has been a major problem for the Nigerian government since its independence from colonial rule. In particular, the oil sector has allowed a great deal of corruption to take place. The government has tried to enact measures to combat corruption that infringes upon the functioning of the state, but have only been quasi-successful. The government has also been rated as lacking in transparency, often not allowing records to be available to the public that should be readily available. Journalism and the media in Nigeria are somewhat free, they are allowed to function independently from the government, but oftentimes those who criticize public figures or offices are arrested or censored. Religious freedom is allowed in Nigeria, however, the government and even non-governmental organizations have been known to violently respond to groups that openly dissent to the federal government. Religion is a contentious topic in Nigeria because of heated, ongoing conflicts between Christians and Muslims within the state. Freedom House rated the Nigerian federal government well in the category of allowing academic freedom, and the public's ability to express their views even if they disagree without the government without fearing a negative reaction from the government. The Nigerian government was rated moderately on people's ability to assemble, ability to work with human rights, and the existence of unions. The judiciary was rated as moderately free from the government, and lacking in due process in trials and equal treatment of all members of society. People in Nigeria do not have great freedom of movement, and are often subjected to curfews set by the federal government in areas that are at a risk of violence or instability. There is a lack of protection for women in regards to rights to abortion, rape, and domestic abuse under the Nigerian federal government. Lastly, there is a pervasive human-trafficking problem in Nigeria and frequent exploitation of citizens that the federal government has done a poor job to prevent.\nPolitical parties.\nThere are 18 recognized political parties in Nigeria. There are a great number of parties as a direct result of corruption and chaos that has ensued in Nigeria surrounding the federal government and elections for years. The vast number of parties has proved to be difficult to monitor. The two major parties are the Peoples Democratic Party and the All Progressives Congress, both of which have held the presidency and seats in the National Assembly for extended periods of time. As opposed to parties in other nations that represent a slew of political opinions that the public can align themselves with, parties in Nigeria act more so as a means through which prominent figures can gain power and influence, and there are so many because they often switch parties to find the one to give them the best chance of achieving authority.\nPolitical parties have been an important aspect of Nigerian government both before and after independence was achieved from the British in 1960. Parties allow for political competition to take place, for the citizenry to find people who represent their ideas and interests in government, and for the introduction of new leaders and perspectives into Nigerian life. Many Nigerians do not understand the political party system because there are so many options and their platforms are unclear to the public. This remains an issue in Nigeria because it marginalizes those who are uneducated or uninvolved in government. Also, there seems to be a tendency for people in Nigeria to support parties based on ethnic or religious divisions, particularly along the Muslim-Christian line of division.\nThe 18 political parties are: Accord, Action Alliance, Action Democratic Party, Action Peoples Party, African Action Congress, African Democratic Congress, All Progressives Congress, All Progressives Grand Alliance, Allied Peoples Movement, Boot Party, Labour Party, National Rescue Movement, New Nigeria Peoples Party, Peoples Democratic Party, Peoples Redemption Party, Social Democratic Party, Young Progressive Party, Zenith Labour Party.\nElectoral system and recent elections.\nThe president and members of the National Assembly of Nigeria are elected by members of the population who are at least 18 years old. The National Electoral Commission is responsible for monitoring elections and ensuring that the results are correct and not fraudulent. The winner of a position is elected through the first-past-the-post system that is used in Great Britain.\nNigeria has faced numerous bouts with fraudulent elections, particularly noteworthy is the general election that took place in 2007. This election was reportedly marred by ballot-rigging, underage voting, violence, intimidation, and an overall absence of clarity and accuracy from the National Electoral Commission.\nChristian\u2013Muslim relations.\nIslamic law has found its way into the heart of many Nigerian state governments, particularly in the northern sect of the country. There is a deep rift between Christians and Muslim in Nigeria, and therefore the government has taken on a hybrid of English common law and Islamic law when dealing with legal issues to appease the diverse national population. Nigeria has the largest population of Christians and Muslims cohabitating in the world. These two religions were introduced in Nigeria largely during the colonial period, and since then, many Africans have merged their own traditional religions with these two institutionalized ones.\nReligious tensions between Christians and Muslims in Nigeria has often been used by politicians and other powerful people to incite violence and create fear and chaos among Nigerians. This has led to many citizens questioning why Nigeria remains one federal state, and that it should possibly split along the Christian\u2013Muslim divide. The northern section of the country is largely Islamic, with 12 states that live under Sharia law, while the southern area is mostly Christian. There have been multiple attempts by Nigerian Muslims to add Sharia concepts to the Constitution which has alarmed the Christian population within the nation. Many Christians have deemed the rise in Islam in Nigeria to be dangerous and that it could possibly lead to increased terrorism and instability. This conflict is threatening the stability of Nigeria's democracy, internal structure, and civil society, and many political scientists and Nigerian leaders hope the two religions can engage in a peaceful dialogue that hopefully pacifies both sides.\nTerrorism in Nigeria.\nThe greatest terrorist threat in Nigeria is from the organization Boko Haram, and became a prevalent issue in the summer of 2009. Boko Haram is a radical jihadist Islamist terrorist group from the northern sect of Nigeria. This organization has launched terror attacks that have largely targeted the Nigerian federal government, non-Muslim religious organizations, and average citizens. The rise and growing effects of Boko Haram have been attributed to the instability and fragility of the Nigerian state. They are upset by the government corruption and policy failures of Nigeria, and in particular, the poverty and lack of development of the north of Nigeria which is predominantly Muslim. The impact of Boko Haram on Nigeria has been devastating, over 37,000 individuals have died due to their terrorist attacks since 2011, and over 200,000 Nigerians have been displaced. Boko Haram was responsible for the kidnapping of hundreds of school girls in 2014, triggering the #BringBackOurGirls movement across the globe. The terrorist organization became a part of ISIS in 2015, drawing concerns to the safety and stability of Nigeria. Many world powers including the United States have contributed military resources to help fight against Boko Haram because Nigeria's oil industry is crucial to the international economy. The Nigerian federal government has launched programs and tactics to combat Boko Haram because of their prevalence. There has also been a recent rise in citizen-created, and in particular youth-led groups that are taking action against Boko Haram to protect themselves and their communities. Both the actions of Boko Haram and the government's efforts to combat terrorism have led to a growing refugee crisis in Nigeria.\nCommonwealth membership.\nNigeria's membership in the British Commonwealth began in 1960 and was suspended from 1995 to 1999 when the country became a state under military rule. It was reinstated in 1999 when democracy was established with the Presidential Constitution and Fourth Republic of Nigeria, and it remains a part of the Commonwealth to this day. The Commonwealth Secretariat aims to help Nigeria detect and deter corruption within its federal government. In 2018, they taught numerous government officials and financial officers how to combat and condemn corruption within the nation. The Secretariat's involvement both in governmental and financial affairs created a better system for the transaction of goods and services in Nigeria with less risk of corruption. As of 2017, the Commonwealth has provided Nigeria with policies and resources for Great Britain's exit from the European Union and outlined the possible effects on Commonwealth nations and trade. The Commonwealth Secretariat has helped Nigeria in its natural resource fields such as oil and mining. They have helped with negotiations and the creation of fair bargains. The Commonwealth Secretariat has also provided Nigeria with access to their Connectivity Agenda, which allows nations under the Commonwealth to communicate and exchange ideas and policies to help each other with economic and domestic productivity.\nStates of Nigeria.\nNigeria is made up of 36 states and 1 capital territory: the Federal Capital Territory, Abia, Adamawa, Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Bayelsa, Benue, Borno, Cross River, Delta, Ebonyi, Edo, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos, Nasarawa, Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, Oyo, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe, and Zamfara state.\nLocal governments.\nEach state is further divided into local government areas (LGAs). These states and their local governments are essential to the function of a federal government because they have a pulse on the local population and can therefore assess the needs of constituents and enact policy or infrastructure that is helpful. They are also important because the federal government has the time and resources to take on national projects and international affairs while local governments can take care of the Nigerians native to their respective states. The devolution of power between the states and the federal government helps the functionality of Nigeria. 774 local governments oversee the collection of local taxes, education, health care, roads, waste, and planning. The local government look after the affairs of the common men and women in the Nigeria society. The creation of local government reform started in 1968, 1970 during the military government but was fully 1976.\nFederal Government's handling of COVID-19.\nAs Africa's most populated nation, the coronavirus pandemic ravaged across Nigeria. Nigeria proved that it could detect, respond to, and prevent the COVID-19 outbreak in a very restricted, poor fashion. Nigeria lacks the resources to conduct the widespread testing the nation needs to keep up with the number of cases surging across the state. Nigeria also lacks the necessary number of other resources for fighting the virus such as hospital workers, rooms, and ventilators.\nThe federal government's response to the virus has been fairly weak and ineffective. Former President Buhari passed numerous lockdowns, mask mandates, and travel bans to decrease the number of cases in the country. However, the lockdowns, mandates, and travel restrictions have led to negative economic effects for a great number of citizens who have lost their jobs and source of income. In response to this, the federal government passed economic stimulus packages to promote important production sectors such as agriculture and oil. The government also passed food assistance measures and cash transfers to aid those in poverty who are going hungry. They also pushed for fundraising efforts to secure funds from donors to support the federal budget and economic sector.\nMilitary.\nThe military of Nigeria has played a major role in the country's history, often seizing control of the country and ruling it for long periods of time. Its last period of rule ended in 1999, following the death of the leader of the previous military junta Sani Abacha in 1998.\nActive duty personnel in the three Nigerian armed services totals approximately 76,000. The Nigerian Army, which is the largest of the services, has about 60,000 personnel, deployed between two mechanized infantry divisions, one composite division (airborne and amphibious), the Lagos Garrison Command (a division-size unit), and the Abuja-based Brigade of Guards. The Nigerian Navy (7,000) is equipped with frigates, fast attack craft, corvettes, and coastal patrol boats. The Nigerian Air Force (9,000) flies transports, trainers, helicopters, and fighter aircraft; however, most of their vehicles are currently not operational.\nForeign relations.\nNigeria currently has better foreign relations with its neighbors, due to its current state of democracy. It is a member of the African Union and sits on that organization's Peace and Security Council.\nThe current minister of foreign affairs of Nigeria is Yusuf Tuggar. Much of Nigeria's foreign affairs, both during the colonial era and post-independence has relied on oil-production. Nigeria's relationships with both its continental neighbors in Africa and throughout the world have improved a great deal since it has transitioned from military rule to a democratic state. Nigeria is hoping to gain a permanent seat on the UN Security Council in the near future. Despite these achievements, Nigeria continues to face challenges in its foreign relations, such as the fight against terrorism and insurgency in the region, the challenge of migration and human trafficking, and the need to increase economic cooperation and integration with its neighbors.\nMedia.\nNigeria's media scene is characterized by state and private broadcasters, popular international brands like the BBC and CC and more than a 100 national and local print titles state and private broadcasters. Radio and televised media in Nigeria is mostly state-owned by the National Broadcasting Commission. This is often used as a tactic of the government to assert control over and sway public opinion in favor of the incumbent party and his policies. However, most newspaper are privately owned and the internet is not restricted to the public. Given that a majority (70%) of citizens are under 30, it is fitting that mobile news consumption (84%) is more than twice as high as computer consumption (41%), with tablet consumption trailing at 11%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21388", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21388", "title": "Economy of Nigeria", "text": "The economy of Nigeria is a middle-income, mixed economy and emerging market with expanding manufacturing, financial, service, communications, technology, and entertainment sectors. It is ranked as the 52nd-largest economy in the world in terms of nominal GDP, the second largest in Africa in terms of purchasing power parity, and the 19th-largest in terms of purchasing power parity.\nThe country's re-emergent manufacturing sector became the largest on the continent in 2013, and it produces a large proportion of goods and services for the region of West Africa. Nigeria's debt-to-GDP ratio was 36.63% in 2021 according to the IMF.\nAlthough oil revenues contributed 2/3 of state revenues, oil only contributes about 9% to the GDP. Nigeria produces about 2.7% of the world's oil supply. Although the petroleum sector is important, as Nigeria's government revenues still heavily rely on this sector, it remains a small part of the country's overall economy. The largely subsistence agricultural sector has not kept up with the country's rapid population growth. Nigeria was once a large net exporter of food, but currently imports some of its food products. Mechanization has led to a resurgence in the manufacturing and exporting of food products, and there was consequently a move towards food sufficiency. In 2006, Nigeria came to an agreement with the Paris Club to buy back the bulk of its owed debts from them, in exchange for a cash payment of roughly US$12 billion.\nAccording to a report by Citigroup, published in February 2011, Nigeria had the highest projected average GDP growth in the world between 2010 and 2050. Nigeria is one of two countries from Africa among the 11 Global Growth Generators countries.\nOverview.\nIn 2014, Nigeria rebased its GDP to account for fast-growing contributors such as telecommunications, banking, and its film industry to its economy. Human capital is underdeveloped, as Nigeria ranked 161 out of 189 countries in the United Nations Development Index in 2019\u2014and non-energy-related infrastructure is inadequate.\nNigeria has advanced efforts to provide universal primary education, and protect the environment.\nA requirement for achieving many of its objectives is reducing endemic corruption, which obstructs development and stains Nigeria's business environment. However, while broad-based progress has been slow, these efforts are becoming visible in international surveys of corruption. Nigeria's ranking has mostly improved since 2001, ranking 154 out of 180 countries in Transparency International's 2021 Corruption Perceptions Index.\nThe Nigerian economy suffers from an ongoing supply crisis in the power sector. Despite a rapidly growing economy, some of the world's largest deposits of coal, oil, and gas and the country's status as Africa's largest oil producer, power supply difficulties are frequently experienced by residents. Two-thirds of Nigerians expect living conditions to improve in the coming decades. According to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) Nigeria's GDP grew by 3.19% in Q2 2024. The non-oil sector drove growth, expanding by 4.13%, while the oil sector contracted by -3.83%.\nEconomic history.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1990\u20132023 (with IMF staff estimates in 2024\u20132029). Inflation under 10% is in green.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNOTES:\nThe US dollar exchange rate is an estimated average of the official rate throughout a year and does not reflect the parallel market rate at which the general population accesses foreign exchange. This rate ranged from a high of 520 in March 2017 to a low of 350 in August 2017, due to a scarcity of forex (oil earnings had dropped by half), and speculative activity as alleged by the Central Bank. All the while the official rate was pegged at 360.\nPer capita income (as % of USA) is calculated using data from estimates in the PPP link above, and census estimates, based on growth rates between census periods. For instance, 2017 GDPs were 1,125 billion (Nigeria) vs. 19,417 billion (USA) and populations were estimated at 320 million vs 190 million. The ratio is, therefore (1125/19417) / (190/320), which roughly comes to 0.0975. These are estimates and are intended to get a feel for the relative wealth and standard of living, as well as the market potential of its middle class.\nThis is a chart of trends of the global ranking of the Nigerian economy, in comparison with other countries of the world, derived from the historical List of countries by GDP (PPP).\nThis chart shows the variance in the parallel exchange rate at which the Dollar can be obtained with Naira in Lagos, with \"Best\" being cheaper for a Nigerian (i.e. stronger Naira).\nFor purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar is exchanged at US$1 to 314.27 Nigerian naira (as of 2017).\nThe current GDP per capita of Nigeria expanded 132% in the sixties reaching a peak growth of 283% in the seventies. But this proved unsustainable, and it consequently shrank by 66% in the 1980s. In the 1990s, diversification initiatives finally took effect and decadal growth was restored to 10%. Although GDP on a PPP basis did not increase until the 2000s.\nIn 2012, the GDP was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 40%; services: 30%; manufacturing: 15%; oil: 14%. By 2015, the GDP was composed of the following sectors: agriculture: 18%; services: 55%; manufacturing: 16%; oil: 8%\nIn 2005 Nigeria's inflation rate was an estimated 15.6%. Nigeria's goal under the National Economic Empowerment Development Strategy (NEEDS) program is to reduce inflation to the single digits. By 2015, Nigeria's inflation stood at 9%. In 2005, the federal government had expenditures of US$13.54 billion but revenues of only US$12.86 billion, resulting in a budget deficit of 5%. By 2012, expenditures stood at $31.61 billion, while revenues were $54.48 billion. In 2024, the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) raised the Monetary Policy Rate (MPR) again, this time to 18.5%, the 6th consecutive increase since September 2022.\nAgriculture.\nThe agricultural sector suffers from extremely low productivity, reflecting reliance on antiquated methods. Agriculture has failed to keep pace with Nigeria's rapid population growth, so the country, which once exported food, now imports a significant amount of food to sustain itself. However, efforts are being made towards making the country food sufficient again. Africa's most populous country has failed to grow more food for its fast-rising population who must be fed with staples ranging from rice, beans, maize etc.\nCrop production.\nNigeria ranks sixth worldwide and first in Africa in farm output. The sector accounts for about 18% of GDP and almost one-third of employment. Though Nigeria is no longer a major exporter, due to local consumer boom, it is still a major producer of many agricultural products. Further agricultural products include palm oil and rubber.\nRoots and tubers.\nCounting by weight, this \"underground food\" is the largest group of food produced in Nigeria, with 118 million tonnes in 2020. This group includes yam, cassava, potatoes and sweet potatoes. These food products are cultivated mostly in the south of Nigeria (\"Roots economy\").\nCereals.\nThe group of sorghum, pear millet etc. is the second-largest group of food produced in Nigeria, with 28.6 million tonnes in 2020. 50% or 14 million tonnes of this is sorghum. The sugar cane production adds another 1.5 million tonnes to this. Cereals are mostly cultivated in the savannah zone of the country, and on the 23rd of June Nigeria's grain market report, the International Grains Council (IGC) placed Nigeria's total 2022-23 grains production at 21.6 million tonnes, this specific figure was reviewed from the previous month's forecast which was 21.1 million, It set the production in the year 2021\u201322 at 21.5 million which demonstrates and proves that there is an increase in the production of grains on the 23rd of June 2022 \u2013 2023.\nRice and paddy.\nThe third-largest group of food produced in Nigeria is rice and paddy. In 2020, 8.2 million tonnes were produced.\nOil crops.\nNigeria produced a good 4 million tonnes of oil crops in 2020. These are e.g. soybeans, sunflower seed, canola and peanuts.\nCitrus fruit.\nNigeria produced close to 4 million tonnes of citrus fruit in 2020. Main Nigerian citrus fruits are tangerine, grape, lemon and lime.\nCocoa.\nCocoa production, mostly from obsolete varieties and overage trees has increased from around 180,000 tons annually to 350,000 tons.\nMore products.\nBeans, melons, pepper and vegetables are grown on chopping fields. Oil palms, rubber and bananas are grown for export. Palm oil plays a major role in Nigeria's burgeoning personal care products industry.\nLivestock.\nCattle.\nIn total, about 15 million head are kept. In addition, about five million pigs are kept. Small livestock such as sheep, goats and chickens are kept mainly for subsistence.\nPoultry and Eggs.\nAn estimated 42% of Nigerians own chicken. As a result, poultry and eggs represent a popular commodity within the food industry. 46% of the poultry is kept in an extensive / free-range system. 300 thousand tonnes of poultry meat and 650 thousand tonnes of eggs are produced annually in Nigeria (estimation).\nFishing.\nIn 2003, Nigeria recorded a fish production of 505.8 metric tons. In 2015, production stood at 1 027 000 tonnes.\nTimber.\nRoundwood removals totaled slightly less than 70 million cubic meters, and sawn wood production was estimated at 2 million cubic meters.\nThe paper industry in Nigeria has a long history that dates back to the 1960s and 1970s, when the government established three integrated pulp and paper mills: the Nigerian Paper Mill in Jebba; the Nigeria Newsprint Manufacturing Company, Oku Iboku; and the Iwopin Pulp and Paper Company. These mills were meant to meet the domestic demand for paper products and reduce import dependence.\nHowever, these mills have faced various challenges over the years, such as lack of maintenance, obsolete equipment, inadequate power supply, and scarcity of raw materials. As a result, they have either become moribund or are operating at low capacity. According to a report by allAfrica.com, only the Jebba mill still has a showing of life.\nThe local production of paper products in Nigeria is estimated at 265,000 metric tons per year, while the domestic demand is estimated at 3 million metric tons per annum. This means that Nigeria relies heavily on importation of paper products to meet its needs, which costs the country about N182 billion annually. Importing paper products also exposes the country to fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and international market prices.\nFood processing.\nPeeling / Milling.\nUntil now, Nigeria exported unhusked rice but imported husked rice, the country's staple food. The rice mill in Imota, near Lagos, is expected to do the relevant processing domestically, improve the balance of trade and the labour market, and save unnecessary costs for transport and middlemen. It began operations in 2023 at low levels, and is expected to employ 250,000 people and produce 2.4 million 50-kg bags of rice annually when fully operational.\nCoconut oil milling and refining.\nA multi-billion Naira coconut oil refinery, first of its kind in Africa\u00a0started business in\u00a0Akwa Ibom State. The\u00a0\"St.Gabriel Coconut Refinery\" in Mkpat Enin was inaugurated in May 2022. The governor of Akwa Ibom promised to commence immediate training of indigenous hands to man the refinery, said the facility has a daily capacity to crack 1,000,000 coconuts\u00a0and will employ no fewer than 3,000 direct and indirect staff. Coconut oil goes for $1,326\u00a0per barrel, according to Governor Emmanuel.\nDairy and meat.\nNigeria has 19 million head of cattle, the largest number in Africa. Yet the dairy sector in Nigeria is only able to supply less than 10% of the country's demand for dairy products (as of June 2021), a gap expected to grow in line with population growth.\nFan Milk, a Danone Group company, manufacturer of popular frozen dairy and ice cream brands, unveiled its newly completed model dairy in Odeda, Ogun state, in June 2022. This dairy farm is Danone's first investment in dairy farming in sub-Saharan Africa to boost local milk production in Nigeria. Fan Milk will launch a world-class dairy farm and training institute, leveraging the expertise of parent company Danone.\nIn Lekki's Free Trade Zone, the Dano Milk Factory (Arla) opened in 2022. - In 2021 farmer owned dairy co-operative Arla Foods started to build a dairy farm in Kaduna state with 200 hectares. It will keep 400 dairy cows and will have modern milking parlors and technology, also grass lands and living facilities for 25 employees.\nBakery, household cereals, etc..\nNigeria's bread sector is growing rapidly, with 72 percent dominated by small- and medium-scale bakers, according to a 2016 KPMG report. The bakery market of Nigeria is a $621 million industry.\n\"Fresh bread and miscellaneous bakery\" is the bakery product group with the highest consumption (8.5M tonnes), which is 91% of total volume. \"Fresh bread and miscellaneous bakery\" exceeded the figures recorded for the second-largest product group \"gingerbread, sweet biscuits and waffles\" (689K tonnes), more than tenfold. The Nigerian bakery product market size is expected to show significant growth in the forecast period 2020\u20132026.\nPrimera Food in cooperation with Michael Foods started production of noodles on a big scale in Ogun state in 2022.\nKellogg's opened a production plant for her products in the Lekki Free Trade Zone in Lagos in 2022. It is the second factory Kellogg's has built in Africa.\nIn Jos, NASCO Foods produces biscuits and corn flakes. In 2022 they expanded their Jos factory.\nMining and fossil fuels.\nMining.\nThe mining of minerals in Nigeria accounts for 0.3% of its gross domestic product. The domestic mining industry is largely underdeveloped, and minerals that it could produce domestically, such as salt or iron ore, are imported. Rights to ownership of mineral resources is held by the Federal Government of Nigeria, which grants titles for mineral exploration, mining, and sale of mineral resources.\nMining regulation is handled by the Ministry of Solid Minerals Development, which oversees the management of all mineral resources. Mining law is codified in the Federal Minerals and Mining Act of 1999.\nOil.\nThe types of crude oil exported by Nigeria are Bonny light oil, Forcados crude oil, Qua Ibo crude oil and Brass River crude oil. The U.S. remains Nigeria's largest buyer of crude oil, accounting for 40% of the country's total oil exports; Nigeria provides about 10% of overall U.S. oil imports and ranks as the fifth-largest source of U.S. imported oil.\nThe United Kingdom is Nigeria's largest trading partner followed by the United States. The stock of U.S. investment is nearly $7 billion, mostly in the energy sector. ExxonMobil and Chevron are the two largest U.S. corporations in offshore oil and gas production.\nNatural gas pipeline Nigeria\u2013Morocco.\nThe supply of natural gas to Europe, which is threatened by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, is pushing projects to transport Nigerian natural gas via pipelines to Morocco or Algeria. In December 2022, Morocco's National Office of Hydrocarbons and Mines signed Momoranda of Understanding with Nigeria, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Guinea, Sierra Leone, and Ghana to start building the pipeline through the countries.\nProcess and Industrial Developments dispute.\nProcess and Industrial Developments Ltd (P&amp;ID) entered into a 20-year contract with the Nigerian government for natural gas supply and processing. Nigeria was to provide the gas, which PI&amp;D was to refine so that it could be used to power the Nigerian electrical grid. PI&amp;D could keep valuable byproducts for its own use. In 2012, PI&amp;D demanded arbitration in London, alleging that Nigeria had not supplied the agreed quantity of gas or to construct the infrastructure it had agreed to build. The arbitral tribunal awarded damages of more than \u00a34.8 billion. The compensation was valued \u00a38.15 billion with interest when the case was heard in London High Court in December 2022.\nIndustry.\nCement.\nDangote and BUA are the dominating companies in the cement market of Nigeria. In May 2022, BUA opened a new, large-scale cement plant in Sokoto, including its own 50 MW power station.\nOil-based products.\nHistorically, Nigeria has exported crude oil, but imported the majority of petroleum products consumed in the country. In September 2024, Dangote Oil Refinery began operations with capacity to produce 650,000 barrels (~103 m liters) of petrol per day and the potential to significantly reduce Nigeria's reliance on imported petroleum products. NNPC, Nigeria's state-owned oil firm, is the sole customer of the refinery.\nFertiliser and paint.\nOn 3 May 2022, after years of construction, a fertiliser production plant was commissioned near Lagos that will be able to produce 3 million tonnes of fertiliser a year. With no more Russian fertiliser coming onto the world market in 2022 due to the invasion of Ukraine, Nigeria is filling a gap in the market. \"The fertiliser market is a seller's market\", enthused company boss Dangote at the plant's opening. \"People are begging for us to sell and we are choosy about who we sell to\".\nNot far from the Dangote refinery, BASF opened a factory in Lekki. BASF is mostly known for fertilisers, paints, and lacquers.\nBodycare products, cleaning detergents.\nThe Colgate factory in the Lekki Free Trade Zone close to Lagos started to produce body care products in 2022.\nPharmaceutical industry.\nNigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa (status 2022) and is projected to grow between $60 billion to $70 billion after COVID-19, experts say. The pharmaceutical industry in Nigeria has headroom for growth and can potentially reach $4 billion over the next 10 years. Goldstein Market Intelligence analyst forecast the Nigeria pharmaceuticals market size is set to grow at a CAGR of 9.1% over the forecast years of 2017\u20132030. Most large pharmaceutical companies in Nigeria are located in Lagos.\nThe pharmaceutical producer with the most employees in Nigeria appears to be \"Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd\". They produce more than 140 pharmaceutical products, including painkillers, vitamins, haematinics, antimalarials, antitussives, antibiotics, anthelmintics, antihistamines, antacids and cardioprotectants.\n\"Fidson Healthcare Plc\" produces painkillers, anti-allergies, blood pressure medicines, digestive aids, sleeping pills and cough syrup. \"May &amp; Baker Nig. Plc\" produces remedies against malaria, hypertension, diabetes, depressions and pain. \"Swiss Pharma Nigeria\" produces pharmaceutical products of BAYER.\nVehicle industry.\nNigerians buy 720,000 cars per year. Of those, less than 20% of these are produced within Nigeria itself.\n\"Indigenous manufacturers\"\nInnoson Vehicle Manufacturing is located in Nnewi. It produces buses, SUVs and since May 2022 tricycles which are locally known as \"kekes\".\n\"Nord Automobiles Ltd\" has two assembly plants: one in Sangotedo, where all eight models are currently assembled; a plant in Epe is still under construction. The company currently manufactures its own plastic parts and plans to add steel stamping in the future.\n30\u00a0km north-east of Lagos \"Proforce Ltd.\" produces armoured vehicles. Proforce sold an unknown number of armoured vehicles to Belarus in March 2022. This is the first time that vehicles manufactured in Nigeria have been supplied to a European country.\n\"Jet Motor Company\" in Epe, Lagos State, is producing Nigeria's first electric-powered delivery trucks in partnership with GIG Logistics.\nIn Idah, Kogi State, \"Electric Motor Vehicle Company\" manufactures electrically powered vehicles. The company is owned by Prince Mustapha Mona Audu, a Glasgow-educated computer specialist and son of a former governor. In May 2022, Audu unveiled the four-seater \"Adoja\", which he claims is the most environmentally friendly vehicle in Nigeria.\n\"Foreign manufacturers\"\nThe \"Stallion Group\" assembles 45,000 Volkswagen models in Lagos per annum.\n\"Peugeot Automobiles Nigeria (PAN)\" operates in Kaduna. In April 2022, Peugeot left the conglomerate and Aliko Dangote bought its shares. The company name was changed to DPAN. DPAN will assemble mainly the Chinese brands Chery and Higer using pre-produced parts. A new production line, Greenfield, will increase the output to 120 cars per day.\nToolmaking industry.\nIn Oshogbo, there is a modest toolmaking industry. Products are e.g. CNC turning machines and industrial drilling machines, but also stud bolts and flanges. Target market is the oil industry in the Niger delta.\nElectronics.\nThe most successful manufacturer of laptops in Nigeria is, by their own admission, the indigenous Zinox Technologies in Lagos.\nSteel production.\nAccording to its website, Ajaokuta Steel Company Limited produces 1.3 million tonnes of steel per year. Steel plants in Katsina, Jos and Osogbo no longer appear to be active.\nServices.\nNigeria ranks 27th worldwide and first in Africa in services output.\nFinance sector.\nNigeria is the largest financial market in Africa. As of November 2018, 21 commercial banks were licensed by the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN). Nigeria has a relatively well-developed banking sector by regional standards, with regionally high level of banking penetration (44.2% vs. regional average of 17.8% for West Africa) and robust use of advanced financial instruments in the local economy. The country is also well connected to international financial markets and following the 2016\u201317 oil crisis, the country has seen an increasing influx of foreign capital over the past 12\u201318 months \u2013 capital importation in Nigeria jumped to US$6.3 billion in Q1\u201318 (594% yoy growth) vs. $12.3 billion for full year 2017 and $5.1 billion in 2016). However, the country is weighed down by high lending rates, which limits access to credit for smaller firms, particularly in the non-oil economy. In 2024, the country's National Assembly denied that it had proposed to strip the central bank of the power to set interest rates.\nNigeria leads the fintech sector, accounting for 28% of all fintech companies on the continent. As of January 2024, Africa has over 1,263 active fintech companies.\nTelecommunication.\nThe Nigerian Communications Commissions (NCC) said on January 14, 2022, the telecommunications sector contributed 12.45per cent to Nigeria's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The commission through its chief executive officer (CEO), Prof Umar Garba Danbatta, during his convocation lecture, titled, \"Empowering the Nigeria Youth Through Information and Communications Technology (ICT)\" held at Fountain University, Osogbo, made this known. Prof Garba disclosed that the ICT sector has been consistently contributing above 10% of Nigeria's GDP for over 10 years. He noted, \"Nigeria is Africa's largest ICT market with 82per cent of the continent's telecoms subscribers and 29per cent of internet usage.\"\nNigeria ranks 11th in the world in the absolute number of internet users and 7th in the absolute number of mobile phones.\nTransport sector, forwarding, shipment.\nDue to Nigeria's location in the centre of Africa, transport plays a major role in the national service sector.\nThe Buhari administration made improvements to the infrastructure after 2015. Extensive road repairs and new construction have been carried out gradually as states in particular spend their share of increased government allocations. Representative of these improvements is the Second Niger Bridge at Onitsha, which is nearly completed in May 2022.\nSince 2009, Nigeria has been laying new railway tracks. These are operated by the state-owned Nigerian Railway Corporation. This has apparently generated a surplus since 2019, despite the covid epidemic.\nPrincipal ports are at Lagos (Apapa and Tin Can Island), Port Harcourt (Onne), and Calabar. A deep seaport in Lekki, 50\u00a0km east of Lagos, is about to open in 2022.\nFive of Nigeria's airports (Lagos, Kano, Port Harcourt, Enugu and Abuja) currently fly to international destinations. The new national airline, \"Nigeria Air\", was scheduled to start operations in mid-2022. It was suspended indefinitely in 2024.\nEntertainment.\nMovie industry, Television, Streaming.\nFrom Nollywood, films and soaps are broadcast to the whole of Africa. Nigeria is the second largest film nation in the world after India and ahead of the US.\nMusic industry.\nPerhaps Nigeria's most famous musician is the inventor of Afrobeat Fela Anikulapo Kuti, who gave legendary concerts with his band \"Africa 70\" at the \"Shrine\" in Lagos. Other characteristic musical styles include J\u00f9j\u00fa, Apala, Fuji and Sakara. In the field of pop music, Nigerian musicians living in Europe such as Sade Adu or Dr. Alban were very successful in the 1980s and 1990s. In Europe, Nneka is one of the best-known Nigerian pop musicians. One of the very few Nigerian artists living in Nigeria who has had commercial success in Europe is D'Banj. He even reached the European singles charts in summer 2012 with Oliver Twist. Wizkid reached number 1 in 2016 alongside Drake.\nSocial media.\nNigerians are passionate users of social media. In 2021 Nigerians spent 3 hours and 41 minutes on social media in average every day. This is much higher than the global average of 2 hours 22 minutes. The number of active social media users in Nigeria increased in 2021 by 22 percent, compared with a global average increase of 13 per cent. WhatsApp and Facebook are the most used social media platforms in Nigeria.\nFashion.\nThe \"Lagos Leather Fair\" is the largest leather fair in West Africa. Nigeria is the sixth largest leather exporter in the world, with brands such as Prada, Gucci and Louis Vuitton sourcing their goods here. Fashion journalist Waridi Schrobsdorff even puts \u2018Milan, Paris, Lagos\u2019 on the same level on news channel N-tv.\nData.\nElectricity \u2013 production:\n18.89 billion kWh (2009)\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\n\"fossil fuel:\"\n61.69%\n\"hydro:\"\n38.31%\n\"nuclear:\"\n0%\n\"other:\"\n&lt;.1% (1998)\nElectricity - consumption:\n17.66 billion kWh (2009)\nElectricity - exports:\n40 million kWh (2003)\nElectricity - imports:\n0 kWh (1998)\nOil - production: \n (July 2006 est.)\nOil - consumption:\n (2003 est.)\nOverseas remittances.\nA major source of foreign exchange earnings for Nigeria are remittances sent home by Nigerians living abroad.\nAccording to the International Organization for Migration, Nigeria witnessed a dramatic increase in remittances sent home from overseas Nigerians, going from US$2.3 billion in 2004 to $17.9 billion in 2007, representing 6.7% of GDP. The United States accounts for the largest portion of official remittances, followed by the United Kingdom, Italy, Canada, Spain and France. On the African continent, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Chad, Libya, and South Africa are important source countries of remittance flows to Nigeria, while China is the biggest remittance-sending country in Asia.\nLabour force.\nIn 2015, Nigeria had a labour force of 74 million. In 2003, the unemployment rate was 10.8% overall; by 2015, unemployment stood at 6.4%.\nSince 1999, the Nigerian Labor Congress (NLC) a union umbrella organization, has called six general strikes to protest domestic fuel price increases. However, in March 2005 the government introduced legislation ending the NLC's monopoly over union organizing. In December 2005, the Nigerian Labour Congress (NLC) was lobbying for an increase in the minimum wage for federal workers. The existing minimum wage, which was introduced six years earlier but has not been adjusted since, has been whittled away by inflation to only US$42.80 per month.\nAccording to the International Organization for Migration, the number of immigrants residing in Nigeria has more than doubled in recent decades \u2013 from 477,135 in 1991 to 971,450 in 2005. The majority of immigrants in Nigeria (74%) are from neighbouring Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and that this number has increased considerably over the last decade, from 63% in 2001 to 97% in 2005.\nThe government has to pay a high interest rate on bonds in part because of the high fertility rate; there are many children and less savings.\nHuman capital.\nAs of 2019, Nigeria's HDI (Human Development Index) is ranked 161st at 0.539. The comparative value for Sub-Saharan Africa is 0.547, 0.926 for the US, and 0.737 for the world average.\nThe value for the education index is 0.499, compared to the average in the US of 0.900. The expected years of schooling in Nigeria is 10.0 (16.3 in the US), while the mean years of schooling for adults over 25 years is 6.7 years (13.4 years in the US). Additionally, Nigeria is also facing a relatively high inequality, worsening the problem regarding the formation of human capital.\nGovernment policy.\nInflation.\nIn 2016, the black-market exchange rate of the Naira was about 60% above the official rate. The central bank releases about $200 million each week at the official exchange rate. However, some companies cite that budgets now include a 30% \"premium\" to be paid to central bank officials to get dollars.\nNigeria's inflation rate rose to 15.63 per cent in December 2021 compared to 15.40 per cent in November, the National Bureau of Statistics announced on January 17, 2022. The statistics office said the prices of goods and services, measured by the Consumer Price Index, increased by 15.63 per cent in December 2021 when compared to December 2020. According to the NBS, this rise in the food index was caused by increases in prices of bread and cereals, food products, meat, fish, potatoes, yam and other tubers, soft drinks and fruits.\nIn 2024 President Bola Tinubu sought to increase the 2024 budget by $13.7 billion to $77.3 billion. The proposed additional funds were $7.1 billion for infrastructure projects and $6.7 billion for recurrent expenditure.\nForeign economic relations.\nNigeria's foreign economic relations revolve around its role in supplying the world economy with oil and natural gas, even as the country seeks to diversify its exports, harmonize tariffs in line with a potential customs union sought by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and encourage inflows of foreign portfolio and direct investment. In October 2005, Nigeria implemented the ECOWAS common external tariff, which reduced the number of tariff bands.\nPrior to this revision, tariffs constituted Nigeria's second largest source of revenue after oil exports. In 2005 Nigeria achieved a major breakthrough when it reached an agreement with the Paris Club to eliminate its bilateral debt through a combination of write-downs and buybacks. Nigeria joined the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries in July 1971 and the World Trade Organization in January 1995.\nIf the global transition to renewable energy is completed and international demand for Nigeria's petroleum resources ceases, Nigeria will be significantly weakened. It is ranked 149 out of 156 countries in the index of Geopolitical Gains and Losses after energy transition (GeGaLo).\nExternal trade.\nIn 2017, Nigeria imported about US$34.2 billion of goods. In 2017 the leading sources of imports were China (28%), the Belgium-Luxembourg (8.9%), the Netherlands (8.3%), South Korea (6.4%), the United States (6.0%) and the India (4.6%). Principal imports were manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, and food and live animals.\nIn 2017, Nigeria exported about US$46.68 billion worth of goods. In 2017, the leading destinations for exports were India (18%), the United States (14%), Spain (9.7%), France (6.0%) and the Netherlands (4.9%). In 2017 oil accounted for 83% of merchandise exports. Natural rubber and cocoa are the country's major agricultural exports.\nIn 2005, Nigeria posted a US$26 billion trade surplus, corresponding to almost 20% of gross domestic product. In 2005, Nigeria achieved a positive current account balance of US$9.6 billion. The Nigerian currency is the naira (NGN). As of June 2006, the exchange rate was about US$1=NGN128.4. As of June 2019, it stands at US$1 =NGN357. In recent years, Nigeria has expanded its trade relations with other developing countries such as India. Nigeria is the largest African crude oil supplier to India \u2013 it annually exports to India valued at US$10 billion annually.\nIndia is the largest purchaser of Nigeria's oil which fulfills 20% to 25% of India's domestic oil demand. Indian oil companies are also involved in oil drilling operations in Nigeria and have plans to set up refineries there.\nThe trade volume between Nigeria and the United Kingdom rose by 35% from US$6.3 billion in 2010 to US$8.5 billion in 2011.\nIn Q1 2024, Nigeria's exports were dominated by petroleum products, including crude oil and liquefied natural gas. Major export destinations included China, India, and the Netherlands.\nThis period saw a notable increase in energy exports, reinforcing Nigeria's role as a key player in the global energy market. The Apapa Port in Lagos handled the bulk of these exports, showcasing the port's significance in the country's trade infrastructure.\nExternal debt.\nIn 2012, Nigeria's external debt was an estimated $5.9 billion and N5.6 trillion domestic, putting total debt at $44 billion.\nIn April 2006, Nigeria became the first African country to fully pay off its debt owed to the Paris Club. This was structured as a debt write off of approximately $18 billion and a cash payment of approximately $12 billion.\nForeign investment.\nIn 2012, Nigeria received a net inflow of US$85.73 billion foreign direct investment (FDI), much of which came from Nigerians in the diaspora. Most FDI is directed toward the energy and banking sectors. Any public designed to encourage inflow of foreign capital is capable of generating employment opportunities within the domestic economy. The Nigerian Enterprises Promotion (NEP) Decree of 1972 (revised in 1977) was intended to reduce foreign investment in the Nigerian economy.\nThe stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Nigeria was valued at $97.75 billion on 15 February 2008 by the Nigerian Stock Exchange.\nSwiss Banks to return Abacha Stolen Funds.\nThe Swiss foreign ministry says it has done all it can to ensure that funds stolen by the late Nigerian dictator Sani Abacha were used properly in his homeland. The authorities were responding to allegations that $200 million (SFr240 million) of $700 million handed back by the Swiss Banks to Nigeria had been misappropriated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21389", "revid": "49403590", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21389", "title": "Telecommunications in Nigeria", "text": " \nNigeria is Africa's largest ICT market, accounting for 82% of the continent's telecoms subscribers and 29% of internet usage. Globally, Nigeria ranks 11th in the absolute number of internet users and 7th in the absolute number of mobile phones.\nEconomically, the ICT sector has contributed over 10% to Nigeria's gross national product for over 10 years.\nTelecommunications in Nigeria include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.\nRadio and television.\nNigeria's media scene is one of the most vibrant in Africa. Television and radio remain the most important medium of mass communication and information, with Social media rapidly emerging as the next big medium. International broadcasters, including the BBC, are popular.\nThere are nearly 70 federal government-controlled national and regional TV stations. All 36 states operate TV stations. Roughly 40 state government-owned radio stations typically carry their own programs except for news broadcasts.\nSeveral private TV stations are operational. Cable and satellite TV subscription services are available. Nigeria has about 20 private radio stations; transmissions of international broadcasters are available. Digital broadcasting migration process has been completed in three states in 2018.\nGovernment-owned stations.\nThe largest broadcasting companies are the government-owned Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria (FRCN) and the Nigerian Television Authority (NTA). The NTA has two television services, one is NTA 1, which is distributed among NTA's six television zones. The other is NTA 2, which is distributed nationwide and is funded mostly by advertising. NITEL owns a majority of the transmitters that broadcast FRCN and NTA programming.\nEach state also has a broadcasting company that broadcasts one or two locally operated terrestrial stations. This means that there are about 50 government owned, but partly independent television stations.\nCommercial stations.\nPrivate players in the Nigerian television scene include: Silverbird Television (STV), Africa Independent Television (AIT), Channels Television, Superscreen Television, and several others. Most of their programming is aimed for the African and global markets and is broadcast globally from Lagos, Abuja, and Port Harcourt centres with affiliated TV stations in other cities in Nigeria and several African countries. African Independent Television (AIT) is a high-profile satellite television station broadcasting globally from its Lagos and Abuja centres. Other direct satellite television stations with international reach operating in Nigeria are Murhi International Television, ON Television, Galaxy TV, TV Continental, etc. all in Lagos.\nThere is general access to cable television like GOtv, DSTV, HiTV, DaarSat, StarTimes and Infinity TV and other cable TVs in Nigeria.\nStatistical data.\nRadio stations:\nRadios:\n23.5 million (1997).\nTelevision stations: nearly 70 federal government-owned national and regional TV stations; all 36 states operate TV stations; several private TV stations operational; cable and satellite TV subscription services are available (2007).\nTelevision sets:\n56.9 million (2007).\nMedia control and press freedom.\nAlthough the government censors the electronic media through the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC), which is responsible for monitoring and regulating broadcast media, there's no established proof towards Government's control of the media. Radio stations remain susceptible to attacks by political groups. For example, in January 2012 some media figures alleged the NBC warned radio stations not to broadcast stories about fuel subsidy protests.\nLibel is a civil offense and requires defendants to prove the truth of opinion or value judgment contained in news reports or commentaries, or pay penalties. However, the media is allowed to broadcast \"fair comment on matters of public interest\". Penalties for defamation of character include two years' imprisonment and possible fines.\nThe law requires local television stations to limit programming from other countries to 40 percent and restricts foreign content of satellite broadcasting to 20 percent. The NBC's 2004 prohibition of live broadcasts of foreign news and programs remains in force, but does not apply to international cable or satellite services.\nOn numerous occasions in the past, especially, during military regime, security forces and police have arrested and detained journalists who criticized the government. Reporting on matters such as political corruption and security issues are particularly sensitive. Politicians and political parties harass journalists perceived as reporting on them or their interests in a negative manner. During local and state elections, journalists have been intimidated for covering certain election-related events. The militant group Boko Haram threatens media outlets and has killed members of the press. On 20 January 2012, unknown gunmen killed Channels TV reporter Enenche Akogwu while he was reporting on the Boko Haram attacks and bombings in Kano that day. Journalists practice self-censorship.\nTelephones.\nThe number of fixed-line connections is insignificant and also in sharp decline (2016: 349,000, 2020: 107,000).\nMobile services, on the other hand, are growing rapidly, partly in response to fixed-line inadequacies; several mobile operators operate across the country, with subscribers at 92 per 100 people (2019). This ranks Nigeria 8th in the world.\nDeregulation of the mobile phone market has led to the introduction of Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) network providers operating on the 900/1800MHz spectrum, MTN Nigeria, Airtel Nigeria, Globacom, and 9mobile (Etisalat). Use of cell-phones has soared, and has mostly replaced the unreliable fixed line services of Nigerian Telecommunications Limited (NITEL).\nWith the expiration of the exclusivity period of the main GSM network providers, Nigeria's telecom regulator, the Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC), introduced the Unified Licensing Regime. It was hoped that telecoms with unified licences would be able to provide fixed and mobile telephony and Internet access as well as any other communications service they choose to offer. In March 2011 the NCC started registering SIM cards. The exercise was expected to last until 28 September 2011.\nIn 2015 the NTC fined MTN Nigeria a record $5.2 billion for issuing 5.2 million unregistered and pre-registered subscriber Identification Module Cards (SIMs). In 2017 the NTC sett up a 12-member task force in response to renewed proliferation of Unregistered and pre-registered SIM cards. The unregistered cards are considered a threat to Nigerian national security.\nAfter a decade of failed privatization attempts, the incumbent national telecom NITEL and its mobile arm have been sold to NATCOM and now rebranded as NTEL.\nNigeria concluded its first 5G spectrum auction in 2021 and granted licences to two firms: MTN Nigeria and Mafab Communications. MTN Nigeria and Airtel Nigeria are the only mobile network operators that have launched 5G services in Nigeria. The companies have rolled out 5G in these 8 states - Lagos, Abuja, Port Harcourt, Ibadan, Ogun, Kano, Owerri, and Maiduguri, and plan to expand 5G coverage to other states in the future. https://\nIn Q1 2024, the telecommunications sector in Nigeria experienced a growth rate of 15.70%, up from 14.10% in Q4 2023. According to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), this growth was driven by increased mobile phone penetration, higher internet usage, and the rollout of 4G and 5G networks. The sector contributed 8.90% to Nigeria's GDP during this period.\nStatistical data.\nCalling code: +234\nInternational call prefix: 009\nConnected lines:\nActive lines:\nInstalled capacity:\nTeledensity: \nSatellite earth stations: 3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) (2010);\nSubmarine cables: \nInternet.\nNigeria is one of the larger telecom markets in Africa subject to sporadic access to electricity. Most Internet connections are via mobile networks. The government is committed to expanding broadband penetration. The operators deploy fiber optic cable in six geopolitical zones and Lagos and invest in base stations to deplete network congestion.\nA submarine cable break in 2020 slowed speeds and interrupted connectivity.\nStatistical data.\nTop-level domain: .ng\nInternet users: \nFixed broadband: 15,311 subscriptions, 136th in the world; less than 0.05% of the population, 185th in the world (2012).\nWireless broadband: 17.3 million subscriptions, 18th in the world; 10.2% of the population, 91st in the world (2012).\nInternet hosts: \nIPv4: 1.0 million addresses allocated, 75th in the world, less than 0.05% of the world total, 5.9 addresses per 1000 people (2012).\nInternet service providers:\nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nListed by the OpenNet Initiative as no evidence of Internet filtering in all four areas for which they test (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) in October 2009.\nThere are few government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. Although the constitution and law provide for freedom of speech, including for members of the press, the government sometimes restricts these rights in practice. Libel is a civil offense and requires defendants to prove the truth of opinion or value judgment contained in news reports or commentaries. Penalties include two years' imprisonment and possible fines. Militant groups such as Boko Haram threaten, attack, and kill journalists in connection with their reporting of the sect's activities. Journalists practice self-censorship.\nReporting on political corruption and security issues has proved to be particularly sensitive. On 24 October 2012 police in Bauchi State arraigned civil servant Abbas Ahmed Faggo before a court for allegedly defaming the character of Governor Isa Yuguda after he posted messages on his Facebook account accusing the governor of spending public funds on his son's wedding. On 4 November, the court discharged Faggo, but media reported the state government fired him later that month.\nDuring 2012 several Internet news sites critical of the government experienced server problems, which site owners attributed to government interference. Such disruptions usually lasted a few hours.\nIn 2008 two journalists were arrested for publishing online articles and photos critical of the government.\nOn 4 June 2021, the Minister of Information and Culture announced that the federal government would \"suspend\" all operations of Twitter in the country for performing actions that \"[undermine] Nigeria\u2019s corporate existence\", and that the federal government would order the National Broadcasting Commission to \"immediately commence the process of licensing all OTT and social media operations\" in the country. This came after Twitter deleted posts by and suspended the account of President Muhammadu Buhari for violating its abuse policy, for making threats against the separatist group Indigenous People of Biafra which had invoked the Nigerian Civil War as a theme. Buhari criticised the actions for infringing his freedom of speech. Pursuant to this action, Twitter has been blocked in Nigeria as of 5 June, and use of the service was made a prosecutable offence. On 13 January 2022, Nigerian government revoked the ban on Twitter after the company agreed to set up a subsidiary in Nigeria for judicial compliance.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21390", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21390", "title": "Transport in Nigeria", "text": " \nNigeria\u2019s transport network has expanded in recent years to accommodate a growing population. The transport and storage sector was valued at N2.6trn ($6.9bn) in current basic prices in 2020, down from N3trn ($8bn) in 2019, according to the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS). This was reflected in a lower contribution to GDP, at 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2020, down from 2.1% during the same period the previous year but higher than the 0.8% recorded in the third quarter of 2020. One of the most significant challenges facing the sector is meeting the needs of both large coastal cities and rural inland communities in order to fully unlock the country's economic potential. This is especially the case with mining and agriculture, both of which are expected to benefit from two large-scale projects: the Lekki Port in Lagos and the Kano-Maradi rail line in the north of the country.\nAlthough transport networks have historically been underfunded, the government is prioritising their development, as enhanced connectivity is key to supporting growth in non-oil sectors such as manufacturing and agriculture. This will help the country diversify its sources of income away from oil, and connect rural and underserved communities to commercial centres. Moreover, planned intra-city mass transit projects are expected to improve the quality of life for Nigeria's 102.8m urban residents.\nRailways.\nImproving rail links is also central to the NIIMP, with the master plan noting at the time that the network \"needs to be almost completely rehabilitated or rebuilt\". The longer-term vision is to expand routes to create a multi-modal system linked with facilities such as ports and airports. The prioritisation of rail development has continued, with the 2021 budget earmarking N71.2bn ($3.2m) for the construction and N11.6bn ($31m) for the rehabilitation of railways.\nThe NRC is responsible for rail services across the country \u2013 both for freight and passengers \u2013 with little participation from the private sector, as most intercity rail routes are not commercially viable. According to the latest data from the NBS, the rail system carried 2.6m passengers in 2017, 3m in 2018 and 723,995 in the first quarter of 2019. Revenue generated from passenger tickets amounted to N1.2bn ($3.2m) and N1.9bn ($5.1m) for 2017 and 2018, respectively, and N520.8m ($1.4m) for the first three months of 2019. In terms of cargo, 141,186 tonnes were moved in 2017 for a revenue of N374m ($999,000) \u2013 figures that grew by 132% and 32%, respectively, in 2018. Some 54,100 tonnes were moved by the rail system in the first quarter of 2019, generating revenue of N102.6m ($274,000).\nIn August 2017 the federal government announced a $41bn programme to expand the rail network. The two headline projects unveiled at the time were a second railway connecting Lagos in the south to Kano in the north and a railway spanning the coast, from Lagos to Calabar. Work on both projects was ongoing as of early 2021. Moreover, in January of that year construction began on a new line linking Kano to Maradi, in neighbouring Niger. The 387-km line will pass through Kazaure, Daura, Katsina and Jibiya, and a 93-km branch from Kano to Dutse will facilitate traffic from Jigawa State. The second Lagos-Kano line is intended to connect with the new Kano-Maradi artery, eventually creating an uninterrupted network across Nigeria.\nRoads.\nNigeria's roads and highways form the backbone of the country's transport network, as these arteries handle 90% of all passenger and freight traffic, according to the NIIMP. As it is the largest segment \u2013 contributing N2.4trn ($6.4bn) to GDP in 2020, down from N2.7trn ($7.2bn) the year before \u2013 the government is focused on both servicing existing roads \u2013 many of which are in poor condition or unpaved \u2013 and constructing new ones. Towards this end, the 2021 budget earmarked N168bn ($451.2m) for the construction, rehabilitation and dualisation of roads. The package also set aside N54bn ($144.2m) for building and renovating bridges, and N4bn ($10.7m) specifically for the rehabilitation of a mainland bridge in Lagos.\nOne key project is the rehabilitation and expansion of the 35-km Apapa-Oshodi-Oworonshoki-Ojota Expressway in Lagos, linking the city\u2019s largest port to the Ojata district. As vehicle ownership is on the rise, traffic is common in the country\u2019s most populous city. In January 2021 Funso Adebiyi, director of highway construction and rehabilitation at the Ministry of Works and Housing, told local press that the first phase of the project was set to be completed in April of that year, with the entirety of the expansion delivered in December. Nigerian conglomerate Dangote Group began work on the expressway in 2018, and the overhaul is the artery\u2019s first since it was built in 1978, with the group adding 10 lanes and repairing connections with other roads. Another priority project was the 43-km Obajana-Kabba link in Kogi State. Completed in January 2021, it is Nigeria\u2019s largest concrete road and links the north and south of the country. As concrete is more durable than asphalt, it is less susceptible to potholes and, as such, requires less maintenance.\nThe government has worked to attract private partners and investment to carry out and finance key projects. For example, the Dangote Group received a 10-year tax rebate worth N73bn ($194.9m) for the Apapa-Oshodi-Oworonshoki-Ojota Expressway as part of a government programme to offer incentives such as tax breaks to private companies to help execute necessary roadworks. Moreover, in May 2020 the government issued its third \"sukuk\" (Islamic bond), worth N162.6bn ($434.1m), to fund infrastructure projects such as road rehabilitation.\nIn 2024, the federal government of Nigeria started the construction of a 700km coastal highway from Lagos - Calabar, which will pass through nine states and reduce travel times among them.\nInternational highways.\nNigeria's strategic location and size results in four routes of the Trans-African Highway network using its national road system:\nWaterways.\nNigeria has 8,600\u00a0km of inland waterways. The longest are the Niger River and its tributary, the Benue River, but the most used, especially by larger powered boats and for commerce, are in the Niger Delta and all along the coast from Lagos Lagoon to Cross River.\nPipelines.\nIn 2004 Nigeria had 105 kilometers of pipelines for condensates, 1,896 kilometers for natural gas, 3,638 kilometers for oil, and 3,626 kilometers for refined products. Various pipeline projects are planned to expand the domestic distribution of natural gas and to export natural gas to Benin, Ghana, Togo through the West African Gas Pipeline, and, potentially, even to Algeria (where Mediterranean export terminals are located) by proposed Trans-Saharan gas pipeline. Energy pipelines are subject to sabotage by militant groups or siphoning by thieves.\nPorts and harbors.\nThe six Nigerian seaports are: \nAccording to the most recent data published by the Nigerian Port Authority (NPA), inbound tonnage across all ports expanded from around 9m tonnes in 2016 to 10.4m in 2017 and 10.9m in 2018, with the first quarter of 2019 recording 2.8m tonnes. Outbound tonnage over the same period also rose, from 2.1m in 2016 to 2.3m in 2017 and 2.4m in 2018. Nigerian ports shipped out some 487,000 tonnes in the first three months of 2019.\nOne notable maritime project is the Lekki Port, located in the Lagos Free Trade Zone. Slated to be Nigeria\u2019s first deepsea port and the deepest such facility in sub-Saharan Africa, work on Lekki began in March 2018 and is targeted to be complete in 2022. The port will help meet rising demand for containers in Nigeria, the compound annual growth rate of which is forecast to be 12.9% between 2016 and 2025. It will also create 170,000 jobs and bring the government $200bn in revenue, according to Lekki Port LFTZ Enterprise, the port\u2019s developer. This would leave the city with a capacity shortfall of 5.5m twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) by 2025. The deepsea port will have a capacity of 2.7m TEUs per year, with three container berths, three liquid berths and one dry bulk berth. The draught will be 16.5 metres with a 600-metre turning circle.\nLekki Port LFTZ Enterprise is a joint venture between the Lagos State government, the NPA and Lekki Port Investment Holdings, a group of investors including China Harbour Engineering Company and Singapore-headquartered holding company Tolaram Group. Unlike in rail, the private sector plays a notable role in the port segment. The privatisation of port operations began in late 2003, and today the private sector is active in areas such as cargo handling, warehousing, the development and maintenance of port structures, safety and security within the terminals, and towing, mooring, bunkering and repairing ships.\nIn May 2022, the new Dala Dry Port opened for business, close to Kano. The dry port will take over tasks from Nigeria's sea ports. It has the capacity of 20.000 TEUs.\nBridges.\nThirty-seven bridges nationwide underwent maintenance and repairs in 2022, some of which had been due for decades. Among these is the bridge from the mainland to Bonny Island, from which the crude oil of the same name is loaded. Others are the Loko-Oweto bridge project, the Third Mainland Bridge in Lagos, the Murtala Mohammed Bridge in Koton Karfi and the Isaac Boro Bridge in Port Harcourt. Others include Chanchangi Bridge in Niger State and the Tambuwara Bridge in Kano.\nAfter decades of political discussions, the Second Niger bridge was nearing completion, as of January 2022.\nMerchant marine.\nThe Nigerian Merchant Navy is not a legally recognized body, but the senior officers are represented by the Merchant Navy Officers' and Water Transport Senior Staff Association.\nThe maritime industry is regulated by the Nigerian Maritime Administration and Safety Agency (NIMASA), which is responsible for regulations related to Nigerian shipping, maritime labor and coastal waters. The agency also undertakes inspections and provides search and rescue services.\n\"total:\"\n40 ships (\u00a0gross tonnage\u00a0(GT) or over) totaling \u00a0GT/\u00a0tonnes deadweight (DWT)\n&lt;br&gt;\"ships by type:\"\nbulk carrier 1, cargo ship 12, chemical tanker 4, petroleum tanker 22, specialized tanker 1 (1999 est.)\nAirport and airlines.\nNigeria's principal airports are Murtala Muhammed International Airport in Lagos and Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport in Abuja. Three other international airports are Mallam Aminu Kano International Airport in Kano, Akanu Ibiam International Airport in Enugu and Port Harcourt International Airport in Port Harcourt. \nThe air transport industry was particularly affected by the pandemic, as many countries closed their borders at various points throughout 2020 to reduce the spread of the virus. Nigeria\u2019s aviation segment entered the pandemic in a relatively strong position, according to FAAN. Arrivals to Nigeria\u2019s 30-some airports totalled 8.8m in 2019, while 8.7m departures were logged. This represented a 7.4% increase from the 16.4m total passenger movements recorded in 2018. Meanwhile, cargo traffic grew in 2019 \u2013 from 164.9m kg in 2018 kg to 174.9m kg \u2013 while mail by air rose from 47.3m kg to 55.6m kg. The domestic terminals of airports in Abuja and Lagos accounted for 25% of passenger movements and 30% of aircraft movements each in 2019, while Murtala Muhammed International Airport (MMIA) in Lagos handled 81% of all cargo.\nPriority aviation projects in the 2021 budget include N10bn ($26.7m) for a second runway at Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport (NAIA) in Abuja, N1bn ($2.7m) for a new terminal building at the airport in Enugu, and N900m ($2.4m) for extending and repaving the runway at MMIA. Laying a second runway at NAIA follows the December 2018 opening of the new international terminal. The terminal is the first in the country to be connected to a rail system, with Abuja\u2019s light rail train taking passengers to the city centre.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21391", "revid": "42836239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21391", "title": "Nigerian Armed Forces", "text": "Military forces of Nigeria\nThe Nigerian Armed Forces (NAF) are the military forces of Nigeria. The forces consist of three service branches: the Nigerian Army, Nigerian Navy, and Nigerian Air Force. The President of Nigeria functions as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional authority through the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the management of the military and its personnel. The operational head of the AFN is the Chief of Defence Staff, who is subordinate to the Nigerian Defence Minister. With a force of more than 230,000 active personnel, the Nigerian military is one of the largest uniformed combat services in Africa.\nThe Nigerian Armed Forces were established in 1960 as the successor to the combat units of the Royal West African Frontier Force stationed in the country, which had previously served as the British Empire's multi-battalion field force, during Nigeria's protectorate period. Since its creation, the Nigerian military has fought in a civil war \u2013 the conflict with Biafra in 1967\u201370 \u2013 and sent peacekeeping forces abroad, both with the United Nations and as the backbone of the Economic Community of West African States Cease-fire Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia and Sierra Leone. It has also seized power twice at home (1966 &amp; 1983). Nigeria's armed forces would continue to remain an active element in combat operations throughout the African continent over the proceeding decades, with \nnotable engagements including its 2017 involvement as part of the ECOWAS military intervention in the Gambia.\nLegal standing.\nThe roles of a country's armed forces are entrenched in her constitution. The defence of the territorial integrity and other core interests of the nation, form the major substance of such roles. Section 217-220 of the 1999 Constitution of Nigeria thus addresses the Nigerian Armed Forces:\nHistory.\nThe origin of the Nigerian Armed Forces lies in the elements of the Royal West African Frontier Force, that became Nigerian when independence was granted in 1960. In 1956, the Nigeria Regiment of the Royal West African Frontier Force (RWAFF) was renamed the Nigerian Military Forces, RWAFF, and in April 1958, the colonial government of Nigeria took over from the British War Office control of the Nigerian Military Forces.\nShortly after its formation, the NAF was engaged in combat operations against the secessionist state of Biafra, during the Nigerian Civil War from 1967 to 1970. At this point, the Nigerian military ballooned in strength from 85,000 personnel in 1967 to more than 250,000 troops by the war's end. In the years following the civil war, the Nigerian Armed Forces were halved in size from its post-war height to approximately 125,000 men. Despite this contraction in the size and funding of its armed forces, Nigeria would boast the only military in West Africa capable of engaging in foreign military operations, such as during its intervention in Liberian civil war in 1990.\nThe great expansion of the military during the civil war further entrenched the existing military hold on Nigerian society, carried over from the first military regime. In doing so, it played an appreciable part in reinforcing the military's nearly first-among-equals status within Nigerian society, and the linked decline in military effectiveness. Olusegun Obasanjo, who by 1999, had become president, bemoaned the fact in his inaugural address that year: \"... Professionalism has been lost... my heart bleeds to see the degradation in the proficiency of the military.\"\nToday, the NAF faces a number of domestic challenges which continue to undermine stability within Nigeria and the region as a whole. Some of these threats include the ongoing conflict against the jihadist rebel group, Boko Haram in northeastern Nigeria, which has been in effect since July 2009. Likewise, Nigeria has been engaged in a long-running anti-piracy campaign in the Niger Delta, which has threatened the vital petroleum industry in the country, which is the source of 90% of Nigeria's exports and 35% of the government's revenue. Compounding this state of affairs is the role corruption plays in the ongoing attempts to strengthen the armed forces. Corruption has historically weakened the Nigerian military's capacity to face internal security threats and is cited as being responsible for the continued longevity of rebels and terrorists operating throughout the nation.\nIn spite of these challenges to its operational readiness, the Nigerian Armed Forces have committed to a number of wide-ranging modernization programs to bolster the discipline and firepower of its troops. This includes the acquisition of new armored vehicles, combat aircraft and aerial reconnaissance drones, and the refurbishing of naval vessels, which had suffered from prolonged periods of poor or minimal maintenance. These trends in the development of the armed forces as a fighting force, as well as efforts to combat corruption within the ranks of military personnel and government bureaucracy, have been critically important in the ability of Nigeria to confront challenges to its national security and stability in the wider region of West Africa as a whole.\nStructure.\nCommand structure.\nThe President of Nigeria functions as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, exercising his constitutional authority through the Ministry of Defence, which is responsible for the management of the military and its personnel. The operational head of the AFN is the Chief of the Defence Staff, who is subordinate to the Nigerian Defence Minister. The current chief is General Olufemi Oluyede.\nThe National Defence Council has been in existence since 1979 and advises the President on matters relating to the armed forces. The NDC is chaired by the president, and its members include the Vice President of Nigeria, the National Security Adviser, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for Defence, the Chief of Defence Staff, the Chief of Army Staff, the Chief of Naval Staff and the Chief of Air Staff, as well as others the president is empowered to appoint.\nService branches.\nArmy.\nThe Nigerian Army (NA) is the land branch of the Nigerian Armed Forces and the largest among the armed forces. Its major formations include the 1st Division, 2nd Division, 3rd Armoured Division, 81st Division, 82nd Division and the newly formed 8th, 7th and 6th Divisions. The Nigerian army is headed currently by Lieutenant General Waidi Shaibu, who was appointed by President Bola Ahmed Tinubu. The Nigerian Army has been playing a major role in defence of Nigerian Democracy since the first republic till date.\nNavy.\nThe Nigerian Navy (NN) is the sea branch of the Nigerian Armed Forces. The Nigerian Navy command structure today consists of the Naval Headquarters in Abuja as well as three other operational commands with headquarters in Lagos, Calabar and Bayelsa. The training command headquarters are located in Lagos, the commercial capital of Nigeria, but with training facilities spread all over Nigeria. There are five operational bases; five forward operational bases (with two more soon to come on stream), two dockyards located in Lagos and Port Harcourt and two fleets based in Lagos and Calabar. The Nigerian Navy is currently headed by Vice Admiral Idi Abbas.\nAir Force.\nThe Nigerian Air Force was formally established in January 1964, with technical assistance from West Germany. The Air Force started as a transport unit, with the aircrew being trained in Canada, Ethiopia and Pakistan. The Air Force did not get combat capability until a number of MiG-17 aircraft were presented by the Soviet Union in 1966.\nIn 2007, the Air Force had a strength of 10,000. It flies transport, trainer, helicopter, and fighter aircraft. By 2021, the number of Air Force personnel had increased to 18,000.\nThe Air Force sponsors the Air Force Military School, Jos, Nigeria and the Air Force Institute of Technology. Nigeria also has pursued a policy of developing domestic training and military production capabilities. Nigeria has continued a strict policy of diversification in its military procurement from various countries. The Nigerian Air force is currently headed by Air Marshal Sunday Aneke.\nTraining establishments.\nTraining establishments in Nigeria include the prestigious officer entry: Nigerian Defence Academy at Kaduna, the Armed Forces Command and Staff College, Jaji, and the National War College at Abuja. The U.S. commercial military contractor, Military Professional Resources Inc. has been involved around 1999\u20132000 in advising on civil-military relations for the armed forces.\nNigerian military operations abroad.\nIn December 1983, the new Major General Muhammadu Buhari regime announced that Nigeria could no longer afford an activist anti-colonial role in Africa. Anglophone ECOWAS members established ECOMOG, dominated by the Nigerian Army in 1990, to intervene in the civil war in Liberia. The Army has demonstrated its capability to mobilize, deploy, and sustain brigade-sized forces in support of peacekeeping operations in Liberia. Smaller army forces have been previously sent on UN and ECOWAS deployments in the former Yugoslavia, Guinea-Bissau, and Sierra Leone. This doctrine of African military intervention by Nigeria is sometimes called Pax Nigeriana.\nThat policy statement did not deter Nigeria under Generals Ibrahim Babangida in 1990 and Sani Abacha in 1997, from sending ECOMOG peacekeeping forces under the auspices of ECOWAS into Liberia and later Sierra Leone, when the civil wars broke out in those countries. President Olusegun Obasanjo in August 2003, committed the Nigerian troops once again to Liberia, at the appeal of the United States, to provide an interim presence until the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) arrived. Charles Taylor was subsequently eased out of power and exiled to Nigeria.\nIn October 2004, the Nigerian troops were deployed to Darfur, Sudan, to spearhead an African Union force, to stop the genocide in Darfur. Nigeria has contributed more than 20,000 troops/police to various UN missions since 1960. The Nigerian Police Force and troops have participated in:\nNigerian officers have served as Chiefs of Defence in other countries, with Brigadier General Maxwell Khobe, serving as Sierra Leone Chief of Staff in 1998\u20131999, and Nigerian officers acting as Command Officer-in-Charge of the Armed Forces of Liberia from at least, 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21392", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21392", "title": "Foreign relations of Nigeria", "text": "Since independence, with Jaja Wachuku as the first Minister for Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations, later called External Affairs, Nigerian foreign policy has been characterised by a focus on Africa as a regional power and by attachment to several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; capability to exercise hegemonic influence in the region: peaceful settlement of disputes; non-alignment and non-intentional interference in the internal affairs of other nations; and regional economic cooperation and development. In carrying out these principles, Nigeria participates in the African Union, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the United Nations.\nNigeria and International Organisations.\nNigeria is a member of the following organizations:\nThe Babangida regime joined the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC, now the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation), though President Obasanjo has indicated he might reconsider Nigeria's membership.comments are being made for Nigeria to establish more bilateral relations.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Nigeria maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21393", "revid": "48039424", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21393", "title": "History of Niue", "text": " \nThe history of Niue is the history of the area and people of Niue, including its indigenous Polynesian societies. Niue was first settled by Polynesian sailors from Samoa in around 900 AD. Further settlers (or possibly invaders) arrived from Tonga in the 16th century.\nThe first known sighting of the island by a European was by Captain James Cook in 1774 during his second Pacific voyage. The pioneering missionary John Williams was the first European to land on the island in 1830. After years of British missionary activity, negotiations with the local kings for British protection of the island began in 1879. Lord Ranfurly, Governor of New Zealand proclaimed British Sovereignty over Niue in 1900, therefore laid the island under the patronage of New Zealand.\nNiue lost around 4% of its population in World War I as 150 Niuean men were sent to France under the New Zealand army, of which nearly none returned. World War II however did not directly affect the island.\nNiue became self-governing in 1974. Since then, the island has been shrinking in population from emigration due to frequent devastating natural disasters and lack of economic opportunities.\nEarly history.\nUntil the beginning of the 18th century, there appears to have been no national government or national leader in Niue. Before that time, chiefs and heads of family exercised authority over segments of the population. Around 1700, the concept and practice of kingship appears to have been introduced through contact with Samoa or Tonga. From then on, a succession of \"patu-iki\" (kings) ruled the island, the first of whom was Puni-mata.\nEuropean contact.\nCaptain James Cook was the first European to sight the island, but he was unable to land there due to fierce opposition by the local population. The \"1911 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" claimed this was due to native fear of foreign disease. In response, Cook named Niue the \"Savage Island\".\nChristian missionaries from the London Missionary Society converted most of the population circa 1846. Tui-toga, who reigned from 1875 to 1887, was the first Christian king of Niue.\nThe island was visited by Captain John Erskine in \"H.M.S. Havannah\" in July 1849.\nBritish protectorate.\nIn 1887, King Fataaiki wrote to Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, requesting that Niue be placed under British protection, but his request was turned down. In 1900, in response to renewed requests, the island became a British protectorate, and the following year it was annexed by New Zealand. Niue's remoteness, as well as cultural and linguistic differences between its Polynesian inhabitants and those of the Cook Islands, caused it to be separately administered.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, 148 Niuean men (4% of the island's population) served as soldiers in the New Zealand armed forces. They were initially sent to Egypt, in February 1916, however, illness was common, and by April over half of them had been hospitalized. They were transferred to Northern France in April 1916, where illness was also common. At the end of May it was decided the Niuean soldiers would be withdrawn from the front, being sent to Hornchurch, in England, before leaving for New Zealand by the end of June.\nAutonomy.\nNiue gained its autonomy in 1974 in free association with New Zealand, which handles the island's military and foreign affairs. Niue had been offered autonomy in 1965 (along with the Cook Islands, which accepted), but had asked for its autonomy to be deferred another decade.\nNiueans continue to be New Zealand citizens, and use standard New Zealand passports. Niueans who meet normal residence criteria in either country may vote or stand in that country's elections. Niue continues to use New Zealand currency, but issues its own postage stamps (New Zealand stamps are not valid for postage in Niue, nor Niuean stamps in New Zealand).\nRecent history.\nIn January 2004, Niue was struck by a devastating cyclone (Cyclone Heta) which left 200 of the islands' 1600 inhabitants homeless. As a number of local residents chose afterwards not to rebuild, New Zealand's Foreign Affairs Minister Phil Goff speculated that Niue's status as a self-governing nation in free association with New Zealand might come into question if too many residents departed the island to maintain basic services. Soon afterwards, Niue Premier Young Vivian categorically rejected the possibility of altering the existing relationship with New Zealand.\nThe population of the island continues to drop (from a peak of 5,200 in 1966 to 2,100 in 2000), with substantial emigration to New Zealand.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21394", "revid": "40727880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21394", "title": "Geography of Niue", "text": " \nNiue is a small, oval island in the South Pacific Ocean, to the east of Tonga. It has an area of 260 square kilometres, and a coastline of 64\u00a0km. It claims an exclusive economic zone of 200\u00a0nautical miles, and a territorial sea of 12\u00a0nautical miles. It is one of world's largest coral islands.\nClimate.\nNiue's climate is tropical, modified by south-east trade winds. Cyclones pose a natural hazard.\nTerrain.\nThe terrain consists of steep coastal cliffs made from limestone and a central plateau. Scenic features on the northern coast are the https://. The three sea arches are https://. Further west on the coast the user will encounter Avaiki Cave. The coastline also includes numerous coastal caverns including https://. The lowest point is at sea level, and the highest is an unnamed point near Mutalau settlement, at 68 m.\nNatural resources.\nThe island's natural resources are fish and arable land. Land use in 1993 was as in the following table:\nEnvironmental issues.\nA current environmental issue is increasing attention to conservationist practices to counter loss of soil fertility from traditional slash-and-burn agriculture. Niue is a party to the following international agreements regarding the environment: Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification. Niue has signed but not ratified the Law of the Sea agreement.\nBoundaries.\nNiue has signed a treaty with the United States in which the parties delimited the east\u2013west maritime boundary between Niue and American Samoa. Niue is south of American Samoa.\nExtreme points.\nThis is a list of the extreme points of Niue, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21395", "revid": "1036687905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21395", "title": "Demographics of Niue", "text": ""}
{"id": "21396", "revid": "40727880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21396", "title": "Politics of Niue", "text": " \nThe politics of Niue take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic dependency, whereby the Chief Minister is the head of government, and of a non-partisan system. Niue is self-governing in free association with New Zealand and is fully responsible for internal affairs. New Zealand retains some responsibility for external affairs, in consultation with Niue. The Niue Constitution Act 1974 (NZ) vests executive authority in His Majesty the King in Right of New Zealand and the Governor-General of New Zealand. The constitution specifies that in everyday practice, it is exercised by a Cabinet of the Premier of Niue and three other ministers. The premier and ministers must be members of the Niue Assembly, the nation's legislative assembly.\nThe Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.\nExecutive branch.\nThe monarch is hereditary; his representative in relation to Niue (the Governor-General of New Zealand) is appointed by the monarch. The New Zealand high commissioner is appointed by, and acts solely as a diplomatic agent of, the New Zealand Government. The cabinet is chosen by the premier and appointed by the Speaker of the Niue Assembly and collectively responsible to Parliament.\nCabinet.\nThe Cabinet is made up of four ministers, each overseeing a different portfolio. Each minister, with the exception of the Premier, has another Member of the Assembly assisting him/her in the operations of their portfolio. Each ministry also has Directory Generals serving as permanent employees of the ministries, as well as directors for each division.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Assembly has 20 members elected for a three-year term, 6 elected on a nationwide list, called the common roll, and 14 representatives of the villages. Electors must be New Zealand citizens, resident for at least three months, and candidates must have been electors, resident for twelve months. The speaker is elected from among the members.\nPolitical parties and elections.\nIn Niue, political parties have never played an important role. There is, at present, no political party, and candidates to elections therefore run as independents. The only party ever to have existed, the Niue People's Party, disbanded in 2003.\nAs there are no political parties, there is no formal parliamentary Opposition, though there are MPs who oppose the government.\nBy-elections.\nBelow is a list of recent by-elections:\nJudicial branch.\nThe Judicial Committee of the Privy Council sitting in the United Kingdom is Niue's highest court. On the island, there is a Court of Appeal (which sat in New Zealand until 2009), and the High Court of Niue.\nThe current Chief Justice of the High Court is Craig Coxhead. The Chief Justice is chosen by the Governor-General of New Zealand on advice from the cabinet of Niue.\nPublic Defender of Niue.\nInitially, it was the Crown Counsel of New Zealand that provided legal assistance to those accused of serious offenses such as murder. In 1971, the Select Committee on the Appointment of a Public Defender recommended that the Government of Niue provide any offenders with court representation. John Funaki (a non-attorney) was the first to serve as the Public Defender of Niue in 1976. Even today, the government provides funding for a Public Defender.\nAdministrative divisions.\nNiue is divided in 14 villages each with its own village council whose members are elected and serve three-year terms.\nLocal government.\nLocal Government in Niue is established under the provisions of the Niue Village Council Act 1967. Every village in Niue have a Village council, the term in office is three years before going back to the polls. The election of the members of the village council follows the same rules and regulations used in the General Election to elect members of the Niue Legislative Assembly (parliament). At the first meeting of the Village Council the Chairman will be elected, including the Deputy Chair and the appointment of the Secretary/Treasurer. The Village Council receives grants from the Government, donor agencies also fund some development projects. The Council use to organize show days and conduct fundraising activities to generate revenue to help run some of the activities of the village.\nAttorney General of Niue.\nBefore achieving independence in 1974, there was an Attorney General for Niue that also served as the Attorney General for New Zealand. However, it would not be until 1996 that Niue would create the official title of Attorney General after amending the Niue Act 1966. Nevertheless, the amendment would not create much of a constitutional change, and the introduction of the Interpretation Act 2004 instated the Crown Law Office as providing legal advice to the Niue government. As a result, it was advised in 2004 that the post of Attorney General be repealed.\nThe head of the Crown Law Office functions as a public servant, and the Public Service Commission designates the titles for the service officers. The Crown Law Office is responsible for advising the government ministries, and advises the police in regards to criminal prosecution. Due to the lack of attorneys in Niue, there are certain instances in which the office will provide legal presentation to Niue residents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21398", "revid": "40727880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21398", "title": "Transport in Niue", "text": "Transport in Niue takes place on a road network, and via an (international) airport and a sea port.\nA ring road around the island's coast is the major route, and roads cross the central plateau linking Alofi to the villages of Lakepa, Liku and Hakupu on the opposite coast. All villages in Niue are connected by roads. There are utility roads to the inland and some coastal areas, unsealed, used mainly for accessing taro plantations, coconut areas and walking access to the sea.\nNiue International Airport in the west, south of Alofi, is the only airfield. It was extended in 1995 to allow Boeing 737 aircraft to take off with maximum weight. Boeing 737-300, 737-800 and Boeing 757 aircraft have used the airport. Air New Zealand is the only airline serving Niue, with a weekly flight from Auckland. The flight is operated with an A320 departing Auckland on Saturday and arriving the previous day due to the International Date Line. The flight from Niue departs on Friday.\nNiue has a sea port, Sir Roberts Wharf in Alofi, which can be used only by flat-bottomed smaller vessels. The cargo ship \"Forum Pacific\" from Reef Shipping uses the wharf when the sea is calm. Otherwise cargo vessels and fishing boats use moorings about 100 metres from the reef, and barges are used to offload their cargo.\nMost Niuean households own a vehicle. There are four car-rental companies, which also hire bicycles, motorbikes and minibuses.\nStatistics.\nRailways:\n0\u00a0km\nHighways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n234\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"tarsealed:\"\n210\u00a0km\n&lt;br&gt;\"unsealed:\"\n24\u00a0km\nPorts and harbors:\nnone; offshore anchorage only\nMerchant marine:\nnone (1999 est.)\nAirports:\n1 (Niue International Airport)\nAirports - with paved runways:\n&lt;br&gt;\"total:\"\n1\n&lt;br&gt;\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n1 (1999 est.)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21399", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21399", "title": "Communications in Niue", "text": " \nCommunications in Niue include postal, telephone, internet, press and radio.\nTelecommunications services.\nTelephone service is provided by Telecom Niue, the sole provider, which services 1,100 landlines and fixed wireless lines. It also operates a cellular telephone service on the AMPS and GSM platforms.\nInternet users:\n1,485 (December, 2020)\nTelephones \u2013 main lines in use:\n1,100 (800 land line, 300 fixed wireless) (2003)\nTelephones \u2013 mobile cellular:\nundisclosed (excludes 300 fixed wireless) (2003)\nTelephones \u2013 GSM mobile cellular:\nundisclosed (2011)\nTelephone system:\n&lt;br&gt;\"domestic:\"\nsingle-line telephone system connects all villages on island\n&lt;br&gt;\"international:\"\nprovided by Telecom Niue (IDD code: 683)\nRadio.\nRadio broadcast stations:\nAM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1998)\nRadios:\n1,000 (1997)\nTelevision broadcast stations:\n1 (1997)\nTelevisions:\nNA\nPostal.\nPostal services are through the Niue Post Office.\nNewspapers.\nNiue has only one printed newspaper, the \"Niue Star\", founded in 1993. Until 2002, the Auckland-based Pasifika Times was also circulated in Niue.\nInternet service.\nNiue has free Internet service through the efforts of the Internet Users Society Niue, established 1999. However users need to pay NZD$25 to a local IT company to register the MAC address of their WiFi card before being able to log into this WiFi network.\nAlternatively, where ADSL is available, users can have connections through Telecom Niue's Internet Services located at Alofi through their island-wide distributed wireline.\n.nu Internet domain.\nThe .nu TLD is assigned to Niue.\nNiue, through an outside company, registers Internet domain names, so most .nu web addresses are not actually located in Niue. They are commonly used by Danish, Dutch and Swedish websites, because in those languages 'nu' means \u201cnow\u201d.\nNiue was the first country in the world to plan on offering free nationwide WiFi internet access, more than five million websites are available/accessible in Niue, using the funds provided by the domain registrations. 79.6% of Niueans were internet users in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21402", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21402", "title": "Northern Mariana Islands", "text": "U.S. territory in the Pacific Ocean\nThe Northern Mariana Islands, officially the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), is an unincorporated territory and commonwealth of the United States consisting of 14 islands in the northwestern Pacific Ocean. The CNMI includes the 14 northernmost islands in the Mariana Archipelago; the southernmost island, Guam, is a separate U.S. territory. The Northern Mariana Islands were listed by the United Nations as a non-self-governing territory until 1990.\nDuring the colonial period, the Northern Marianas were variously under the control of the Spanish, German, and Japanese empires. After World War II, the islands were part of the United Nations trust territories under American administration before formally joining the United States as a territory in 1986, with their population gaining United States citizenship.\nThe United States Department of the Interior cites a landmass of . According to the 2020 United States census, 47,329 people were living in the CNMI at the time. The vast majority of the population resides on Saipan, Tinian, and Rota. The other islands of the Northern Marianas are sparsely inhabited; the most notable among these is Pagan, which has been largely uninhabited since a 1981 volcanic eruption.\nThe administrative center is Capitol Hill, a village in northwestern Saipan. The current governor of the CNMI is David M. Apatang, who was elevated from lieutenant governor on July 23, 2025, following the death in office of Arnold Palacios who had served as governor since January 2023. The legislative branch has a nine-member Senate and a 20-member House of Representatives.\nHistory.\nThe islands were settled around 1500 BCE when various peoples migrated there. Eventually, the islands were claimed by Spain in 1521. In the 18th century, the people of the northern Marianas were forced by Spain to relocate, and when they returned, new peoples migrated there. In 1899 Spain sold the Northern Marianas to Germany in the Spanish-German Treaty of 1899, while Guam went to the United States. At the end of World War I, with the defeat of Germany, the islands became a part of the Japanese Mandate under the League of Nations, starting in 1918. The islands were liberated from the Japanese in the Battle of Saipan in 1944, and after the war, became part of the UN Trust Territory called the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). Over the decades, integration with Guam was rejected, and eventually, the islands left the TTPI and became a part of the US in 1986. The Northern Marianas then became the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) and its residents are US citizens. In 2009, they elected a non-voting delegate to the US Congress.\nArrival of humans.\nThe Mariana Islands were the first islands settled by humans in Remote Oceania. Incidentally, their settlement was the first and longest of the ocean-crossing voyages of the Austronesian peoples, separate from the later Polynesian settlement of the rest of Remote Oceania. The islands were first settled around 1500 to 1400 BC by people from the Philippines. This was followed by a second migration from the Caroline Islands by the first millennium AD, and a third migration from Island Southeast Asia (likely the Philippines or eastern Indonesia) by 900 AD.\nAfter their first contact with Spaniards, the islanders eventually became known as the Chamorros, a Spanish word similar to \"Chamori\", the name of the Indigenous caste system's higher division.\nThe ancient people of the Marianas raised colonnades of megalithic-capped pillars called latte stones upon which they built their homes. The Spanish reported that by their arrival, the largest of these was already in ruins and that the Chamorros believed the ancestors who had erected the pillars lived in an era when people possessed supernatural abilities.\nIn 2013 archaeologists posited that the first people to settle in the Marianas may have made what was at that point the longest uninterrupted ocean-crossing voyage in human history. Archeological evidence indicates that Tinian may have been the first Pacific island to be settled.\nSpanish possession.\nThe Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, sailing under the Spanish flag, arrived in 1521. He and his crew were the first Europeans to arrive in the Mariana Islands. He landed on Guam, the southernmost island of the Marianas, and claimed the archipelago for Spain. The Spanish ships were met offshore by the native Chamorros, who delivered refreshments and then helped themselves to a small boat belonging to Magellan's fleet. This led to a cultural clash: in Chamorro tradition, little property was private, and taking something one needed, such as a boat for fishing, did not count as stealing. The Spanish did not understand this custom and fought the Chamorros until the boat was recovered. Three days after he had been welcomed on his arrival, Magellan fled the archipelago. Spain regarded the islands as annexed and later made them part of the Spanish East Indies in 1565. In 1734, the Spanish built a royal palace, the Plaza de Espa\u00f1a, in Guam for the governor of the islands. The palace was largely destroyed during World War II, but portions of it remain.\nGuam operated as an important stopover between the Philippines and Mexico for the Manila galleon, which carried trading between Spanish colonies.\nIn 1668, Father Diego Luis de San Vitores renamed the islands \"Las Marianas\" in honor of his patroness, the Spanish regent Mariana of Austria (1634\u20131696), widow of Felipe IV (reigned 1621\u20131665).\nMost of the islands' native population (90\u201395%) died from European diseases carried by the Spaniards or married non-Chamorro settlers under Spanish rule. New settlers from the Philippines and the Caroline Islands were brought to repopulate the islands. The Chamorro population gradually recovered, and Chamorro, Filipino, and Refaluwasch languages and other ethnic groups remain in the Marianas.\nDuring the 17th century, Spanish colonists forcibly moved the Chamorros to Guam, to encourage assimilation and conversion to Roman Catholicism. By the time they were allowed to return to the Northern Marianas, many Carolinians from present-day eastern Yap State and western Chuuk State had settled in the Marianas. Both languages, as well as English, are now official in the commonwealth.\nIn 1720 the Spanish moved the remaining islanders, whose population had been decimated by diseases, from the Marianas to Guam. By 1741, there were about 5000 remaining Chamorros.\nCarolinian immigration.\nThe Northern Marianas experienced an influx of immigration from the Carolines (Micronesia region) during the 19th century. Both this Carolinian sub-ethnicity and Carolinians in the Carolines archipelago refer to themselves as the Refaluwasch. The indigenous Chamorro word for the same group of people is \"gu'palao\". They are usually referred to simply as \"Carolinians\", though, unlike the other two monikers, this can also mean those who live in the Carolines and may have no affiliation with the Marianas.\nThe conquering Spanish did not focus attempts at cultural suppression against Carolinian immigrants, whose immigration they allowed during a period when the indigenous Chamorro majority was being subjugated with land alienation and forced relocations. Carolinians in the Marianas continue to be fluent in the Carolinian language and have maintained many of the cultural distinctions and traditions of their ethnicity's land of ancestral origin.\nGerman possession and Japanese mandate.\nFollowing its loss during the Spanish\u2013American War of 1898, Spain ceded Guam to the United States and sold the remainder of the Marianas (i.e., the Northern Marianas), along with the Caroline Islands, to Germany under the German\u2013Spanish Treaty of 1899. The United States could have taken the entire Marianas, but beyond Guam, saw no need for the group. Germany administered the islands as part of its colony of German New Guinea and did little in terms of development.\nGermany built an office on Saipan to administer the island, and the head administrator was Georg Fritz. San Jose church was built during the German period. The Germans established a public school system and homesteading program, and some efforts were put into copra production; there was an overall effort to grow the economy with roads being built and vocational/trades training. Pagan and Alamagan were leased to a company called Pagan Gesellschaft, which planned to produce copra there, although its goals were hampered by numerous typhoons. Eight islands were leased to bird hunters, which used the feathers for hats.\nEarly in World War I, Japan declared war on Germany and invaded the Northern Marianas. In 1919 after the war concluded, the League of Nations (LoN) awarded all of Germany's islands in the Pacific Ocean located north of the Equator, including the Northern Marianas, under mandate to Japan. Under this arrangement, the Japanese thus administered the Northern Marianas as part of the South Seas Mandate. During the Japanese period, sugar cane became the primary industry of the islands. Garapan on Saipan was developed as a regional capital, and numerous Japanese (including ethnic Koreans and Okinawan and Taiwanese) migrated to the islands. In the December 1939 census, the total population of the South Seas Mandate was 129,104, of whom 77,257 were Japanese (including ethnic Taiwanese and Koreans). On Saipan, the pre-war population comprised 29,348 Japanese settlers and 3,926 Chamorro and Caroline Islanders; Tinian had 15,700 Japanese settlers (including 2,700 ethnic Koreans and 22 ethnic Chamorro). The Japanese built military constructions on the island in the 1930s and, in December 1941, used it as a staging area to invade Guam, which was part of the U.S. at that time.\nDuring the Japanese mandate, the main economic focus was sugar production, and for example, about 98% of Tinian island was used to grow sugarcane.\nWorld War II.\nOn December 8, 1941, hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Japanese forces from the Marianas launched an invasion of Guam. Chamorros from the Northern Marianas, which had been under Japanese rule for more than 20 years, were brought to Guam to assist the Japanese administration. This, combined with the harsh treatment of Guamanian Chamorros during the 31-month occupation, created a rift that would become the main reason Guamanians rejected the referendum on the reunification of Guam with the Northern Marianas that the Northern Marianas approved in the 1960s.\nOn June 15, 1944, the United States military invaded the Mariana Islands, starting the Battle of Saipan, which ended on July 9. Of the 30,000 Japanese troops defending Saipan, fewer than 1,000 remained alive at the battle's end. Many civilians were also killed, by disease, starvation, enemy fire, or suicide; about 1,000 civilians killed themselves by jumping off cliffs. U.S. forces then recaptured Guam on July 21, and invaded Tinian on July 24. A year later, Tinian was the takeoff point for the \"Enola Gay\", the plane that dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima. Rota was left untouched (and isolated) until the Japanese surrender in August 1945, owing to its military insignificance and U.S. forces' strategy of \"island hopping\" in which they did not invade islands that they did not need. \nThe war did not end for everyone with the signing of the armistice. A large group of Japanese holdouts surrendered on Saipan on December 1, 1945. However, a group of about 30 held out until 1951 on Anatahan; their story was told in the film \"The Saga of Anatahan\". On a related note, on Guam, Japanese soldier Shoichi Yokoi, unaware that the war had ended, hid in a jungle cave in the Talofofo area until 1972.\nJapanese nationals were eventually repatriated to the Japanese home islands. After World War II, the people of Marianas were able to return to the Northern Marianas under the protection of the United Nations Trusteeship administered by the United States. During this time, a series of referendums took place.\nUnited Nations trusteeship ends, Commonwealth begins.\nAfter Japan's defeat in World War II, the Northern Marianas were administered by the United States pursuant to Security Council Resolution 21 as part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, which assigned responsibility for defense and foreign affairs to the United States as trustee. Four referendums offering integration with Guam or changes to the islands' status were held in 1958, 1961, 1963 and 1969. On each occasion, a majority voted in favor of integration with Guam, but this did not happen: Guam rejected integration in a 1969 referendum.\nIn the 1975 Northern Mariana Islands status referendum nearly 80% voted to become a commonwealth of the United States, and in 1977 over 93% approved the constitution of the CNMI.\nThe people of the Northern Mariana Islands decided in the 1970s not to seek independence, but instead to forge closer links with the United States. Negotiations for commonwealth status began in 1972, and a covenant to establish a commonwealth in political union with the United States was approved in a 1975 referendum. A new government and constitution came into effect in part on January 9, 1978, after being approved in a 1977 referendum. The United Nations approved this arrangement pursuant to Security Council Resolution 683. The Northern Mariana Islands came under U.S. sovereignty on November 4, 1986, and the islanders became US citizens. Also on November 4, 1986, the Northern Mariana Islands constitution became fully effective under the Covenant.\nIn May 1981, volcanic eruptions led to the evacuation of the island of Pagan. Most residents of Pagan have not yet returned to Pagan due to ongoing volcanic activity.\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, agriculture and ranching became an important activity with thousands of beef cattle, dairy cows, hogs, and many crops such as pineapple. The food production became an important source of food supply for the Marianas region.\nThe Chamorro-Carolinian Language Policy Commission was created in 1982 to carry out policies in support of the Chamorro and Carolinian languages and cultures.\nIn December 1986, 20 percent of the homes on Saipan were destroyed by Typhoon Kim, trees were stripped of foliage, thousands of coconut trees were knocked down, roads were blocked, and there was no electricity or public water supply for weeks.\nIn April 1990, the inhabitants of the western coast of Anatahan were evacuated after earthquake swarms and active fumaroles indicated that an eruption might be imminent, but no eruption occurred at that time. A further earthquake swarm occurred in May 1992. The first historical eruption of Anatahan occurred in May 2003, when a large explosive eruption with a VEI of 4 took place, forming a new crater inside the eastern caldera and causing an ash plume high which impaired air traffic to Saipan and Guam.\nTwenty-first century.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands does not have voting representation in the United States Congress, but, since 2009, has been represented in the U.S. House of Representatives by a delegate; congressional delegates may participate in debates and serve on congressional committees but may not cast decisive votes on the House floor. In the United States, a non-voting delegate is not a new concept, but rather goes back to before 1800. Territorial delegates represent their region's interest in Congress, and their powers have been established over time, beginning in 1795. A major power of the territorial delegates (which have also been called Resident Commissioners), besides serving on committees, is speaking on the floor. Perhaps more importantly, the position is seen as a precursor to establishing voting rights, and discussion about granting delegate voting rights have occurred.\nIn 2018, 18 people embarked on a mission to repopulate the northern islands of Alamagan and Agrihan. They left Saipan aboard MV \"Super Emerald\"; the families involved originally had come from Alamagan. The mayor's office coordinated the months-long project plans, including a clean water supply, establishment of radio contact, and hopefully sending more families to the two islands. One returning Marianan remarked, \"I was born and raised on Saipan but my family is from Alamagan. We are going to live there for a long time.\" The 2020 United States Census reported a total of 7 people living on Alamagan and Agrihan.\nTyphoon Yutu caused widespread damage in October 2018, and was the strongest typhoon known to hit the islands. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) personnel deployed to both Tinian and Saipan ahead of the storm. U.S. President Donald Trump declared an emergency for the Northern Islands on October\u00a024, 2018.\nGeography.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands, together with Guam to the south, compose the Mariana Islands archipelago. The southern islands are limestone, with level terraces and fringing coral reefs. The northern islands are volcanic, with active volcanoes on several islands, including Anatahan, Pagan, and Agrihan. The volcano on Agrihan, Mount Agrihan, has the highest elevation at . An expedition organized by John D. Mitchler and Reid Larson made the first complete ascent to the summit of this peak on June 1, 2018.\nThe islands going from north to south comprise 14 main islands, but some smaller islands are often grouped together. Also, Zealandia Bank can sometimes be an island, depending on the tide. In terms of area, it is smaller than Guam; however, as an island chain, it spans hundreds of kilometers/miles from the northernmost to the southernmost. Many islands have multiple names due to popular nicknames, usually of Spanish, Chamorro, or English origin. Many of the islands have had to be evacuated due to volcanic activity.\nAnatahan Volcano is a small volcanic island north of Saipan. It is about long and wide. Anatahan began erupting from its east crater on May 10, 2003. It has since alternated between eruptive and calm periods. On April 6, 2005, an estimated of ash and rock were ejected, causing a large, black cloud to drift south over Saipan and Tinian.\nThe islands lie in the Marianas tropical dry forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nThe ocean area to the east of the islands and parts of the islands themselves are part of the Marianas Trench Marine National Monument. This area includes three northernmost islands, the \"Arc of Fire\" refuge, which includes 21 underwater volcanic sites, and the trench region, which goes to the maximum limit of the EEZ. The nature preserve aims to protect the unique marine life, which includes seabirds, sea turtles, unique coral reefs, and life around under-sea vents. The Marianas Trench includes the deepest ocean water on the planet, along with other underwater wonders, including a pool of liquid sulfur located at Daikoku, an underwater volcano. (see also Challenger Deep)\nGuam is to the south of the CNMI and Rota. To the east is Wake Island, then further east is the island of Midway, and eventually, the start of the Hawaiian island chain. American Samoa is located to the east and south and lies below the Equator. To the north and east, lies Alaska, which is a string of islands known as the Aleutians. To the west of the CNMI is the Philippines, and to the south and west is Palua, home to Chamorro people. To the south and east is Micronesia, which is home to the Carolinian people, many of which also settled on the CNMI centuries ago.\nSaipan has some additional semi-attached islets, including Bird Island, a nature reserve for birds. It is connected to Saipan only at low tide. Forbidden Island is similar, but larger on the southeast side of Saipan.\nClimate.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands have a tropical rainforest climate (K\u00f6ppen: Af) moderated by seasonal northeast trade winds, with little seasonal temperature variation. The dry season runs from December to June; the rainy season runs from July to November and can include typhoons. The \"Guinness Book of World Records\" has said Saipan has the most equable climate in the world.\nPolitics and government.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands have a multiparty presidential representative democratic system. They are a commonwealth of the United States. Federal funds to the commonwealth are administered by the Office of Insular Affairs of the U.S. Department of the Interior.\nReplicating the separation of powers elsewhere in the United States, the executive branch is headed by the governor of the Northern Mariana Islands; legislative power is vested in the bicameral Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature and the judicial power is vested in the CNMI Supreme Court and the trial courts inferior to it.\nSome critics, including the author of the political website \"Saipan Sucks\", say that politics in the Northern Mariana Islands is often \"more a function of family relationships and personal loyalties\" where the size of one's extended family is more important than a candidate's personal qualifications. They charge that this is nepotism carried out within the trappings of democracy.\nIn April 2012, anticipating a loss of funding by 2014, the commonwealth's public pension fund declared Chapter 11 bankruptcy. The retirement fund is a defined benefit-type pension plan and was only partially funded by the government, with only $268.4\u00a0million in assets and $911\u00a0million in liabilities. The plan experienced low investment returns and a benefit structure that had been increased without raises in funding.\nIn August 2012, cries for impeachment arose, as the sitting governor Benigno Fitial was being held responsible for withholding payments from the pension fund, not paying the local utility (Commonwealth Utilities or \"CUC\") for government offices, cutting off funding to the only hospital in the Northern Marianas, interfering with the delivery of a subpoena to his attorney general, withholding required funds from the public schools, and for signing a sole source $190\u00a0million contract for power generation.\nNorthern Mariana Islands' delegation to the 2016 Republican National Convention boasted about being \"the most Republican territory\" in the U.S. In 2017, the Republican Party had large majorities in both the Northern Mariana Islands Senate and the Northern Mariana Islands House of Representatives, though no party has a majority in either chamber as of 2023.\nAdministrative divisions.\nThe islands total . The table gives an overview, with the individual islands listed from north to south:\nAdministratively, the CNMI is divided into four municipalities:\nThe Northern Islands (north of Saipan) form the Northern Islands Municipality. The three main islands of the Southern Islands form the municipalities of Saipan, Tinian, and Rota, with uninhabited Aguijan forming part of Tinian municipality.\nThe northern islands have been evacuated because of a volcanic threat. Human habitation was limited to Agrihan, Pagan, and Alamagan, but the population varied due to various economic factors, including children's education. The 2020 census showed only seven residents in the Northern Islands Municipality, and the Northern Islands' mayor's office is located in \"exile\" on Saipan.\nSaipan, Tinian, and Rota have the only ports and harbors and are the only permanently populated islands.\nFor statistical purposes, the United States Census Bureau counts the four municipalities of the Northern Mariana Islands as county equivalents.\nPolitical status and autonomy.\nIn 1947, the Northern Mariana Islands became part of the post\u2013World War II United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (TTPI). The United States became the TTPI's administering authority under the terms of a trusteeship agreement. In 1976, Congress approved the mutually negotiated Covenant to establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America. The Covenant was codified on March 24, 1976, as Public Law 94-241. The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) government adopted its own constitution in 1977, and the new government took office in January 1978. Implementation of the Covenant, which took effect on January 1, 1978, was completed on November 3, 1986, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation no. 5564; which placed into effect the Covenant With the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Compacts of Free Association With the Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the Marshall Islands. This allowed the CNMI to be represented to the United States Government in Washington, DC by a \"Resident Representative\", elected at-large by CNMI voters and whose office was paid for by the CNMI government. The Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008 (\"CNRA\"), approved by the U.S. Congress on May 8, 2008, established a CNMI delegate's seat; Democrat Gregorio Sablan was elected in November 2008 as the first CNMI delegate and took office in the 111th Congress. Like the other five delegates in the House, the CNMI delegate participates in debates and committee votes but has no vote on the floor of the House of Representatives and has no role in the U.S. Senate, but is equal to a Senator when serving on a conference committee.\nOn December 22, 1990, the United Nations Trusteeship Council terminated the TTPI as it applied to the CNMI and five other of the TTPI's original seven districts (the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap)), this was acknowledged in United Nations Security Council Resolution 683 passed on the same day.\nUnder the Covenant, only certain provisions of the U.S. Constitution apply to the Commonwealth, and legislation passed by the U.S. Congress can only apply to the Commonwealth if it applies to all 50 states. The CNMI is outside the customs area of the United States and \"bona fide\" residents of the Commonwealth are exempt from U.S. federal income tax, as is the case in the four self-governing territories. According to the Covenant, the federal minimum wage and federal immigration laws \"will not apply to the Northern Mariana Islands except in the manner and to the extent made applicable to them by the Congress by law after termination of the Trusteeship Agreement.\" Local control of minimum wage was superseded by the United States Congress in 2007; it was slowly raised until in 2015 it reached parity with the 50 states.\nInitially, under the Covenant, a separate immigration system existed in the CNMI, and U.S. immigration law did not apply. Still, the Covenant gave the United States power of reservation over immigration law in the Commonwealth. After reports surfaced of abusive practices for immigrant workers, on November 28, 2009, the United States exercised its power of reservation; specifically, CNRA \u00a7 702(a) amended the Covenant to state that \"the provisions of the 'immigration laws' (as defined in section 101(a)(17) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(17))) shall apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.\" Further, under CNRA \u00a7 702(a), the \"immigration laws,\" as well as the amendments to the Covenant, \"shall...supersede and replace all laws, provisions, or programs of the Commonwealth relating to the admission of aliens and the removal of aliens from the Commonwealth.\" Transition to U.S. immigration laws began November 28, 2009.\nJudicial system.\nCases under federal law are heard by the District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands, which was established by act of Congress in 1977, and began operations in January 1978. The court sits on the island of Saipan but may sit in other places within the commonwealth. The district court has the same jurisdiction as all other United States district courts, including diversity jurisdiction and bankruptcy jurisdiction. Appeals are taken to the Ninth Circuit. As a United States territorial court established under Congress's territorial power granted by Article IV of the United States Constitution, judges do not have lifetime appointments, unlike the Article III courts in the 50 states, District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico.\nCases under territorial law are heard by the Superior Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, with appeals heard by the Supreme Court of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.\nIn June 2024, Julian Assange pleaded guilty in a court in Saipan, the capital of the US territory, before flying home to Australia.\nCitizenship.\nArticle III of the Covenant conferred United States citizenship on legally qualified CNMI residents, which generally included all citizens of the CNMI, and established U.S. birthright citizenship for persons born in the CNMI.\nThe CNMI has a number of special visa programs and conditions, one of the latest was the CNMI Long-Term Resident Status program. However, the visa exemptions for Guam-CNMI are more restrictive than the general U.S. Visa Waiver Program. Still, they need to become residents of a U.S. state or Washington, D.C. to be able to vote in presidential elections. Per the terms of the covenant, since 1986, the Northern Marianas have the right of \"jus soli\"; children born there, as anywhere in the U.S., are citizens at birth. This has also made the CNMI a refuge for pregnant women who escape authoritarian regimes in East Asia: when their child is born in the Northern Marianas it can be a U.S. citizen. \nThere are a number of serious restrictions on immigration and citizenship rules in the CNMI. For example, it is not possible to apply for asylum before 2030. The U.S. has tried to work with Asian countries and local Marianas to create a realistic balance that allows access but not abuse of the CNMI system and realistic pathways to citizenship according to the rules of the United States and a respect for human situations.\nEconomy.\nThe Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands benefits from its trading relationship with the federal government of the United States and cheap trained labor from Asia. The CNMI's economy has historically relied on tourism, mostly from Japan, and the garment manufacturing sector. The economy has declined since quotas were lifted in 2005, eventually leading all the garment factories in Saipan to close by February 2009. Tourism also declined after 2005 when Japan Airlines stopped serving the Marianas.\nAgricultural production, primarily of tapioca, cattle, coconuts, breadfruit, tomatoes, and melons, is relatively unimportant in the economy, representing only 1.7% of CNMI GDP as of 2016. It remains important for the community, and the Marianas, with their thousands of cattle and rich soils, are important for feeding the region, with Tinian being known as the breadbasket of the Marianas. The cattle herds in the CNMI supply beef not only locally but also to Guam, Palau, and Micronesia. Some of the cattle breeds on Tinian in the 21st century include Senepol, Brangus (Brahman X Angus), Red Angus, and American Brahman, and various modern ranching techniques are utilized.\nNon-native islanders are not allowed to own land but can lease it.\nTourism.\nTourism is popular; several hundred thousand people visit the CNMI in a typical year, and one of the highest years was 1997 when over 760,000 people visited the islands. \nTourism was strong in 2019, comprising visitors mainly from China and South Korea. Tourism dropped during the pandemic, and has been slow to recover since it ended. Direct flights from Japan have decreased, and the political issues between the US and China have stopped all flights from China (except from Hong Kong) to Saipan. CNMI hopes to attract tourists again from Japan, requiring direct flights to increase between Saipan and Japanese cities. The market in 2023 and 2024 for tourism is about half the 2019, pre-pandemic level, relying on tourists from South Korea. \u201cThe number of tourists recovered to over 194,600 in fiscal 2023 from some 5,370 in fiscal 2021 and about 69,530 in fiscal 2022 thanks to the return of South Koreans, according to the MVA data.\u201d Some travel experts suggest that CNMI change its image from the low cost destination to a slightly fancier destination.\nActivities known to be popular are jungle hikes, golfing, diving, and historical sites such as prehistoric stones. One of the golf courses was designed by professional champion golfer Greg Norman. A tourism hot spot is Managaha Island, which must be accessed by ferry and has various bbq vendors, water sport activities, and has wide sandy beaches surrounding a tropical forest. \nTourists from the U.S. do not need a visa, while those from other countries that qualify for ESTA or the Guam-CNMI Visa Waiver Program can usually stay for up to 45 or 90 days.\nNoted tourist destinations in the CNMI include:\nLabor controversies.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands had successfully used its position as a free trade area with the U.S., while at the same time not being subject to the same labor laws. For example, the Commonwealth's $3.05 per hour minimum wage, which lasted from 1997 to 2007, was lower than in the U.S., and some other worker protections are weaker, leading to lower production costs. That allowed garments to be labeled \"Made in USA\" without complying with all U.S. labor laws. However, the U.S. minimum wage law signed by President George W. Bush on May 25, 2007, resulted in stepped increases in the Northern Marianas' minimum wage, which allowed it to reach the U.S. level in 2015. The first step (to $3.55) became effective July 25, 2007, and a yearly increase of $0.50 will take effect every May thereafter until the CNMI minimum wage equals the nationwide minimum wage. However, a law signed by President Obama in December 2009 delayed the yearly increase from May to September. In 2018, the minimum wage finally reached $7.25, matching the U.S. federal minimum wage.\nThe island's exemption from U.S. labor laws had led to many alleged exploitations, including recent claims of sweatshops, child labor, child prostitution, and forced abortions.\nAn immigration system mostly outside of federal U.S. control (which ended on November 28, 2009) resulted in many Chinese migrant workers (about 15,000 during the peak years) being employed in the islands' garment trade. However, the lifting of World Trade Organization restrictions on Chinese imports to the U.S. in 2005 had put the commonwealth-based trade under severe pressure, leading to a number of factory closures. Along with the U.S.-imposed scheduled wage increases, the last factories were closed in early 2009 and the garment industry became extinct.\nInfrastructure.\nThe islands have more than of highways, three airports with paved runways (one about long; two around ), three airports with unpaved runways, and one heliport. The main commercial airport is Saipan International Airport.\nCommuter airline Star Marianas Air provides short-haul flights between Guam, Saipan, Tinian, and Rota. International carriers connect Saipan with Korea, China, and Japan; flights to the U.S. mainland typically connect through Guam or Hawai\u02bbi.\nIn addition to by air, inter-island travel within the commonwealth is possible via ferry or chartered vessel services. For example, to visit Pagan is a boat trip.\nMail service for the islands is provided by the U.S. Postal Service (USPS). Each major island has its own ZIP code in the 96950\u201396952 range, and the USPS two-letter abbreviation for the CNMI is MP (\"Marianas Pacific\", NM and MI being taken). \"CM\" has been used previously and is still used in some contexts, but can be confused with Cameroon. For phone service, the islands are included in the North American Numbering Plan, using area code 670.\nTelevision service is provided by KPPI-LD, Channel 7, which simulcasts Guam's ABC affiliate, KTGM, as well as WSZE, Channel 10, which simulcasts Guam's NBC affiliate, KUAM-TV. About 10 radio stations broadcast within the CNMI.\nIn 2012, \"Slate\" reported that CNMI internet prices were five times those of Guam and that the price per megabit increases if a customer chooses a higher level internet package due to the limited bandwidth. In 2023, some Federal funding for improving broadband was allocated to the territory.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the 2020 census, the population of the CNMI was 47,329, down from 69,221 in 2000. The decrease was reportedly due to a combination of factors, including the demise of the garment industry (the vast majority of whose employees were females from China), economic crises, and a decline in tourism, one of the CNMI's primary sources of revenue.\nAs of the 2020 Census, except for the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands, the Northern Mariana Islands are the second least populous sub-federal jurisdiction in the United States, next to American Samoa. However, the islands population has fluctuated over time hitting 80 thousand in 2000, then declining to around 50 thousand in the 2010s. In 1986, when the people of the CNMI became U.S. citizens, it had a population of about 36 thousand. In 1950, the population was about 7 thousand. For comparison, in 1776, the smallest American state by population was Delaware with a population of about 60 thousand.\nAs of 2020, about 60% of the population are U.S. Citizens or Lawful Permanent Residents, and the other 40% are foreign workers. The United States has a program that monitors the ratio of workers to citizens and the number of lawful residents of different types.\nMany Marianans have migrated to the continental US, and moving to the West Coast is slightly more popular. One of the largest communities is in Washington State, with a community of almost 5,000 people from the islands.\nLanguages.\nThe official languages on the Northern Mariana Islands include English, Chamorro, and Carolinian. Few people still speak the nearly extinct Tanapag language. Many Philippine languages, Chinese, and other Pacific island languages are also spoken. Spanish is still retained in surnames but is no longer commonly used, though it is still familiar to some elders as a third or fourth language.\nEthnic groups.\nBased on the 2010 census in the CIA World Factbook:\nThe Northern Marianas is mostly a diverse mix of Asian and Pacific peoples.\nReligion.\nOwing to the Spanish missionaries in the Marianas, a large majority of Chamorros and Carolinians practice Roman Catholicism. The Japanese occupation created a sizable Buddhist community which remained even after their departure. Due to the influence of the United States, diverse denominations of Protestantism also entered the islands. Many people on the Northern Mariana Islands are Roman Catholic or have traditional beliefs.\nAccording to the Pew Research Center, 2010:\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints reported 865 members in a ward (congregation) in the Northern Mariana Islands.\nEducation.\nThe Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands Public School System operates public schools in the commonwealth and there are numerous private schools. Northern Marianas College is accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges and offers a range of programs similar to other small U.S. community colleges.\nCulture.\nMuch of the Chamorro culture in the Mariana Islands was influenced by Spanish rule; it also displays influence from the Germans and Japanese. Respect is an integral part of Chamorro culture, and one typical display is the tradition of \"manngingi'\". This tradition has been around for centuries and involves an elder and a young Chamorro child. The child takes the hand of the elder, places it on their nose, and says \"\u00f1ot\" to the men and \"\u00f1ora\" to the women, with the elders responding \"diosti ayudi\" (from Spanish \"Se\u00f1or\", \"Se\u00f1ora\", \"Dios Te Ayude\"), meaning \"God help you\".\nThe Carolinian culture is very similar to that of the Chamorros, with respect paramount. Carolinian culture can be traced to Yap and Chuuk, where the population originated. One of the differences between Guam and the Northern Marianas is the significant migration of the Carolinian (modern-day Micronesia) people and culture, in addition to the Chamorros.\nCuisine.\nMuch of Chamorro cuisine is influenced by various cultures. Popular foods of foreign origin include various types of sweet or savory empanada, initially introduced by Spain, and pancit, a noodle dish from the Philippines.\nArcheological evidence reveals that rice has been cultivated in the Marianas since prehistoric times. Red rice made with achoti is a distinct staple food that strongly distinguishes Chamorro cuisine from that of other Pacific islands. It is commonly served for special events, such as parties (gupot or \"fiestas\"), novenas, and high school or college graduations. Fruits such as lemmai (breadfruit), mangga (mangoes), niyok (coconuts), and bilimbines (bilimbi, a fruit related to starfruit) are included in various local recipes. Korean, Chinese, Japanese, and American cuisine are also commonly available.\nLocal specialties include kelaguen, a dish in which meat is cooked in whole or in part by the action of citric acid rather than heat; \"tinaktak\", a meat dish made with coconut milk; and k\u00e5'du fanihi (flying fox/fruit bat soup). Fruit bats have become scarce in modern times on several islands, primarily due to the overharvesting of the species and loss of habitat; hunting them is now illegal even though poaching still occurs.\nThe Marianas and the Hawaiian islands are the world's foremost consumers, per capita, of Spam, with Guam at the top of the list and Hawaii second (details regarding the rest of the Marianas are often absent from statistics). Spam was introduced to the islands by the American military as war rations during World War II.\nSpam is considered a \"default\" meal or snack and is often incorporated into recipes such as Spam sushi, Spam pizza, Spam and eggs, and Spam-fried rice. The food is popular on other islands also including Guam and Hawaiian islands, and one popular flavor is hot and spicy spam.\nCinema.\nA small independent cinema of Northern Mariana Islands, producing mostly documentary films, developed in the 21st century thanks to the efforts of the Commonwealth and of the Northern Marianas College. Foreign producers had already shot films on the islands in the 20th century.\nIn 2002, a new \u00a7 2151 of the Commonwealth Code established within the Marianas Visitors Authority (MVA), a Commonwealth Film, Video, and Media Office, also known as the Northern Mariana Islands Film Office, with the purpose of attracting foreign companies to produce movies in the Commonwealth and to develop a local cinema industry.\nSports.\nTeam sports prevalent in the United States were introduced to the Northern Mariana Islands by American soldiers during World War II. Baseball is the islands' most popular sport. CNMI teams have made appearances in the Little League World Series (in the Little, Junior, Senior, and Big league divisions) as well as winning gold medals in the Micronesian Games and South Pacific Games.\nBasketball and mixed martial arts are also popular in the islands, which hosted the official 2009 Oceania Basketball Tournament. Trench Wars is the CNMI's Mixed Martial Arts brand. Fighters from the CNMI have competed in the Pacific Xtreme Combat as well as the UFC.\nOther sports in the CNMI include Ultimate Frisbee, volleyball, tennis, soccer, outrigger sailing, softball, beach volleyball, rugby, golf, boxing, kickboxing, tae kwon do, track and field, swimming, triathlon, and football.\nThe islands have several golf courses, mostly on Saipan and often near resorts. There are four golf courses on Saipan as of the 2020s: Marianas Country Club, Laolao Bay Country Club, Coral Ocean Point Resort Clu, and Kingfisher Golf Links. To the south, Rota Island has another Rota Resort &amp; Country Club. All the courses have 18 holes, but the level of difficulty varies.\nFlora and fauna.\nThe official bird of the Northern Marianas Islands is the endemic Mariana fruit dove and the official flower is the Plumeria, which originated in the Americas. The islands are home to many tropical plants and animals, as well as marine life such as whales and dugongs. The islands are heavily forested, with about 80% ground cover consisting of tropical forests. Trees include palm, banana, pine, fern, and plumeria. There are many species of coral around the islands, many of which are ringed by coral reefs, and some islands have upwards of 60 species of coral.\nThere are nine known species of birds endemic to the Northern Marianas, such as the Saipan Reed Warbler and Golden white-eye, as well as a variety of invertebrates, insects, and plants. Some of examples include Langford's tree snail (\"Partula langfordi\") or the tree fern \"(Cyathea aramaganensis\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21403", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21403", "title": "History of the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "21404", "revid": "48141740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21404", "title": "Geography of the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": " \nThe Northern Mariana Islands, together with Guam to the south, compose the Mariana Islands. The southern islands are limestone, with level terraces and fringing coral reefs. The northern islands are volcanic, with active volcanoes on Anatahan, Pagan and Agrihan. The volcano on Agrihan has the highest elevation at . About one-fifth of the land is arable; another tenth is pasture. The primary natural resource is fish, some of which are endangered species, which leads to conflict. Also, development has created landfills which have contaminated the groundwater on Saipan, which could lead to disease.\nAnatahan Volcano is a small volcanic island north of Saipan. It is about long and wide. Anatahan began erupting suddenly from its east crater on May 10, 2003, at about 6\u00a0p.m. local time (08:00 UTC). It has since alternated between eruptive and calm periods. On April 6, 2005, approximately of ash and rock were ejected, causing a large, black cloud to drift south over Saipan and Tinian.\nClimate.\nThe islands have a tropical marine climate moderated by seasonal northeast trade winds. There is little seasonal temperature variation. The dry season runs from December to June, and the rainy season from July to November and can include typhoons. The Guinness Book of World Records has cited Saipan as having the most equable climate in the world. From 1927 to 1935, the temperature ranged from at the lowest to at the highest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21405", "revid": "17304657", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21405", "title": "Demographics of the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": " \nPopulation.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2011): \nDemographic features of the population of the Northern Mariana Islands include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.\nBirths and deaths.\nPopulation from census data, other data from CDC Births/Deaths reports.\nReligion.\nAccording to the Pew Research Center, 2010:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21406", "revid": "50046790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21406", "title": "Politics of the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": " \nPolitics of the Northern Mariana Islands takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic system, whereby the Governor is head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. The Northern Mariana Islands is an unincorporated territory of the United States, and in a political union with it in the form of a commonwealth. Executive power is exercised by the governor. Legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the legislature. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature. Local government is carried out through four regional mayors.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands and the United States of America reached a Covenant Agreement which became fully effective on November 4, 1986. The Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands became effective on January 1, 1978.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Northern Mariana Islands Commonwealth Legislature has two chambers. The House of Representatives has 20 members, elected for a two-year term from seven districts. The Senate has 9 members, elected for a four-year term in two staggered classes.\nPrior to January 2009, the Commonwealth maintained an elected \"Resident Representative\" in Washington, DC. As authorized by Pub. L.\u00a0, the Commonwealth now elects a nonvoting delegate to the U.S. Congress, similar to other U.S. insular areas. The first election was held on November 4, 2008.\nJudicial branch.\nCommonwealth Supreme Court; Superior Court; Federal District Court\nFederal representation.\nIn November 2008, the Northern Mariana Islands held its first election for a delegate to the United States Congress. Gregorio \"Kilili\" Sablan won the election, and began his term of office in January 2009. The delegate serves as a member to some House committees and may vote in those committees, but the delegate is not permitted to vote on bills up for vote among all members of the House.\nPolitical culture.\nHistorically the Northern Mariana Islands have been subject to the colonizing powers of Spain, Germany, Japan, and the United States under a United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands Agreement. Each power contributed elements that mixed with local indigenous cultures to form the current political culture of the Northern Mariana Islands.\nUnited States citizenship was granted in 1986. Politics in the Northern Mariana Islands is often \"more a function of family relationships and personal loyalties\" where the size of one's extended family is more important than a candidate's personal qualifications. Both scholarly works and the authors of the controversial website Saipansucks.com charge that this is nepotism carried out within the trappings of democracy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21408", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21408", "title": "Communications on the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "21409", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21409", "title": "Transportation on the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "21410", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21410", "title": "Military of the Northern Mariana Islands", "text": ""}
{"id": "21411", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21411", "title": "Northern Mariana Islands/Transnational issues", "text": ""}
{"id": "21418", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21418", "title": "Norway/Military", "text": ""}
{"id": "21422", "revid": "51001561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21422", "title": "Norfolk Island", "text": "External territory of Australia\nNorfolk Island ( , ; ) is an external territory of Australia located in the Pacific Ocean between New Zealand and New Caledonia, directly east of Australia's Evans Head and about from Lord Howe Island. Together with the neighbouring Phillip Island and Nepean Island, the three islands collectively form the Territory of Norfolk Island. At the 2021 census, it had 2,188 inhabitants living on a total area of about . Its capital is Kingston.\nEast Polynesians were the first to settle Norfolk Island, but they had already departed when Great Britain settled it as part of its 1788 colonisation of Australia. The island served as a convict penal settlement from 6 March 1788 until 5 May 1855, except for an 11-year hiatus between 15 February 1814 and 6 June 1825, when it lay abandoned. On 8 June 1856, permanent civilian residence on the island began when descendants of the \"Bounty\" mutineers were relocated from Pitcairn Island. In 1914, the UK handed Norfolk Island over to Australia, but did not Annex it to Australia, requiring it to only manage its requirements, not own it, as an external territory.\nNative to the island, the evergreen Norfolk Island pine is a symbol of the island and is pictured on its flag. The pine is a key export for Norfolk Island, being a popular ornamental tree in Australia (where two related species grow), and also worldwide.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nNorfolk Island was uninhabited when first settled by Europeans, but evidence of earlier habitation was obvious. Archaeological investigation suggests that in the 13th or 14th century the island was settled by East Polynesian seafarers, either from the Kermadec Islands north of mainland New Zealand, or from the North Island of New Zealand. However, both Polynesian and Melanesian artefacts have been found, so it is possible that people from New Caledonia, relatively close to the north, also reached Norfolk Island. Human occupation must have ceased at least a few hundred years before Europeans arrived in the late 18th century. Ultimately, the relative isolation of the island, and its poor horticultural environment, were not favourable to long-term settlement.\nFirst penal settlement (1774\u20131814).\nThe first European known to have sighted and landed on the island was Captain James Cook, on 10 October 1774, on his second voyage to the South Pacific on . He named it after Mary Howard, Duchess of Norfolk. Sir John Call argued the advantages of Norfolk Island in that it was uninhabited and that New Zealand flax grew there.\nAfter the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in 1775 halted penal transportation to the Thirteen Colonies, British prisons started to overcrowd. Several stopgap measures proved ineffective, and the government announced in December 1785 that it would send convicts to parts of what is now known as Australia. In 1786, it included Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, as proposed by John Call, in its plan for colonisation of the Colony of New South Wales. The decision to settle Norfolk Island was taken after Empress Catherine II of Russia restricted the sale of hemp. At the time, practically all the hemp and flax required by the Royal Navy for cordage and sailcloth was imported from Russia.\nWhen the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January\u00a01788, Governor Arthur Phillip ordered Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of 15\u00a0convicts and seven free men to take control of Norfolk Island, and prepare for its commercial development. They arrived on 6 March. During the first year of the settlement, which was also called \"Sydney\" like its parent, more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from New South Wales. Robert Watson, harbourmaster, arrived with the First Fleet as quartermaster of , and was still serving in that capacity when the ship was wrecked at Norfolk Island in 1790. Next year, he obtained and cultivated a grant of on the island.\nAs early as 1794, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales Francis Grose suggested its closure as a penal settlement, as it was too remote and difficult for shipping and too costly to maintain. The first group of people left in February\u00a01805, and by 1808, only about 200\u00a0remained, forming a small settlement until the remnants were removed in 1813. A small party remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings, so that there would be no inducement for anyone, especially from other European powers, to visit and lay claim to the place. From February\u00a01814 until June\u00a01825, the island was uninhabited.\nSecond penal settlement (1824\u20131856).\nIn 1824, the British government instructed the Governor of New South Wales, Thomas Brisbane, to reoccupy Norfolk Island as a place to send \"the worst description of convicts\". Its remoteness, previously seen as a disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of recalcitrant male prisoners. The convicts detained have long been assumed to be hardcore recidivists, or 'doubly-convicted capital respites' \u2013 that is, men transported to Australia who committed fresh crimes in the colony for which they were sentenced to death, but were spared the gallows on condition of life on Norfolk Island. However, a 2011 study, using a database of 6,458 Norfolk Island convicts, has demonstrated that the reality was somewhat different: More than half were detained on Norfolk Island without ever receiving a colonial conviction, and only 15% had been reprieved from a death sentence. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of convicts sent to Norfolk Island had committed non-violent property offences, and the average length of detention there was three years. Nonetheless, Norfolk Island went through periods of unrest with convicts staging a number of uprisings and mutinies between 1826 and 1846, all of which failed. The British government began to wind down the second penal settlement after 1847, and the last convicts were removed to Tasmania in May 1855. The island was abandoned because transportation from the United Kingdom to Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania) had ceased in 1853, to be replaced by penal servitude in the UK.\nSettlement by Pitcairn Islanders (1856\u2013present).\nThe next settlement began on 8 June 1856, as the descendants of Tahitians and the HMS \"Bounty\" mutineers, including those of Fletcher Christian, were resettled from the Pitcairn Islands, which had become too small for their growing number. On 3 May 1856, 193 people left Pitcairn Islands aboard the \"Morayshire\". On 8 June 194 people arrived, a baby having been born in transit. The Pitcairners occupied many of the buildings remaining from the penal settlements, and gradually established traditional farming and whaling industries on the island. Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island's population continued to grow. They accepted additional settlers, who often arrived on whaling vessels.\nThe island was a regular resort for whaling vessels in the age of sail. The first such ship was the \"Britannia\" in November 1793. The last on record was the \"Andrew Hicks\" in August\u2013September 1907. They came for water, wood and provisions, and sometimes they recruited islanders to serve as crewmen on their vessels.\nIn 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of England was established on the island. In 1920, the Mission was relocated from Norfolk Island to the Solomon Islands to be closer to the focus of population.\nNorfolk Island was the subject of several experiments in administration during the century. It began the 19th century as part of the Colony of New South Wales. On 29 September 1844, Norfolk Island was transferred from the Colony of New South Wales to the Colony of Van Diemen's Land. On 1 November 1856 Norfolk Island was separated from the Colony of Tasmania (formerly Van Diemen's Land) and constituted as a \"distinct and separate Settlement, the affairs of which should until further Order in that behalf by Her Majesty be administered by a Governor to be for that purpose appointed\". The Governor of New South Wales was constituted as the Governor of Norfolk Island.\nOn 19 March 1897, the office of the Governor of Norfolk Island was abolished and responsibility for the administration of Norfolk Island was vested in the Governor of the Colony of New South Wales. Yet, the island was not made a part of New South Wales and remained separate. The Colony of New South Wales ceased to exist upon the establishment of the Commonwealth of Australia on 1 January 1901, and from that date responsibility for the administration of Norfolk Island was vested in the Governor of the State of New South Wales.\n20th century.\nThe Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia accepted the territory by the \"Norfolk Island Act 1913\" (Cth), subject to British agreement; the Act received royal assent on 19 December 1913. In preparation for the handover, a proclamation by the Governor of New South Wales on 23 December 1913 (in force when gazetted on 24 December) repealed \"all laws heretofore in force in Norfolk Island\" and replaced them by re-enacting a list of such laws. Among those laws was the \"Administration Law 1913\" (NSW), which provided for appointment of an Administrator of Norfolk Island and of magistrates, and contained a code of criminal law.\nBritish agreement was expressed on 30 March 1914, in a UK Order in Council made pursuant to the \"Australian Waste Lands Act\" 1855 (Imp). A proclamation by the Governor-General of Australia on 17 June 1914 gave effect to the Act and the Order as from 1 July 1914.\nDuring World War II, the island became a key airbase and refuelling depot between Australia and New Zealand and between New Zealand and the Solomon Islands. The airstrip was constructed by Australian, New Zealand and United States servicemen during 1942. Since Norfolk Island fell within New Zealand's area of responsibility, it was garrisoned by a New Zealand Army unit known as N Force at a large army camp that had the capacity to house a 1,500-strong force. N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force. The island proved too remote to come under attack during the war, and N Force left the island in February 1944.\nIn 1979, Norfolk Island was granted limited self-government by Australia, under which the island elected a government that ran most of the island's affairs.\n21st century.\nIn 2006, a formal review process took place in which the Australian government considered revising the island's model of government. The review was completed on 20 December 2006, when it was decided that there would be no changes in the governance of Norfolk Island.\nFinancial problems and a reduction in tourism led to Norfolk Island's administration appealing to the Australian federal government for assistance in 2010. In return, the islanders were to pay income tax for the first time but would be eligible for greater welfare benefits. However, by May 2013, agreement had not been reached and islanders were having to leave to find work and welfare. An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on 12 March 2015 to replace self-government with a local council but against the wishes of the Norfolk Island government. A majority of Norfolk Islanders objected to the Australian plan to make changes to Norfolk Island without first consulting them and allowing their say, with 68% of voters against forced changes. An example of growing friction between Norfolk Island and increased Australian rule was featured in a 2019 episode of Discovery Channel's annual Shark Week. The episode featured Norfolk Island's policy of culling growing cattle populations by killing older cattle and feeding the carcasses to tiger sharks well off the coast. This is done to help prevent tiger sharks from coming further toward shore in search of food. Norfolk Island holds one of the largest populations of tiger sharks in the world. Australia has banned the culling policy as cruelty to animals. Norfolk Islanders fear this will lead to increased shark attacks and damage an already waning tourist industry.\nOn 4 October 2015, the time zone for Norfolk Island was changed from to .\nReduced autonomy 2016.\nIn March 2015, the Australian Government announced comprehensive reforms for Norfolk Island. The action was justified on the grounds it was necessary \"to address issues of sustainability which have arisen from the model of self-government requiring Norfolk Island to deliver local, state and federal functions since 1979\". On 17 June 2015, the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished, with the territory becoming run by an Administrator and an advisory council. Elections for a new Regional Council were held on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016.\nFrom that date, most Australian Commonwealth laws were extended to Norfolk Island. This means that taxation, social security, immigration, customs and health arrangements apply on the same basis as in mainland Australia. Travel between Norfolk Island and mainland Australia became domestic travel on 1 July 2016. For the 2016 Australian federal election, 328 people on Norfolk Island voted in the ACT electorate of Canberra, out of 117,248 total votes. Since 2018, Norfolk Island is covered by the electorate of Bean.\nThere is opposition to the reforms, led by Norfolk Island People for Democracy Inc., an association appealing to the United Nations to include the island on its list of \"non-self-governing territories\". There has also been movement to join New Zealand since the autonomy reforms.\nIn October 2019, the Norfolk Island People For Democracy advocacy group conducted a survey of 457 island residents (about one quarter of the entire population) and found that 37% preferred free association with New Zealand, 35% preferred free association with Australia, 25% preferred full independence, and 3% preferred full integration with Australia.\nGeography.\nThe Territory of Norfolk Island is located in the South Pacific Ocean, east of the Australian mainland. Norfolk Island itself is the main island of the island group that the territory encompasses and is located at . It has an area of , with no large-scale internal bodies of water and of coastline.\nThe island's highest point is Mount Bates reaching above sea level, located in the northwest quadrant of the island. The majority of the terrain is suitable for farming and other agricultural uses. Phillip Island, the second largest island of the territory, is located at , south of the main island. Norfolk and Phillip islands were formed from several basaltic volcanic eruptions between 3.1 and 2.3 million years ago, with much of the volcanic deposits now eroded. There are four main strata, the oldest being Ball Bay basalts, the 2.66-2.69 million years old, Duncombe Bay basalts, the about 2.4 million years old Cascade basalts and the most recent Steeles Point basalts. The islands form the highest point on the Norfolk Ridge, part of the submerged continent Zealandia. Nepean Island, also to the south of Norfolk Island consists of late Pleistocene coarse marine calcareous rock (sand, coral and shell fragments cemented with lime), a rock type also found in a small area of Norfolk Island near Kingston.\nThe coastline of Norfolk Island consists, to varying degrees, of cliff faces. A downward slope exists towards Slaughter Bay and Emily Bay, the site of the original colonial settlement of Kingston. There are no safe harbour facilities on Norfolk Island, with loading jetties existing at Kingston and Cascade Bay. All goods not domestically produced are brought in by ship, usually to Cascade Bay. Emily Bay, protected from the Pacific Ocean by a small coral reef, is the only safe area for recreational swimming, although surfing waves can be found at Anson and Ball Bays.\nThe climate is subtropical and mild, with little seasonal differentiation. \nThe area surrounding Mount Bates is preserved as the Norfolk Island National Park. The park, covering around 10% of the land of the island, contains remnants of the forests which originally covered the island, including stands of subtropical rainforest.\nThe park also includes the two smaller islands to the south of Norfolk Island, Nepean and Phillip islands. The vegetation of Phillip Island was devastated due to the introduction during the penal era of pest animals such as pigs and rabbits, giving it a red-brown colour as viewed from Norfolk; however, pest control and remediation work by park staff has recently brought some improvement to the Phillip Island environment.\nThe major settlement on Norfolk Island is Burnt Pine, located predominantly along Taylors Road, where the shopping centre, post office, bottle shop, telephone exchange and community hall are located. Settlement also exists over much of the island, consisting largely of widely separated homesteads.\nGovernment House, the official residence of the Administrator, is located on Quality Row in what was the penal settlement of Kingston. Other government buildings, including the court, Legislative Assembly and Administration, are also located there. Kingston's role is largely a ceremonial one, however, with most of the economic impetus coming from Burnt Pine.\nClimate.\nNorfolk Island has a maritime-influenced humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\") with warm, humid summers and very mild, rainy winters. The highest recorded temperature is on 23 January 2024, whilst the lowest is on 29 July 1953. The island has moderate rainfall , with a maximum in winter; and 52.8 clear days annually.\nEnvironment.\nNorfolk Island is part of the Interim Biogeographic Regionalisation for Australia region \"Pacific Subtropical Islands\" (PSI), and forms subregion PSI02, with an area of . The country is home to the Norfolk Island subtropical forests terrestrial ecoregion.\nFlora.\nNorfolk Island has 174 native plants; 51 of them are endemic. At least 18 of the endemic species are rare or threatened. The Norfolk Island palm (\"Rhopalostylis baueri\") and the smooth tree-fern (\"Cyathea brownii\"), the tallest tree-fern in the world, are common in the Norfolk Island National Park but rare elsewhere on the island. Before European colonisation, most of Norfolk Island was covered with subtropical rain forest, the canopy of which was made of \"Araucaria heterophylla\" (Norfolk Island pine) in exposed areas, and the palm \"Rhopalostylis baueri\" and tree ferns \"Cyathea brownii\" and \"C. australis\" in moister protected areas. The understory was thick with lianas and ferns covering the forest floor. Only one small tract, , of rainforest remains, which was declared as the Norfolk Island National Park in 1986.\nThis forest has been infested with several introduced plants. The cliffs and steep slopes of Mount Pitt supported a community of shrubs, herbaceous plants, and climbers. A few tracts of cliff top and seashore vegetation have been preserved. The rest of the island has been cleared for pasture and housing. Grazing and introduced weeds currently threaten the native flora, displacing it in some areas. In fact, there are more weed species than native species on Norfolk Island.\nFauna.\nAs a relatively small and isolated oceanic island, Norfolk has few land birds but a high degree of endemicity among them. Norfolk Island is home to a radiation of about 40 endemic snail species. Many of the endemic bird species and subspecies have become extinct as a result of massive clearance of the island's native vegetation of subtropical rainforest for agriculture, hunting and persecution as agricultural pests. The birds have also suffered from the introduction of mammals such as rats, cats, foxes, pigs and goats, as well as from introduced competitors such as common blackbirds and crimson rosellas. Although the island is politically part of Australia, many of Norfolk Island's native birds show affinities to those of neighbouring New Zealand, such as the Norfolk k\u0101k\u0101, Norfolk pigeon, and Norfolk boobook.\nExtinctions include that of the endemic Norfolk k\u0101k\u0101, Norfolk ground dove and Norfolk pigeon, while of the endemic subspecies the starling, triller, thrush and boobook owl are extinct, although the latter's genes persist in a hybrid population descended from the last female. Other endemic birds are the white-chested white-eye, which may be extinct, the Norfolk parakeet, the Norfolk gerygone, the slender-billed white-eye and endemic subspecies of the Pacific robin and golden whistler. Subfossil bones indicate that a species of \"Coenocorypha\" snipe was also found on the island and is now extinct, but the taxonomic relationships of this are unclear and have not been scientifically described yet.\nThe Norfolk Island Group Nepean Island is also home to breeding seabirds. The providence petrel was hunted to local extinction by the beginning of the 19th century but has shown signs of returning to breed on Phillip Island. Other seabirds breeding there include the white-necked petrel, Kermadec petrel, wedge-tailed shearwater, Australasian gannet, red-tailed tropicbird and grey ternlet. The sooty tern (known locally as the whale bird) has traditionally been subject to seasonal egg harvesting by Norfolk Islanders.\nNorfolk Island, with neighbouring Nepean Island, has been identified by BirdLife International as an Important Bird Area because it supports the entire populations of white-chested and slender-billed white-eyes, Norfolk parakeets and Norfolk gerygones, as well as over 1% of the world populations of wedge-tailed shearwaters and red-tailed tropicbirds. Nearby Phillip Island is treated as a separate IBA.\nNorfolk Island also has a botanical garden, which is home to a sizeable variety of plant species. However, the island has only one native mammal, Gould's wattled bat (\"Chalinolobus gouldii\"). It is very rare, and may already be extinct on the island.\nThe Norfolk swallowtail (\"Papilio amynthor\") is a species of butterfly that is found on Norfolk Island and the Loyalty Islands.\nCetaceans were historically abundant around the island as commercial hunts on the island were operating until 1956. Today, numbers of larger whales have disappeared, but even today many species such humpback whale, minke whale, sei whale, and dolphins can be observed close to shore, and scientific surveys have been conducted regularly. Southern right whales were once regular migrants to Norfolk, but were severely depleted by historical hunts, and further by recent illegal Soviet and Japanese whaling, resulting in none or very few, if remnants still live, right whales in these regions along with Lord Howe Island.\nWhale sharks can be encountered off the island as well.\nDemographics.\nThe population of Norfolk Island was 2,188 in the 2021 census, which had declined from a high of 2,601 in 2001.\nIn 2011, residents were 78% of the census count, with the remaining 22% being visitors. 16% of the population were 14\u00a0years and under, 54% were 15 to 64\u00a0years, and 24% were 65\u00a0years and over. The figures showed an ageing population, with many people aged 20\u201334 having moved away from the island.\nMost islanders are of either European-only (mostly British) or combined European-Tahitian ancestry, being descendants of the \"Bounty\" mutineers as well as more recent arrivals from Australia and New Zealand. About half of the islanders can trace their roots back to Pitcairn Island.\nThis common heritage has led to a limited number of surnames among the islanders \u2013 a limit constraining enough that the island's telephone directory also includes nicknames for many subscribers, such as Carrots, Dar Bizziebee, Diddles, Geek, Lettuce Leaf, Possum, Pumpkin, Smudgie, Truck and Wiggy.\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by sex and age group (Census 09.VIII.2011): \nPopulation\nPopulation growth rate\nAncestry\nCitizenship (as of the 2011 census)\nReligion.\n62% of the islanders are Christians. After the death of the first chaplain Rev G. H. Nobbs in 1884, a Methodist church was formed, followed in 1891 by a Seventh-day Adventist congregation led by one of Nobbs' sons. Some unhappiness with G. H. Nobbs, the more organised and formal ritual of the Church of England service arising from the influence of the Melanesian Mission, decline in spirituality, the influence of visiting American whalers, literature sent by Christians overseas impressed by the Pitcairn story, and the adoption of Seventh-day Adventism by the descendants of the mutineers still on Pitcairn, all contributed to these developments.\nThe Roman Catholic Church began an ongoing presence on Norfolk Island in 1957. In the late 1990s, a group left the former Methodist (then Uniting Church) and formed a charismatic fellowship. In the 2021 Census, 22% of the ordinary residents identified as Anglican (compared to 34% in 2011), 13% as Uniting Church, 11% as Roman Catholic and 3% as Seventh-day Adventist. 9% were from other religions. 35.7% had no religion (up from 24% in 2011), and 14.7% did not indicate a religion. Typical ordinary congregations in any church do not exceed 30 local residents as of 2010[ [update]]. The three older denominations have good facilities. Ministers are usually short-term visitors.\nThere are two Anglican churches on Norfolk Island, All Saints Kingston (established 1870) and St Barnabas Chapel (established 1880 as the Melanesian Mission) which are both part of the Diocese of Sydney, Anglican Church of Australia.\nThere is one Roman Catholic church on Norfolk Island, the Church of St Philip Howard within the Archdiocese of Sydney.\nStatistics in 2016 Census:\nCountry of birth.\nAll information below is from the 2016 Census.\nLanguage.\nIslanders speak both English and a creole language known as Norfuk, a blend of 18th-century English and Tahitian, based on Pitkern. The Norfuk language is decreasing in popularity as more tourists visit the island, and more young people leave for work and education. However, efforts are being made to keep it alive via dictionaries and the renaming of some tourist attractions to their Norfuk equivalents.\nIn 2004, an act of the Norfolk Island Assembly made Norfuk a co-official language of the island. The act is long-titled: \"An Act to recognise the Norfolk Island Language (Norf'k) as an official language of Norfolk Island\". The \"language known as 'Norf'k'\" is described as the language \"that is spoken by descendants of the first free settlers of Norfolk Island who were descendants of the settlers of Pitcairn Island\". The act recognises and protects use of the language but does not require it; in official use, it must be accompanied by an accurate translation into English. 32% of the total population reported speaking a language other than English in the 2011 census, and just under three-quarters of the ordinarily resident population could speak Norfuk.\nEducation.\nThe sole school on the island, Norfolk Island Central School, provides education from kindergarten through to Year 12. The school had a contractual arrangement referred to as a Memorandum of Understanding with the New South Wales Department of Education regarding the provision of education services at the school, the latest of which took effect in January 2015. In 2015 enrolment at the Norfolk Island Central School was students. As of 1 January 2022, The Department of Education (Queensland) took over the running of the Norfolk Island Central School in line with the transition of state services from the New South Wales Government to the Queensland Government. The NSW curriculum will continue to be utilised until the end of the 2023 school year.\nChildren on the island learn English as well as Norfuk, in efforts to revive the language.\nNo public tertiary education infrastructure exists on the island. The Norfolk Island Central School works in partnership with registered training organisations (RTOs) and local employers to support students accessing Vocational Education and Training (VET) courses.\nLiteracy is not recorded officially, but can be assumed to be roughly at a par with Australia's literacy rate, as islanders attend a school which uses a New South Wales curriculum, before traditionally moving to the mainland for further study.\nCulture.\nWhile there was no \"indigenous\" culture on the island at the time of settlement, the Tahitian influence of the Pitcairn settlers has resulted in some aspects of Polynesian culture being adapted to that of Norfolk, including the hula dance. Local cuisine also shows influences from the same region.\nIslanders traditionally spend a lot of time outdoors, with fishing and other aquatic pursuits being common pastimes, an aspect which has become more noticeable as the island becomes more accessible to tourism. Most island families have at least one member involved in primary production in some form.\nReligious observance remains an important part of life for some islanders, particularly the older generations, but actual attendance is about 8% of the resident population plus some tourists. In the 2006 census, 19.9% had no religion compared with 13.2% in 1996. Businesses are closed on Wednesday and Saturday afternoons and Sundays.\nOne of the island's long-term residents was the novelist Colleen McCullough, whose works include \"The Thorn Birds\" and the \"Masters of Rome\" series as well as \"Morgan's Run\", set, in large part, on Norfolk Island. Ruth Park, notable author of \"The Harp in the South\" and many other works of fiction, also lived on the island for several years after the death of her husband, writer D'Arcy Niland. Actress/singer Helen Reddy also moved to the island in 2002, and maintained a house there.\nAmerican novelist James A. Michener, who served in the United States Navy during World War II, set one of the chapters of his episodic novel \"Tales of the South Pacific\" on Norfolk Island.\nThe island is one of the few locations outside North America to celebrate the holiday of Thanksgiving.\nNorfolk Island has a number of museums and heritage organisations, including Norfolk Island Museum and Bounty Museum. The former has five sites within the Kingston and Arthur's Vale Historic Area, a World Heritage Site also linked to the Australian Convict Sites.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Norfolk Island is very similar to that of the Pitcairn Islands, as Norfolk Islanders trace their origins to Pitcairn. The local cuisine is a blend of British cuisine and Tahitian cuisine.\nRecipes from Norfolk Island of Pitcairn origin include mudda (green banana dumplings) and kumara pilhi. The island's cuisine also includes foods not found on Pitcairn, such as chopped salads and fruit pies.\nSettlements.\nThere are several settlements on Norfolk Island; they are all either towns or hamlets. There are no cities on Norfolk Island.\nGovernment and politics.\nNorfolk Island was the only non-mainland Australian territory to have had self-governance. The \"Norfolk Island Act 1979\", passed by the Parliament of Australia in 1979, is the Act under which the island was governed until the passing of the \"Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act\" 2015 (Cth). The Australian government maintains authority on the island through an Administrator, currently George Plant.\nFrom 1979 to 2015, a Legislative Assembly was elected by popular vote for terms of not more than three years, although legislation passed by the Australian Parliament could extend its laws to the territory at will, including the power to override any laws made by the assembly. The Assembly consisted of nine seats, with electors casting nine equal votes, of which no more than two could be given to any individual candidate. It is a method of voting called a \"weighted first past the post system\". Four of the members of the Assembly formed the Executive Council, which devised policy and acted as an advisory body to the Administrator. The last Chief Minister of Norfolk Island was Lisle Snell. Other ministers included: Minister for Tourism, Industry and Development; Minister for Finance; Minister for Cultural Heritage and Community Services; and Minister for Environment.\nAll seats were held by independent candidates. Norfolk Island did not embrace party politics. In 2007, a branch of the Australian Labor Party was formed on Norfolk Island, with the aim of reforming the system of government.\nSince 2018, residents of Norfolk Island have voted in the Division of Bean for House of Representatives elections. Norfolk Island voters are represented in the Senate together with those of the ACT. As is the case for all Australian citizens, enrollment and voting is compulsory for Norfolk Islanders.\nDisagreements over the island's relationship with Australia were put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian government. Under the more radical of two models proposed in the review, the island's legislative assembly would have been reduced to the status of a local council. However, in December 2006, citing the \"significant disruption\" that changes to the governance would impose on the island's economy, the Australian government ended the review leaving the existing governance arrangements unaltered.\nIn a move that apparently surprised many islanders, the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its self-government status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.\nIt was announced on 19 March 2015 that self-governance for the island would be revoked by the Commonwealth and replaced by a local council with the state of New South Wales providing services to the island. A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth, being given $12.5 million in 2015 alone. It meant that residents would have to start paying Australian income tax, but they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Centrelink and Medicare.\nThe Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal. On 8 May 2015, voters were asked if Norfolk Islanders should freely determine their political status and their economic, social and cultural development, and to \"be consulted at referendum or plebiscite on the future model of governance for Norfolk Island before such changes are acted upon by the Australian parliament\". 68% out of 912 voters voted in favour. The Norfolk Island Chief Minister, Lisle Snell, said that \"the referendum results blow a hole in Canberra's assertion that the reforms introduced before the Australian Parliament that propose abolishing the Legislative Assembly and Norfolk Island Parliament were overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island\".\nThe \"Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Act 2015\" passed the Australian Parliament on 14 May 2015 (assented on 26 May 2015), abolishing self-government on Norfolk Island and transferring Norfolk Island into a council as part of New South Wales law.\nBetween 1 July 2016 and 1 January 2022, New South Wales provided state-based services. Since 1 January 2022, Queensland has provided state-based services directly for Norfolk Island.\nThe island's official capital is Kingston; it is, however, more a centre of government than a sizeable settlement. The largest settlement is at Burnt Pine.\nThe most important local holiday is Bounty Day, celebrated on 8 June, in memory of the arrival of the Pitcairn Islanders in 1856.\nLocal ordinances and acts apply on the island, where most laws are based on the Australian legal system. Australian common law applies when not covered by either Australian or Norfolk Island law. Suffrage is universal at age eighteen.\nAs a territory of Australia, Norfolk Island does not have diplomatic representation abroad, or within the territory, and is also not a participant in any international organisations, other than sporting organisations.\nThe flag is three vertical bands of green, white, and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centred in the slightly wider white band.\nThe Norfolk Island Regional Council was established in July 2016 to govern the territory at the local level in line with local governments in mainland Australia.\nConstitutional status.\nFrom 1788 until 1844, Norfolk Island was a part of the Colony of New South Wales. In 1844, it was severed from New South Wales and annexed to the Colony of Van Diemen's Land. With the demise of the third settlement and in contemplation that the inhabitants of Pitcairn Island would move to Norfolk Island, the \"Australian Waste Lands Act\" 1855 (Imp), gave the Queen in Council the power to \"separate Norfolk Island from the Colony of Van Diemen's Land and to make such provision for the government of Norfolk Island as might seem expedient\". In 1856, the Queen in Council ordered that Norfolk Island be a distinct and separate settlement, appointing the Governor of New South Wales to also be the Governor of Norfolk Island with \"full power and authority to make laws for the order, peace, and good government\" of the island. Under these arrangements Norfolk Island was effectively self-governing, Although Norfolk Island was a colony acquired by settlement, it was never within the \"British Settlements Act\".\nThe constitutional status of Norfolk Island was revisited in 1894 when the British government appointed an inquiry into the administration of justice on the island. By this time, there had been steps in Australia towards federation including the 1891 constitutional convention. There was a correspondence between the Governor of Norfolk Island, the British colonial office and the Governor of New Zealand as to how the island should be governed and by whom. Even within New South Wales, it was felt that \"the laws and system of government in the Colony of New South Wales would not prove suitable to the Island Community\". In 1896, the Governor of New Zealand wrote \"I am advised that, as far as my Ministers can ascertain, if any change is to take place in the government of Norfolk Island, the Islanders, while protesting against any change, would prefer to come under the control of New Zealand rather than that of New South Wales\".\nThe British government decided not to annex Norfolk Island to the Colony of New South Wales and instead that the affairs of Norfolk Island would be administered by the Governor of New South Wales in that capacity rather than having a separate office as Governor of Norfolk Island. The order-in-council contemplated the future annexation of Norfolk Island to the Colony of NSW or to any federal body of which NSW form part. Norfolk Island was not a part of NSW and residents of Norfolk Island were not entitled to have their names placed on the NSW electoral roll. Norfolk Island was accepted as a territory of Australia, separate from any state, by the \"Norfolk Island Act\" 1913 (Cth), passed under the territories power, and made effective in 1914. Norfolk Island was given a limited form of self-government by the \"Norfolk Island Act\" 1979 (Cth).\nThere have been four challenges to the constitutional validity of the Australian Government's authority to administer Norfolk Island:\nThe Government of Australia thus holds that:\n Norfolk Island has been an integral part of the Commonwealth of Australia since 1914, when it was accepted as an Australian territory under section 122 of the Constitution. The Island has no international status independent of Australia.\nMuch of the self-government under the 1979 legislation was repealed with effect from 2016. The reforms included, to the chagrin of some of the locals of Norfolk Island, a repeal of the preambular sections of the Act which originally were 3\u20134 pages recognising the particular circumstances in the history of Norfolk Island.\nConsistent with the Australian position, the United Nations Decolonization Committee does not include Norfolk Island on its list of non-self-governing territories.\nThis legal position is disputed by some residents on the island. Some islanders claim that Norfolk Island was actually granted independence at the time Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on the island.\nFollowing reforms to the status of Norfolk Island, there were mass protests by the local population. In 2015, it was reported that Norfolk Island was taking its argument for self-governance to the United Nations. A campaign to preserve the island's autonomy was formed, named Norfolk's Choice. A formal petition was lodged with the United Nations by Geoffrey Robertson on behalf of the local population on 25 April 2016.\nVarious suggestions for retaining the island's self-government have been proposed. In 2006, a UK MP, Andrew Rosindell, raised the possibility of the island becoming a self-governing British Overseas Territory. In 2013, the island's last chief minister, Lisle Snell, suggested independence, to be supported by income from fishing, offshore banking and foreign aid.\nThe laws of Norfolk Island were in a transitional state, under the Norfolk Island Applied Laws Ordinance 2016 (Cth), from 2016 until 2018. Laws of New South Wales as applying in Norfolk Island were suspended (with five major exceptions, which the 2016 Ordinance itself amended) until the end of June 2018. From 1 July 2018, all laws of New South Wales apply in Norfolk Island and, as \"applied laws\", are subject to amendment, repeal or suspension by federal ordinance. The Local Government Act 1993 (NSW) has been amended for application to Norfolk Island.\nImmigration and citizenship.\nThe island was subject to separate immigration controls from the remainder of Australia. Before 1 July 2016, immigration to Norfolk Island, even by other Australian citizens was heavily restricted. In 2012, immigration controls were relaxed with the introduction of an Unrestricted Entry Permit for all Australian and New Zealand citizens upon arrival and the option to apply for residency; the only criteria were to pass a police check and be able to pay into the local health scheme. From 1 July 2016, the Australian migration system replaced the immigration arrangements previously maintained by the Norfolk Island Government. Holders of Australian visas who travelled to Norfolk Island would have departed the Australian Migration Zone before 1 July 2016. Unless they held a multiple-entry visa, the visa would have ceased; in which case they would require another visa to re-enter mainland Australia.\nAustralian citizens and residents from other parts of the nation now have an automatic right of residence on the island after meeting these criteria (Immigration (Amendment No. 2) Act 2012). Australian citizens can carry either a passport or a form of photo identification to travel to Norfolk Island. The Document of Identity, which is no longer issued, is also acceptable within its validity period. Citizens of all other nations must carry a passport to travel to Norfolk Island even if arriving from other parts of Australia.\nNon-Australian citizens who are permanent residents of Norfolk Island may apply for Australian citizenship after meeting normal residence requirements and are eligible to take up residence in mainland Australia at any time through the use of a Confirmatory (Residence) visa (subclass 808). Children born on Norfolk Island are Australian citizens as specified by Australian nationality law.\nHealth care.\nNorfolk Island Hospital is the only medical centre on the island. Since 1 July 2016, medical treatment on Norfolk Island has been covered by Medicare and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme as it is in Australia. Emergency medical treatment is covered by Medicare or a private health insurer. Although the hospital can perform minor surgery, serious medical conditions are not permitted to be treated on the island and patients are flown back to mainland Australia. Air charter transport can cost as much as , which is covered by the Australian Government. For serious emergencies, medical evacuations were provided by the Royal Australian Air Force; currently this service is provided by Australian Retrieval Services. The island has one ambulance, staffed by one employed St John Officer and a group of St John Ambulance Australia volunteers.\nThe lack of medical facilities available in most remote communities has a major impact on the health care of Norfolk Islanders. As is consistent with other extremely remote regions, many older residents move to New Zealand or Australia to access the required medical care.\nDefence and law enforcement.\nDefence is the responsibility of the Australian Defence Force. There are no active military installations or defence personnel on Norfolk Island. The Administrator may request the assistance of the Australian Defence Force if required. As part of \"Operation Resolute\", the Royal Australian Navy and Australian Border Force deploy and patrol boats to carry out civil maritime security operations in Australian mainland and offshore territories including Norfolk Island, the Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Christmas Island, the Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Macquarie Island, and Lord Howe Island. In part to carry out this mission, as of 2023, the Navy's \"Armidale\"-class boats are in the process of being replaced by larger s.\nIn 2023, Australian and American forces conducted joint military exercises in the vicinity of Norfolk Island signifying the island's potential as a staging base for peacekeeping, disaster-relief and other operations in the South Pacific.\nCivilian law enforcement and community policing are provided by the Australian Federal Police. The normal deployment to the island is one sergeant and two constables. These are augmented by five local Special Members who have police powers but are not AFP employees.\nCourts.\nThe Norfolk Island Court of Petty Sessions is the equivalent of a Magistrates Court and deals with minor criminal, civil or regulatory matters. The Chief Magistrate of Norfolk Island is usually the current Chief Magistrate of the Australian Capital Territory. Three local Justices of the Peace have the powers of a Magistrate to deal with minor matters.\nThe Supreme Court of Norfolk Island deals with more serious criminal offences, more complex civil matters, administration of deceased estates and federal laws as they apply to the Territory. The Judges of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island are generally appointed from among Justices of the Federal Court of Australia and may sit on the Australian mainland or convene a circuit court. Appeals are to the Federal Court of Australia.\nAs stated by the Legal Profession Act 1993, \"a resident practitioner must hold a Norfolk Island practising certificate.\" As of 2014[ [update]], only one lawyer maintained a full-time legal practice on Norfolk Island.\nCensus.\nUntil 2016, Norfolk Island took its own censuses, separate from those taken by the Australian Bureau of Statistics for the remainder of Australia.\nPostal service.\nPrior to 2016, the Norfolk Island Postal Service was responsible for mail receipt and delivery on the island and issued its own postage stamps. With the merger of Norfolk Island as a regional council, the Norfolk Island Postal Service ceased to exist and all postage is now handled by Australia Post. Australia Post sends and receives mail from Norfolk Island with the postcode 2899.\nEconomy and infrastructure.\nTourism, the primary economic activity, has steadily increased over the years. As Norfolk Island prohibits the importation of fresh fruit and vegetables, most produce is grown locally. Beef is both produced locally and imported. The island has one winery, Two Chimneys Wines.\nThe Australian government controls the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and revenue from it extending around Norfolk Island equating to roughly , and territorial sea claims to from the island. There is a strong belief on the island that some of the revenue generated from Norfolk's EEZ should be available to provide services such as health and infrastructure on the island, which the island has been responsible for, similar to how the Northern Territory is able to access revenue from their mineral resources. The exclusive economic zone provides the Islanders with fish, its only major natural resource. Norfolk Island has no direct control over any marine areas but has an agreement with the Commonwealth through the Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) to fish \"recreationally\" in a small section of the EEZ known locally as \"the Box\". While there is speculation that the zone may include oil and gas deposits, this is not proven. There are no major arable lands or permanent farmlands, though about 25 percent of the island is a permanent pasture. There is no irrigated land. The island uses the Australian dollar as its currency.\nIn 2015, Australian cannabis industry company AusCann was granted a licence to grow and export medicinal cannabis in Norfolk Island. The medicinal cannabis industry has been viewed by some as a means of reinvigorating the economy of Norfolk Island. The Commonwealth stepped in to overturn the decision, with the island's administrator, former Liberal MP Gary Hardgrave revoking the local licence to grow the crop. (Legislation to allow the cultivation of cannabis in Australia for medical or scientific purposes passed Federal Parliament in February 2016. The Victorian Government will be undertaking a small-scale, strictly controlled cannabis cultivation trial at a Victorian research facility.)\nTaxes.\nFormerly, residents of Norfolk Island did not pay Australian federal taxes, which created a tax haven for locals and visitors alike. There was no income tax so the island's legislative assembly raised money through an import duty, fuel levy, medicare levy, goods and services tax of 12%, and local/international phone calls. The Chief Minister of Norfolk Island, David Buffett, announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its tax-free status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts. The introduction of income taxation came into effect on 1 July 2016. Prior to these reforms, residents of Norfolk Island were not entitled to social services. The reforms extend to private persons, companies and trustees.\nCommunications.\nAs of 2004[ [update]], telephone main lines were in use, a mix of analog () and digital () circuits. Satellite communications services are planned. The island has two locally based radio stations (Radio Norfolk), a government run station broadcasting on both AM and FM frequencies and an independent station 87.6 FM owned by the Bounty Museum Trust. Norfolk Island doesn't have its own dedicated ABC Local Radio station but the island is covered by ABC Western Plains which broadcasts on 95.9 FM from its studios in Dubbo in mainland Australia. Television signals were first reportedly seen on the island's only television set on 21 November 1963, with distant reception of ABN-2 Sydney by ham radio technician Ray Hoare. Since then, reception not only of ABC but also NZBC TV was possible, with its apex in the summer months, as the signals were propagated through the ionosphere. There is also one television station, Norfolk TV, featuring local programming, plus transmitters for Australian channels ABC, SBS, Nine (through Imparja Television) and Seven. The Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) is .nf. A small GSM (2G) mobile network operates on the island across three towers, however no data transmission is available on this network. An eight-tower 4G/LTE 1800\u00a0MHz network was installed in November 2018, improving data service significantly on the island.\nTransport.\nThere are no railways, waterways, ports or harbours on the island. Loading jetties are located at Kingston and Cascade, but ships cannot get close to either of them. When a supply ship arrives, it is emptied by whaleboats towed by launches, five tonnes at a time. A mobile crane picks up the freight using nets and straps and lifts the freight onto the pier. Which jetty is used depends on the prevailing weather of the day; the jetty on the leeward side of the island is often used. If the wind changes significantly during unloading/loading, the ship will move around to the other side. Visitors often gather to watch the activity when a supply ship arrives. Norfolk Forwarding Services is the primary Freight Forwarding service for Norfolk Island handling both sea and airfreight. In 2017 Norfolk Forwarding Services shipped most of the freight for the Cascade Pier Project over a period of 18 months.\nThe island hosts of roads, of which are paved and unpaved. As with the rest of Australia, driving is on the left side of the road. Uniquely, local law gives livestock right of way. Speed limits are lower than most mainland Australian roads; the general speed limit is , reducing to in town and near schools. Drivers on the island wave to other passing vehicles, this tradition is nicknamed the \"Norfolk wave\".\nThere is one airport, Norfolk Island Airport. Qantas operates direct flights to Sydney and Brisbane, and Air Chathams flies to Auckland. A local airline, Norfolk Island Airlines, ran flights to Auckland and Brisbane until 2018. In mid 2018, Air Chathams announced it was looking to re-establish flights between Auckland and Norfolk Island. It began a weekly service between Auckland and Norfolk Island on 6 September 2019 using a Convair 580.\nSince the reopening of the Trans-Tasman bubble in 2021, the Air Chathams Auckland service operates on Thursdays using a 36-seater Saab 340 aircraft.\nElectricity.\nElectricity is provided by diesel generators operated by Norfolk Island Electricity, a government organisation. Some electricity is also provided by privately owned rooftop solar panels.\nSport.\nNorfolk Island competes at the Commonwealth Games, and has won two bronze medals, both in lawn bowls. The territory also competes in the Pacific Games and Pacific Mini Games and even hosted the sixth edition of the Mini Games in 2001.\nThe island supports national rugby league, cricket and netball teams. It is a member of World Athletics.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n Government\nGeneral information\nArchaeology and Polynesian settlement in prehistory\nOthers"}
{"id": "21423", "revid": "51012204", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21423", "title": "History of Norfolk Island", "text": " \n \nThe history of Norfolk Island dates back to the fourteenth or fifteenth century when it was settled by Polynesian seafarers.\nEarly history.\nNorfolk Island was first settled by East Polynesian seafarers either from the Kermadec Islands north of New Zealand or from the North Island of New Zealand. They arrived in the fourteenth or fifteenth century, and survived for several generations before disappearing. Their main village site has been excavated at Emily Bay, and they also left behind stone tools, the Polynesian rat, and banana trees as evidence of their sojourn. They also brought the \"harakeke\" (\"Phormium tenax\"), or New Zealand flax plant, to Norfolk Island, either directly from New Zealand or from Raoul Island (Sunday Island). The flax has no relation to the European flax but is related to the daylily and other genera within the sub-family \"Hemerocallidaceae\". The final fate of the early settlers remains a mystery.\nThe first European known to have sighted the island was Captain James Cook, in 1774, on his second voyage to the South Pacific on HMS \"Resolution\", which he named after the Duchess of Norfolk (c. 1712\u20131773). The Duchess was dead at the time of the island's sighting by Cook, but Cook had set out from England in 1772 and could not have known of her death in May of 1773.\nCook went ashore on Tuesday 11 October 1774 and is said to have been impressed with the tall straight trees and New Zealand flax plants, which, although not related to the Northern Hemisphere flax plants after which they are named, produce fibres of economic importance. He took samples back to Britain and reported on their potential uses for the Royal Navy.\nAndrew Kippis as the biographer of this voyage puts it as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As the Resolution pursued her course from New Caledonia, land was discovered, which, on a nearer approach, was found to be an island, of good height, and five leagues in circuit. Captain Cook named it Norfolk Isle, in honour of the noble family of Howard\" (Fn.: It is situated in the latitude of 29\u00b0 2' 30\" south, and in the longitude of 168\u00b0 16' east). \"It was uninhabited; and the first persons that ever set foot on it were unquestionably our English navigators. Various trees and plants were observed that are common at New Zealand; and in particular, the flax plant, which is rather more luxuriant here than in any other part of that country. The chief produce of the island is a kind of spruce pine, exceedingly straight and tall, which grows in great abundance. Such is the size of many of the trees that, breast high, they are as thick as two men can fathom. Among the vegetables of the place, the palm-cabbage afforded both a wholesome and palatable refreshment; and, indeed, proved the most agreeable repast that our people had for a considerable time enjoyed...\nThe cabbage palm referred to is a cabbage tree species Cordyline obtecta, also found in New Zealand, the edible heart of which resembles a small cabbage. At the time, Britain was heavily dependent on flax (\"Linum usitatissimum\") (for sails) and hemp (\"Cannabis\" sp.) (for ropes) from the shores of the Baltic Sea ports. Any threat to their supply endangered Britain's sea power. The UK also relied on timbers from New England for mainmasts, and these were not supplied after the American War of Independence. The alternative source of Norfolk Island for these (or in the case of flax and hemp, and similar) supplies is argued by some historians, notably by Geoffrey Blainey in \"\", as being a major reason for the founding of the convict settlement of New South Wales by the First Fleet in 1788. \nJames Cook said that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"except for New Zealand, in no other island in the South Sea was wood and mast-timber so ready to hand\".\nSir John Call, Member of Parliament, member of the Royal Society, and former chief engineer of the East India Company, stated the advantages of Norfolk Island in a proposal for colonisation he put to the Home Office in August 1784:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This Island has an Advantage not common to New Caledonia, New Holland and New Zealand by not being inhabited, so that no Injury can be done by possessing it to the rest of Mankind\u2026there seems to be nothing wanting but Inhabitants and Cultivation to make it a delicious Residence. The Climate, Soil, and Sea provide everything that can be expected from them. The Timber, Shrubs, Vegetables and Fish already found there need no Embellishment to pronounce them excellent samples; but the most invaluable of all is the Flax-plant, which grows more luxuriant than in New Zealand.\"\nGeorge Forster, who had been on Cook's second voyage to the Pacific and had been with him when he landed on Norfolk Island, was at the time professor of natural history at the University of Vilna (or Vilnius) in Polish Lithuania: Forster discussed the proposed Botany Bay colony in an article written in November 1786, \"Neuholland, und die brittische Colonie in Botany Bay\". Though unaware of the British intention to settle Norfolk Island, which was not announced until 5 December 1786, Forster referred to \"the nearness of New Zealand; the excellent flax plant (\"Phormium\") that grows so abundantly there; its incomparable shipbuilding timber\" as among the advantages of the new colony.\nThe proposal written by James Matra under the supervision of Sir Joseph Banks for establishing a settlement in New South Wales, stated that Botany Bay was: \u201cno further than a fortnight from New Zealand, which is covered with timber even to the water's edge\". The trees are immensely big and tall that a single tree is enough to make a mast of a first rate man of war. New Zealand, in addition, produces flax, which is an object of utility and curiosity. Any quantity of it might be raised in the colony, as this plant grows naturally in New Zealand. It can be made to serve the various purposes of cotton, hemp and linen, and is easier manufactured than any of them. In naval affairs, it exhibited great strength which is why it was regarded to be of utmost importance; a cable of was supposed to be of equal strength and durability to one of European hemp of eighteen inches.\nIn 1786, the British government included Norfolk Island as an auxiliary settlement, as proposed by John Call, in its plan for colonisation of New South Wales. The flax and ship timber of New Zealand were attractive, but these prospective advantages were balanced by the obvious impossibility of forming a settlement there in the face of undoubted opposition from the native Maori. There was no native population to oppose a settlement on Norfolk Island, which also possessed those desirable natural resources, but the island was too small to sustain a colony, hence the ultimate decision for a dual colonisation along the lines, proposed by Call.\nThe decision to settle Norfolk Island was taken under the impetus of the shock Britain had just received from Empress Catherine II of Russia. Practically all the hemp and flax required by the Royal Navy for cordage and sailcloth was imported from the Russian dominions through the ports of St. Petersburg (Kronstadt) and Riga. Comptroller of the Navy Sir Charles Middleton explained to Prime Minister Pitt in a letter on 5 September 1786: \"It is for Hemp only we are dependent on Russia. Masts can be procured from Nova Scotia, and Iron in plenty from the Ores of this Country; but as it is impracticable to carry on a Naval War without Hemp, it is materially necessary to promote the growth of it in this Country and Ireland\". In the summer of 1786, the Empress Catherine, in the context of tense negotiations on a renewed treaty of commerce, had emphasised her control over this vital commodity by asking the merchants who supplied it to restrict sales to English buyers: \u201cthe Empress has contrary to Custom speculated on this Commodity\u201d, complained the author of a subsequent memorandum to the Home Secretary. \"It is unnecessary\", said the memorandum, \"to remark the Consequences which might result from a prohibition of supply from that Quarter altogether\". This implicit threat to the viability of the Royal Navy became apparent in mid-September (a month after the decision had been taken to settle Botany Bay) and caused the Pitt Administration to begin an urgent search for new sources of supply, including from Norfolk Island, which was then added to the plan to colonise New South Wales.\nThe need for an alternative non-Russian source of naval stores is indicated by the information from the British Ambassador in Copenhagen, Hugh Elliott, who wrote to Foreign Secretary, Lord Carmarthen on 12 August 1788:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u201cThere is no Topick so common in the Mouths of the Russian Ministers, as to insist on the Facility with which the Empress, when Mistress of the Baltic, either by Conquest, Influence, or Alliance with the other two Northern Powers, could keep England in a State of Dependence for its Baltic Commerce and Naval Stores\u201d.\nOn 6 December 1786, an Order in Council was issued, designating \"the Eastern Coast of New South Wales, or some one or other of the Islands adjacent\" as the destination for transported convicts, as required by the Transportation, etc. Act 1784 (24 Geo. 3. Sess. 2. c. 56) that authorised the sending of convicted felons to any place appointed by the King in Council. Norfolk Island was thereby brought officially within the bounds of the projected colony.\nAn article in \"The Daily Universal Register\" (the forerunner of \"The Times\") of 23 December 1786 revealed the plan for a dual colonisation of Norfolk Island and Botany Bay:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The ships for Botany Bay are not to leave all the convicts there; some of them are to be taken to Norfolk Island, which is about eight hundred miles East of Botany Bay, and about four hundred miles short of New Zealand\".\nThe advantage of Britain's new colony in providing a non-Russian source of flax and hemp for naval supplies was referred to in an article in \"Lloyd\u2019s Evening Post\" of 5 October 1787 which urged: \"It is undoubtedly the interest of Great-Britain to remain neutral in the present contest between the Russians and the Turks\" and observed, \"Should England cease to render her services to the Empress of Russia, in a war against the Turks, there can be little of nothing to fear from her ill-will. England will speedily be enabled to draw from her colony of New South Wales, the staple of Russia, hemp and flax.\"\nFirst penal settlement.\nGovernor Arthur Phillip's instructions, given to him in April 1787, included an injunction to send a party to secure Norfolk Island \"as soon as Circumstances may admit of it\u2026. to prevent its being occupied by the Subjects of any other European Power\". This could only have been a reference to the expedition then in the Pacific commanded by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de La P\u00e9rouse. \"The Daily Universal Register\" of 11 November 1786 had stated: \"the Botany Bay scheme is laid aside, as there is a strong presumption that a squadron from Brest are now, or soon will be, in possession of the very spot we meant to occupy in New Holland\". This may have been a reference to a report from the British Ambassador in Paris, who had believed that when La P\u00e9rouse's expedition set out from Brest in August 1785 it had as one of its objectives the establishment of a settlement in New Zealand to forestall the British.\nLa P\u00e9rouse did attempt to visit Norfolk Island, but only to investigate, not to take possession. He had instructions to investigate any colonies the British may have established, and in the process learned of the intention to settle Botany Bay and Norfolk Island, from despatches sent to him from Paris through St. Petersburg as well as by land across Siberia to Petropavlovsk in Kamchatka, all of which he received on 26 September 1787, just four days before his departure from the port. His ships, the \"Boussole\" and \"Astrolabe\", anchored off the northern side of the island on 13 January 1788, but at the time high seas were running, which made it too dangerous for the two ships\u2019 boats that were put out to attempt a landing: \u201cIt was obvious that I would have had to wait maybe for a very long time for a moment suitable for a landing and a visit to this island was not worth this sacrifice\u201d, he recorded in his journal. Having noted that the island was still uninhabited, he was presumably the less inclined to risk a landing when there was no British settlement there to report on.\nWhen the First Fleet arrived at Port Jackson in January 1788, Phillip ordered Lieutenant Philip Gidley King to lead a party of 15 convicts and seven free men, including surgeon Thomas Jamison (the future Principal Surgeon of New South Wales), to take control of the island and prepare for its commercial development. They arrived on 6 March 1788.\nDuring the first year of the settlement, which was also called \"Sydney\" like its parent, more convicts and soldiers were sent to the island from New South Wales. A second village was started at Ball Bay, named after the captain of \"HMS Supply\", Lieutenant Henry Lidgbird Ball. On 8 January 1789, the first child was born, Norfolk King, the son of Philip Gidley King and a convict, Ann Inett. Norfolk King went on to become the first British Naval officer born in Australia, and was a Lieutenant, commanding the schooner \"Ballahoo\" when an American privateer captured her.\nThe \"Letter from an Officer of Marines at New South Wales, 16 November 1788\", published in the London newspaper, \"The World\" on 15 May 1789, reported the glowing description of the island and its prospects by Philip Gidley King, but also drew attention to the fatal defect of the lack of a safe port: \u201cThe said Island lies near Port Jackson, and is nearly as large as the Isle of Wight. Lieutenant King, who was sent with a detachment of marines and some convicts, to settle there, gives the most flattering portrayal of it. The island is fully wooded. Its timber is in the opinion of everyone the most beautiful and finest in the world...they are most suitable for masts, yards, spars and such. The New Zealand flax-plant grows there in abundance. European grains and seeds also thrive wonderfully well on Norfolk Island. It only lacks a good port and suitable landing places, without which the island is of no use, but with them it would be of the greatest importance for Great Britain. How far these deficiencies can be improved by art and the hand of man, time must decide.\u201d\nAn idealised vision of the new British settlement was given in the novel by Therese Forster, \"Abentheuer auf einer Reise nach Neu-Holland [Adventures on a Voyage to New Holland],\" published in the German women's magazine, \"Flora\" for 1793 and 1794:\nWe went towards the centre of this small island where at the foot of a round hill a crystal-clear river rushes forth, dividing up further on into several arms. Towards North and West the hill is covered with the most beautiful ploughed fields all the way down to the sea. The sight of these great flax fields is one of the loveliest I ever beheld. The slender stalks, of the most beautiful green and reaching far above a man's head, bent in the gentle breeze that blew from the sea. Their red blossoms, shining like rubies, danced in the green waves. The top of the hill and the whole of the south and east sides are covered with enormous pines whose dark green is enhanced by a pleasant foreground of cabbage palms and banana trees, and I also observed a low bush among them the fruit of which resembles our red currants but is much larger and hangs in purple and red clusters that help to give the whole a gay appearance. The dwellings of the colonists are strewn along the fringes of the forest and from my post I could see several of them. Simple houses surrounded by barns and stalls and the fields all enclosed with hedges give the region a youthful appearance the like of which is rarely found in Europe. And plants here bloom more luxuriantly and more perfectly with a natural vigour that knows no exhaustion and fears no poverty, a vigour that has disappeared from our continent.\nMore convicts were sent, and the island was seen as a farm, supplying Sydney with grain and vegetables during its early years of near-starvation. However, crops often failed due to the salty wind, rats, and caterpillars. The lack of a natural safe harbour hindered communication and the transport of supplies and produce.\nManning Clark observed that \"at first the convicts behaved well, but as more arrived from Sydney Cove, they renewed their wicked practices\". These included an attempted overthrowing of King in January 1789 by convicts, described by Margaret Hazzard as \"incorrigible rogues who took his 'goodwill' for weakness\". While some convicts responded well to the opportunities offered to them to become respectable, most remained \"idle and miserable wretches\" according to Clark, despite the climate and their isolation from previous haunts of crime.\nThe impending starvation at Sydney led to a great transplantation of convicts and marines to Norfolk Island in March 1790 on HMS \"Sirius\". This attempt to relieve the pressure on Sydney turned to disaster when \"Sirius\" was wrecked and, although there was no loss of life, some stores were destroyed, and the ship's crew was marooned for ten months. This news was met in Sydney with \"unspeakable consternation\". Norfolk Island was now further cut off from Sydney which, with the arrival of the Second Fleet with its cargo of sick and abused convicts, had more pressing problems with which to contend.\nIn spite of this the settlement grew slowly as more convicts were sent from Sydney. Many convicts chose to remain as settlers on the expiry of their sentence, and the population grew to over 1,000 by 1792. Norfolk Island, in 1793, was described by Josef Espinosa y Tello, an officer of the Spanish expedition led by Alessandro Malaspina that visited New South Wales: \nThe colony of Norfolk, settled shortly after that at Port Jackson, merits little attention both because of the small size of that island and because of the hilly nature of its terrain, and the particular circumstance of its lacking entirely an anchorage or a place where longboats can be drawn up with any security. Despite this, some 1,500 persons live there, and its fertile soil produces copiously all kinds of grains, although the difficulty of clearing the ground covered with trees and undergrowth retards the large harvests which the fertility of the land would yield without that obstacle. The pines are of a prodigious height, straight, thick and of the finest grain, and several have been felled of above 7 feet in diameter at the foot, six at 17 and five at 37 yards, having 147 feet of height in total and 120 to the first branches. The flax brought there from New Zealand bears a good aspect, but no great hopes are rested on its cultivation, and it seems that the second trials of this plant made in London have not achieved the happy outcome of the first.\nLieutenant governors of the first settlement:\nNorfolk Island was governed by a succession of short-term commandants for the next 11 years, starting with King's replacement, Robert Ross, from 1789 to 1790. When Joseph Foveaux arrived as Lieutenant Governor in 1800, he found the settlement quite run down, little maintenance having been carried out in the previous four years, and he set about building it up, particularly through public works and attempts to improve education.\nAs early as 1794, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales Francis Grose suggested its closure as a penal settlement as it was too remote and difficult for shipping, and too costly to maintain. By 1803, the Secretary of State, Lord Hobart, called for the removal of part of the Norfolk Island military establishment, settlers and convicts to Van Diemen's Land, due to its great expense and the difficulties of communication between Norfolk Island and Sydney. This was achieved more slowly than anticipated, due to reluctance of settlers to uproot themselves from the land they had struggled to tame, and compensation claims for loss of stock. It was also delayed by King's insistence on its value for providing refreshment to the whalers. The first group of 159 left in February 1805 and was mainly composed of convicts and their families and military personnel, with only four groups of settlers departing. Between November 1807 and September 1808, five groups of 554 people departed. Only about 200 remained, forming a small settlement until the remnants were removed in 1813. A small party remained to slaughter stock and destroy all buildings so that there would be no inducement for anyone, especially from another European power, to visit that place.\nFrom 15 February 1814 to 6 June 1825, the island lay abandoned.\nSecond penal settlement.\nCommandants of the second settlement:\nIn 1824 the British government instructed the Governor of New South Wales Thomas Brisbane to occupy Norfolk Island as a place to send \"the worst description of convicts\". Its remoteness, seen previously as a disadvantage, was now viewed as an asset for the detention of the \"twice-convicted\" men, who had committed further crimes since arriving in New South Wales. Brisbane assured his masters that \"the felon who is sent there is forever excluded from all hope of return\" He saw Norfolk Island as \"the nec plus ultra of Convict degradation\". The detained convicts have long been assumed to be hardcore recidivists, or 'doubly-convicted capital respites' \u2013 that is, men transported to Australia who committed fresh colonial crimes for which they were sentenced to death and were spared the gallows on condition of life at Norfolk Island. However, a recent study has demonstrated, utilising a database of 6,458 Norfolk Island convicts, that the reality was somewhat different: more than half were detained at Norfolk Island without ever receiving a colonial conviction, and only 15% had been reprieved from a death sentence. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of convicts sent to Norfolk Island had committed non-violent property sentences, the average length of detention was three years, and the scale of punishments inflicted upon the prisoners was significantly less than assumed.\nHis successor, Governor Ralph Darling, was even more severe than Brisbane, wishing that \"every man should be worked in irons that the example may deter others from the commission of crime\" and \"to hold out [Norfolk Island] as a place of the extremest punishment short of death\". Governor Arthur, in Van Diemen's Land, likewise believed that \"when prisoners are sent to Norfolk Island, they should on no account be permitted to return. Transportation thither should be considered as the ultimate limit and a punishment short only of death\". Reformation of the convicts was not seen as an objective of the Norfolk Island penal settlement.\nThe evidence that has passed down through the years points to the creation of a \"Hell in Paradise\". A widespread and popular notion of the harshness of penal settlements, including Norfolk Island, has come from the novel \"For the Term of his Natural Life\" by Marcus Clarke, which appears to be based on the writings and recollections of witnesses. However, though Clarke did carry out primary research, he selected the most sensational examples possible.\nFollowing a convict mutiny in 1834, Father William Ullathorne, vicar general of Sydney, visited Norfolk Island to comfort the mutineers due for execution. He found it \"the most heartrending scene that I ever witnessed\". Having the duty of informing the prisoners as to who was reprieved and who was to die, he was shocked to record as \"a literal fact that each man who heard his reprieve wept bitterly, and that each man who heard of his condemnation to death went down on his knees with dry eyes, and thanked God.\"\nThe 1846 report of magistrate Robert Pringle Stuart exposed the scarcity and poor quality of food, inadequacy of housing, horrors of torture and incessant flogging, insubordination of convicts, and corruption of overseers.\nBishop Robert Willson visited Norfolk Island from Van Diemen's Land on three occasions. Following his first visit in 1846, he reported to the House of Lords who, for the first time, came to realise the enormity of atrocities perpetrated under the British flag and attempted to remedy the evils. Willson returned in 1849 and found that many of the reforms had been implemented. However, rumours of resumed atrocities brought him back in 1852, and this visit resulted in a damning report, listing atrocities and blaming the system, which invested one man at this remote place with absolute power over so many people.\nOnly a handful of convicts left any written record, and their descriptions (as quoted by Hazzard and Hughes) of the living and working conditions, food and housing, and, in particular, the punishments given for seemingly trivial offences, are unremittingly horrifying, describing a settlement devoid of all human decency, under the iron rule of the tyrannical autocratic commandants. However, these conclusions have been reached by a reliance on a series of over-used (mainly published) sources, with them not having been tested or drawn into question by detailed archival research. Such work is currently being done and has, for example, drawn into question the sensationalised version of Norfolk Island's past, such as in demonstrating that the widespread assumption that Norfolk Island convicts engaged in 'murder-suicide pacts' \u2013 that is, drawing lots to select a killer and willing victim to 'escape' from Norfolk Island \u2013 is a myth.\nThe actions of some of the commandants, such as Morisset and particularly Price appear to be excessively harsh. All but one were military officers, brought up in a system where discipline was severe throughout the period of transportation. In addition, the commandants relied on a large number of military guards, civil overseers, ex-convict constables, and convict informers to provide them with intelligence and carry out their orders.\nOf the commandants, only Alexander Maconochie appeared to reach the conclusion that brutality would breed defiance, as demonstrated by the mutinies of 1826, 1834 and 1846, and he attempted to apply his theories of penal reform, providing incentives as well as punishment. His methods were criticised as being too lenient and he was replaced, a move that returned the settlement to its harsh rule. However, recent research has also demonstrated that the level of punishment under Maconochie's regime was much higher than assumed, as the average number of lashes per flogging \u2013 93 \u2013 was higher under Maconochie than any other time during the second penal settlement's history.\nThe second penal settlement began to be wound down by the British government after 1847 and the last convicts were removed to Tasmania in May 1855. It was abandoned because transportation to Van Diemen's Land had ceased in 1853 and was replaced by penal servitude in the United Kingdom.\nSettlement by Pitcairn Islanders.\nOn 8 June 1856, the next settlement began on Norfolk Island. These were the descendants of Tahitians and the HMS \"Bounty\" mutineers, resettled from the Pitcairn Islands, which had become too small for their growing population. The British government had permitted the transfer of the Pitcairners to Norfolk, which was thus established as a colony separate from New South Wales but under the administration of that colony's governor. They left Pitcairn Islands on 3 May 1856 and arrived with 194 persons on 8 June.\nThe Pitcairners occupied many of the buildings remaining from the penal settlements, and gradually established their traditional farming and whaling industries on the island. Although some families decided to return to Pitcairn in 1858 and 1863, the island's population continued to slowly grow as the island accepted settlers, often arriving with whaling fleets.\nIn 1867, the headquarters of the Melanesian Mission of the Church of England were established on the island, and in 1882 the church of St. Barnabas was erected to the memory of the mission's head Bishop John Coleridge Patteson, with windows designed by Edward Burne-Jones and executed by William Morris. In 1920 the mission was relocated from the island to the Solomon Islands to be closer to its target population.\nTwentieth century.\nAfter the creation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901, Norfolk Island was placed under the authority of the new Commonwealth government to be administered as an external territory.\nDuring World War II, the island became a key airbase and refueling depot between Australia and New Zealand, and New Zealand and the Solomon Islands. Because Norfolk Island fell within New Zealand's area of responsibility, it was garrisoned by a New Zealand Army unit known as N Force at a large army camp which had the capacity to house a 1,500 strong force. N Force relieved a company of the Second Australian Imperial Force. The island proved too remote to come under attack during the war and N Force left the island in February 1944.\nIn the late 1960s a mini-invasion by British ex-pats followed after the island was featured on a BBC television documentary presented by Alan Whicker. Fifty families decided to emigrate from the United Kingdom to Norfolk Island as a result of the programme.\nIn 1979, Norfolk was granted limited self-government by Australia, under which the island elects a government that runs most of the island's affairs. As such, residents of Norfolk Island are not represented in the Commonwealth Parliament of Australia, making them the only group of residents of an Australian state or territory not represented there.\nIn 2006, a formal review process took place, in which the Australian government considered revising this model of government. The review was completed on 20 December 2006, when it was decided that there would be no changes in the governance of Norfolk Island.\nFinancial problems and a reduction in tourism led to Norfolk Island's administration appealing to the Australian federal government for assistance in 2010. In return, the islanders were to pay income tax for the first time but would be eligible for greater welfare benefits. However, by May 2013, the agreement had not been reached, and the islanders had to leave to find work and welfare. An agreement was finally signed in Canberra on 12 March 2015 to replace self-government with a local council, against the wishes of the Norfolk Island government. A majority of Norfolk Islanders objected to the Australian plan to make changes to Norfolk Island without first consulting them and allowing their say, with 68% of voters being against forced changes. An example of growing friction between Norfolk Island and increased Australian rule was featured in a 2019 episode of Discovery Channel's annual Shark Week. The episode featured Norfolk Island's policy of culling growing cattle populations by killing older cattle and feeding the carcasses to tiger sharks well off the coast. This is done to help prevent tiger sharks from coming further toward shore in search of food. Norfolk Island holds one of the largest populations of tiger sharks in the world. Australia has banned the culling policy as cruelty to animals. Norfolk Islanders fear this will lead to increased shark attacks and damage an already waning tourist industry.\nOn 4 October 2015, the time zone for Norfolk Island was changed from to .\nReduced autonomy 2016.\nIn March 2015, the Australian Government announced comprehensive reforms for Norfolk Island. The action was justified on the grounds it was necessary \"to address issues of sustainability which have arisen from the model of self-government requiring Norfolk Island to deliver local, state and federal functions since 1979\". On 17 June 2015, the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished, with the territory becoming run by an Administrator and an advisory council. Elections for a new Regional Council were held on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016.\nFrom that date, most Australian Commonwealth laws were extended to Norfolk Island. This means that taxation, social security, immigration, customs and health arrangements apply on the same basis as in mainland Australia. Travel between Norfolk Island and mainland Australia became domestic travel on 1 July 2016. For the 2016 Australian federal election, 328 people on Norfolk Island voted in the ACT electorate of Canberra, out of 117,248 total votes. Since 2018, Norfolk Island is covered by the electorate of Bean.\nThere is opposition to the reforms, led by Norfolk Island People for Democracy Inc., an association appealing to the United Nations to include the island on its list of \"non-self-governing territories\". There has also been movement to join New Zealand since the autonomy reforms.\nIn October 2019, the Norfolk Island People for Democracy advocacy group conducted a survey on 457 island residents (about one quarter of the entire population) and found that 37% preferred free association with New Zealand, 35% preferred free association with Australia, 25% preferred full independence, and 3% preferred full integration with Australia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21424", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21424", "title": "Geography of Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21425", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21425", "title": "Demographics of Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21426", "revid": "1316377338", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21426", "title": "Politics of Norfolk Island", "text": " \nPolitics of Norfolk Island takes place in the framework of the \"Norfolk Island Act 1979\", an act of the Parliament of Australia which governs the status of Norfolk Island as an external territory of Australia.\nThe administrator of Norfolk Island is appointed by the federal government and administered through a federal government department (the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts since 2022). Norfolk Island historically enjoyed a significant level of self-government, with the Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly serving as its independent legislature from 1979 to 2015 and electing a chief minister. The Legislative Assembly was replaced by the Norfolk Island Regional Council in 2016. The regional council operates under the local government legislation of the state of New South Wales, although Norfolk Island remains a federal territory.\nResidents of Norfolk Island are eligible to vote in federal elections, with their votes counting towards election of senators for the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) and the ACT-based Division of Bean in the House of Representatives.\nPolitical parties.\nThe Australian Labor Party (ALP) has been active on Norfolk Island for a number of years, and as of 2023 operated as a sub-branch of ACT Labor. At the 2010 Norfolk Island legislative election, Labor ran four candidates, receiving 13.59% of the total vote. Mike King, a member of the party, served as leader of the opposition in the Legislative Assembly. However, King did not recontest the 2013 election.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], a \"Norfolk Island Interest Branch\" operated within the Canberra Liberals.\nAt the 2015 status referendum, the local branches of both the ALP and Liberal Party supported the \"no\" vote, which was ultimately unsuccessful.\nExecutive branch.\nThe Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly was abolished on 1 July 2015 and replaced with the Australian Government maintaining authority on the island through an Administrator (currently Eric Hutchinson) who is appointed by the Governor-General of Australia. Two of the members of the Assembly would form the Executive Council, which devises policy and acts as an advisory body to the Administrator. This council would be headed by the Administrator of Norfolk Island.\nRelationship with Australia.\nControversy exists as to the exact status of Norfolk Island. Despite the island's status as a self-governing territory of Australia, some Islanders claim that it was actually granted independence at the time Queen Victoria granted permission to Pitcairn Islanders to re-settle on the island. These views have been repeatedly rejected by the Australian parliament's joint committee on territories, most recently in 2004, and were also rejected by the High Court of Australia in \"Berwick Ltd v Gray\".\nDisagreements over the island's relationship with Australia were put in sharper relief by a 2006 review undertaken by the Australian government. Under the more radical of two proposed models proposed as a result of the review, the island's legislative assembly would be reduced to the status of a local council.\nIn a move that apparently surprised many islanders, the Chief Minister of Norfolk Island David Buffett announced on 6 November 2010 that the island would voluntarily surrender its tax free status in return for a financial bailout from the federal government to cover significant debts.\nIt was announced on 19 March 2015 that self-governance for the island would be revoked by the Commonwealth and replaced by a local council with the state of New South Wales providing services to the island. A reason given was that the island had never gained self-sufficiency and was being heavily subsidised by the Commonwealth, by $12.5 million in 2015 alone. It meant residents would have to start paying Australian income tax, but they would also be covered by Australian welfare schemes such as Medicare.\nThe Norfolk Island Legislative Assembly decided to hold a referendum on the proposal in 2015. Voters were asked if Norfolk Islanders should freely determine their political status, their economic, social and cultural development, and to \"be consulted at referendum or plebiscite on the future model of governance for Norfolk Island before such changes are acted upon by the Australian parliament.\" The outcome of the referendum was a 68% 'Yes' vote. The Norfolk Island Chief Minister said that \"the referendum results blow a hole in Canberra's assertion that the reforms introduced before the Australian Parliament that propose abolishing the Legislative Assembly and Norfolk Island Parliament were overwhelmingly supported by the people of Norfolk Island\".\nThe Norfolk Island Legislation Amendment Bill 2015 passed the Australian Parliament on 14 May 2015 (Assented on 26 May 2015) abolishing self-government on Norfolk Island and transferring Norfolk Island into a council as part of New South Wales law. From 1 July 2016 Norfolk Island legislation was transferred to New South Wales and subject to NSW legislation. From 1 July 2016, the Norfolk Island Regional Council was established to govern Norfolk Island at the local level as a local government area subject to the laws of New South Wales.\nChanges from July 2016.\nResidents of Norfolk Island who are citizens of Australia and meet the normal enrolment requirements are required to enrol to vote in Australian federal and once enrolled must vote. 393 people voted at the polling booths on Norfolk Island for the Canberra electorate at the 2016 Federal election, with 16.5% of votes being informal. 777 Norfolk Island residents were on the Commonwealth electoral roll as of 2019[ [update]], and 669 people voted at the booths on Norfolk Island in the 2019 Federal election in the newly created Bean electorate, with 17.8% of votes being informal.\nThe election for the inaugural Norfolk Island Regional Council occurred on 28 May 2016, with the new council taking office on 1 July 2016. Three of the five councilors elected supported self-determination.\nFrom 1 July 2016, Norfolk Island residents came under Australian levies, personal or business income and corporation taxation by the Australian Taxation Office. Also both Centrelink and Medicare will apply to Norfolk Island. In addition, flights between mainland Australia and Norfolk Island became classified as domestic not international meaning a passport was no longer required by visiting Australian citizens. Despite New South Wales laws being applied on Norfolk Island, residents are not eligible to vote in New South Wales elections.\nState-based services switch to Queensland from 2022.\nSince 1 January 2022, Queensland has provided state-based services directly for Norfolk Island, taking over from New South Wales.\nIndependence.\nSome residents on Norfolk Island advocate independence from Australia. In 2013, Chief Minister Lisle Snell claimed that Norfolk Island could survive alone. He also told Radio Australia that 'Norfolk-Pitcairn people see themselves as a people with some rights to self-determination' that the Island's future relationship with Australia was not clear, but also stated that for the time being they need to integrate further with Australia for financial reasons.\nForeign relations.\nAs a territory of Australia, Norfolk Island does not have diplomatic representation abroad or within the territory. It is however a full participant in the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (an international organisation) and a member in its own right of a number of international sporting organisations (e.g. the Commonwealth Games).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21427", "revid": "1754504", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21427", "title": "Economy of Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21428", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21428", "title": "Communications on Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21429", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21429", "title": "Transportation on Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21430", "revid": "10049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21430", "title": "Military of Norfolk Island", "text": ""}
{"id": "21433", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21433", "title": "New Testament", "text": "Second division of the Christian biblical canon\nThe New Testament (NT) is the second division of the Christian biblical canon. It discusses the teachings and person of Jesus, as well as events relating to first-century Christianity. The New Testament's background, the first division of the Christian Bible, has the name of Old Testament, which is based primarily upon the Hebrew Bible; together they are regarded as Sacred Scripture by Christians.\nThe New Testament is a collection of 27 Christian texts written in Koine Greek by various authors, forming the second major division of the Christian Bible. It includes four gospels, the Acts of the Apostles, epistles attributed to Paul and other authors, and the Book of Revelation. The New Testament canon developed gradually over the first few centuries of Christianity through a complex process of debate, rejection of heretical texts, and recognition of writings deemed apostolic, culminating in the formalization of the 27-book canon by the late 4th century. It has been widely accepted across Christian traditions since Late Antiquity.\nLiterary analysis suggests many of its texts were written in the mid-to-late first century. There is no scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament text. The earliest New Testament manuscripts date from the late second to early third centuries AD, with the possible exception of Papyrus 52.\nThe New Testament was transmitted through thousands of manuscripts in various languages and church quotations and contains variants. Textual criticism uses surviving manuscripts to reconstruct the oldest version feasible and to chart the history of the written tradition. It has varied reception among Christians today. It is viewed as a holy scripture alongside Sacred Tradition among Catholics and Orthodox, while evangelicals and some other Protestants view it as the inspired word of God without tradition.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"testament\".\nThe word \"testament\" in the expression \"New Testament\" refers to a Christian new covenant that Christians believe completes or fulfils the Mosaic covenant (the Jewish covenant) that Yahweh (the God of Israel) made with the people of Israel on Mount Sinai through Moses, described in the books of the Old Testament of the Christian Bible. While Christianity traditionally even claims this \"Christian new covenant\" as being prophesied in the Jewish Bible's Book of Jeremiah, Judaism traditionally disagrees:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; forasmuch as they broke My covenant, although I was a lord over them, saith the LORD. But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, saith the LORD, I will put My law in their inward parts, and in their heart will I write it; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people; and they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying: 'Know the LORD'; for they shall all know Me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD; for I will forgive their iniquity, and their sin will I remember no more.\nThe word \"covenant\" means 'agreement' (from Latin \"to agree\", literally 'to come together'): the use of the word \"testament\", which describes the different idea of written instructions for inheritance after death, to refer to the covenant with Israel in the Old Testament, is foreign to the original Hebrew word () describing it, which only means 'alliance, covenant, pact' and never 'inheritance instructions after death'. This use comes from the transcription of Latin \"testamentum\" 'will (left after death)', a literal translation of Greek \"diatheke\" (\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03b8\u03ae\u03ba\u03b7) 'will (left after death)', which is the word used to translate Hebrew \"brit\" in the Septuagint.\nThe choice of this word \"diatheke\", by the Jewish translators of the Septuagint in Alexandria in the 3rd and 2nd century BC, has been understood in Christian theology to imply a reinterpreted view of the Old Testament covenant with Israel as of a 'will left after death' (the death of Jesus) and has generated considerable attention from biblical scholars and theologians: in contrast to the Jewish usage where \"brit\" was the usual Hebrew word used to refer to pacts, alliances and covenants in general, like a common pact between two individuals, and to the one between God and Israel in particular, in the Greek world \"diatheke\" was virtually never used to refer to an alliance or covenant (one exception is noted in a passage from Aristophanes) and referred instead to a will left after the death of a person. There is scholarly debate as to the reason why the translators of the Septuagint chose the term \"diatheke\" to translate Hebrew \"brit\", instead of another Greek word generally used to refer to an alliance or covenant.\nThe phrase \"New Testament\" as the collection of scriptures.\nThe use of the phrase \"New Testament\" (Koine Greek: , ) to describe a collection of first- and second-century Christian Greek scriptures can be traced back to Tertullian in his work \"Against Praxeas\". Irenaeus uses the phrase \"New Testament\" several times, but does not use it in reference to any written text. In \"Against Marcion\", written c.\u00a0208\u00a0AD, Tertullian writes of:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;the Divine Word, who is doubly edged with the two testaments of the law and the gospel.\nAnd Tertullian continues later in the book, writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;it is certain that the whole aim at which he [Marcion] has strenuously laboured, even in the drawing up of his Antitheses, centres in this, that he may establish a diversity between the Old and the New Testaments, so that his own Christ may be separate from the Creator, as belonging to this rival God, and as alien from the law and the prophets.\nBy the 4th century, the existence\u2014even if not the exact contents\u2014of both an Old and New Testament had been established. Lactantius, a 3rd\u20134th century Christian author wrote in his early-4th-century Latin \"Institutiones Divinae\" (\"Divine Institutes\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But all scripture is divided into two Testaments. That which preceded the advent and passion of Christ\u2014that is, the law and the prophets\u2014is called the Old; but those things which were written after His resurrection are named the New Testament. The Jews make use of the Old, we of the New: but yet they are not discordant, for the New is the fulfilling of the Old, and in both there is the same testator, even Christ, who, having suffered death for us, made us heirs of His everlasting kingdom, the people of the Jews being deprived and disinherited. As the prophet Jeremiah testifies when he speaks such things: \"Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new testament to the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not according to the testament which I made to their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; for they continued not in my testament, and I disregarded them, saith the Lord.\" ... For that which He said above, that He would make a new testament to the house of Judah, shows that the old testament which was given by Moses was not perfect; but that which was to be given by Christ would be complete.\nEusebius describes the collection of Christian writings as \"covenanted\" (\u1f10\u03bd\u03b4\u03b9\u03b1\u03b8\u03ae\u03ba\u03b7) books in \"Hist. Eccl.\" 3.3.1\u20137; 3.25.3; 5.8.1; 6.25.1.\nBooks.\nThe Gospels.\nEach of the four gospels in the New Testament narrates the life, death, and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth (the gospel of Mark in the original text ends with the empty tomb and has no account of the post-resurrection appearances, but the emptiness of the tomb implies a resurrection). The word \"gospel\" derives from the Old English \"g\u014dd-spell\" (rarely \"godspel\"), meaning \"good news\" or \"glad tidings\". Its Hebrew equivalent being \"besorah\" (\u05d1\u05b0\u05bc\u05e9\u05c2\u05d5\u05b9\u05e8\u05b8\u05d4). The gospel was considered the \"good news\" of the coming Kingdom of Messiah, and the redemption through the life and death of Jesus, the central Christian message.\nStarting in the late second century, the four narrative accounts of the life and work of Jesus Christ have been referred to as \"The Gospel of ...\" or \"The Gospel according to ...\" followed by the name of the supposed author. The first author to explicitly name the canonical gospels is Irenaeus of Lyon, who promoted the four canonical gospels in his book \"Against Heresies\", written around 180.\nThese four gospels that were eventually included in the New Testament were only a few among many other early Christian gospels. The existence of such texts is even mentioned at the beginning of the Gospel of Luke. Many non-canonical gospels were also written, all later than the four canonical gospels, and like them advocating the particular theological views of their various authors. In modern scholarship, the Synoptic Gospels are the primary sources for reconstructing Christ's ministry.\nActs of the Apostles.\nThe Acts of the Apostles is a narrative of the apostles' ministry and activity after Christ's death and resurrection, from which point it resumes and functions as a sequel to the Gospel of Luke. Examining style, phraseology, and other evidence, modern scholarship generally concludes that Acts and the Gospel of Luke share the same author, referred to as Luke\u2013Acts. Luke\u2013Acts does not name its author. Church tradition identified him as Luke the Evangelist, the companion of Paul, but the majority of scholars reject this due to the many differences between Acts and the authentic Pauline letters, though most scholars still believe the author, whether named Luke or not, met Paul. The most probable date of composition is around 80\u201390 AD, although some scholars date it significantly later, and there is evidence that it was still being substantially revised well into the 2nd century.\nEpistles.\nPauline letters to churches.\nThe Pauline letters are the thirteen New Testament books that present Paul the Apostle as their author. Paul's authorship of six of the letters is disputed. Four are thought by most modern scholars to be pseudepigraphic, i.e., not actually written by Paul even if attributed to him within the letters themselves. Opinion is more divided on the other two disputed letters (2 Thessalonians and Colossians). These letters were written to Christian communities in specific cities or geographical regions, often to address issues faced by that particular community. Prominent themes include the relationship both to broader \"pagan\" society, to Judaism, and to other Christians.\n[Disputed letters are marked with an asterisk (*).]\nPauline letters to persons.\nThe last four Pauline letters in the New Testament are addressed to individual persons. They include the following:\n[Disputed letters are marked with an asterisk (*).]\nAll of the above except for Philemon are known as the pastoral epistles. They are addressed to individuals charged with pastoral oversight of churches and discuss issues of Christian living, doctrine and leadership. They often address different concerns to those of the preceding epistles. These letters are believed by many to be pseudepigraphic. Some scholars (e.g., Bill Mounce, Ben Witherington, R.C. Sproul) will argue that the letters are genuinely Pauline, or at least written under Paul's supervision.\nHebrews.\nThe Epistle to the Hebrews addresses a Jewish audience who had come to believe that Jesus was the Anointed One (Hebrew: \u05de\u05b8\u05e9\u05b4\u05c1\u05d9\u05d7\u05b7\u2014transliterated in English as \"Moshiach\", or \"Messiah\"; Greek: \u03a7\u03c1\u03b9\u03c3\u03c4\u03cc\u03c2\u2014transliterated in English as \"Christos\", for \"Christ\") who was predicted in the writings of the Hebrew Scriptures. The author discusses the superiority of the new covenant and the ministry of Jesus, to the Mosaic Law Covenant and urges the readers in the practical implications of this conviction through the end of the epistle.\nThe book has been widely accepted by the Christian church as inspired by God and thus authoritative, despite the acknowledgment of uncertainties about who its human author was. Regarding authorship, although the Epistle to the Hebrews does not internally claim to have been written by the Apostle Paul, some similarities in wordings to some of the Pauline Epistles have been noted and inferred. In antiquity, some began to ascribe it to Paul in an attempt to provide the anonymous work an explicit apostolic pedigree.\nIn the 4th century, Jerome and Augustine of Hippo supported Paul's authorship. The Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation. The letter to the Hebrews had difficulty in being accepted as part of the Christian canon because of its anonymity. As early as the 3rd century, Origen wrote of the letter, \"Men of old have handed it down as Paul's, but who wrote the Epistle God only knows.\"\nContemporary scholars often reject Pauline authorship for the epistle to the Hebrews, based on its distinctive style and theology, which are considered to set it apart from Paul's writings.\nBook of Revelation.\nThe final book of the New Testament is the Book of Revelation, also known as the Apocalypse of John. In the New Testament canon, it is considered prophetical or apocalyptic literature. Its authorship has been attributed either to John the Apostle (in which case it is often thought that John the Apostle is John the Evangelist, i.e. author of the Gospel of John) or to another John designated \"John of Patmos\" after the island where the text says the revelation was received (1:9). Some ascribe the writership date as c.\u200981\u201396 AD, and others at around 68 AD. The work opens with letters to seven local congregations of Asia Minor and thereafter takes the form of an apocalypse, a \"revealing\" of divine prophecy and mysteries, a literary genre popular in ancient Judaism and Christianity.\nNew Testament canons.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBook order.\nThe order in which the books of the New Testament appear differs between some collections and ecclesiastical traditions. In the Latin West, prior to the Vulgate (an early 5th-century Latin version of the Bible), the four Gospels were arranged in the following order: Matthew, John, Luke, and Mark. The Syriac Peshitta places the major Catholic epistles (James, 1 Peter, and 1 John) immediately after Acts and before the Pauline epistles.\nThe order of an early edition of the letters of Paul is based on the size of the letters: longest to shortest, though keeping 1 and 2 Corinthians and 1 and 2 Thessalonians together. The Pastoral epistles were apparently not part of the \"Corpus Paulinum\" in which this order originated and were later inserted after 2 Thessalonians and before Philemon. Hebrews was variously incorporated into the \"Corpus Paulinum\" either after 2 Thessalonians, after Philemon (i.e. at the very end), or after Romans.\nLuther's canon, found in the 16th-century Luther Bible, continues to place Hebrews, James, Jude, and the Apocalypse (Revelation) last. This reflects the thoughts of the Reformer Martin Luther on the canonicity of these books.\nAuthors.\nIt is considered the books of the New Testament were all or nearly all written by Jewish Christians\u2014that is, Jewish disciples of Christ, who lived in the Roman Empire, and under Roman occupation. The author of the Gospel of Luke and the Book of Acts is frequently thought of as an exception; scholars are divided as to whether he was a Gentile or a Hellenistic Jew. A few scholars identify the author of the Gospel of Mark as probably a Gentile, and similarly for the Gospel of Matthew, though most assert Jewish-Christian authorship.\nHowever, more recently the above understanding has been challenged by the publication of evidence showing only educated elites after the Jewish War would have been capable of producing the prose found in the Gospels.\nGospels.\nAuthorship of the Gospels remains divided among both evangelical and critical scholars. The names of each Gospel stems from church tradition, and yet the authors of the Gospels do not identify themselves in their respective texts. All four gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are anonymous works. The Gospel of John claims to be based on eyewitness testimony from the Disciple whom Jesus loved, but never names this character. The author of Luke-Acts claimed to access an eyewitness to Paul; this claim remains accepted by most scholars. Objections to this viewpoint mainly take the form of the following two interpretations, but also include the claim that Luke-Acts contains differences in theology and historical narrative which are irreconcilable with the authentic letters of Paul the Apostle. According to Bart D. Ehrman of the University of North Carolina, none of the authors of the Gospels were eyewitnesses or even explicitly claimed to be eyewitnesses of Jesus's life. Ehrman has argued for a scholarly consensus that many New Testament books were not written by the individuals whose names are attached to them. Scholarly opinion is that names were fixed to the gospels by the mid second century AD. Many scholars believe that none of the gospels were written in the region of Palestine.\nChristian tradition identifies John the Apostle with John the Evangelist, the supposed author of the Gospel of John. Traditionalists tend to support the idea that the writer of the Gospel of John himself claimed to be an eyewitness in their commentaries of John 21:24 and therefore the gospel was written by an eyewitness. This idea is rejected by the majority of modern scholars; most think the verses claim the beloved disciple was the author of the gospel, but the passage is widely viewed as a later addition by either the author of chapters 1-20 or by another redactor, though a growing minority view it as part of the earliest text. The author may also claim to be a witness in 19:35.\nMost scholars hold to the two-source hypothesis, which posits that the Gospel of Mark was the first gospel to be written, though alternative hypotheses that posit the direct use of Matthew by Luke or vice versa without Q are increasing in popularity within scholarship. On this view, the authors of the Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke used as sources the Gospel of Mark and a hypothetical Q document to write their individual gospel accounts. These three gospels are called the Synoptic Gospels, because they include many of the same stories, often in the same sequence, and sometimes in exactly the same wording. Scholars agree that the Gospel of John was written last, by using a different tradition and body of testimony. In addition, most scholars agree that the author of Luke also wrote the Acts of the Apostles. Scholars hold that these books constituted two-halves of a single work, Luke\u2013Acts.\nActs.\nThe same author appears to have written the Gospel of Luke and the Acts of the Apostles, and most refer to them as the Lucan texts. The most direct evidence comes from the prefaces of each book; both were addressed to Theophilus, and the preface to the Acts of the Apostles references \"my former book\" about the ministry of Jesus. Furthermore, there are linguistic and theological similarities between the two works, suggesting that they have a common author.\nPauline epistles.\nThe Pauline epistles are the thirteen books in the New Testament traditionally attributed to Paul of Tarsus. Seven letters are generally classified as \"undisputed\", expressing contemporary scholarly near consensus that they are the work of Paul: Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Philippians, 1 Thessalonians and Philemon. Six additional letters bearing Paul's name do not currently enjoy the same academic consensus: Ephesians, Colossians, 2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy and Titus.\nThe anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews is, despite unlikely Pauline authorship, often functionally grouped with these thirteen to form a corpus of fourteen \"Pauline\" epistles.\nWhile many scholars uphold the traditional view, some question whether the first three, called the \"Deutero-Pauline Epistles\", are authentic letters of Paul. As for the latter three, the \"Pastoral epistles\", some scholars uphold the traditional view of these as the genuine writings of the Apostle Paul; most regard them as pseudepigrapha.\nOne might refer to the Epistle to the Laodiceans and the Third Epistle to the Corinthians as examples of works identified as pseudonymous. Since the early centuries of the church, there has been debate concerning the authorship of the anonymous Epistle to the Hebrews, and contemporary scholars generally reject Pauline authorship.\nThe epistles all share common themes, emphasis, vocabulary and style; they exhibit a uniformity of doctrine concerning the Mosaic Law, Jesus, faith, and various other issues. All of these letters easily fit into the chronology of Paul's journeys depicted in Acts of the Apostles.\nOther epistles.\nThe author of the Epistle of James identifies himself in the opening verse as \"James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ\". From the middle of the 3rd century, patristic authors cited the \"Epistle\" as written by James the Just. Ancient and modern scholars have always been divided on the issue of authorship. Many consider the epistle to be written in the late 1st or early 2nd centuries.\nThe author of the First Epistle of Peter identifies himself in the opening verse as \"Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ\", and the view that the epistle was written by St. Peter is attested to by a number of Church Fathers: Irenaeus (140\u2013203), Tertullian (150\u2013222), Clement of Alexandria (155\u2013215) and Origen of Alexandria (185\u2013253). Unlike The Second Epistle of Peter, the authorship of which was debated in antiquity, there was little debate about Peter's authorship of this first epistle until the 18th century. Although 2 Peter internally purports to be a work of the apostle, many biblical scholars have concluded that Peter is not the author. For an early date and (usually) for a defense of the Apostle Peter's authorship see Kruger, Zahn, Spitta, Bigg, and Green.\nThe Epistle of Jude title is written as follows: \"Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James\". The debate has continued over the author's identity as the apostle, the brother of Jesus, both, or neither.\nJohannine works.\nThe Gospel of John, the three Johannine epistles, and the Book of Revelation, exhibit marked similarities, although more so between the gospel and the epistles (especially the gospel and 1 John) than between those and Revelation. Most scholars therefore treat the five as a single corpus of Johannine literature, albeit not from the same author.\nBurkett argues the gospel went through two or three \"editions\" before reaching its current form around AD 90\u2013110, though more recent scholars tend to be less interested in theories about hypothetical editions or sources of the gospel. It speaks of an unnamed \"disciple whom Jesus loved\" as the source of its traditions, but according to Burkett does not say specifically that he is its author except in John 21, which is widely viewed as a later addition by either the author of chapters 1-20 or by another redactor, though Keith notes a growing minority views it as original. According to M\u00e9ndez, the gospel gradually identifies its narrator as the beloved disciple, notably in chapter 19. Christian tradition identifies this disciple as the apostle John, but while this idea still has supporters, for a variety of reasons the majority of modern scholars have abandoned it or hold it only tenuously. It is significantly different from the synoptic gospels, with major variations in material, theological emphasis, chronology, and literary style, sometimes amounting to contradictions.\nThe author of the Book of Revelation identifies himself several times as \"John\". and states that he was on Patmos when he received his first vision. As a result, the author is sometimes referred to as John of Patmos. The author has traditionally been identified with John the Apostle to whom the Gospel and the epistles of John were attributed. It was believed that he was exiled to the island of Patmos during the reign of the Roman emperor Domitian, and there wrote Revelation. Justin Martyr (c. 100\u2013165 AD) who was acquainted with Polycarp, who had been mentored by John, makes a possible allusion to this book, and credits John as the source. Irenaeus (c. 115\u2013202) assumes it as a conceded point. According to the \"Zondervan Pictorial Encyclopedia of the Bible\", modern scholars are divided between the apostolic view and several alternative hypotheses put forth in the last hundred years or so. Ben Witherington points out that linguistic evidence makes it unlikely that the books were written by the same person.\nDating the New Testament.\nThere is no scholarly consensus on the date of composition of the latest New Testament texts. John A. T. Robinson, Dan Wallace, William F. Albright, Maurice Casey, and James Crossley all dated many or all of the books of the New Testament before 70 AD. Jonathan Bernier's recent argument for early dates has enjoyed a positive reception, with endorsements from Chris Keith and Anders Runesson, among others. Many other scholars, such as Bart D. Ehrman and Stephen L. Harris, date some New Testament texts much later than this; Richard Pervo dated Luke\u2013Acts to c.\u2009115 AD, and David Trobisch places Acts in the mid-to-late second century, contemporaneous with the publication of the first New Testament canon. Whether the Gospels were composed before or after 70 AD, according to Bas van Os, the lifetime of various eyewitnesses that includes Jesus's own family through the end of the First Century is very likely statistically. Markus Bockmuehl finds this structure of lifetime memory in various early Christian traditions.\nExternal evidence.\nThe earliest manuscripts of New Testament books date from the late second to early third centuries (although see Papyrus 52 for a possible exception).\nInternal evidence.\nLiterary analysis of the New Testament texts themselves can be used to date many of the books of the New Testament to the mid-to-late first century. The earliest works of the New Testament are the letters of the Apostle Paul. It can be determined that 1 Thessalonians is likely the earliest of these letters, written around 52 AD.\nLanguage.\nThe major languages spoken by both Jews and Greeks in the Holy Land at the time of Jesus were Aramaic and Koine Greek, and also a colloquial dialect of Mishnaic Hebrew. It is generally agreed by most scholars that the historical Jesus primarily spoke Aramaic, perhaps also some Hebrew and Koine Greek. The majority view is that all of the books that would eventually form the New Testament were written in the Koine Greek language.\nAs Christianity spread, these books were later translated into other languages, most notably, Latin, Syriac, and Egyptian Coptic. Some of the Church Fathers imply or claim that Matthew was originally written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and then soon after was written in Koine Greek. Nevertheless, some scholars believe the Gospel of Matthew known today was composed in Greek and is neither directly dependent upon nor a translation of a text in a Semitic language.\nStyle.\nThe style of Koine Greek in which the New Testament is written differs from the general Koine Greek used by Greek writers of the same era, a difference that some scholars have explained by the fact that the authors of the New Testament, nearly all Jews and deeply familiar with the Septuagint, wrote in a Jewish-Greek dialect strongly influenced by Aramaic and Hebrew (see Jewish Koine Greek, related to the Greek of the Septuagint). But other scholars say that this view is arrived at by comparing the linguistic style of the New Testament to the preserved writings of the literary men of the era, who imitated the style of the great Attic texts and as a result did not reflect the everyday spoken language, so that this difference in style could be explained by the New Testament being written, unlike other preserved literary material of the era, in the Koine Greek spoken in everyday life, in order to appeal to the common people, a style which has also been found in contemporary non-Jewish texts such as private letters, receipts and petitions discovered in Egypt (where the dry air has preserved these documents which, as everyday material not deemed of literary importance, had not been copied by subsequent generations).\nDevelopment of the New Testament canon.\nThe process of canonization of the New Testament was complex and lengthy. In the initial centuries of early Christianity, there were many books widely considered by the church to be inspired, but there was no single formally recognized New Testament canon. The process was characterized by a compilation of books that apostolic tradition considered authoritative in worship and teaching, relevant to the historical situations in which they lived, and consonant with the Old Testament. Writings attributed to the apostles circulated among the earliest Christian communities and the Pauline epistles were circulating, perhaps in collected forms, by the end of the 1st century AD.\nOne of the earliest attempts at solidifying a canon was made by Marcion, c.\u2009140 AD, who accepted only a modified version of Luke (the Gospel of Marcion) and ten of Paul's letters, while rejecting the Old Testament entirely. His canon was largely rejected by other groups of Christians, notably the proto-orthodox Christians, as was his theology, Marcionism. Adolf von Harnack, John Knox, and David Trobisch, among other scholars, have argued that the church formulated its New Testament canon partially in response to the challenge posed by Marcion.\nPolycarp, Irenaeus and Tertullian held the epistles of Paul to be divinely inspired \"scripture\". Other books were held in high esteem but were gradually relegated to the status of New Testament apocrypha. Justin Martyr, in the mid 2nd century, mentions \"memoirs of the apostles\" as being read on Sunday alongside the \"writings of the prophets\".\nThe Muratorian fragment, dated at between 170 and as late as the end of the 4th century (according to the \"Anchor Bible Dictionary\"), may be the earliest known New Testament canon attributed to mainstream Christianity. It is similar, but not identical, to the modern New Testament canon.\nThe oldest clear endorsement of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John being the only legitimate gospels was written c.\u2009180 AD. A four gospel canon (the \"Tetramorph\") was asserted by Irenaeus, who refers to it directly in his polemic \"Against Heresies\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Irenaeus of Lyon (emphasis added)\nThe books considered to be authoritative by Irenaeus included the four gospels and many of the letters of Paul, although, based on the arguments Irenaeus made in support of only four authentic gospels, some interpreters deduce that the fourfold Gospel must have still been a novelty in Irenaeus's time.\nOrigen (3rd century).\nBy the early 200s, Origen may have been using the same twenty-seven books as in the Catholic New Testament canon, though there were still disputes over the canonicity of the Letter to the Hebrews, Epistle of James, II Peter, II John and III John and the Book of Revelation, known as the Antilegomena. Likewise, the Muratorian fragment is evidence that, perhaps as early as 200, there existed a set of Christian writings somewhat similar to the twenty-seven book NT canon, which included four gospels and argued against objections to them. Thus, while there was a good measure of debate in the Early Church over the New Testament canon, the major writings are claimed to have been accepted by almost all Christians by the middle of the 3rd century.\nOrigen was largely responsible for the collection of usage information regarding the texts that became the New Testament. The information used to create the late-4th-century Easter Letter, which declared accepted Christian writings, was probably based on the \"Ecclesiastical History\" (HE) of Eusebius of Caesarea, wherein he uses the information passed on to him by Origen to create both his list at HE 3:25 and Origen's list at HE 6:25. Eusebius got his information about what texts were then accepted and what were then disputed, by the third-century churches throughout the known world, a great deal of which Origen knew of firsthand from his extensive travels, from the library and writings of Origen.\nIn fact, Origen would have possibly included in his list of \"inspired writings\" other texts kept out by the likes of Eusebius\u2014including the Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and 1 Clement. Notwithstanding these facts, \"Origen is not the originator of the idea of biblical canon, but he certainly gives the philosophical and literary-interpretative underpinnings for the whole notion.\"\nEusebius's Ecclesiastical History.\nEusebius, c.\u2009300, gave a detailed list of New Testament writings in his \"Ecclesiastical History\" http://, Chapter XXV:\n \"1... First then must be put the holy quaternion of the gospels; following them the Acts of the Apostles... the epistles of Paul... the epistle of John... the epistle of Peter... After them is to be placed, if it really seem proper, the Book of Revelation, concerning which we shall give the different opinions at the proper time. These then belong among the accepted writings.\"\n \"3 Among the disputed writings, which are nevertheless recognized by many, are extant the so-called epistle of James and that of Jude, also the second epistle of Peter, and those that are called the second and third of John, whether they belong to the evangelist or to another person of the same name. Among the rejected [Kirsopp Lake translation: \"not genuine\"] writings must be reckoned also the Acts of Paul, and the so-called Shepherd, and the Apocalypse of Peter, and in addition to these the extant epistle of Barnabas, and the so-called Teachings of the Apostles; and besides, as I said, the Apocalypse of John, if it seem proper, which some, as I said, reject, but which others class with the accepted books. And among these some have placed also the Gospel according to the Hebrews... And all these may be reckoned among the disputed books.\"\n \"6... such books as the Gospels of Peter, of Thomas, of Matthias, or of any others besides them, and the Acts of Andrew and John and the other apostles... they clearly show themselves to be the fictions of heretics. Wherefore they are not to be placed even among the rejected writings, but are all of them to be cast aside as absurd and impious.\"\nThe Book of Revelation is counted as both accepted (Kirsopp Lake translation: \"recognized\") and disputed, which has caused some confusion over what exactly Eusebius meant by doing so. From other writings of the church fathers, it was disputed with several canon lists rejecting its canonicity. EH 3.3.5 adds further detail on Paul: \"Paul's fourteen epistles are well known and undisputed. It is not indeed right to overlook the fact that some have rejected the Epistle to the Hebrews, saying that it is disputed by the church of Rome, on the ground that it was not written by Paul.\" EH 4.29.6 mentions the Diatessaron: \"But their original founder, Tatian, formed a certain combination and collection of the gospels, I know not how, to which he gave the title Diatessaron, and which is still in the hands of some. But they say that he ventured to paraphrase certain words of the apostle Paul, in order to improve their style.\"\n4th century and later.\nIn his Easter letter of 367, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, gave a list of the books that would become the twenty-seven-book NT canon, and he used the word \"canonized\" (\"kanonizomena\") in regards to them. The first council that accepted the present canon of the New Testament may have been the Synod of Hippo Regius in North Africa (393 AD). The acts of this council are lost. A brief summary of the acts was read at and accepted by the Council of Carthage (397) and the Council of Carthage (419). These councils were under the authority of St. Augustine, who regarded the canon as already closed.\nPope Damasus I's Council of Rome in 382, if the \"Decretum Gelasianum\" is correctly associated with it, issued a biblical canon identical to that mentioned above, or, if not, the list is at least a 6th-century compilation. Likewise, Damasus' commissioning of the Latin Vulgate edition of the Bible, c.\u2009383, was instrumental in the fixation of the canon in the West. In c.\u2009405, Pope Innocent I sent a list of the sacred books to a Gallic bishop, Exsuperius of Toulouse. Christian scholars assert that, when these bishops and councils spoke on the matter, they were not defining something new but instead \"were ratifying what had already become the mind of the Church.\"\nThe New Testament canon as it is now was first listed by St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, in 367, in a letter written to his churches in Egypt, http://. Also cited is the Council of Rome, but not without controversy. That canon gained wider and wider recognition until it was accepted at the Third Council of Carthage in 397 and 419. The Book of Revelation was not added till the Council of Carthage (419).\nThus, some claim that, from the 4th century, there existed unanimity in the West concerning the New Testament canon (as it is today), and that, by the 5th century, the Eastern Church, with a few exceptions, had come to accept the Book of Revelation and thus had come into harmony on the matter of the canon. Nonetheless, full dogmatic articulations of the canon were not made until the Canon of Trent of 1546 for Roman Catholicism, the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563 for the Church of England, the Westminster Confession of Faith of 1647 for Calvinism, and the Synod of Jerusalem of 1672 for the Greek Orthodox.\nOn the question of NT Canon formation generally, New Testament scholar Lee Martin McDonald has written that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlthough a number of Christians have thought that church councils determined what books were to be included in the biblical canons, a more accurate reflection of the matter is that the councils recognized or acknowledged those books that had already obtained prominence from usage among the various early Christian communities.\nAccording to the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" article on the Canon of the New Testament: \"The idea of a complete and clear-cut canon of the New Testament existing from the beginning, that is from Apostolic times, has no foundation in history. The Canon of the New Testament, like that of the Old, is the result of a development, of a process at once stimulated by disputes with doubters, both within and without the Church, and retarded by certain obscurities and natural hesitations, and which did not reach its final term until the dogmatic definition of the Tridentine Council.\"\nIn 331, Constantine I commissioned Eusebius to deliver fifty Bibles for the Church of Constantinople. Athanasius (\"Apol. Const. 4\") recorded Alexandrian scribes around 340 preparing Bibles for Constans. Little else is known, though there is plenty of speculation. For example, it is speculated that this may have provided motivation for canon lists, and that Codex Vaticanus and Codex Sinaiticus may be examples of these Bibles. Together with the Peshitta and Codex Alexandrinus, these are the earliest extant Christian Bibles.\nEarly manuscripts.\nLike other literature from antiquity, the text of the New Testament was (prior to the advent of the printing press) preserved and transmitted in manuscripts. Manuscripts containing at least a part of the New Testament number in the thousands. The earliest of these (like manuscripts containing other literature) are often very fragmentarily preserved. Some of these fragments have even been thought to date as early as the 2nd century (i.e., Papyrus 90, Papyrus 98, Papyrus 104, and famously Rylands Library Papyrus P52, though the early date of the latter has recently been called into question).\nTextual variation.\nTextual criticism deals with the identification and removal of transcription errors in the texts of manuscripts. Ancient scribes made errors or alterations (such as including non-authentic additions). The New Testament has been preserved in more than 5,800 Greek manuscripts, 10,000 Latin manuscripts and 9,300 manuscripts in various other ancient languages including Syriac, Slavic, Ethiopic and Armenian. Even if the original Greek versions were lost, the entire New Testament could still be assembled from the translations.\nIn addition, there are so many quotes from the New Testament in early church documents and commentaries that the entire New Testament could also be assembled from these alone. Not all biblical manuscripts come from orthodox Christian writers. For example, the Gnostic writings of Valentinus come from the 2nd century AD, and these Christians were regarded as heretics by the mainstream church. The sheer number of witnesses presents unique difficulties, but it also gives scholars a better idea of how close modern Bibles are to the original versions.\nOn noting the large number of surviving ancient manuscripts, Bruce Metzger sums up the view on the issue by saying \"The more often you have copies that agree with each other, especially if they emerge from different geographical areas, the more you can cross-check them to figure out what the original document was like. The only way they'd agree would be where they went back genealogically in a family tree that represents the descent of the manuscripts.\nInterpolations.\nIn attempting to determine the original text of the New Testament books, some modern textual critics have identified sections as additions of material, centuries after the gospel was written. These are called interpolations. In modern translations of the Bible, the results of textual criticism have led to certain verses, words and phrases being left out or marked as not original. According to Bart D. Ehrman, \"These scribal additions are often found in late medieval manuscripts of the New Testament, but not in the manuscripts of the earlier centuries.\"\nMost modern Bibles have footnotes to indicate passages that have disputed source documents. Bible commentaries also discuss these, sometimes in great detail. While many variations have been discovered between early copies of biblical texts, almost all have no importance, as they are variations in spelling, punctuation, or grammar. Also, many of these variants are so particular to the Greek language that they would not appear in translations into other languages. For example, order of words (i.e. \"man bites dog\" versus \"dog bites man\") often does not matter in Greek, so textual variants that flip the order of words often have no consequences.\nOutside of these unimportant variants, there are a couple variants of some importance. The two most commonly cited examples are the last verses of the Gospel of Mark and the story of Jesus and the woman taken in adultery in the Gospel of John. Many scholars and critics also believe that the Johannine Comma reference supporting the Trinity doctrine in the First Epistle of John to have been a later addition. According to Norman Geisler and William Nix, \"The New Testament, then, has not only survived in more manuscripts than any other book from antiquity, but it has survived in a purer form than any other great book\u2014a form that is 99.5% pure\".\nThe often referred to \"Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible\", a book written to prove the validity of the New Testament, says: \"A study of 150 Greek [manuscripts] of the Gospel of Luke has revealed more than 30,000 different readings... It is safe to say that there is not one sentence in the New Testament in which the [manuscript] is wholly uniform.\"\nBiblical criticism.\nBiblical criticism is the scholarly \"study and investigation of biblical writings that seeks to make discerning judgments about these writings.\"\nEstablishing a critical text.\nThe textual variation among manuscript copies of books in the New Testament prompted attempts to discern the earliest form of text already in antiquity (e.g., by the 3rd-century Christian author Origen). The efforts began in earnest again during the Renaissance, which saw a revival of the study of ancient Greek texts. During this period, modern textual criticism was born. In this context, Christian humanists such as Lorenzo Valla and Erasmus promoted a return to the original Greek of the New Testament. This was the beginning of modern New Testament textual criticism, which over subsequent centuries would increasingly incorporate more and more manuscripts, in more languages (i.e., versions of the New Testament), as well as citations of the New Testament by ancient authors and the New Testament text in lectionaries in order to reconstruct the earliest recoverable form of the New Testament text and the history of changes to it.\nRelationship to earlier and contemporaneous literature.\nBooks that later formed the New Testament, like other Christian literature of the period, originated in a literary context that reveals relationships not only to other Christian writings, but also to Graeco-Roman and Jewish works. Of singular importance is the extensive use of and interaction with the Jewish Bible and what would become the Christian Old Testament. Both implicit and explicit citations, as well as countless allusions, appear throughout the books of the New Testament, from the Gospels and Acts, to the Epistles, to the Apocalypse.\nEarly versions.\nThe first translations (usually called \"versions\") of the New Testament were made beginning already at the end of 2nd century. The earliest versions of the New Testament are the translations into the Syriac, Latin, and Coptic languages.\nSyriac.\nThe Philoxenian probably was produced in 508 for Bishop Philoxenus of Mabbug.\nCoptic.\nThere are several dialects of the Coptic language: Bohairic (the Nile Delta), Fayyumic (in the Faiyum in Middle Egypt), Sahidic (in Upper Egypt), Akhmimic (what is now Sohag Governorate in Upper Egypt), and others. The first translation was made by at least the third century into the Sahidic dialect (copsa). This translation represents a mixed text, mostly Alexandrian, though also with Western readings.\nA Bohairic translation was made later, but existed already in the 4th century. Though the translation makes less use of Greek words than the Sahidic, it does employ some Greek grammar (e.g., in word-order and the use of particles such as the syntactic construction \u03bc\u03b5\u03bd\u2014\u03b4\u03b5). For this reason, the Bohairic translation can be helpful in the reconstruction of the early Greek text of the New Testament.\nOther ancient translations.\nThe continued spread of Christianity, and the foundation of national churches, led to the translation of the Bible\u2014often beginning with books from the New Testament\u2014into a variety of other languages at a relatively early date: Armenian, Georgian, Ethiopic, Persian, Sogdian, and eventually Gothic, Old Church Slavonic, Arabic, and Nubian.\nModern translations.\nThe 16th century saw the rise of Protestantism and an explosion of translations of the New (and Old) Testament into the vernacular. Notable are those of Martin Luther (1522), Jacques Lef\u00e8vre d'\u00c9taples (1523), the Froschau Bible (1525\u20131529, revised in 1574), William Tyndale (1526, revised in 1534, 1535 and 1536), the Brest Bible (1563), and the Authorized Version (also called the \"King James Version\") (1611).\nTranslations of the New Testament made since the appearance of critical editions of the Greek text (notably those of Tischendorf, Westcott and Hort, and von Soden) have largely used them as their base text. Unlike the Textus Receptus, they have a pronounced Alexandrian character. Standard critical editions are those of Nestle-\u00c5land (the text, though not the full critical apparatus of which is reproduced in the United Bible Societies' \"Greek New Testament\"), Souter, Vogels, Bover and Merk.\nNotable translations of the New Testament based on these most recent critical editions include the Revised Standard Version (1946, revised in 1971), (1961, revised in 1973 and 2000), the Einheits\u00fcbersetzung (1970, final edition 1979), the New American Bible (1970, revised in 1986 and 2011), the New International Version (1973, revised in 1984 and 2011), the Traduction Oecum\u00e9nique de la Bible (1988, revised in 2004), the New Revised Standard Version (1989) and the English Standard Version (2001, revised in 2007, 2011 and 2016).\nTheological interpretation in Christian churches.\nAccording to Gary T. Meadors:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The self-witness of the Bible to its inspiration demands a commitment to its unity. The ultimate basis for unity is contained in the claim of divine inspiration in 2 Timothy 3:16 that \"all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness\" (KJV). The term \"inspiration\" renders the Greek word \"theopneustos\". This term only occurs here in the New Testament and literally means \"God-breathed\" (the chosen translation of the NIV).\nUnity in diversity.\nThe notion of unity in diversity of Scripture claims that the Bible presents a noncontradictory and consistent message concerning God and redemptive history. The fact of diversity is observed in comparing the diversity of time, culture, authors' perspectives, literary genre, and the theological themes.\nStudies from many theologians considering the \"unity in diversity\" to be found in the New Testament (and the Bible as a whole) have been collected and summarized by New Testament theologian Frank Stagg. He describes them as some basic presuppositions, tenets, and concerns common among the New Testament writers, giving to the New Testament its \"unity in diversity\":\nRoman Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, and Classical Anglicanism.\nFor the Roman Catholic Church, there are two modes of Revelation: Scripture and Tradition. Both of them are interpreted by the teachings of the Church. The Roman Catholic view is expressed clearly in the Catechism of the Catholic Church (1997):\n\u00a7 82: As a result the Church, to whom the transmission and interpretation of Revelation is entrusted, does not derive her certainty about all revealed truths from the holy Scriptures alone. Both Scripture and Tradition must be accepted and honoured with equal sentiments of devotion and reverence.\n\u00a7 107: The inspired books teach the truth. Since therefore all that the inspired authors or sacred writers affirm should be regarded as affirmed by the Holy Spirit, we must acknowledge that the books of Scripture firmly, faithfully, and without error teach that truth which God, for the sake of our salvation, wished to see confided to the Sacred Scriptures.\nIn Catholic terminology the teaching office is called the Magisterium. The Catholic view should not be confused with the two-source theory. As the Catechism states in \u00a7\u00a7 80 and 81, Revelation has \"one common source ... two distinct modes of transmission.\"\nWhile many Eastern Orthodox writers distinguish between Scripture and Tradition, Bishop Kallistos Ware says that for the Orthodox there is only one source of the Christian faith, Holy Tradition, within which Scripture exists.\nTraditional Anglicans believe that \"Holy Scripture containeth all things necessary to salvation\", (Article VI), but also that the Catholic Creeds \"ought thoroughly to be received and believed\" (Article VIII), and that the Church \"hath authority in Controversies of Faith\" and is \"a witness and keeper of Holy Writ\" (Article XX).\nIn the famous words of Thomas Ken, Bishop of Bath and Wells: \"As for my religion, I dye in the holy catholic and apostolic faith professed by the whole Church before the disunion of East and West, more particularly in the communion of the Church of England, as it stands distinguished from all Papal and Puritan innovations, and as it adheres to the doctrine of the Cross.\"\nProtestantism.\nFollowing the doctrine of \"sola scriptura\", Protestants believe that their traditions of faith, practice and interpretations carry forward what the scriptures teach, and so tradition is not a source of authority in itself. Their traditions derive authority from the Bible, and are therefore always open to reevaluation. This openness to doctrinal revision has extended in Liberal Protestant traditions even to the reevaluation of the doctrine of Scripture upon which the Reformation was founded, and members of these traditions may even question whether the Bible is infallible in doctrine, inerrant in historical and other factual statements, and whether it has uniquely divine authority. The adjustments made by modern Protestants to their doctrine of scripture vary widely.\nAmerican evangelical and fundamentalist Protestantism.\nWithin the US, the Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy (1978) articulates evangelical views on this issue. Paragraph four of its summary states: \"Being wholly and verbally God-given, Scripture is without error or fault in all its teaching, no less in what it states about God's acts in creation, about the events of world history, and about its own literary origins under God, than in its witness to God's saving grace in individual lives.\"\nAmerican mainline and liberal Protestantism.\nOfficials of the Presbyterian Church USA report: \"We acknowledge the role of scriptural authority in the Presbyterian Church, but Presbyterians generally do not believe in biblical inerrancy. Presbyterians do not insist that every detail of chronology or sequence or prescientific description in scripture be true in literal form. Our confessions do teach biblical infallibility. Infallibility affirms the entire truthfulness of scripture without depending on every exact detail.\"\nMessianic Judaism.\nMessianic Judaism generally holds the same view of New Testament authority as evangelical Protestants. According to the view of some Messianic Jewish congregations, Jesus did not annul the Torah, but that its interpretation is revised and ultimately explained through the Apostolic Scriptures.\nJehovah's Witnesses.\nJehovah's Witnesses accept the New Testament as divinely inspired Scripture, and as infallible in every detail, with equal authority as the Hebrew Scriptures. They view it as the written revelation and good news of the Messiah, the ransom sacrifice of Jesus, and the Kingdom of God, explaining and expounding the Hebrew Bible, not replacing but vitally supplementing it. They also view the New Testament as the primary instruction guide for Christian living, and church discipline. They generally call the New Testament the \"Christian Greek Scriptures\", and see only the \"covenants\" as \"old\" or \"new\", but not any part of the actual Scriptures themselves.\nUnited Pentecostals.\nOneness Pentecostalism subscribes to the common Protestant doctrine of \"sola scriptura\". They view the Bible as the inspired Word of God, and as absolutely inerrant in its contents (though not necessarily in every translation). They regard the New Testament as perfect and inerrant in every way, revealing the Lord Jesus Christ in the Flesh, and his Atonement, and which also explains and illuminates the Old Testament perfectly, and is part of the Bible canon, not because church councils or decrees claimed it so, but by witness of the Holy Spirit.\nSeventh-day Adventists.\nThe Seventh-day Adventist Church holds the New Testament as the inspired Word of God, with God influencing the \"thoughts\" of the Apostles in the writing, not necessarily every word though. The first fundamental belief of the Seventh-Day Adventist church stated that \"The Holy Scriptures are the infallible revelation of [God's] will.\" Adventist theologians generally reject the \"verbal inspiration\" position on Scripture held by many conservative evangelical Christians. They believe instead that God inspired the thoughts of the biblical authors and apostles, and that the writers then expressed these thoughts in their own words. This view is popularly known as \"thought inspiration\", and most Adventist members hold to that view. According to Ed Christian, former \"JATS\" editor, \"few if any ATS members believe in verbal inerrancy\".\nHow the Mosaic Law should be applied came up at Adventist conferences in the past, and Adventist theologians such as A. T. Jones and E. J. Waggoner looked at the problem addressed by Paul in Galatians as not the ceremonial law, but rather the wrong use of the law (legalism). They were opposed by Uriah Smith and George Butler at the 1888 Conference. Smith in particular thought the Galatians issue had been settled by Ellen White already, yet in 1890 she claimed that justification by faith is \"the third angel's message in verity.\" White interpreted Colossians 2:14 as saying that the ceremonial law was nailed to the cross.\nLatter-day Saints.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) believe that the New Testament, as part of the Christian biblical canon, is accurate \"as far as it is translated correctly\". They believe the Bible as originally revealed is the word of God, but that the processes of transcription and translation have introduced errors into the texts as currently available, and therefore they cannot be regarded as completely inerrant. In addition to the Old and New Testaments, the , the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price are considered part of their scriptural canon.\nIn the arts.\n Most of the influence of the New Testament upon the arts has come from the Gospels and the Book of Revelation. Literary expansion of the Nativity of Jesus found in the Gospels of Matthew and Luke began already in the 2nd century, and the portrayal of the Nativity has continued in various art forms to this day. The earliest Christian art would often depict scenes from the New Testament such as the raising of Lazarus, the baptism of Jesus or the motif of the Good Shepherd.\nBiblical paraphrases and poetic renditions of stories from the life of Christ (e.g., the Heliand) became popular in the Middle Ages, as did the portrayal of the arrest, trial and execution of Jesus in Passion plays. Indeed, the Passion became a central theme in Christian art and music. The and Passion of Jesus, as portrayed in one or more of the , has also been a theme in film, almost since the inception of the medium (e.g., \"La Passion\", France, 1903).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21435", "revid": "41363991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21435", "title": "Nerve", "text": "Cable-like bundle of axons\nA nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers (called axons). Nerves have historically been considered the basic units of the peripheral nervous system. A nerve provides a common pathway for the electrochemical nerve impulses called action potentials that are transmitted along each of the axons to peripheral organs or, in the case of sensory nerves, from the periphery back to the central nervous system. Each axon is an extension of an individual neuron, along with other supportive cells such as some Schwann cells that coat the axons in myelin. \nEach axon is surrounded by a layer of connective tissue called the endoneurium. The axons are bundled together into groups called fascicles, and each fascicle is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the perineurium. The entire nerve is wrapped in a layer of connective tissue called the epineurium. Nerve cells (often called neurons) are further classified as either sensory or motor.\nIn the central nervous system, the analogous structures are known as nerve tracts.\nStructure.\nEach nerve is covered on the outside by a dense sheath of connective tissue, the epineurium. Beneath this is a layer of fat cells, the perineurium, which forms a complete sleeve around a bundle of axons. Perineurial septa extend into the nerve and subdivide it into several bundles of fibres. Surrounding each such fibre is the endoneurium. This forms an unbroken tube from the surface of the spinal cord to the level where the axon synapses with its muscle fibres, or ends in sensory receptors. The endoneurium consists of an inner sleeve of material called the glycocalyx and an outer delicate meshwork of collagen fibres. Nerves are bundled and often travel along with blood vessels, since the neurons of a nerve have fairly high energy requirements.\nWithin the endoneurium, the individual nerve fibres are surrounded by a low-protein liquid called endoneurial fluid. This acts in a similar way to the cerebrospinal fluid in the central nervous system and constitutes a blood-nerve barrier similar to the blood\u2013brain barrier. Molecules are thereby prevented from crossing the blood into the endoneurial fluid. During the development of nerve edema from nerve irritation (or injury), the amount of endoneurial fluid may increase at the site of irritation. This increase in fluid can be visualized using magnetic resonance (MR) neurography, and thus MR neurography can identify nerve irritation and/or injury.\nCategories.\nNerves are categorized into three groups based on the direction that signals are conducted:\nNerves can be categorized into two groups based on where they connect to the central nervous system:\nTerminology.\nSpecific terms are used to describe nerves and their actions. A nerve that supplies information to the brain from an area of the body, or controls an action of the body is said to \"innervate\" that section of the body or organ. Other terms relate to whether the nerve affects the same side (\"ipsilateral\") or opposite side (\"contralateral\") of the body, to the part of the brain that supplies it.\nDevelopment.\nNerve growth normally ends in adolescence but can be re-stimulated with a molecular mechanism known as \"notch signaling\". If the axons of a neuron are damaged, as long as the cell body of the neuron is not damaged, the axons can regenerate and remake the synaptic connections with neurons with the help of guidepost cells. This is also referred to as neuroregeneration. The nerve begins the process by destroying the nerve distal to the site of injury allowing Schwann cells, basal lamina, and the neurilemma near the injury to begin producing a regeneration tube. Nerve growth factors are produced causing many nerve sprouts to bud. When one of the growth processes finds the regeneration tube, it begins to grow rapidly towards its original destination guided the entire time by the regeneration tube. Nerve regeneration is very slow and can take up to several months to complete. While this process does repair some nerves, there will still be some functional deficit as the repairs are not perfect.\nFunction.\nA nerve conveys information in the form of electrochemical impulses (as nerve impulses known as action potentials) carried by the individual neurons that make up the nerve. These impulses are extremely fast, with some myelinated neurons conducting at speeds up to 120\u00a0m/s. The impulses travel from one neuron to another by crossing a synapse, where the message is converted from electrical to chemical and then back to electrical.\nNervous system.\nThe nervous system is the part of an animal that coordinates its actions by transmitting signals to and from different parts of its body. In vertebrates it consists of two main parts, the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. The PNS consists mainly of nerves, which are enclosed bundles of the long fibers or axons, that connect the CNS to all remaining body parts. Nerves that exit from the cranium are called cranial nerves while those exiting from the spinal cord are called spinal nerves.\nClinical significance.\nNeurologists usually diagnose disorders of nerves by a physical examination, including the testing of reflexes, walking and other directed movements, muscle weakness, proprioception, and the sense of touch. This initial exam can be followed with tests such as nerve conduction study, electromyography (EMG), and computed tomography (CT).\nNerves can be damaged by physical injury as well as conditions like carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) and repetitive strain injury. Autoimmune diseases such as Guillain\u2013Barr\u00e9 syndrome, neurodegenerative diseases, polyneuropathy, infection, neuritis, diabetes, or failure of the blood vessels surrounding the nerve all cause nerve damage, which can vary in severity. A pinched nerve occurs when pressure is placed on a nerve, usually from swelling due to an injury, or pregnancy and can result in pain, weakness, numbness or paralysis, an example being CTS. Symptoms can be felt in areas far from the actual site of damage, a phenomenon called referred pain. Referred pain can happen when the damage causes altered signalling to other areas.\nCancer can spread by invading the spaces around nerves. This is particularly common in head and neck cancer, prostate cancer and colorectal cancer. Multiple sclerosis is a disease associated with extensive nerve damage. It occurs when the macrophages of an individual's own immune system damage the myelin sheaths that insulate the axon of the nerve.\nOther animals.\nA neuron is called \"identified\" if it has properties that distinguish it from every other neuron in the same animal\u2014properties such as location, neurotransmitter, gene expression pattern, and connectivity\u2014and if every individual organism belonging to the same species has exactly one neuron with the same set of properties. In vertebrate nervous systems, very few neurons are \"identified\" in this sense. Researchers believe humans have none\u2014but in simpler nervous systems, some or all neurons may be thus unique.\nIn vertebrates, the best known identified neurons are the gigantic Mauthner cells of fish. Every fish has two Mauthner cells, located in the bottom part of the brainstem, one on the left side and one on the right. Each Mauthner cell has an axon that crosses over, innervating (stimulating) neurons at the same brain level and then travelling down through the spinal cord, making numerous connections as it goes. The synapses generated by a Mauthner cell are so powerful that a single action potential gives rise to a major behavioral response: within milliseconds the fish curves its body into a C-shape, then straightens, thereby propelling itself rapidly forward. Functionally of this is a fast escape response, triggered most easily by a strong sound wave or pressure wave impinging on the lateral line organ of the fish. Mauthner cells are not the only identified neurons in fish\u2014there are about 20 more types, including pairs of \"Mauthner cell analogs\" in each spinal segmental nucleus. Although a Mauthner cell is capable of bringing about an escape response all by itself, in the context of ordinary behavior other types of cells usually contribute to shaping the amplitude and direction of the response.\nMauthner cells have been described as command neurons. A command neuron is a special type of identified neuron, defined as a neuron that is capable of driving a specific behavior all by itself. Such neurons appear most commonly in the fast escape systems of various species\u2014the squid giant axon and squid giant synapse, used for pioneering experiments in neurophysiology because of their enormous size, both participate in the fast escape circuit of the squid. The concept of a command neuron has, however, become controversial, because of studies showing that some neurons that initially appeared to fit the description were really only capable of evoking a response in a limited set of circumstances.\nIn organisms of radial symmetry, nerve nets serve for the nervous system. There is no brain or centralised head region, and instead there are interconnected neurons spread out in nerve nets. These are found in Cnidaria, Ctenophora and Echinodermata.\nHistory.\nHerophilos (335\u2013280 BC) described the functions of the optic nerve in sight and the oculomotor nerve in eye movement. Analysis of the nerves in the cranium enabled him to differentiate between blood vessels and nerves ( \"string, plant fiber, nerve\").\nModern research has not confirmed William Cullen's 1785 hypothesis associating mental states with physical nerves, although popular or lay medicine may still invoke \"nerves\" in diagnosing or blaming any sort of psychological worry or hesitancy, as in the common traditional phrases \"my poor nerves\",\n\"high-strung\", and \"nervous breakdown\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21436", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21436", "title": "Negligence", "text": "Failure to exercise reasonable care\nNegligence (Lat. \"negligentia\") is a failure to exercise appropriate care expected to be exercised in similar circumstances. \nWithin the scope of tort law, negligence pertains to harm caused by the violation of a duty of care through a negligent act or failure to act. The concept of negligence is linked to the obligation of individuals to exercise reasonable care in their actions and to consider foreseeable harm that their conduct might cause to other people or property. The elements of a negligence claim include the duty to act or refrain from action, breach of that duty, actual and proximate cause of harm, and damages. Someone who suffers loss caused by another's negligence may be able to sue for damages to compensate for their harm. Such loss may include physical injury, harm to property, psychiatric illness, or economic loss. \nElements of negligence claims.\nTo successfully pursue a claim of negligence through a lawsuit, a plaintiff must establish the \"elements\" of negligence. In most jurisdictions there are four elements to a negligence action:\nSome jurisdictions narrow the definition down to three elements: duty, breach and proximately caused harm. Some jurisdictions recognize five elements, duty, breach, actual cause, proximate cause, and damages. Despite these differences, definitions of what constitutes negligent conduct remain similar.\nDuty of care.\nThe legal liability of a defendant to a plaintiff is based on the defendant's failure to fulfil a responsibility, recognised by law, of which the plaintiff is the intended beneficiary. The first step in determining the existence of a legally recognised responsibility is the concept of an obligation or duty. In the tort of negligence, the term used is duty of care.\nThe case of \"Donoghue v Stevenson\" (1932) established the modern law of negligence, laying the foundations of the duty of care and the fault principle which, (through the Privy Council), have been adopted throughout the Commonwealth. May Donoghue and her friend were in a caf\u00e9 in Paisley. The friend bought Donoghue a ginger beer float. She drank some of the beer and later poured the remainder over her ice-cream and was horrified to see the decomposed remains of a snail exit the bottle. Donoghue suffered nervous shock and gastro-enteritis, but did not sue the cafe owner, instead suing the manufacturer, Stevenson. (As Donoghue had not herself bought the beer, the doctrine of privity precluded a contractual action against Stevenson.)\nThe Scottish judge, Lord MacMillan, considered the case to fall within a new category of delict (the Scots law nearest equivalent of tort). The case proceeded to the House of Lords, where Lord Atkin interpreted the biblical ordinance to \"love thy neighbour\" as a legal requirement to \"not harm thy neighbour\". He then went on to define neighbour as \"persons who are so closely and directly affected by my act that I ought reasonably to have them in contemplation as being so affected when I am directing my mind to the acts or omissions that are called in question.\"\nIn England the case of \"Caparo Industries Plc v Dickman\" (1990) introduced a \"threefold test\" for a duty of care. Harm must be (1) reasonably foreseeable (2) there must be a relationship of proximity between the plaintiff and defendant and (3) it must be \"fair, just, and reasonable\" to impose liability. However, these act as guidelines for the courts in establishing a duty of care; much of the principle is still at the discretion of judges.\nIn Australia, \"Donoghue v Stevenson\" was used as a persuasive precedent in the case of \"Grant v Australian Knitting Mills\" (AKR) (1936). This was a landmark case in the development of the negligence law in Australia.\nWhether a duty of care is owed for psychiatric, as opposed to physical, harm was discussed in the Australian case of \"Tame v State of New South Wales; Annetts v Australian Stations Pty Ltd\" (2002). Determining a duty for mental harm has now been subsumed into the \"Civil Liability Act 2002\" in New South Wales. The application of Part 3 of the \"Civil Liability Act 2002\" (NSW) was demonstrated in \"Wicks v SRA (NSW); Sheehan v SRA (NSW)\".\nBreach of duty.\nOnce it is established that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff/claimant, the matter of whether or not that duty was breached must be settled. The test is both subjective and objective. The defendant who knowingly (subjective, which is based on observation and personal prejudice or view) exposes the plaintiff/claimant to a substantial risk of loss, breaches that duty. The defendant who fails to realize the substantial risk of loss to the plaintiff/claimant, which any \"reasonable person\"(objective, which is totally based on ground facts without any personal prejudice or point of view) in the same situation would have realized, also breaches that duty. However, whether the test is objective or subjective may depend upon the particular case involved.\nThere is a reduced threshold for the standard of care owed by children. In the Australian case of \"McHale v Watson\", McHale, a 9-year-old girl was blinded in one eye after being hit by the ricochet of a sharp metal rod thrown by a 12-year-old boy, Watson. The defendant child was held not to have the level of care to the standard of an adult, but of a 12-year-old child with similar experience and intelligence. Kitto J explained that a child's lack of foresight is a characteristic they share with others at that stage of development. The same principle was demonstrated to exist in English law in \"Mullin v Richards\".\nCertain jurisdictions, also provide for breaches where professionals, such as doctors, fail to warn of risks associated with medical treatments or procedures, such as an obstetrician did not warn a mother of complications arising. In \"Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board\", the UK Supreme Court (hearing a Scottish delict case) decided that doctors are under a duty to ensure patients are aware of material risks in the treatment they recommend, and to make them aware (if possible) of any other reasonable treatment option\u2014a form of informed consent. Under Queensland's Civil Liability Act, doctors owe both objective and subjective duties to warn\u2014breach of either is sufficient to satisfy this element in a court of law.\nIn \"Donoghue v Stevenson\", Lord Macmillan declared that \"the categories of negligence are never closed\"; and in \"Dorset Yacht v Home Office\" it was held that the government had no immunity from suit when they negligently failed to prevent the escape of juvenile offenders who subsequently vandalise a boatyard. In other words, all members of society have a duty to exercise reasonable care toward others and their property. In \"Bolton v. Stone\" (1951), the House of Lords held that a defendant was not negligent if the damage to the plaintiff were not a reasonably foreseeable consequence of his conduct. In the case, a Miss Stone was struck on the head by a cricket ball while standing outside a cricket ground. Finding that no batsman would normally be able hit a cricket ball far enough to reach a person standing as far away as was Miss Stone, the court held her claim would fail because the danger was not reasonably or sufficiently foreseeable. As stated in the opinion, \"reasonable risk\" cannot be judged with the benefit of hindsight. In \"Roe v Minister of Health\", Lord Denning said the past should not be viewed through rose coloured spectacles, finding no negligence on the part of medical professionals accused of using contaminated medical jars, since contemporary standards would have indicated only a low possibility of medical jar contamination.\n\"For the rule in the U.S., see Calculus of negligence\"\nIntention and/or malice.\nFurther establishment of conditions of intention or malice where applicable may apply in cases of gross negligence.\nCausation.\nIn order for liability to result from a negligent act or omission, it is necessary to prove not only that the injury was caused by that negligence, but also that there is a legally sufficient connection between the act and the negligence.\nFactual causation (actual cause).\nFor a defendant to be held liable, it must be shown that the particular acts or omissions were the cause of the loss or damage sustained. Although the notion sounds simple, the causation between one's breach of duty and the harm that results to another can at times be very complicated. The basic test is to ask whether the injury would have occurred \"but for\", or without, the accused party's breach of the duty owed to the injured party. In Australia, the High Court has held that the \"but for\" test is not the exclusive test of causation because it cannot address a situation where there is more than one cause of damage. When \"but for\" test is not satisfied and the case is an exceptional one, a commonsense test (\"Whether and Why\" test) will be applied Even more precisely, if a breaching party materially increases the risk of harm to another, then the breaching party can be sued to the value of harm that he caused.\nAsbestos litigations which have been ongoing for decades revolve around the issue of causation. Interwoven with the simple idea of a party causing harm to another are issues on insurance bills and compensations, which sometimes drove compensating companies out of business.\nLegal causation (proximate cause).\nSometimes factual causation is distinguished from \"legal causation\" to avert the danger of defendants being exposed to, in the words of Cardozo, J., \"liability in an indeterminate amount for an indeterminate time to an indeterminate class\". It is said a new question arises of how remote a consequence a person's harm is from another's negligence. We say that one's negligence is \"too remote\" (in England) or not a \"proximate cause\" (in the US) of another's harm if one would \"never reasonably foresee it happening\". A \"proximate cause\" in US terminology (to do with the chain of events between the action and the injury) should not be confused with the \"proximity test\" under the English duty of care (to do with closeness of relationship). The idea of legal causation is that if no one can foresee an incident, and therefore can not take care to avoid it, nobody could be responsible. For instance, in \"Palsgraf v. Long Island Rail Road Co.,\" the judge decided that the defendant, a railway, was not liable for an injury suffered by a distant bystander. The plaintiff, Palsgraf, was hit by coin-operated scale which toppled because of fireworks explosion that fell on her as she waited on a train platform. The scales fell because of a far-away commotion (a train conductor had pushed a passenger holding a box containing an explosive) but it was not clear that what type of commotion caused the scale to fall, either it was the explosion's effect or the confused movement of the terrified people. A train conductor had run to help a man into a departing train. The man was carrying a package as he jogged to jump in the train door. The package had fireworks in it. The conductor mishandled the passenger, or his package, causing it to fall. The fireworks slipped and exploded on the ground causing shockwaves to travel through the platform, which became the cause of commotion on the platform, and as a consequence, the scales fell. Because Palsgraf was hurt by the falling scales, she sued the train company who employed the conductor for negligence.\nThe defendant train company argued it should not be liable as a matter of law, because despite the fact that they employed the employee, who was negligent, his negligence was too remote from the plaintiff's injury. On appeal, the majority of the court agreed, with four judges adopting the reasons, written by Judge Cardozo, that the defendant owed no duty of care to the plaintiff, because a duty was owed only to foreseeable plaintiffs. Three judges dissented, arguing, as written by Judge Andrews, that the defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, regardless of foreseeability, because all men owe one another a duty not to act negligently.\nSuch disparity of views on the element of remoteness continues to trouble the judiciary. Courts that follow Cardozo's view have greater control in negligence cases. If the court can find that, as a matter of law, the defendant owed no duty of care to the plaintiff, the plaintiff will lose his case for negligence before having a chance to present to the jury. Cardozo's view is the majority view. However, some courts follow the position put forth by Judge Andrews. In jurisdictions following the minority rule, defendants must phrase their remoteness arguments in terms of proximate cause if they wish the court to take the case away from the jury.\nRemoteness takes another form, seen in \"The Wagon Mound (No. 2)\". The Wagon Mound was a ship in Sydney harbour. The ship leaked oil creating a slick in part of the harbour. The wharf owner asked the ship owner about the danger and was told he could continue his work because the slick would not burn. The wharf owner allowed work to continue on the wharf, which sent sparks onto a rag in the water which ignited and created a fire which burnt down the wharf. The Privy Council determined that the wharf owner \"intervened\" in the causal chain, creating a responsibility for the fire which canceled out the liability of the ship owner.\nIn Australia the concept of remoteness, or proximity, was tested with the case of \"Jaensch v Coffey\". The wife of a policeman, Vicki Coffey, suffered a nervous shock injury from the aftermath of a motor vehicle collision, although she was not actually at the scene at the time of the collision. The court upheld that, in addition to it being reasonably foreseeable that his wife might suffer such an injury, it required that there be sufficient proximity between the plaintiff and the defendant who caused the collision. Here there was sufficient causal proximity. See also \"Kavanagh v Akhtar\", \"Imbree v McNeilly\", and \"Tame v NSW\".\nInjury.\nEven though there is breach of duty, and the cause of some injury to the defendant, a plaintiff may not recover unless he can prove that the defendant's breach caused a pecuniary injury.\nAs a general rule, plaintiffs in tort litigation can only recover damages if they prove both that they suffered a loss and that the loss was reasonably foreseeable to the defendant. When damages are not a necessary element of a tort claim, a plaintiff may prevail without demonstrating a financial injury, potentially recovering nominal damages along with any other remedy available under the law.\nNegligence is different in that the plaintiff must ordinarily prove a pecuniary loss in order to recover damages. In some cases, such as defamation per se, damages may be presumed. Recovery for non-pecuniary losses, such as emotional injury, are normally recoverable only if the plaintiff has also proved a pecuniary loss. Examples of pecuniary loss include medical bills that result from an injury, or repair costs or loss of income due to property damage.\nThe damage may be physical, purely economic, both physical and economic (loss of earnings following a personal injury), or reputational (in a defamation case).\nIn English law, the right to claim for purely economic loss is limited to a number of \"special\" and \"clearly defined circumstances\", often related to the nature of the duty to the plaintiff as between clients and lawyers, financial advisers, and other professions where money is central to the consultative services.\nEmotional distress has been recognized as an actionable tort. Generally, emotional distress damages had to be parasitic. That is, the plaintiff could recover for emotional distress caused by injury, but only if it accompanied a physical or pecuniary injury.\nA claimant who has suffered only emotional distress and no pecuniary loss would not recover for negligence. However, courts have recently allowed recovery for a plaintiff to recover for purely emotional distress under certain circumstances. The state courts of California allowed recovery for emotional distress alone\u00a0\u2013 even in the absence of any physical injury, when the defendant physically injures a relative of the plaintiff, and the plaintiff witnesses it.\nThe eggshell skull rule is a legal doctrine upheld in some tort law systems, which holds that a tortfeasor is liable for the full extent of damage caused, even where the extent of the damage is due to the unforeseen frailty of the claimant. The eggshell skull rule was recently maintained in Australia in the case of \"Kavanagh v Akhtar\".\nSpecial doctrines.\n\"Res ipsa loquitur\": Latin for \"the thing speaks for itself\". To prove negligence under this doctrine the plaintiff must prove (1) the incident does not usually happen without negligence, (2) the object that caused the harm was under the defendant's control and (3) the plaintiff did not contribute to the cause.\nNegligence \"per se\" comes down to whether or not a party violated a standard in law meant to protect the public such as a building code or speed limit.\nDamages.\nDamages place a monetary value on the harm done, following the principle of \"restitutio in integrum\" (Latin for \"restoration to the original condition\"). Thus, for most purposes connected with the quantification of damages, the degree of culpability in the breach of the duty of care is irrelevant. Once the breach of the duty is established, the only requirement is to compensate the victim.\nOne of the main tests that is posed when deliberating whether a claimant is entitled to compensation for a tort, is the \"reasonable person\". The test is self-explanatory: would a reasonable person (as determined by a judge or jury), under the given circumstances, have done what the defendant did to cause the injury in question; or, in other words, would a reasonable person, acting reasonably, have engaged in similar conduct when compared to the one whose actions caused the injury in question? Simple as the \"reasonable person\" test sounds, it is very complicated. It is a risky test because it involves the opinion of either the judge or the jury that can be based on limited facts. However, as vague as the \"reasonable person\" test seems, it is extremely important in deciding whether or not a plaintiff is entitled to compensation for a negligence tort.\nDamages are compensatory in nature. Compensatory damages addresses a plaintiff/claimant's losses (in cases involving physical or mental injury the amount awarded also compensates for pain and suffering). The award should make the plaintiff whole, sufficient to put the plaintiff back in the position he or she was before Defendant's negligent act. Anything more would unlawfully permit a plaintiff to profit from the tort.\nThere are also two other general principles relating to damages. Firstly, the award of damages should take place in the form of a single lump sum payment. Therefore, a defendant should not be required to make periodic payments (however some statutes give exceptions for this). Secondly, the court is not concerned with how the plaintiff uses the award of damages. For example, if a plaintiff is awarded $100,000 for physical harm, the plaintiff is not required to spend this money on medical bills to restore them to their original position \u2013 they can spend this money any way they want.\nWorldwide.\nCivil law.\nIn the Swiss Criminal Code, the term \"n\u00e9gligence\" is used to denote an omission, akin to the English term \"negligence\". However, unlike criminal negligence, it describes situations where the perpetrator acts without being aware of the potential consequences of their actions or disregards these consequences. Similarly, under the Turkish Penal Code No. 5237, which took effect on June 1, 2005, \"criminal negligence\" () refers to a person\u2019s failure to act when required by law, while \"negligence\" () is defined as the occurrence of a legally foreseen consequence due to a lack of necessary care.\nThe French criminal code, as a rule, requires a person to have acted with \"mens rea\", for an act to be punishable. Comparably, the Italian Penal Code [], enacted on October 19, 1930, specifies in Article 42 that a person can only be punished for a crime if it was committed with intent. However, Article 43 provides exceptions for crimes arising from negligence or exceeding intentionality. These negligent crimes occur despite the defendant's foresight and are the result of negligence, carelessness, lack of experience, or non-compliance with laws, regulations, orders, or disciplinary rules. Consistent with other civil law systems, Turkish Criminal Law also treats criminal responsibility for acts committed negligently as an exception, confined to those acts explicitly stated in the law. Article 23 of the Turkish Penal Code further asserts that for crimes that are aggravated by their consequences to be attributed to the perpetrator, the base crime must be committed with intent. Furthermore, concerning the aggravated or unintended consequences, the perpetrator must have acted with at least a minimal level of negligence, whether advertently or inadvertently.\nCommon law.\nIndia.\nWith regard to negligence, Indian jurisprudence follows the approach stated in \"Ratanlal &amp; Dhirajlal: The Law of Torts\", laying down three elements:\nThe Indian approach to professional negligence requires that any skilled task requires a skilled professional. Such a professional would be expected to be exercising his skill with reasonable competence. Professionals may be held liable for negligence on one of two findings:\nUnited States.\nThe United States generally recognizes four elements to a negligence action: duty, breach, proximate causation and injury. A plaintiff who makes a negligence claim must prove all four elements of negligence in order to win his or her case. Therefore, if it is highly unlikely that the plaintiff can prove one of the elements, the defendant may request judicial resolution early on, to prevent the case from going to a jury. This can be by way of a demurrer, motion to dismiss, or motion for summary judgment.\nThe elements allow a defendant to test a plaintiff's accusations before trial, as well as providing a guide to the finder of fact at trial (the judge in a bench trial, or jury in a jury trial) to decide whether the defendant is or is not liable. Whether the case is resolved with or without trial again depends heavily on the particular facts of the case, and the ability of the parties to frame the issues to the court. The duty and causation elements in particular give the court the greatest opportunity to take the case from the jury, because they directly involve questions of policy. The court can find that regardless of any disputed facts, the case may be resolved as a matter of law from undisputed facts because as a matter of law the defendant cannot be legally responsible for the plaintiff's injury under a theory of negligence.\nOn appeal, depending on the disposition of the case and the question on appeal, the court reviewing a trial court's determination that the defendant was negligent will analyze at least one of the elements of the cause of action to determine if it is properly supported by the facts and law. For example, in an appeal from a final judgment after a jury verdict, the appellate court will review the record to verify that the jury was properly instructed on each contested element, and that the record shows sufficient evidence for the jury's findings. On an appeal from a dismissal or judgment against the plaintiff without trial, the court will review \"de novo\" whether the court below properly found that the plaintiff could not prove any or all of his or her case.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21437", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21437", "title": "Niger River", "text": "Major river in West Africa\nThe Niger River ( ; ) is the main river of West Africa, extending about . Its drainage basin is in area. Its source is in the Guinea Highlands in south-eastern Guinea near the Sierra Leone border. It runs in a crescent shape through Mali, Niger, on the border with Benin and then through Nigeria, discharging through a massive delta, known as the Niger Delta, into the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean. The Niger is the third-longest river in Africa, exceeded by the Nile and the Congo River. Its main tributary is the Benue River.\nEtymology.\nThe Niger has different names in the different languages of the region:\nThe earliest use of the name \"Niger\" for the river is by Leo Africanus in his \"Della descrittione dell'Africa et delle cose notabili che ivi sono\", published in Italian in 1550. Nevertheless, \"Nigris\" was already the name of a river in West Africa, as mentioned by Pliny the Elder and Solinus, among others. Whether this river was the same as the actual Niger, or rather the river also known as Ger (currently known as Oued Guir, in Morocco), is a matter of discussion. This Nigris was said to divide \"Africa proper\" from the land of the (Western) Ethiopians to the south, and its name (as well as that of the river Ger) might well come from the Berber phrase \"gr-n-grwn\" meaning \"river of rivers\", as the current Tuareg name for the river Niger. As Timbuktu was the southern end of the principal Trans-Saharan trade route to the western Mediterranean, it was the source of most European knowledge of the region. \nMedieval European maps applied the name \"Niger\" to the middle reaches of the river, in modern Mali, but \"Quorra\" (\"Kworra\") to the lower reaches in modern Nigeria, as these were not recognized at the time as being the same river. When European colonial powers began to send ships along the west coast of Africa in the 16th and 17th centuries, the Senegal River was often postulated to be the seaward end of the Niger. The Niger Delta, pouring into the Atlantic through mangrove swamps and thousands of distributaries along more than , was thought to be coastal wetlands. It was only with the 18th-century visits of Mungo Park, who travelled down the Niger River and visited the great Sahelian empires of his day, that Europeans correctly identified the course of the Niger and extended the name to its entire course.\nThe modern nations of Nigeria and Niger take their names from the river, marking contesting national claims by colonial powers of the \"upper\", \"lower\" and \"middle\" Niger river basin during the Scramble for Africa at the end of the 19th century.\nClimate.\nAs part of the West Africa Sahel region, the Niger River has a hot climate characterized by very high temperatures year-round; a long, intense dry season from October to May; and a brief, irregular rainy season linked to the West African monsoon.\nGeography.\nThe Niger River is a relatively clear river, carrying only a tenth as much sediment as the Nile because the Niger's headwaters lie in ancient rocks that provide little silt. Like the Nile, the Niger floods yearly; this begins in September, peaks in November, and finishes by May. An unusual feature of the river is the Inner Niger Delta, which forms where its gradient suddenly decreases. The result is a region of braided streams, marshes, and large lakes; the seasonal floods make the Delta extremely productive for both fishing and agriculture.\nThe river loses nearly two-thirds of its potential flow in the Inner Delta between S\u00e9gou and Timbuktu to seepage and evaporation. The water from the Bani River, which flows into the Delta at Mopti, does not compensate for the losses. The average loss is estimated at 31\u00a0km3/year but varies considerably between years. The river is then joined by various tributaries but also loses more water to evaporation. The quantity of water entering Nigeria was estimated at 25\u00a0km3/year before the 1980s and at 13.5\u00a0km3/year during the 1980s.\nThe most important tributary is the Benue River which merges with the Niger at Lokoja in Nigeria. The total volume of tributaries in Nigeria is six times higher than the inflow into Nigeria, with a flow near the mouth of the river standing at 177.0\u00a0km3/year before the 1980s and 147.3\u00a0km3/year during the 1980s.\nCourse.\nThe Niger takes one of the most unusual routes of any major river, a boomerang shape that baffled geographers for two centuries. Its source (Tembakounda) is 240\u00a0km (150\u00a0mi) inland from the Atlantic Ocean, but the river runs directly away from the sea into the Sahara Desert, then takes a sharp right turn near the ancient city of Timbuktu and heads southeast to the Gulf of Guinea. This strange geography apparently came about because the Niger River is two ancient rivers joined together. The upper Niger, from the source west of Timbuktu to the bend in the current river near Timbuktu, once emptied into a now dry lake to the east northeast of Timbuktu, while the lower Niger started to the south of Timbuktu and flowed south into the Gulf of Guinea. Over time upstream erosion by the lower Niger resulted in stream capture of the upper Niger by the lower Niger.\nThe northern part of the river, known as the \"Niger bend\", is an important area because it is the major river and source of water in that part of the Sahara. This made it the focal point of trade across the western Sahara and the centre of the Sahelian kingdoms of Mali and Gao. The surrounding Niger River Basin is one of the distinct physiographic sections of the Sudan province, which in turn is part of the larger African massive physiographic division.\nDrainage basin.\nThe Niger River basin, located in western Africa, covers 7.5% of the continent and spreads over ten countries.\nNiger River basin: areas and rainfall by country\nHydrometric stations on the Niger River\nDischarge.\nAverage, minimum and maximum discharge of the Niger River at Koulikoro (Upper Niger), Niamey (Middle Niger) and Lokoja (Lower Niger). Period from 2000/06/01 to 2024/05/31.&lt;ref name=\"BILAN HYDROLOGIQUE DU BASSIN DU NIGER ANNEE 2023/2024\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nAverage discharge of the Niger River at Niger Delta (period from 2010 to 2018):\nNiger River at Lokoja.\nNiger River at Lokoja average, minimum and maximum discharge (1946 to 2023):\nTributaries.\nThe main tributaries from the mouth:\nHistory.\nAt the end of the African humid period around 5,500 years before present, the modern Sahara Desert, once a savanna, underwent desertification. As plant species sharply declined, humans migrated to the fertile Niger River bend region, with abundant resources including plants for grazing and fish. Like in the Fertile Crescent, many food crops were domesticated in the Niger River region, including yams, African rice (\"Oryza glaberrima\"), and pearl millet. The Sahara aridification may have triggered, or at least accelerated, these domestications. Agriculture, as well as fishing and animal husbandry, led to the rise of settlements like Djenn\u00e9-Djenno in the Inner Delta, now a World Heritage Site.\nThe region of the Niger bend, in the Sahel, was a key origin and destination for trans-Saharan trade, fueling the wealth of great empires such as the Ghana, Mali, and Songhai Empires. Major trading ports along the river, including Timbuktu and Gao, became centers of learning and culture. Trade to the Niger bend region also brought Islam to the region in approximately the 14th century CE. Much of the northern Niger basin remains Muslim today, although the southern reaches of the river tend to be Christian.\nClassical writings on the interior of the Sahara begin with Ptolemy, who mentions two rivers in the desert: the \"Gir\" (\u0393\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1) and farther south, the \"Nigir\" (\u039d\u03b9\u03b3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1). The first has been since identified as the Wadi Ghir on the north-western edge of the Tuat, along the borders of modern Morocco and Algeria. This would likely have been as far as Ptolemy would have had consistent records. The Ni-Ger was likely speculation, although the name stuck as that of a river south of the Mediterranean's \"known world\". Suetonius reports Romans traveling to the \"Ger\", although in reporting any river's name derived from a Berber language, in which \"gher\" means \"watercourse\", confusion could easily arise. Pliny connected these two rivers as one long watercourse which flowed (via lakes and underground sections) into the Nile, a notion which persisted in the Arab and European worlds \u2013 and further added the Senegal River as the \"Ger\" \u2013 until the 19th century.\nWhile the true course of the Niger was presumably known to locals, it was a mystery to the outside world until the late 18th century. The connection to the Nile River was made not simply because this was then known as the great river of \"Aethiopia\" (by which all lands south of the desert were called by Classical writers), but because the Nile like the Niger flooded every summer. Through the descriptions of Leo Africanus and even Ibn Battuta \u2013 despite his visit to the river \u2013 the myth connecting the Niger to the Nile persisted.\nMany European expeditions to plot the river were unsuccessful. In 1788 the African Association was formed in England to promote the exploration of Africa in the hopes of locating the Niger, and in June 1796 the Scottish explorer Mungo Park was the first European to lay eyes on the middle portion of the river since antiquity (and perhaps ever). He wrote an account in 1799, \"Travels in the Interior of Africa\". Park proposed a theory that the Niger and Congo were the same river. Although the Niger Delta would seem like an obvious candidate, it was a maze of streams and swamps that did not look like the head of a great river. He died in 1806 on a second expedition attempting to prove the Niger-Congo connection. The theory became the leading one in Europe. Several failed expeditions followed; however the mystery of the Niger would not be solved for another 25 years, in 1830, when Richard Lander and his brother became the first Europeans to follow the course of the Niger to the ocean.\nIn 1946, three Frenchmen, Jean Sauvy, Pierre Ponty and movie maker Jean Rouch, former civil servants in the African French colonies, set out to travel the entire length of the river, as no one else seemed to have done previously. They travelled from the beginning of the river near Kissidougou in Guinea, walking at first till a raft could be used, then changing to various local crafts as the river broadened and changed. Two of them reached the ocean on March 25, 1947, with Ponty having left the expedition at Niamey, somewhat past the halfway mark. They carried a 16mm movie camera, the resulting footage giving Rouch his first two ethnographic documentaries: \"Au pays des mages noirs\", and \"La chasse \u00e0 l'hippopotame\". A camera was used to illustrate Rouch's subsequent book \"Le Niger En Pirogue\" (Fernand Nathan, 1954), as well as Sauvy's \"Descente du Niger\" (L'Harmattan, 2001). A typewriter was brought as well, on which Ponty produced newspaper articles he mailed out whenever possible.\nManagement and development.\nThe water in the Niger River basin is partially regulated through dams. In Mali the S\u00e9lingu\u00e9 Dam on the Sankarani River is mainly used for hydropower but also permits irrigation. Two diversion dams, one at Sotuba just downstream of Bamako, and one at Markala, just downstream of S\u00e9gou, are used to irrigate about 54,000 hectares. In Nigeria the Kainji Dam, Shiroro Dam, Zungeru Dam, and Jebba Dam are used to generate hydropower.\nThe water resources of the Niger River are under pressure because of increased water abstraction for irrigation. The construction of dams for hydropower generation is underway or envisaged in order to alleviate chronic power shortages in the countries of the Niger basin. The FAO estimates the irrigation potential of all countries in the Niger river basin at 2.8 million hectares. Only 0.93m hectares (ha) were under irrigation in the late 1980s. The irrigation potential was estimated at 1.68m ha in Nigeria 0.56m ha in Mali, and the actual irrigated area was 0.67m ha and 0.19m ha.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21439", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21439", "title": "Neutral Monism", "text": ""}
{"id": "21440", "revid": "18779361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21440", "title": "Neutral monism", "text": "Class of metaphysical theories in the philosophy of mind\nNeutral monism is an umbrella term for a class of metaphysical theories in the philosophy of mind, concerning the relation of mind to matter. These theories take the fundamental nature of reality to be neither mental nor physical; in other words it is \"neutral\".\nNeutral monism has gained prominence as a potential solution to theoretical issues within the philosophy of mind, specifically the mind\u2013body problem and the hard problem of consciousness. The mind\u2013body problem is the problem of explaining how mind relates to matter. The hard problem is a related philosophical problem targeted at physicalist theories of mind specifically: the problem arises because it is not obvious how a purely physical universe could give rise to conscious experience. This is because physical explanations are mechanistic: that is, they explain phenomena by appealing to underlying functions and structures. And, though explanations of this sort seem to work well for a wide variety of phenomena, conscious experience seems uniquely resistant to functional explanations. As the philosopher David Chalmers has put it: \"even when we have explained the performance of all the cognitive and behavioral functions in the vicinity of experience - perceptual discrimination, categorization, internal access, verbal report - there may still remain a further unanswered question: Why is the performance of these functions accompanied by experience?\".\nWith this, there has been growing demand for alternative ontologies (such as neutral monism) that may provide explanatory frameworks more suitable for explaining the existence of consciousness. It has been accepted by several prominent English-speaking philosophers, such as William James and Bertrand Russell.\nRelations to other theories.\nSince neutral monism provides a potential solution to theoretical problems in the philosophy of mind, it helps to situate neutral monism against its competitors (that is, alternative solutions offered to the same problems). These competing frameworks can be identified by the relationship they draw between mind and matter, and which of the two they take to be more fundamental.\nNote that their 'fundamental' is here being used as a technical term. An entity is fundamental if and only if it is irreducible to any other entities. For example, a birthday cake is not fundamental because it can be reduced to its ingredients; a lego-house is not fundamental because it can be reduced to its constituent lego pieces; and a corporation is not fundamental because it can be reduced to its various buildings, employees, and so forth. In contrast, the fundamental interactions of physics are fundamental because they cannot be reduced to any lower-level physical interactions.\nSimilarly, what is at stake within the philosophy of mind is whether reality has mental properties (such as conscious experience) as fundamental properties. Physicalists would deny this, and insist that consciousness and all mental properties are derivable from some lower-level physical properties (similar to how the properties of water are derivable from H2O). Idealists, in contrast, believe reality is fundamentally mental, and that physical things are nothing more than mind-dependant perceptions. Dualists play both side of the aisle as they believe that reality consists of both fundamentally mental and fundamentally physical elements, each irreducible to the other. Then there are panpsychists, who believe that everything is both mental and physical (consciousness is what reality looks like 'from the inside' and the physical world is what reality looks like 'from the outside'). Neutral monists break this mold by claiming that the fundamental elements of reality are neither physical nor mental.\nDualism.\nNeutral monism is similar to dualism in that both take reality to have both mental and physical properties irreducible to one another. Unlike dualism however, neutral monism does not take these properties to be fundamental or separate from one another from any meaningful sense. Dualism is the view that reality is, broadly speaking, made up of two distinct substances or properties: physical substances/properties and mental substances/properties. Neutral monism, in contrast, takes both mind and matter to supervene on a neutral third substance, which is neither mental nor physical. According to Baruch Spinoza, the mind and the body are dual aspects of Nature or God, which he identified as the only real substance.\nWhile schematic differences and neutral monism are quite stark, contemporary conceptions of the theories overlap in certain key areas. For instance, Chalmers (1996) maintains that the difference between neutral monism and his preferred property dualism can, at times, be mostly semantic.\nPanpsychism.\nPanpsychism is a class of theories that believe that all physical things are conscious. John Searle distinguished it from neutral monism as well as property dualism, which he identified as a form of dualism. However, some neutral monist theories are panpsychist and some panpsychist theories are neutral monist. However, the two do not always overlap. For instance, Russellian monism is not panpsychism in response to the combination problem. Conversely, some versions of property dualism are panpsychist, but not neutral monistic.\nHistory.\nAntecedents.\nEarly examples of neutral monism are found in Indian philosophy. Baruch Spinoza and David Hume provided accounts of reality that may also be interpreted as neutral monism. Spinoza's metaphysics in \"Ethics\" argues for a monistic worldview, as well as a neutral one where body and mind are the same. H. H. Price argues that Hume's empiricism introduces a \"neutral monist theory of sensation\" as both \"matter and mind are constructed out of sense-data\".\nIn the late 19th century, physicist Ernst Mach theorized that physical entities are nothing apart from their perceived mental properties. Mach ultimately surmises that \"both object and ego are provisional fictions of the same kind\".\nEarly 20th century.\nWilliam James propounded the notion of radical empiricism to advance neutral monism in his essay \"Does Consciousness Exist?\" in 1904 (reprinted in \"Essays in Radical Empiricism\" in 1912). William James was one of the earliest philosophers to fully articulate a complete neutral monist view of the world. He did so largely in reaction to neo-Kantianism, which was prevalent at the time.\nA convert of James, Bertrand Russell advocated for neutral monism, coining the term itself. Russell expressed interest in neutral monism early on his career, and officially endorsed the view from 1919 onward, at least until 1927, when \"The Analysis of Matter\" appeared. The ontology of neutral monism conformed to the \"supreme maxim in scientific philosophising\", as Russell put it in \"Logical Atomism\" in 1924. Russell's conception of neutral monism went through a number of versions through his career. Russell's own brand of neutral monism, at whichever stage, can be referred to as \"Russell's neutral monism\", but Russellian monism tends to refer to Russell's adherence to the causal theory of perception on the one hand, and the data of consciousness on the other, the latter reduced to neurological events. This view is actually materialist, which neutral monism is not. The version of 1919-1927 is however compatible with logical atomism, Russel's earlier ontology. His position was contentious among his contemporaries; G.E Moore maintained that Russell's philosophy was flawed due to a misinterpretation of facts (e.g. the concept of acquaintance).\nNeutral monism about the mind\u2013body relationship is described by historian C. D. Broad in \"The Mind and Its Place in Nature\". Broad's list of possible views about the mind\u2013body problem, which became known simply as \"Broad's famous list of 1925\" (see chapter XIV of Broad's book) states the basis of what this theory had been and was to become. Whately Carington in his book \"Matter, Mind, and Meaning\" (1949) advocated a form of neutral monism. He held that mind and matter both consist of the same kind of components known as \"cognita\" or sense data. Russian psychologist Boris Sidis also appears to have adhered to some form of neutral monism.\nPresent.\nDavid Chalmers has been known to express sympathy toward neutral monism. In \"The Conscious Mind\" (1996) he concludes that facts about consciousness are \"further facts about our world\" and that there ought to be more to reality than just the physical. He then goes on to engage with a Platonic rendition of neutral monism that holds information as fundamental. Though Chalmers believes neutral monism and panpsychism ought to be taken seriously, he considers the combination problem to be point of concern. He considers Russell's solution of \"protophenominal properties\" to be ad hoc, and thinks such speculation undercuts the parsimony that made neutral monism initially appealing.\nAccording to Stephen Stich and Ted Warfield, neutral monism has not been a popular view in philosophy as it is difficult to develop or understand the nature of the neutral elements. Nevertheless, a Machian version of the view has been defended by Jonathan Westphal in \"The Mind\u2013Body Problem\", 2016.\nArguments in favour.\nRussell was attracted to neutral monism due to its parsimony. In his view, neutral monism offered an \"immense simplification\" for metaphysics. The upshot of this is that neutral monism provides a solution to the hard problem of consciousness. Annaka Harris formulated the hard problem as \"how experience arises out of non-sentient matter\"; the neutral monist solves the problem by arguing that if matter is neutral and contains some level of sentience, then one has perceptual contact with the world without needing to explain how experience mysteriously arises from physical matter.\nAn account for how this works relies on creating a distinction between \"extrinsic\" properties and \"intrinsic\" properties. Extrinsic properties are properties that exist by virtue of how they interact the world and are outwardly observable, such as structures and form. Intrinsic properties are properties exist by virtue of the way they are and are not necessarily outwardly observable. Astrophysicist Arthur Eddington notes that physics can only provide metrical indicators but tells us nothing about the intrinsic nature of things. In other words, most of the positive claims in science are related to the extrinsic properties of reality; that is, with their relationships. However, just because the intrinsic properties of matter are unknown does not mean they do not exist, and in fact may be required. As Chalmers puts it, a world of \"pure causal flux\" may be logically impossible, for there is \"nothing for causation to relate.\"\nExtrapolating from this, philosopher Philip Goff argues in \"Galileo's Error\" (2019) that consciousness may be the only feature of the universe that we are certain of. It cannot be seen through extrinsic signatures (as is evidenced by the problem of other minds), but we know from first-hand experience that it exists. So if (1) consciousness is the only intrinsic property of matter there is evidence for, and (2) matter must necessarily have intrinsic properties, then one can inductively infer that all matter has intrinsic conscious properties.\nArguments against.\nWhile neutral monism presents a novel approach to the mind-body problem, it must navigate a complex web of objections and reconcile its tenets with the consciousness combination, reductionist, materialist, mentalist, the problem of experience, and emergence to establish its viability as a solution.\nCritics of neutral monism, which addresses the mind-body problem, frequently identify the \"combination problem\" as its most significant challenge. Neutral monism argues that the mind and body are two aspects of the same underlying, neutral substance. In this framework, micro-entities possess basic conscious experiences, leading to questions about how these experiences amalgamate to form complex human consciousness. A major point of contention is the mechanics of combination. Sam Coleman specifically argues that the notion of subject-summing is inherently incoherent. He posits that if two distinct viewpoints, A and B, were to merge into an \"uber-mind,\" this entity would paradoxically need to encompass A's experiences without B's and vice versa, while still maintaining a unified experience, a scenario that appears contradictory. On the other hand, Galen Strawson suggests that the solution to this conundrum might lie in yet unresolved aspects of consciousness. He implies that our current understanding of consciousness is incomplete, and that further exploration could potentially unravel how the subject-summing problem could logically occur, providing a resolution to the combination problem central to neutral monism.\nExpanding upon this criticism, neutral monism grapples with the dilemma of reduction versus elimination. The theory grapples with the ontological status of entities it seeks to reduce: are they merely simplified or entirely eliminated? This debate is integral to understanding neutral monism's approach to traditional concepts like \u201cmind\u201d and \u201cmatter.\u201d Ernst Mach exemplified this dilemma by proposing that entities such as \"body\" and \"ego\" are not fixed unities but rather provisional constructs or composites of more tightly interlinked elements. This suggests a fluidity in the conceptualization of these entities, oscillating between them being useful fictions and complex combinations of more fundamental parts. Similarly, Bertrand Russell advocated for the elimination of traditional psychological terms like \"knowledge,\" \"memory,\" \"perception,\" and \"sensation\" from our vocabulary, as he believed they did not accurately represent the underlying reality. In his view, traditional dualist and materialist conceptions of mind and matter were inadequate. Instead, Russell proposed neutral constructions to replace these entities, which, though devoid of traditional properties like solidity or inherent object-reference, were designed to fulfill similar roles.\nBertrand Russell proposed protophenomenal properties to address this issue. These properties, as basic, non-mental, and non-physical, are meant to underlie both mental and physical phenomena, thereby bridging the gap between mind and matter. However, David Chalmers criticizes this approach as being ad hoc, questioning whether these differ sufficiently from physicalism. Contemporary interpretations of neutral monism, such as those by Gregory Landini and Erik Banks, further complicate this distinction. Landini argues that Russell's transient particulars are physical entities foundational to mental and physical continuants, while Banks' \"realistic empiricism\" suggests a physicalist interpretation of these basic entities. Additionally, Donovan Wishon observes a later shift in Russell's work towards a materialistic ontology, indicating that the mental-physical distinction may be rooted more in our methods of knowledge acquisition than in intrinsic properties. These developments challenge the central neutral monist assertion that reality's fundamental constituents are neither purely mental nor physical, suggesting that the conceptual gap between neutral monism and physicalism may be narrower than previously thought.\nThe suspicion of mentalism also looms over neutral monism. The critics, such as Lenin and Ayer, argue that these remain fundamentally mentalistic, thus undermining the neutrality claim. Although traditional neutral monists removed mentalistic connotations from sensations and experiences, the charge of mentalism remains a point of contention.\nAdditionally, the problem of experience persists. Critics like Chalmers and Strawson argue that neutral monism, like materialism, fails to accommodate experience, suggesting a gap between qualities and the awareness of them. Traditional neutral monists respond by arguing that appropriate relationships among qualities can lead to awareness, although the debate continues.\nThe notion of emergence further complicates the picture. The concept of emergence, particularly the distinctions between weak, strong, and radical emergence as outlined by Chalmers, bring up challenges. While neutral monism comfortably accommodates weak emergence, where novel phenomena unexpectedly arise from known domains, it struggles with strong and radical emergence, the latter involving novel features in complex systems not fully grounded in their components. For instance, Landini suggests that Russell's later work implies a radical emergence of qualia, a position not universally accepted.\nVariants.\nRadical empiricism.\nThis form of neutral monism was formulated by William James. It was done mostly in response to his colleagues dismissal of its rank \"among first principles\". Consciousness, in William James perspective, is the epistemic foundation upon which all other knowledge rests; if an ontology is incompatible with its existence, then it is the ontology that must be dismissed, not consciousness. William James considered \"the perceived and the perceiver\" to simply be two sides of the same coin.\nRussellian monism.\nRussellian monism most famously differs from other views of neutral monism in its proposed solution to the combination problem. Russell proposes the existence of \"paraphenomenal\" properties, that may give rise to consciousness when organised in a certain way.\nPlatonism.\nNot all Platonic theories are neutral monist, but some neutral monist theories are Platonic. Platonic versions of neutral monism have become more prevalent in recent decades. According to these views, the 'neutral' substance that reality are Platonic forms, or something similar. Though these views vary in the details, they usually take a form similar to more common forms of radical Platonism such as the Mathematical Universe Hypothesis (the view that reality is fundamentally made up of mathematics, which is neither physical nor mental). That said, these theories often suffer from the same problems as physicalist theories of mind, since the existence of Platonic forms, mathematical objects, and the like, are not on their own sufficient to explain the emergence of conscious experience.\nSome may also find Platonism appealing thanks to its parsimony: logical truths may necessarily exist, and the mental and physical are mere consequences of this necessary existence. These theories also have the advantage of having coherently defined the neutral variable, thus having overcome what's long been a major challenge for neutral monism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21442", "revid": "33959159", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21442", "title": "Necronomicon", "text": "Fictional textbook of magic in stories by H. P. Lovecraft\nThe Necronomicon, also referred to as the Book of the Dead, or under a purported original Arabic title of \"\", is a fictional grimoire (textbook of magic) appearing in stories by the horror writer H. P. Lovecraft and his followers. It was first mentioned in Lovecraft's 1924 short story \"The Hound\", written in 1922, though its purported author, the \"Mad Arab\" Abdul Alhazred, had been quoted a year earlier in Lovecraft's \"The Nameless City\". Among other things, the work contains an account of the Old Ones, their history, and the means for summoning them.\nOther authors such as August Derleth and Clark Ashton Smith also cited the \"Necronomicon\" in their works. Lovecraft approved of other writers building on his work, believing such common allusions built up \"a background of evil verisimilitude\". Many readers have believed it to be a real work, with booksellers and librarians receiving many requests for it; pranksters have listed it in rare book catalogues, and a student smuggled a card for it into the card catalog of the Yale University Library.\nCapitalizing on the notoriety of the fictional volume, real-life publishers have printed many books entitled \" since Lovecraft's death.\nOrigin and etymology.\nHow Lovecraft conceived the name \" is not clear\u2014Lovecraft said that the title came to him in a dream. Although some have suggested that Lovecraft was influenced primarily by Robert W. Chambers' collection of short stories \"The King in Yellow\", which centers on a mysterious and disturbing play in book form, Lovecraft is not believed to have read that work until 1927.\nDonald R. Burleson has argued that the idea for the book was derived from Nathaniel Hawthorne, though Lovecraft himself noted that \"mouldy hidden manuscripts\" were one of the stock features of Gothic literature.\nLovecraft wrote that the title, as translated from the Greek language, meant \"an image of the law of the dead\", compounded respectively from ' \"dead\", ' \"law\", and ' \"image\". Robert M. Price notes that the title has been variously translated by others as \"Book of the names of the dead\", \"Book of the laws of the dead\", \"Book of dead names\" and \"Knower of the laws of the dead\". S. T. Joshi states that Lovecraft's own etymology is \"almost entirely unsound. The last portion of it is particularly erroneous, since ' is nothing more than a neuter adjectival suffix and has nothing to do with \"\" (image).\" Joshi translates the title as \"Book considering (or classifying) the dead\".\nLovecraft was often asked about the veracity of the \"\", and always answered that it was completely his invention. In a letter to Willis Conover, Lovecraft elaborated upon his typical answer:\nNow about the \"terrible and forbidden books\"\u2014I am forced to say that most of them are purely imaginary. There never was any Abdul Alhazred or ', for I invented these names myself. Robert Bloch devised the idea of Ludvig Prinn and his \"De Vermis Mysteriis\", while the \"Book of Eibon\" is an invention of Clark Ashton Smith's. Robert E. Howard is responsible for Friedrich von Junzt and his \"Unaussprechlichen Kulten\"... As for seriously-written books on dark, occult, and supernatural themes\u2014in all truth they don't amount to much. That is why it's more fun to invent mythical works like the ' and \"Book of Eibon\".\nReinforcing the book's fictionalization, the name of the book's supposed author, Abdul Alhazred, is not even a grammatically correct Arabic name. What is transliterated as \"Abdul\" in English is actually a noun in the nominative form \"\u02bfabdu\" (, \"servant\") and the definite article \"al-\" () and amounts to \"servant of the\" with the article actually being part of the second noun in the construct, which in this case is supposed to be \"Alhazred\" (traditional Arabic names do not follow the modern first name-surname format). But \"Alhazred\", even if considered as a corruption of \"al-\u1e25a\u1e0dr\u0101t\" (, \"the presences\") though it seems unlikely, itself is a definite noun (i.e., a noun prefixed by the definite article) and thus \"Abdul Alhazred\" could not possibly be a real Arabic name. Lovecraft first used the name \"Abdul Alhazred\" as a pseudonym he gave himself as a five-year-old, and very likely mistook \"Abdul\" to be a first name while inventing \"Alhazred\" as an Arabic-sounding surname.\nFictional history.\nIn 1927, Lovecraft wrote a brief fictitious history of the \"Necronomicon\". This fictitious history was published in 1938, after his death, as \"History of the \"Necronomicon\"\". According to this account, the book was originally called ', an Arabic word that Lovecraft defined as \"that nocturnal sound (made by insects) supposed to be the howling of demons\", drawing on a footnote by Rev. Samuel Henley in Henley's translation of \"Vathek\". Henley, commenting upon a passage which he translated as \"those nocturnal insects which presage evil\", alluded to the diabolic legend of Beelzebub, \"Lord of the Flies\" and to Psalm 91:5, which in some 16th century English Bibles (such as Myles Coverdale's 1535 translation) describes \"bugges by night\" where later translations render \"terror by night\". One Arabic/English dictionary translates ' () as \"whistling (of the wind); weird sound or noise\". Gabriel Oussani defined it as \"the eerie sound of the jinn in the wilderness\". The tradition of \"\" () is linked to the phenomenon of \"singing sand\".\nIn the \"History\", Alhazred is said to have been a \"half-crazed Arab\" who worshipped the Lovecraftian entities Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu in the early 700s CE. He is described as being from Sana\u00e1 in Yemen. He visited the ruins of Babylon, the \"subterranean secrets\" of Memphis and the Empty Quarter of Arabia. In his last years, he lived in Damascus, where he wrote ' before his sudden and mysterious death in 738, which, according to Ibn Khallikan, happened when he was \"seized by an invisible monster in broad daylight and devoured horribly before a large number of fright-frozen witnesses\". In subsequent years, Lovecraft wrote, the ' \"gained considerable, though surreptitious circulation amongst the philosophers of the age.\" In 950, it was translated into Greek and given the title \"Necronomicon\" by Theodorus Philetas, a fictional scholar from Constantinople. This version \"impelled certain experimenters to terrible attempts\" before being \"suppressed and burnt\" in 1050 by Patriarch Michael (a historical figure who died in 1059).\nAfter this attempted suppression, the work was \"only heard of furtively\" until it was translated from Greek into Latin by Olaus Wormius. (Lovecraft gives the date of this edition as 1228, though the real-life Danish scholar Olaus Wormius lived from 1588 to 1654.) Both the Latin and Greek text, the \"History\" relates, were banned by Pope Gregory IX in 1232, though Latin editions were apparently published in 15th century Germany and 17th century Spain. A Greek edition was printed in Italy in the first half of the 16th century. The Elizabethan magician John Dee (1527 \u2013 c.\u20091609) allegedly translated the book\u2014presumably into English\u2014but Lovecraft wrote that this version was never printed and only fragments survive.\nAccording to Lovecraft, the Arabic version of \"\" had already disappeared by the time the Greek version was banned in 1050, though he cites \"a vague account of a secret copy appearing in San Francisco during the current [20th] century\" that \"later perished in fire\". The Greek version, he writes, has not been reported \"since the burning of a certain Salem man's library in 1692\", an apparent reference to the Salem witch trials. (In the story \"The Diary of Alonzo Typer\", the character Alonzo Typer finds a Greek copy.) According to \"History of the \"Necronomicon\"\" the very act of studying the text is inherently dangerous, as those who attempt to master its arcane knowledge generally meet terrible ends.\nAppearance and contents.\nThe \"Necronomicon\" is mentioned in a number of Lovecraft's short stories and in his novellas \"At the Mountains of Madness\" and \"The Case of Charles Dexter Ward\". However, despite frequent references to the book, Lovecraft was very sparing of details about its appearance and contents. He once wrote that \"if anyone were to try to write the \"Necronomicon\", it would disappoint all those who have shuddered at cryptic references to it.\"\nIn \"The Nameless City\" (1921), a rhyming couplet that appears at two points in the story is ascribed to Abdul Alhazred:\n&lt;poem&gt;That is not dead which can eternal lie.\nAnd with strange aeons even death may die.&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe same couplet appears in \"The Call of Cthulhu\" (1928), where it is identified as a quotation from the \"Necronomicon\". This \"much-discussed\" couplet, as Lovecraft calls it in the latter story, has also been quoted in works by other authors, including Brian Lumley's \"The Burrowers Beneath\", which adds a long paragraph preceding the couplet.\nIn his story \"History of the \"Necronomicon\"\", Lovecraft states that it is rumored that artist R. U. Pickman (from his story \"Pickman's Model\") owned a Greek translation of the text, but it vanished along with the artist in early 1926.\nThe \"Necronomicon\" is undoubtedly a substantial text, as indicated by its description in \"The Dunwich Horror\" (1929). In the story, Wilbur Whateley visits Miskatonic University's library to consult the \"unabridged\" version of the \"Necronomicon\" for a spell that would have appeared on the 751st page of his own inherited, but defective, Dee edition. The \"Necronomicon\" introduces the incantation with this passage:\nNor is it to be thought...that man is either the oldest or the last of earth's masters, or that the common bulk of life and substance walks alone. The Old Ones were, the Old Ones are, and the Old Ones shall be. Not in the spaces we know, but between them, they walk serene and primal, undimensioned and to us unseen. Yog-Sothoth knows the gate. Yog-Sothoth is the gate. Yog-Sothoth is the key and guardian of the gate. Past, present, future, all are one in Yog-Sothoth. He knows where the Old Ones broke through of old, and where They shall break through again. He knows where They had trod earth's fields, and where They still tread them, and why no one can behold Them as They tread. By Their smell can men sometimes know Them near, but of Their semblance can no man know, saving only in the features of those They have begotten on mankind; and of those are there many sorts, differing in likeness from man's truest eidolon to that shape without sight or substance which is Them. They walk unseen and foul in lonely places where the Words have been spoken and the Rites howled through at their Seasons. The wind gibbers with Their voices, and the earth mutters with Their consciousness. They bend the forest and crush the city, yet may not forest or city behold the hand that smites. Kadath in the cold waste hath known Them, and what man knows Kadath? The ice desert of the South and the sunken isles of Ocean hold stones whereon Their seal is engraven, but who hath seen the deep frozen city or the sealed tower long garlanded with seaweed and barnacles? Great Cthulhu is Their cousin, yet can he spy Them only dimly. I\u00e4! Shub-Niggurath! As a foulness shall ye know Them. Their hand is at your throats, yet ye see Them not; and Their habitation is even one with your guarded threshold. Yog-Sothoth is the key to the gate, whereby the spheres meet. Man rules now where They ruled once; They shall soon rule where man rules now. After summer is winter, after winter summer. They wait patient and potent, for here shall They reign again.\nThe \"Necronomicon\"'s appearance and physical dimensions are not clearly stated in Lovecraft's work. Other than the obvious black letter editions, it is commonly portrayed as bound in leather of various types and having metal clasps. Moreover, editions are sometimes disguised. In \"The Case of Charles Dexter Ward\", for example, John Merrit pulls down a book labelled \"Qanoon-e-Islam\" from Joseph Curwen's bookshelf and discovers to his disquiet that it is actually the \"Necronomicon\".\nMany commercially available versions of the book fail to include any of the contents that Lovecraft describes. The Simon \"Necronomicon\" in particular has been criticized for this.\nLocations.\nAccording to Lovecraft's \"History of the \"Necronomicon\"\", copies of the original \"Necronomicon\" were held by only five institutions worldwide:\nThe Miskatonic University also holds the Latin translation by Olaus Wormius, printed in Spain in the 17th century.\nOther copies, Lovecraft wrote, were kept by private individuals. Joseph Curwen, as noted, had a copy in \"The Case of Charles Dexter Ward\" (1941). A version is held in Kingsport in \"The Festival\" (1925). The provenance of the copy read by the narrator of \"The Nameless City\" is unknown; a version is read by the protagonist in \"The Hound\" (1924).\nHoaxes.\nLovecraft felt that a well-written weird story should be believable and constructed like a convincing hoax. To this end, many of his stories were written as if they were firsthand testimonials or news stories, leading some readers to believe there could be truth to them. Lovecraft said he felt guilty when he heard of fans searching libraries for real-life copies of the Necronomicon. Pranksters occasionally listed the \"Necronomicon\" for sale in book stores or in library card catalogues. The Vatican receives requests for this book from those who believe the Vatican Library holds a copy.\nStarting in the 1950s, various hoaxes were published that purported to be the real Necronomicon. However, none of these early hoaxes made a serious claim to authenticity and were understood to be homages. The early hoaxes typically combined excerpts of previously published occult books with references to Lovecraft's fiction. In 1973, George H. Scithers commercially published a hoax Necronomicon under his publishing company Owlswick. It featured an introduction by L. Sprague de Camp that purported it to be untranslatable and detailed a fictional history of various attempted translators who died mysteriously. In reality, it consisted of repeated, nonsensical glyphs in a fictional language known as Duriac. When some credulous customers believed it to be authentic, Scithers attempted to convince them otherwise. Around the same time, LaVeyan Satanists and some occultists became interested in incorporating Lovecraft's mythology into their rituals.\nDrawn by the success of Scithers' Necronomicon, more followed. The most famous of these is the Simon Necronomicon, published in 1977. This book, by the pseudonymous \"Simon\", has little connection to the fictional Lovecraft Mythos but instead is based on Sumerian mythology. The author uses this as evidence of its authenticity, arguing that a hoax spellbook would not use the title of an in-universe spellbook from series of horror stories. It purports to come from an ancient manuscript that predates Lovecraft's stories, though there is no record of such a thing. Simon's story incorporates two real-life thieves who were arrested for selling stolen manuscripts, but they have no connection to the Simon Necronomicon, and nobody has ever produced the alleged manuscript. Instead, it is likely that Peter Levenda, the registered copyright holder of several of Simon's books, is the author. Levenda has denied this. The other major work was a hoax edited by George Hay, which was published in 1978 and included an introduction by the paranormal researcher and writer Colin Wilson. David Langford described how the book was prepared from a computer analysis of a discovered \"cipher text\" by Dr. John Dee. The resulting \"translation\" was in fact written by occultist Robert Turner, but it was far truer to the Lovecraftian version than the Simon text and incorporated quotations from Lovecraft's stories in its passages.\nIn 2004, \"Necronomicon: The Wanderings of Alhazred\", by Canadian occultist Donald Tyson, was published by Llewellyn Worldwide. Donald Tyson has clearly stated that the \"Necronomicon\" is fictional, but that has not prevented his book from being the center of some controversy. Tyson has since published \"Alhazred\", a novelization of the life of the \"Necronomicon\"'s author.\nKenneth Grant, the British occultist, disciple of Aleister Crowley, and head of the Typhonian Ordo Templi Orientis, suggested in his 1972 book \"The Magical Revival\" that there was an unconscious connection between Crowley and Lovecraft. He thought they both drew on the same occult forces; Crowley via his magic and Lovecraft through the dreams which inspired his stories and the \"Necronomicon\". Grant claimed that the \"Necronomicon\" existed as an astral book as part of the Akashic records and could be accessed through ritual magic or in dreams. Grant's ideas on Lovecraft were featured heavily in the introduction to the Simon \"Necronomicon\" and also have been backed by Tyson.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nPrimary sources\nSecondary sources"}
{"id": "21443", "revid": "40220352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21443", "title": "Neal Stephenson", "text": "American speculative fiction writer (born 1959)\nNeal Town Stephenson (born October 31, 1959) is an American writer known for his works of speculative fiction. His novels have been categorized as science fiction, historical fiction, cyberpunk, and baroque.\nStephenson's work explores mathematics, cryptography, linguistics, philosophy, currency, and the history of science. He also writes nonfiction articles about technology in publications such as \"Wired\". He has written novels with his uncle, George Jewsbury (\"J. Frederick George\"), under the collective pseudonym Stephen Bury.\nStephenson has worked part-time as an advisor for Blue Origin, a company (founded by Jeff Bezos) developing a spacecraft and a space launch system, and also co-founded the Subutai Corporation, whose first offering is the interactive fiction project \"The Mongoliad\". He was Magic Leap's chief futurist from 2014 to 2020.\nEarly life.\nBorn on October 31, 1959, in Fort Meade, Maryland, Stephenson came from a family of engineers and scientists; his father is a professor of electrical engineering and his paternal grandfather was a physics professor. His mother worked in a biochemistry laboratory and her father was a biochemistry professor. Stephenson's family moved to Champaign-Urbana, Illinois, in 1960, and to Ames, Iowa, in 1966. He graduated from Ames High School in 1977.\nStephenson studied at Boston University, first specializing in physics, then switching to geography after he found that it would allow him to spend more time on the university mainframe. He graduated in 1981 with a B.A. in geography and a minor in physics. \nSince 1984, Stephenson has lived mostly in the Pacific Northwest and as of 2012 lived in Seattle with his family.\nWriting.\nStephenson's first novel, \"The Big U\", published in 1984, is a satirical take on life at American Megaversity, a vast, bland, and alienating research university beset by chaotic riots. His next novel, \"Zodiac\" (1988), is a thriller following a radical environmentalist in his struggle against corporate polluters. Neither novel attracted much critical attention on first publication, but both showcased concerns that Stephenson developed in his later work.\nStephenson's breakthrough came in 1992 with \"Snow Crash\", a cyberpunk or postcyberpunk novel fusing memetics, computer viruses, and other high-tech themes with Sumerian mythology, along with a sociological extrapolation of extreme laissez-faire capitalism and collectivism. Mike Godwin described Stephenson at this time as \"a slight, unassuming grad-student type whose soft-spoken demeanor gave no obvious indication that he had written the manic apotheosis of cyberpunk science fiction.\" In 1994, Stephenson and his uncle, J. Frederick George, published a political thriller, \"Interface\", under the pen name \"Stephen Bury\"; they followed this in 1996 with \"The Cobweb\".\nStephenson's next solo novel, published in 1995, was \"The Diamond Age: Or, A Young Lady's Illustrated Primer\". The plot involves a weapon implanted in a character's skull, near-limitless replicators for everything from mattresses to foods, smartpaper, and air and blood-sanitizing nanobots. It is set in a world with a neo-Victorian social structure.\nThis was followed by \"Cryptonomicon\" in 1999, a novel including concepts ranging from Alan Turing's research into codebreaking and cryptography during World War II, to a modern attempt to set up a data haven. \"Cryptonomicon\" won the Prometheus Hall of Fame Award in 2013.\n\"The Baroque Cycle\" is a series of historical novels set in the 17th and 18th centuries, and in some respects a prequel to \"Cryptonomicon\". It was originally published in three volumes of two or three books each\u2014\"Quicksilver\" (2003), \"The Confusion\" (2004), and \"The System of the World\" (2004)\u2014but was subsequently republished as eight separate books: \"Quicksilver\", \"King of the Vagabonds\", \"Odalisque\", \"Bonanza\", \"Juncto\", \"Solomon's Gold\", \"Currency\", and \"System of the World\". (The titles and exact breakdown vary in different markets.) \"The System of the World\" won the Prometheus Award in 2005.\nNext, Stephenson wrote \"Anathem\" (2008), a long, detailed work of speculative fiction. It is set in an Earthlike world, deals with metaphysics, and refers heavily to Ancient Greek philosophy. \"Anathem\" won the Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel in 2009.\nIn 2010, the Subutai Corporation, of which Stephenson was named chairman, announced the production of an experimental multimedia fiction project, \"The Mongoliad\", which centered on a narrative by Stephenson and other speculative fiction authors.\nStephenson's novel \"Reamde\" was released in 2011. The title is a play on the common filename README. A thriller set in the present, it centers around a group of MMORPG developers caught in the middle of Chinese cyber-criminals, Islamic terrorists, and Russian mafia.\nIn 2012, Stephenson released a collection of essays and other previously published fiction, \"Some Remarks: Essays and Other Writing\". It also includes a new essay and a short story written specifically for this volume.\nIn 2013, Stephenson said he was working on a multi-volume work of historical novels that would \"have a lot to do with scientific and technological themes and how those interact with the characters and civilisation during a particular span of history\". He expected the first two volumes to be released in 2014. But at about the same time, he shifted his attention to a science fiction novel, \"Seveneves\", which was completed about a year later and published in May 2015. On June 8, 2016, plans were announced to adapt \"Seveneves\" for the screen.\n\"Seveneves\" won the Prometheus Award for Best Novel in 2016.\nIn May 2016, during a video discussion with Bill Gates, Stephenson said he had just submitted the manuscript for a new historical novel\u2014\"a time travel book\"\u2014co-written with Nicole Galland, one of his \"Mongoliad\" coauthors. This book, \"The Rise and Fall of D.O.D.O.\", was released in 2017.\nIn 2019, his novel \"Fall; or, Dodge in Hell\" was published. It is a near-future novel that explores mind uploading into the cloud, and contains characters from \"Reamde\", \"Cryptonomicon\", and other books.\n\"Termination Shock\", published in 2021, is a climate fiction novel about solar geoengineering.\nWriting style.\nStephenson's books tend to have elaborate plots that draw on numerous technological and sociological ideas. The discursive nature of his writing together with significant plot and character complexity and an abundance of detail suggests a baroque writing style, which Stephenson brought fully to bear in his \"Baroque Cycle\".\nOutside of writing.\nStephenson worked at Blue Origin, Jeff Bezos's spaceflight company, for seven years in the early 2000s while its focus was on \"novel alternate approaches to space, alternate propulsion systems, and business models.\" He left after Blue became a more standard aerospace company.\nIn 2012, Stephenson launched a Kickstarter campaign for \"Clang\", a realistic sword-fighting fantasy game. The concept was to use motion control to provide an immersive experience. The campaign's funding goal of $500,000 was reached by the target date of July 9, 2012, but funding options remained open and the project continued to accept contributions on its official site. The project ran out of money in September 2013. This, and the circumstances around it, angered some backers, and some threatened a class action lawsuit. The \"Clang\" project ended in September 2014 without being completed. Stephenson took some responsibility for the project's failure, saying, \"I probably focused too much on historical accuracy and not enough on making it sufficiently fun to attract additional investment\".\nIn 2014, the Florida-based augmented reality company Magic Leap hired Stephenson as chief futurist. He left the company in 2020 as part of a layoff. In 2021, Stephenson and colleagues Sean Stewart and Austin Grossman released \"New Found Land: The Long Haul\", an Audible audio drama based on the intellectual property they developed at Magic Leap.\nIn 2022, Stephenson launched Lamina1 to build an open source metaverse that will use smart contracts on a blockchain.\nInfluence.\nStephenson's writing is influential in technology circles. Bill Gates, Sergey Brin, John Carmack, and Peter Thiel are all fans of his work. In \"Snow Crash\", Stephenson coined the term Metaverse and popularized the term avatar in a computing context. The Metaverse inspired the inventors of Google Earth, and \"Snow Crash\" was required reading on the Xbox development team under Microsoft executive J Allard. According to academic Paul Youngquist, \"Snow Crash\" also dealt the cyberpunk genre a \"killer blow\". According to \"Publishers Weekly\", \"Cryptonomicon\" is \"often credited with sketching the basis for cryptocurrency\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21444", "revid": "7007500", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21444", "title": "Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli", "text": "Florentine statesman, diplomat, and political theorist (1469\u20131527)\nNiccol\u00f2 di Bernardo dei Machiavelli (3 May 1469 \u2013 21 June 1527) was a Florentine diplomat, author, philosopher, and historian who lived during the Italian Renaissance. He is best known for his political treatise \"The Prince\" (), written around 1513 but not published until 1532, five years after his death. He has often been called the father of modern political philosophy and political science.\nFor many years he served as a senior official in the Florentine Republic with responsibilities in diplomatic and military affairs. He wrote comedies, carnival songs, and poetry. His personal correspondence is also important to historians and scholars of Italian correspondence. He worked as secretary to the second chancery of the Republic of Florence from 1498 to 1512, when the Medici were out of power.\nAfter his death Machiavelli's name came to evoke unscrupulous acts of the sort he advised most famously in his work, \"The Prince\". He concerned himself with the ways a ruler could succeed in politics, and believed those who flourished engaged in deception, treachery, and violence. He advised rulers to engage in evil when political necessity requires it, at one point stating that successful founders and reformers of governments should be excused for killing other leaders who would oppose them. Machiavelli's \"Prince\" has been surrounded by controversy since it was published. Some consider it to be a straightforward description of political reality. Many view \"The Prince\" as a manual, teaching would-be tyrants how they should seize and maintain power. Even into recent times, scholars such as Leo Strauss have restated the traditional opinion that Machiavelli was a \"teacher of evil\".\nEven though Machiavelli has become most famous for his work on principalities, scholars also give attention to the exhortations in his other works of political philosophy. The \"Discourses on Livy\" (composed c.\u20091517) has been said to have paved the way for modern republicanism. His works were a major influence on Enlightenment authors who revived interest in classical republicanism, such as Jean-Jacques Rousseau and James Harrington. Machiavelli's philosophical contributions have influenced generations of academics and politicians, with many of them debating the nature of his ideas.\nLife.\nNiccol\u00f2 Machiavelli was born in Florence, Italy, the third child and first son of attorney Bernardo di Niccol\u00f2 Machiavelli and his wife, Bartolomea di Stefano Nelli, on 3 May 1469. The Machiavelli family is believed to be descended from the old marquesses of Tuscany and to have produced thirteen Florentine Gonfalonieres of Justice, one of the offices of a group of nine citizens selected by drawing lots every two months and who formed the government, or Signoria; he was never, though, a full citizen of Florence because of the nature of Florentine citizenship in that time even under the republican regime. Not much is known about Machiavelli's early life, thus one of the main sources that historians rely on regarding his experiences exists in his father's diary, found in the 20th century. His family was a huge influence on his life, and it is said that it was his heritage which instilled Machiavelli with his preference for a republican form of government. There isn't much known about Machiavelli's mother as few facts have been found about her life by historians.\nMachiavelli was born in a tumultuous era. The Italian city-states, and the families and individuals who ran them could rise and fall suddenly, as popes and the kings of France, Spain, and the Holy Roman Empire waged acquisitive wars for regional influence and control. Political-military alliances continually changed, featuring condottieri (mercenary leaders), who changed sides without warning, and the rise and fall of many short-lived governments.\nMachiavelli was taught grammar, rhetoric, and Latin by his teacher, Paolo da Ronciglione. It is unknown whether Machiavelli knew Greek; Florence was at the time one of the centres of Greek scholarship in Europe. In 1494 Florence restored the republic, expelling the Medici family that had ruled Florence for some sixty years.\nDiplomatic career.\nShortly after the execution of Savonarola, Machiavelli was appointed to an office of the second chancery, a medieval writing office that put Machiavelli in charge of the production of official Florentine government documents. Shortly thereafter, he was also made the secretary of the \"Dieci di Libert\u00e0 e Pace\", the Florentine council responsible for diplomacy and warfare. His appointment remains a mystery to scholars as he was a very young man, 29 at the time, with no experience in law or public office.\nMachiavelli married Marietta Corsini in 1501. They had seven children, five sons and two daughters: Primerana, Bernardo, Lodovico, Guido, Piero, Baccina and Totto.\nMachiavelli's position as a secretary enabled him to witness firsthand the state-building methods of the Pope Alexander VI, and his son, Cesare Borgia. Machiavelli often wrote highly about Cesare, stating in one letter that \"this lord is splendid and magnificent\", and that his pursuit of glory he \"knows neither danger or fatigue\". Machiavelli personally witnessed the brutal retribution Cesare Borgia inflicted on his rebellious commanders, Oliverotto Euffreducci and Vitellozzo Vitelli in Sinigaglia on December 31, 1502, an event he famously chronicled in a political work, \"A description of the methods adopted by the Duke Valentino when murdering Vitellozzo Vitelli, Oliverotto da Fermo, the Signor Pagolo, and the Duke di Gravina Orsini\". In many of his early writings, Machiavelli emphasized the danger of offending a ruler and then expecting to trust him afterward. In 1503, Machiavelli was dispatched to Rome to observe the papal conclave that ultimately selected Julius II, who was a bitter rival of the Borgia family, as pope, despite Cesare's support for his election. As Cesare's power waned, Machiavelli documented his downfall in his poem First Decennale.\nMachiavelli also was present during Pandolfo Petrucci's consolidation of his rule in Siena, later noting in his works that he \"governed his state more with those who were suspected of him than with others\".\nIn the first decade of the sixteenth century, he carried out several diplomatic missions, most notably to the papacy in Rome. Florence sent him to Pistoia to pacify the leaders of two opposing factions which had broken into riots in 1501 and 1502; when this failed, the leaders were banished from the city, a recommendation which Machiavelli had disagreed with from the outset, and would later advise governments in similar situations to do the opposite. Machiavelli's official duties within the Florentine Republic, including his involvement in the disturbances of Pistoia and the rebellion of Arezzo, were not of major political consequence but served as critical experiences that shaped his intellectual development. Though his influence was subtle, often exerted through anonymous chancery work, biographers suggest he advocated for firm punishment of rebellious cities, a stance consistent with his known political attitudes, even if not fully implemented. These events, and the evident structural weaknesses of Florence's government compared to figures like Borgia, offered Machiavelli valuable insights. While his official report \"De rebus pistoriensibus\" was routine and unremarkable, his later discourse \"Del modo di trattare i sudditi della Valdichiana ribellati\" marked a turning point as it was more reflective and analytical, blending historical knowledge with political thought, and is considered his first mature, literary political work not driven by immediate bureaucratic necessity.\nAt the start of the 16th century, Machiavelli conceived of a militia for Florence, and he then began recruiting and creating it. He distrusted mercenaries (a distrust that he explained in his official reports and then later in his theoretical works for their unpatriotic and uninvested nature in the war that makes their allegiance fickle and often unreliable when most needed), and instead staffed his army with citizens, a policy that yielded some positive results. By February 1506 he was able to have four hundred farmers marching on parade, suited (including iron breastplates), and armed with lances and small firearms. Under his command, Florentine citizen-soldiers conquered Pisa in 1509.\nExile and later years.\nMachiavelli's success was short-lived. In August 1512, the Medici, backed by Pope Julius II, used Spanish troops to defeat the Florentines at Prato. In the wake of the siege, Piero Soderini resigned as Florentine head of state and fled into exile. The experience would, like Machiavelli's time in foreign courts and with the Borgia, heavily influence his political writings. The Florentine city-state and the republic were dissolved. Machiavelli was ordered to remain in Florence for a year, and to pay a surety of one thousand florins. He was falsely implicated in a conspiracy to remove the Medici family from power merely because his name was on a list of possible sympathizers. Despite being subjected to torture (\"with the rope\", in which the prisoner is hanged from his bound wrists from the back, forcing the arms to bear the body's weight and dislocating the shoulders), he denied involvement and was released after three weeks.\nMachiavelli then retired to his farm estate at Sant'Andrea in Percussina, near San Casciano in Val di Pesa, where he devoted himself to studying and writing political treatises. During this period, he represented the Florentine Republic on diplomatic visits to France, Germany, and elsewhere in Italy. Despairing of the opportunity to remain directly involved in political matters, after a time he began to participate in intellectual groups in Florence and wrote several plays that (unlike his works on political theory) were both popular and widely known in his lifetime. Politics remained his main passion, and to satisfy this interest, he maintained a well-known correspondence with more politically connected friends, attempting to become involved once again in political life. Machiavelli had a lengthy correspondence with his close friend, Francesco Vettori. In one of his letters which he details his life after his exile, he described his latest project as one of his \"whimsies\" that would later be called \"Il Principe\" (The Prince), and that he is planning on filling the work \"with everything he knows\".\nAs the letter to Vettori continues, he described his current situation:\nWhen evening comes, I go back home, and go to my study. On the threshold, I take off my work clothes, covered in mud and filth, and I put on the clothes an ambassador would wear. Decently dressed, I enter the ancient courts of rulers who have long since died. There, I am warmly welcomed, and I feed on the only food I find nourishing and was born to savour. I am not ashamed to talk to them and ask them to explain their actions and they, out of kindness, answer me. Four hours go by without my feeling any anxiety. I forget every worry. I am no longer afraid of poverty or frightened of death. I live entirely through them.\nThough scholars often debate on the time of the composition of the \"Discourses on Livy\", it is often said that he was composing the work in the years between 1515 and 1517.\nFrom 1516 Machiavelli had freqented the Orti Oricellari gardens, a place where it was common for humanists and philosophers to discuss anti-tyrannical themes, and it was in these gardens where Machiavelli gained a friendship with Bernardo Rucellai and Zanobi Buondelmonti, men whom Machiavelli would dedicate his \"Discoursi\" to.\nIn 1520, Machiavelli won the favor of the Medici family, and Giulio Cardinal de Medici commissioned him to write a work of history of the city of Florence. Machiavelli saw this as an opportunity to get back into his political career, thus he began working on what would later be known as The Florentine Histories. During this period, Machiavelli also wrote the \"Dell'arte della guerra\", which was the only work published during his lifetime.\nIn his exile, he also wrote plays, including \"Clizia\", \"The Mandrake\" (\"La Mandragola\"), and \"The Golden Ass\".\nAfter the 1527 Sack of Rome, the Medici were thrown out of Florence once more, and citizens set up a republican form of government. There were discussions to give Machiavelli a post in this new government, which were rejected due to the favors he was given to by the Medici.\nDeath and burial.\nMachiavelli died on 21 June 1527 from a stomach disease that he had been suffering from since 1525. He died at the age of 58 after receiving his last rites. He was buried at the Church of Santa Croce in Florence. In 1789 George Nassau Clavering, and Pietro Leopoldo, Grand Duke of Tuscany, initiated the construction of a monument on Machiavelli's tomb. It was sculpted by Innocenzo Spinazzi, with an epitaph by Doctor Ferroni inscribed on it.\nMajor works.\n\"The Prince\".\nMachiavelli's best-known book \"Il Principe\" contains several maxims concerning politics. Instead of the more traditional target audience of a hereditary prince, it concentrates on the possibility of a \"new prince\". To retain royal authority, the hereditary prince does not have to do much to keep his position, as Machiavelli states that only an \"excessive force\" will deprive him of his rule. By contrast, a new prince has the more difficult task in ruling: He must first stabilize his newfound power in order to build an enduring political structure. Machiavelli views that the virtues often recommended to princes actually hinder their ability to rule, thus a prince must learn to be able to act opposite said virtues in order to maintain his regime. A ruler must be concerned not only with reputation, but also must be positively willing to act unscrupulously at the right times. Machiavelli believed that, for a ruler, it was better to be widely feared than to be greatly loved; a loved ruler retains authority by obligation, while a feared leader rules by fear of punishment. As a political theorist, Machiavelli emphasized the \"necessity\" for the methodical exercise of brute force or deceit, including extermination of entire noble families, to head off any chance of a challenge to the prince's authority.\nScholars often note that Machiavelli glorifies instrumentality in state building, an approach embodied by the saying, often erroneously attributed to Machiavelli, \"The ends justify the means\". Fraud and deceit are held by Machiavelli as necessary for a prince to use. Violence may be necessary for the successful stabilization of power and introduction of new political institutions. Force may be used to eliminate political rivals, destroy resistant populations, and purge the community of other men strong enough of a character to rule, who will inevitably attempt to replace the ruler. In one passage, Machiavelli subverts the advice given by Cicero to avoid duplicity and violence, by saying that the prince should \"be the fox to avoid the snares, and a lion to overwhelm the wolves\". It would become one of Machiavelli's most famous maxims. Machiavelli's view that acquiring a state and maintaining it requires evil means has been noted as the chief theme of the treatise. Machiavelli has become infamous for such political advice, ensuring that he would be remembered in history through the adjective \"Machiavellian\".\nDue to the treatise's controversial analysis on politics, in 1559, the Catholic Church banned \"The Prince\", putting it on the \"\". Humanists, including Erasmus (c.\u20091466\u00a0\u2013 1536), also viewed the book negatively. As a treatise, its primary intellectual contribution to the history of political thought is the fundamental break between political realism and political idealism, due to it being a manual on acquiring and keeping political power. In contrast with\u2014and in opposition to\u2014Plato and Aristotle, Machiavelli insisted that \"imaginary republics and principalities\" i.e. the realization of the best political regime is not possible, and as such a prince must seek the \"effectual truth\" (\"verita effetuale\").\nConcerning the differences and similarities in Machiavelli's advice to ruthless and tyrannical princes in \"The Prince\" and his more republican exhortations in \"Discourses on Livy\", a few commentators assert that \"The Prince\", although written as advice for a monarchical prince, contains arguments for the superiority of republican regimes, similar to those found in the \"Discourses\". In the 18th century, the work was even called a satire, for example by Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712\u20131778). This however is an interpretation that is often refuted by scholars.\nScholars such as Leo Strauss (1899\u20131973) and Harvey Mansfield (b.\u20091932) have stated that sections of \"The Prince\" and his other works have deliberately esoteric statements throughout them. However, Mansfield states that this is the result of Machiavelli's seeing grave and serious things as humorous because they are \"manipulable by men\", and sees them as grave because they \"answer human necessities\".\nThe Marxist theorist Antonio Gramsci (1891\u20131937) argued that Machiavelli's audience was the common people, as opposed to the ruling class, who were already made aware of the methods described through their education.\n\"Discourses on Livy\".\nThe \"Discourses on the First Ten Books of Titus Livius\", written around 1517, and published in 1531, often referred to simply as the \"Discourses\" or \"Discorsi\", is nominally a discussion regarding the classical history of early Ancient Rome, although it strays far from this subject matter and also uses contemporary political examples to illustrate points. Machiavelli presents it as a series of lessons on how a republic should be started and structured. It is a larger work than \"The Prince\", and while it more openly explains the advantages of republics, it also contains many similar themes from his other works. For example, Machiavelli has noted that to save a republic from corruption, it is necessary to return it to a \"kingly state\" using violent means. He excuses Romulus for murdering his brother Remus and co-ruler Titus Tatius to gain absolute power for himself in that he established a \"civil way of life\", or a kingdom with laws suitable for a republic. Commentators disagree about how much the two works agree with each other, as Machiavelli frequently refers to leaders of republics as \"princes\". Machiavelli even sometimes acts as an advisor to tyrants. Other scholars have pointed out the aggrandizing and imperialistic features of Machiavelli's republic. It became one of the central texts of modern republicanism, and has been argued by Pocock to be a more comprehensive work than \"The Prince\".\nOriginality.\nMajor commentary on Machiavelli's work has focused on two issues: how unified and philosophical his work is and how innovative or traditional it is.\nCoherence.\nThere is some disagreement concerning how best to describe the unifying themes, if there are any, that can be found in Machiavelli's works, especially in the two major political works, \"The Prince\" and \"Discourses\". Some commentators have described him as inconsistent, and perhaps as not even putting a high priority on consistency. Others such as Hans Baron have argued that his ideas must have changed dramatically over time. Some have argued that his conclusions are best understood as a product of his times, experiences and education. Others, such as Leo Strauss and Harvey Mansfield, have argued strongly that there is a strong and deliberate consistency and distinctness, even arguing that this extends to all of Machiavelli's works including his comedies and letters.\nInfluences.\nCommentators such as Leo Strauss have gone so far as to name Machiavelli as the deliberate originator of modernity itself. Others have argued that Machiavelli is only a particularly interesting example of trends which were happening around him. In any case, Machiavelli presented himself at various times as someone reminding Italians of the old virtues of the Romans and Greeks, and other times as someone promoting a completely new approach to politics. Machiavelli emphasizes the originality of his endeavor in several instances. Many scholars note that Machiavelli seems particularly original and that he frequently seems to act without any regard for his predecessors.\nThat Machiavelli had a wide range of influences is in itself not controversial. Their relative importance is however a subject of ongoing discussion. It is possible to summarize some of the main influences emphasized by different commentators.\nThe Mirror of Princes genre\nGilbert (1938) summarized the similarities between \"The Prince\" and the genre it imitates, the so-called \"Mirror of Princes\" style. This was a classically influenced genre, with models at least as far back as Xenophon and Isocrates. While Gilbert emphasized the similarities, however, he agreed with all other commentators that Machiavelli was particularly novel in the way he used this genre, even when compared to his contemporaries such as Baldassare Castiglione and Erasmus. One of the major innovations Gilbert noted was that Machiavelli focused on the \"deliberate purpose of dealing with a new ruler who will need to establish himself in defiance of custom\". Normally, these types of works were addressed only to hereditary princes. (Xenophon is also an exception in this regard.)\nClassical republicanism\nCommentators such as Quentin Skinner and J.G.A. Pocock, in the so-called \"Cambridge School\" of interpretation, have asserted that some of the republican themes in Machiavelli's political works, particularly the \"Discourses on Livy\", can be found in medieval Italian literature which was influenced by classical authors such as Sallust.\nClassical political philosophy: Xenophon, Plato and Aristotle\nPolitical thinkers usually engage to some extent with their forerunners, even (or perhaps particularly) those who aim to fundamentally disagree with prior thoughts. Therefore, even with a figure as seemingly innovative as Machiavelli, scholars have looked deeper into his works to consider possible historical and philosophical influences. Although Machiavelli examined ancient philosophers, he does not frequently reference them as authorities. He mentions neither Plato nor Aristotle in \"The Prince\", and he mentions Aristotle only once in The Discourses. He usually does not speak of philosophers as such, but mentions \"writers\" and \"authors\". One of the writers Machiavelli mentions the most is Xenophon. In his time, the most commonly cited discussion of classical virtues was Book One of Cicero's \"De Officiis\". Yet, Cicero is never directly mentioned in The Prince, and is mentioned only three times in the Discourses.\nThe major difference between Machiavelli and the Socratics, according to Strauss, is Machiavelli's materialism, and therefore his rejection of both a teleological view of nature and of the view that philosophy is higher than politics. With their teleological understanding of things, Socratics argued that by nature, everything that acts, acts towards some end, as if nature desired them, but Machiavelli claimed that such things happen by blind chance or human action.\nClassical materialism\nStrauss argued that Machiavelli may have seen himself as influenced by some ideas from classical materialists such as Democritus, Epicurus and Lucretius. Strauss however sees this also as a sign of major innovation in Machiavelli, because classical materialists did not share the Socratic regard for political life, while Machiavelli clearly did.\nThucydides\nSome scholars note the similarity between Machiavelli and the Greek historian Thucydides, since both emphasized power politics. Strauss argued that Machiavelli may indeed have been influenced by pre-Socratic philosophers, but he felt it was a new combination:\n...contemporary readers are reminded by Machiavelli's teaching of Thucydides; they find in both authors the same \"realism\", i.e., the same denial of the power of the gods or of justice and the same sensitivity to harsh necessity and elusive chance. Yet Thucydides never calls in question the intrinsic superiority of nobility to baseness, a superiority that shines forth particularly when the noble is destroyed by the base. Therefore Thucydides' History arouses in the reader a sadness which is never aroused by Machiavelli's books. In Machiavelli we find comedies, parodies, and satires but nothing reminding of tragedy. One half of humanity remains outside of his thought. There is no tragedy in Machiavelli because he has no sense of the sacredness of \"the common\". \u2013 \nBeliefs.\nAmongst commentators, there are a few consistently made proposals concerning what was most new in Machiavelli's work.\nEmpiricism and realism versus idealism.\nMachiavelli is sometimes seen as the prototype of a modern empirical scientist, building generalizations from experience and historical facts, and emphasizing the uselessness of theorizing with the imagination.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was not only a theorist of monarchical rule in The Prince, but, paradoxically, an ardent republican. He was a religious radical, rejecting not only the contemporary Catholic church but Christianity as such; he may even have been a clandestine atheist.\u2014\u200a\nMachiavelli often switches between his professed novelty of his ideas and his evident reliance on ancient history. In the preface to the first book of The Discourses, he presents himself as both a discoverer of \"new modes and orders\" and as a restorer of the ancient understanding of politics. While he viewed the classical approach to government to be self-limiting and harmful in many cases, he nonetheless attributes this to a false understanding of political history. Moreover, he studied the way people lived and aimed to inform leaders how they should rule and even how they themselves should live. Machiavelli denies the classical opinion that living virtuously always leads to happiness. For example, Machiavelli viewed misery as \"one of the vices that enables a prince to rule.\" Machiavelli stated that \"it would be best to be both loved and feared. But since the two rarely come together, anyone compelled to choose will find greater security in being feared than in being loved.\" In much of Machiavelli's work, he often states that the ruler must adopt unsavoury policies for the sake of the continuance of his regime. Because cruelty and fraud play such important roles in his politics, it is not unusual for certain issues (such as murder and betrayal) to be commonplace within his works. Machiavelli also places his focus specifically on the beginnings and foundations of political societies, where a lawful government has to be established by extralegal methods.\nA related and more controversial proposal often made is that he described how to do things in politics in a way which seemed neutral concerning who used the advice\u00a0\u2013 tyrants or good rulers. That Machiavelli strove for realism is not doubted, but for four centuries scholars have debated how best to describe his morality. \"The Prince\" made the word \"Machiavellian\" a byword for deceit, despotism, and political manipulation. Leo Strauss declared himself as sympathetic toward the traditional view that Machiavelli was self-consciously a \"teacher of evil\", since he recommends princes to avoid the values of justice, mercy, temperance, and wisdom, in preference to the use of cruelty, violence, terror, and deception. Strauss takes up this opinion because he asserted that failure to accept the traditional opinion misses the \"intrepidity of his thought\" and \"the graceful subtlety of his speech\". Italian anti-fascist philosopher Benedetto Croce (1925) concludes Machiavelli is simply a \"realist\" or \"pragmatist\" who accurately states that moral values, in reality, do not greatly affect the decisions that political leaders make. German philosopher Ernst Cassirer (1946) held that Machiavelli merely adopts the stance of a political scientist\u00a0\u2013 a Galileo of politics\u00a0\u2013 in distinguishing between the actuality of politics instead of providing value judgements on political morality. With a focus on Machiavelli's ideas on the foundations of cities and societies, Louis Althusser stated that Machiavelli was a \"theorist of beginnings\".\nFortune.\nMachiavelli is generally seen as being critical of Christianity as it existed in his time, specifically its effect upon politics and humanity in general. In his opinion, the Christianity that the Church had come to accept allowed practical decisions to be guided too much by imaginary ideals and encouraged people to lazily leave events up to providence or, as he would put it, chance, luck or fortune. Machiavelli took a radically different view, and opined that the pagan religion, given its faults, was preferable to Christianity as it championed martial warfare. Machiavelli's own concept of virtue, which he calls \"virt\u00f9\", is original and is usually seen by scholars as different from the traditional viewpoints of other political philosophers. Virt\u00f9 can consist of any quality at the moment that helps a ruler maintain his state, even being ready to engage in necessary evil when it is advantageous. Harvey wrote of Machiavelli's followers that: \"In attempting other, more regular and scientific modes of overcoming fortune, Machiavelli's successors formalized and emasculated his notion of virtue.\" Mansfield describes Machiavelli's usage of \"virt\u00f9\" as a \"compromise with evil\". Mansfield however argues that Machiavelli's own aims have not been shared by those he influenced. Machiavelli argued against seeing mere peace and economic growth as worthy aims on their own if they would lead to what Mansfield calls the \"taming of the prince\".\nNajemy has argued that this same approach can be found in Machiavelli's approach to love and desire, as seen in his comedies and correspondence. Najemy shows how Machiavelli's friend Vettori argued against Machiavelli and cited a more traditional understanding of fortune.\nCary Nederman says of Machiavelli's use of \"fortuna\" that: \"Machiavelli\u2019s remarks point toward several salient conclusions about Fortuna and her place in his intellectual universe. Throughout his corpus, Fortuna is depicted as a primal source of violence (especially as directed against humanity) and as antithetical to reason. Thus, Machiavelli realizes that only preparation to pose an extreme response to the vicissitudes of Fortuna will ensure victory against her. This is what virt\u00f9 provides: the ability to respond to fortune at any time and in any way that is necessary.\" On Machiavelli's use of \"virtu\", Quentin Skinner noted that \"properly understood, the princely virtues are among the qualities that go to make up the virt\u00f9 of a truly virtuoso prince, thereby helping him to fulfil his primary duty of maintaining the state in a condition of security and peace.\"\nStrauss concludes his 1958 book \"Thoughts on Machiavelli\" by proposing that \"The difficulty implied in the admission that inventions pertaining to the art of war must be encouraged is the only one which supplies a basis for Machiavelli's criticism of classical political philosophy.\" and that this shows that classical-minded men \"had to admit in other words that in an important respect the good city has to take its bearings by the practice of bad cities or that the bad impose their law on the good\".\nReligion.\nMachiavelli shows repeatedly that he saw religion as man-made, and that the value of religion lies in its contribution to social order and the rules of morality must be dispensed with if security requires it. In \"The Prince\", the \"Discourses\" and in the \"Life of Castruccio Castracani\" he describes \"prophets\", as he calls them, like Moses, Romulus, Cyrus the Great and Theseus as the greatest of new princes, the glorious and brutal founders of the most novel innovations in politics, and men whom Machiavelli assures us have always used armed force, being willing to kill those who did not ultimately agree with their vision. He estimated that these sects last from 1,666 to 3,000 years each time, which, as pointed out by Leo Strauss, would mean that Christianity became due to start finishing about 150 years after Machiavelli. Machiavelli's concern with Christianity as a religion was that it made the Italians of his day \"weak and effeminate\", delivering politics into the hands of cruel and wicked men without a fight, as well as celebrated humility and otherworldly things, instead of being focused on the tangible world. While Machiavelli's own religious allegiance has been debated, it is assumed that he had a low regard of contemporary Christianity. Some scholars, like Sebastian De Grazia and Maurizio Viroli, view that Machiavelli viewed religion more intimately than previously thought. In contrast, Nathan Tarcov has noted that Machiavelli's praise of religion, in actuality, provides cover for his anti-clericalism and antipathy towards Christianity proper. Vickie Sullivan similarly argues that, for Machiavelli, Christianity made the practice of free government impossible.\nWhile fear of God can be replaced by fear of the prince, if there is a strong enough prince, Machiavelli felt that having a religion is in any case especially essential to keeping a republic in order. For Machiavelli, a truly great prince can never be conventionally religious himself, but he should make his people religious if he can. According to he was not the first person to explain religion in this way, but his description of religion was novel because of the way he integrated this into his general account of princes.\nMachiavelli's judgment that governments need religion for practical political reasons was widespread among modern proponents of republics until approximately the time of the French Revolution. This, therefore, represents a point of disagreement between Machiavelli and late modernity.\nTerminology.\nStato\nAnother term of Machiavelli's that scholars debate over is his use of the word \"stato\" (literally translated as \"state\"). Whenever he uses the word, it usually refers to a regime's political command to which a leader takes a hold of, and rules over himself. Generally he believes that in all states, there exists two humors, that of the great, who wish to rule and oppress others, and that of the people, who do not seek to oppress. Glory plays a central role in Machiavelli's political thought, drawing heavily on the Roman ideal of gloria, which emphasized public recognition for one's achievements, especially in warfare or public service.\nRepublicanism\nThe majority of scholars have taken into account Machiavelli's admiration of, and recommendations to republics, and his contribution to republican theory. Machiavelli gives lengthy advice for republics in how they can best protect their liberties, and how they can avoid those who would ultimately usurp legitimate authority. Even in this, commentators have no consensus as to the exact nature of his republicanism. For example, the \"Cambridge School\" of interpretation holds Machiavelli to be a civic humanist and classical republican who viewed that the highest quality of republican virtue is self-sacrifice for the common good. However this opinion has been contested by scholars who believe that Machiavelli has a radically modern view of republics, accepting and unleashing the self interest of those who rule. Some scholars have even asserted that the goal of his ideal republic does not differ greatly from his principality, as both rely on rather ruthless measures for conquest and empire.\nInfluence.\nTo quote Robert Bireley:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...there were in circulation approximately fifteen editions of the \"Prince\" and nineteen of the \"Discourses\" and French translations of each before they were placed on the Index of Paul IV in 1559, a measure which nearly stopped publication in Catholic areas except in France. Three principal writers took the field against Machiavelli between the publication of his works and their condemnation in 1559 and again by the Tridentine Index in 1564. These were the English cardinal Reginald Pole and the Portuguese bishop Jeronymo Osorio, both of whom lived for many years in Italy, and the Italian humanist and later bishop, Ambrogio Caterino Politi.\nMachiavelli's ideas had a profound impact on political leaders throughout the modern west, helped by the new technology of the printing press. During the first generations after Machiavelli, his main influence was in non-republican governments. Pole reported that \"The Prince\" was spoken of highly by Thomas Cromwell in England and had influenced Henry VIII in his turn towards Protestantism, and in his tactics, for example during the Pilgrimage of Grace. A copy was also possessed by the Catholic king and emperor Charles V. In France, after an initially mixed reaction, Machiavelli came to be associated with Catherine de' Medici and the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre. As reports, in the 16th century, Catholic writers \"associated Machiavelli with the Protestants, whereas Protestant authors saw him as Italian and Catholic\". In fact, he was apparently influencing both Catholic and Protestant kings.\nOne of the most important early works dedicated to criticism of Machiavelli, especially \"The Prince\", was that of the Huguenot, Innocent Gentillet, whose work commonly referred to as \"Discourse against Machiavelli\" or \"Anti Machiavel\" was published in Geneva in 1576. He accused Machiavelli of being an atheist and accused politicians of his time by saying that his works were the \"Koran of the courtiers\", that \"he is of no reputation in the court of France which hath not Machiavel's writings at the fingers ends\". Another theme of Gentillet was more in the spirit of Machiavelli himself: he questioned the effectiveness of immorality in politics (just as Machiavelli had himself done, despite also explaining how they could sometimes work). Gentillet, like many of Machiavelli's critics, ultimately accepted the aspects of his thought that they denounced. This became the theme of much future political discourse in Europe during the 17th century. This includes the Catholic Counter Reformation writers summarised by Bireley: Giovanni Botero, Justus Lipsius, Carlo Scribani, Adam Contzen, Pedro de Ribadeneira, and Diego de Saavedra Fajardo. These authors criticized Machiavelli, but also followed him in many ways. They accepted the need for a prince to be concerned with reputation, and even a need for cunning and deceit, but compared to Machiavelli, and like later modernist writers, they emphasized economic progress much more than the riskier ventures of war. These authors tended to cite Tacitus as their source for realist political advice, rather than Machiavelli, and this pretence came to be known as \"Tacitism\". \"Black tacitism\" was in support of princely rule, but \"red tacitism\" arguing the case for republics, more in the original spirit of Machiavelli himself, became increasingly important. Cardinal Reginald Pole read The Prince while he was in Italy, and on which he gave his comments. Frederick the Great, king of Prussia and patron of Voltaire, wrote Anti-Machiavel, with the aim of rebutting \"The Prince\".\nModern materialist philosophy developed in the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, starting in the generations after Machiavelli. Modern political philosophy tended to be republican, but as with the Catholic authors, Machiavelli's realism and encouragement of innovation to try to control one's own fortune were more accepted than his emphasis upon war and factional violence. Not only was innovative economics and politics a result, but also modern science, leading some commentators to say that the 18th century Enlightenment involved a \"humanitarian\" moderating of Machiavellianism.\nThe importance of Machiavelli's influence is notable in many important figures in this endeavour, for example Bodin, Francis Bacon, Algernon Sidney, Harrington, John Milton, Spinoza, Rousseau, Hume, Edward Gibbon, and Adam Smith. Although he was not always mentioned by name as an inspiration, due to his controversy, he is also thought to have been an influence for other major philosophers, such as Montaigne, Descartes, Hobbes, Locke and Montesquieu. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who is associated with very different political ideas, viewed Machiavelli's work as a satirical piece in which Machiavelli exposes the faults of a one-man rule rather than exalting amorality.\nIn the seventeenth century it was in England that Machiavelli's ideas were most substantially developed and adapted, and that republicanism came once more to life; and out of seventeenth-century English republicanism there were to emerge in the next century not only a theme of English political and historical reflection\u00a0\u2013 of the writings of the Bolingbroke circle and of Gibbon and of early parliamentary radicals\u00a0\u2013 but a stimulus to the Enlightenment in Scotland, on the Continent, and in America.\nScholars have argued that Machiavelli was a major indirect and direct influence upon the political thinking of the Founding Fathers of the United States due to his overwhelming favouritism of republicanism and the republican type of government. According to John McCormick, it is still very much debatable whether or not Machiavelli was \"an advisor of tyranny or partisan of liberty.\" Benjamin Franklin, James Madison and Thomas Jefferson followed Machiavelli's republicanism when they opposed what they saw as the emerging aristocracy that they feared Alexander Hamilton was creating with the Federalist Party. Hamilton learned from Machiavelli about the importance of foreign policy for domestic policy, but may have broken from him regarding how rapacious a republic needed to be in order to survive. George Washington was less influenced by Machiavelli.\nThe Founding Father who perhaps most studied and valued Machiavelli as a political philosopher was John Adams, who profusely commented on the Italian's thought in his work, \"A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America\". In this work, John Adams praised Machiavelli, with Algernon Sidney and Montesquieu, as a philosophic defender of mixed government. For Adams, Machiavelli restored empirical reason to politics, while his analysis of factions was commendable. Adams likewise agreed with the Florentine that human nature was immutable and driven by passions. He also accepted Machiavelli's belief that all societies were subject to cyclical periods of growth and decay. For Adams, Machiavelli lacked only a clear understanding of the institutions necessary for good government.\nThe 20th-century Italian Communist Antonio Gramsci drew great inspiration from Machiavelli's writings on ethics, morals, and how they relate to the State and revolution in his writings on Passive Revolution, and how a society can be manipulated by controlling popular notions of morality. Joseph Stalin read \"The Prince\" and annotated his own copy.\nIn the 20th century there was also renewed interest in Machiavelli's play \"La Mandragola\" (1518), which received numerous stagings, including several in New York, at the New York Shakespeare Festival in 1976 and the Riverside Shakespeare Company in 1979, as a musical comedy by Peer Raben in Munich's Anti Theatre in 1971, and at London's National Theatre in 1984.\n\"Machiavellian\".\nMachiavelli's works are sometimes even said to have contributed to the modern negative connotations of the words \"politics\" and \"politician\", and it is sometimes thought that it is because of him that \"Old Nick\" became an English term for the Devil. The adjective \"Machiavellian\" became a term describing a form of politics that is \"marked by cunning, duplicity, or bad faith\". The word \"Machiavellianism\" is also a term used in political discussions, often as a byword for bare-knuckled political realism.\nScholars often point to other themes within his works. For example, J. G. A. saw him as a major source of the republicanism that spread throughout England and North America in the 17th and 18th centuries and Leo , whose view of Machiavelli is quite different in many ways, had similar remarks about Machiavelli's influence on republicanism and argued that even though Machiavelli was a teacher of evil he had a \"grandeur of vision\" that led him to advocate immoral actions. Whatever his intentions, which are still debated today, he has become associated with a particular type of political action and thinking which justifies unsavory conduct in government. For example, Leo wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Machiavelli is the only political thinker whose name has come into common use for designating a kind of politics, which exists and will continue to exist independently of his influence, a politics guided exclusively by considerations of expediency, which uses all means, fair or foul, iron or poison, for achieving its ends\u00a0\u2013 its end being the aggrandizement of one's country or fatherland\u00a0\u2013 but also using the fatherland in the service of the self-aggrandizement of the politician or statesman or one's party.\nIn popular culture.\nDue to Machiavelli's popularity, he has been featured in various ways in cultural depictions. In English Renaissance theatre (Elizabethan and Jacobean), the term \"Machiavel\" (from 'Nicholas Machiavel', an \"anglicization\" of Machiavelli's name based on French) was used for a stock antagonist that resorted to ruthless means to preserve the power of the state, and is now considered a synonym of \"Machiavellian\".\nChristopher Marlowe's play \"The Jew of Malta\" (c.\u20091589) contains a prologue by a character called Machiavel, a Senecan ghost based on Machiavelli. Machiavel expresses the cynical view that power is amoral, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt; \n \"I count religion but a childish toy, \n And hold there is no sin but ignorance.\"\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nShakespeare's titular character, \"Richard III\", refers to Machiavelli in \"Henry VI, Part III\", as the \"murderous Machiavel\".\nWorks.\nFictional works.\nBesides being a statesman and political scientist, Machiavelli also translated classical works, and was a playwright (\"Clizia\", \"Mandragola\"), a poet (\"Sonetti\", \"Canzoni\", \"Ottave\", \"Canti carnascialeschi\"), and a novelist (\"Belfagor arcidiavolo\").\nSome of his other work:\nOther works.\n\"Della Lingua\" (Italian for \"On the Language\") (1514), a dialogue about Italy's language is normally attributed to Machiavelli.\nMachiavelli's literary executor, Giuliano de' Ricci, also reported having seen that Machiavelli, his grandfather, made a comedy in the style of Aristophanes which included living Florentines as characters, and to be titled \"Le Maschere\". It has been suggested that due to such things as this and his style of writing to his superiors generally, there was very likely some animosity to Machiavelli even before the return of the Medici.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPolitical thought.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nItalian studies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEditions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCollections\nThe Prince\nThe Discourses on Livy\nThe Art of War\nFlorentine Histories\nCorrespondence\nPoetry and comedy"}
{"id": "21445", "revid": "754658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21445", "title": "November", "text": "Eleventh month in the Julian and Gregorian calendars\nNovember is the 11th and penultimate month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars. Its length is 30 days. November was the ninth month of the calendar of Romulus c.\u2009750 BC. November retained its name (from the Latin \"novem\" meaning \"nine\") when January and February were added to the Roman calendar.\nNovember is a month of late spring in the Southern Hemisphere and late autumn in the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, November in the Southern Hemisphere is the seasonal equivalent of May in the Northern Hemisphere and vice versa. In Ancient Rome, Ludi Plebeii was held from November 4\u201317, Epulum Jovis was held on November 13 and Brumalia celebrations began on November 24. These dates do not correspond to the modern Gregorian calendar.\nNovember was referred to as Bl\u014dtm\u014dna\u00fe by the Anglo-Saxons. Brumaire and Frimaire were the months on which November fell in the French Republican calendar.\nAstronomy.\nNovember meteor showers include the Andromedids, which occurs from September 25 to December 6 and generally peak around November 9\u201314, the Leonids, which occurs from November 15\u201320, the Alpha Monocerotids, which occurs from November 15\u201325 with the peak on November 21\u201322, the Northern Taurids, which occurs from October 20 to December 10, and the Southern Taurids, which occurs from September 10 \u2013 November 20, and the Phoenicids; which occur from November 29 to December 9 with the peak occurring on December 5\u20136. The Orionids, which occurs in late October, sometimes lasts into November.\nAstrology.\nThe Western zodiac signs for November are Scorpio (October 23 \u2013 November 21) and Sagittarius (November 22 \u2013 December 21).\nSymbols.\nNovember's birthstone is the topaz (particularly, yellow) which symbolizes friendship and the citrine. Its birth flower is the chrysanthemum.\nObservances.\n\"This list does not necessarily imply either official status or general observance.\"\nMovable.\nFirst Sunday\nFirst Monday\nTuesday after the first Monday\nFirst Wednesday\nFirst Thursday\nFirst Friday\nFirst Saturday\nSecond Sunday\nWeek of November 8\nWeek of November 11\nSecond Monday:\nSecond Saturday\nThird Sunday:\nThird week\nWeekdays of the third week\nWednesday of the third week\nThird Thursday\nThird Friday\nThird Friday until the next Monday\nSaturday before Fourth Thursday\nLast Week\nDay before fourth Thursday\nLast Wednesday\nFourth Thursday\nDay after fourth Thursday\nFourth Saturday\nSaturday after Thanksgiving\nFourth Sunday\nLast Sunday\nMonday after fourth Thursday in November\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21446", "revid": "21857263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21446", "title": "November 9", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 9 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar"}
{"id": "21447", "revid": "51063856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21447", "title": "November 11", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 11 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21448", "revid": "49708360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21448", "title": "November 27", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 27 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21449", "revid": "1104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21449", "title": "Nobel Prize for literature", "text": ""}
{"id": "21451", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21451", "title": "Nobel Prize in physics", "text": ""}
{"id": "21452", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21452", "title": "November 18", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 18 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21453", "revid": "3940708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21453", "title": "Neville Chamberlain", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1937 to 1940\nArthur Neville Chamberlain (; 18 March 1869\u00a0\u2013 9 November 1940) was a British politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from May 1937 to May 1940 and Leader of the Conservative Party from May 1937 to October 1940. He is best known for his foreign policy of appeasement, and in particular for his signing of the Munich Agreement on 30 September 1938, ceding the German-speaking Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia to Nazi Germany led by Adolf Hitler. Following the invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939, which marked the beginning of World War II, Chamberlain announced the declaration of war on Germany two days later and led the United Kingdom through the first eight months of the war until his resignation as prime minister on 10 May 1940.\nAfter working in business and local government, and after a short spell as Director of National Service in 1916 and 1917, Chamberlain followed his father Joseph Chamberlain and elder half-brother Austen Chamberlain in becoming a Member of Parliament in the 1918 general election for the new Birmingham Ladywood division at the age of 49. He declined a junior ministerial position, remaining a backbencher until 1922. He was rapidly promoted in 1923 to Minister of Health and then Chancellor of the Exchequer. After a short-lived Labour-led government, he returned as Minister of Health, introducing a range of reform measures from 1924 to 1929. He was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer in the National Government in 1931.\nChamberlain succeeded Stanley Baldwin as prime minister on 28 May 1937. His premiership was dominated by the question of policy towards an increasingly aggressive Germany, and his actions at Munich were widely popular among the British at the time. In response to Hitler's continued aggression, Chamberlain pledged the United Kingdom to defend Poland's independence if the latter were attacked, an alliance that brought his country into declaring war on Germany after it invaded Poland, which resulted in the \"Phoney War\", but not in any substantial assistance to Poland's fight against the aggression. The failure of Allied forces to prevent the German invasion of Norway caused the House of Commons to hold the Norway Debate in May 1940. Chamberlain's conduct of the war was heavily criticised by members of all parties and, in a vote of confidence, his government's majority was greatly reduced. Accepting that a national government supported by all the main parties was essential, Chamberlain resigned the premiership because the Labour and Liberal parties would not serve under his leadership. Although he still led the Conservative Party, he was succeeded as prime minister by his colleague Winston Churchill. Until ill health forced him to resign on 22 September 1940, Chamberlain was an important member of the war cabinet as Lord President of the Council, heading the government in Churchill's absence. His support for Churchill proved vital during the May 1940 war cabinet crisis. Chamberlain died aged 71 on 9 November of cancer, six months after leaving the premiership.\nChamberlain's reputation remains controversial among historians, the initial high regard for him being entirely eroded by books such as \"Guilty Men\", published in July 1940, which blamed Chamberlain and his associates for the Munich accord and for allegedly failing to prepare the country for war. Most historians in the generation following Chamberlain's death held similar views, led by Churchill in \"The Gathering Storm\". Some later historians have taken a more favourable perspective of Chamberlain and his policies, citing government papers released under the thirty-year rule and arguing that going to war with Germany in 1938 would have been disastrous as the UK was unprepared. Nonetheless, Chamberlain is still unfavourably ranked amongst British prime ministers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and political career (1869\u20131918).\nChildhood and businessman.\nArthur Neville Chamberlain was born on 18 March 1869 at a house called Southbourne in the Edgbaston district of Birmingham. He was the only son of the second marriage of Joseph Chamberlain, who later became Mayor of Birmingham and a Cabinet minister. His mother was Florence Kenrick, a cousin of William Kenrick MP; she died when he was a small boy. Joseph Chamberlain had had another son, Austen Chamberlain, by his first marriage. The Chamberlain family were Unitarian, though Joseph lost personal religious faith by the time Neville was six years old and never required religious adherence of his children. Neville, who disliked attending worship services of any kind and showed no interest in organised religion, described himself as a Unitarian with no stated faith and also a \"reverent agnostic\".\nNeville Chamberlain was educated at home by his elder sister Beatrice Chamberlain and later at Rugby School. Joseph Chamberlain then sent Neville to Mason College, now the University of Birmingham. Neville Chamberlain had little interest in his studies there, and in 1889 his father apprenticed him to a firm of accountants. Within six months he became a salaried employee. In an effort to recoup diminished family fortunes, Joseph Chamberlain sent his younger son to establish a sisal plantation on Andros Island in the Bahamas. Neville Chamberlain spent six years there but the plantation was a failure, and Joseph Chamberlain lost \u00a350,000 (equivalent to \u00a3 in 2023).\nOn his return to England, Neville Chamberlain entered business, purchasing (with assistance from his family) Hoskins &amp; Company, a manufacturer of metal ship berths. Chamberlain served as managing director of Hoskins for 17\u00a0years during which time the company prospered. He also involved himself in civic activities in Birmingham. In 1906, as Governor of Birmingham General Hospital, and along with \"no more than fifteen\" other dignitaries, Chamberlain became a founding member of the national United Hospitals Committee of the British Medical Association.\nAt forty, Chamberlain was expecting to remain a bachelor, but in 1910 he fell in love with Anne Cole, a recent connection by marriage, and married her the following year. They met through his Aunt Lilian, the Canadian-born widow of Joseph Chamberlain's brother Herbert, who in 1907 had married Anne Cole's uncle Alfred Clayton Cole, a director of the Bank of England.\nShe encouraged and supported his entry into local politics and was to be his constant companion, helper, and trusted colleague, fully sharing his interests in housing and other political and social activities after his election as an MP. The couple had a son and a daughter.\nEntry into politics.\nChamberlain initially showed little interest in politics, though his father and half-brother were in Parliament. During the \"Khaki election\" of 1900 he made speeches in support of Joseph Chamberlain's Liberal Unionists. The Liberal Unionists were allied with the Conservatives and later merged with them under the name \"Unionist Party\", which in 1925 became known as the \"Conservative and Unionist Party\". In 1911, Neville Chamberlain successfully stood as a Liberal Unionist for Birmingham City Council for the All Saints' Ward, located within his father's parliamentary constituency.\nChamberlain was made chairman of the Town Planning Committee. Under his direction, Birmingham soon adopted one of the first town planning schemes in Britain. The start of the First World War in 1914 prevented implementation of his plans. In 1915, Chamberlain became Lord Mayor of Birmingham. Apart from his father Joseph, five of Chamberlain's uncles had also attained the chief Birmingham civic dignity: they were Joseph's brother Richard Chamberlain, William and George Kenrick, Charles Beale, who had been four times Lord Mayor and Thomas Martineau. As a lord mayor in wartime, Chamberlain had a huge burden of work and he insisted that his councillors and officials work equally hard. He halved the lord mayor's expense allowance and cut back on the number of civic functions expected of the incumbent. In 1915, Chamberlain was appointed a member of the Central Control Board on liquor traffic.\nIn December 1916, Prime Minister David Lloyd George offered Chamberlain the new position of Director of National Service, with responsibility for co-ordinating conscription and ensuring that essential war industries were able to function with sufficient workforces. His tenure was marked by conflict with Lloyd George; in August 1917, having received little support from the Prime Minister, Chamberlain resigned. The relationship between Chamberlain and Lloyd George would, thereafter, be one of mutual hatred.\nChamberlain decided to stand for the House of Commons, and was adopted as Unionist candidate for Birmingham Ladywood. After the war ended, a general election was called almost immediately. The campaign in this constituency was notable because his Liberal Party opponent was Margery Corbett Ashby, one of the seventeen women who stood for Parliament at the first election at which women were eligible to do so. Chamberlain reacted to this intervention by being one of the few male candidates to specifically target women voters deploying his wife, issuing a special leaflet headed \"A word to the Ladies\" and holding two meetings in the afternoon. Chamberlain was elected with almost 70% of the vote and a majority of 6,833. He was 49 years old, which was at the time the greatest age at which any future prime minister had first been elected to the Commons.\nMP and minister (1919\u20131931).\nRise from the backbench.\nChamberlain threw himself into parliamentary work, begrudging the times when he was unable to attend debates and spending much time on committee work. He was chairman of the national Unhealthy Areas Committee (1919\u201321) and in that role, had visited the slums of London, Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool and Cardiff. Consequently, in March 1920, Bonar Law offered him a junior post at the Ministry of Health on behalf of the Prime Minister, but Chamberlain was unwilling to serve under Lloyd George and was offered no further posts during Lloyd George's premiership. When Law resigned as party leader, Austen Chamberlain took his place as head of the Unionists in Parliament. Unionist leaders were willing to fight the 1922 election in coalition with the Lloyd George National Liberals, but on 19 October, Unionist MPs held a meeting at which they voted to fight the election as a single party. Lloyd George resigned, as did Austen Chamberlain, and Law was recalled from retirement to lead the Unionists as prime minister.\nMany high-ranking Unionists refused to serve under Law to the benefit of Chamberlain, who rose over the course of ten months from backbencher to Chancellor of the Exchequer. Law initially appointed Chamberlain Postmaster General and Chamberlain was sworn of the Privy Council. When Arthur Griffith-Boscawen, the Minister of Health, lost his seat in the 1922 election and was defeated in a by-election in March 1923 by future home secretary James Chuter Ede, Law offered the position to Chamberlain. Two months later, Law was diagnosed with advanced, terminal throat cancer. He immediately resigned and was replaced by Chancellor of the Exchequer Stanley Baldwin. In August 1923, Baldwin promoted Chamberlain to the position of Chancellor of the Exchequer.\nChamberlain served only five months in the office before the Conservatives were defeated at the 1923 general election. Ramsay MacDonald became the first-ever Labour prime minister, but his government fell within months, necessitating another general election. By a margin of only 77 votes, Chamberlain narrowly defeated the Labour candidate, Oswald Mosley, who later led the British Union of Fascists. Believing he would lose if he stood again in Birmingham Ladywood, Chamberlain arranged to be adopted for Birmingham Edgbaston, the district of the city where he was born and which was a much safer seat, which he would hold for the rest of his life. The Unionists won the election, but Chamberlain declined to serve again as chancellor, preferring his former position as Minister of Health.\nWithin two weeks of his appointment as Minister of Health, Chamberlain presented the Cabinet with an agenda containing 25 pieces of legislation he hoped to see enacted. Before he left office in 1929, 21 of the 25 bills had passed into law. Chamberlain sought the abolition of the elected Poor Law Boards of Guardians which administered relief\u2014and which in some areas were responsible for rates. Many of the boards were controlled by Labour, and such boards had defied the government by distributing relief funds to the able-bodied unemployed. In 1929, Chamberlain initiated the Local Government Act 1929 to abolish the Poor Law boards entirely. Chamberlain spoke in the Commons for two and a half hours on the second reading of the bill, and when he concluded he was applauded by all parties. The bill was passed into law.\nThough Chamberlain struck a conciliatory note during the 1926 General Strike, in general he had poor relations with the Labour opposition. Future Labour prime minister Clement Attlee complained that Chamberlain \"always treated us like dirt,\" and in April 1927 Chamberlain wrote: \"More and more do I feel an utter contempt for their lamentable \"stupidity\".\" His poor relations with the Labour Party later played a major part in his downfall as prime minister.\nChancellor of the Exchequer (1931\u20131937).\nBaldwin called a general election for 30 May 1929, resulting in a hung parliament with Labour holding the most seats. Baldwin and his government resigned and Labour, under MacDonald, again took office. In 1931, the MacDonald government faced a serious crisis as the May Report revealed that the budget was unbalanced, with an expected shortfall of \u00a3120\u00a0million. The Labour government resigned on 24 August, and MacDonald formed a National Government supported by most Conservative MPs. Chamberlain once again returned to the Ministry of Health.\nAfter the 1931 general election, in which supporters of the National Government (mostly Conservatives) won an overwhelming victory, MacDonald designated Chamberlain as Chancellor of the Exchequer. Chamberlain proposed a 10% tariff on foreign goods and lower or no tariffs on goods from the colonies and the Dominions. Joseph Chamberlain had advocated a similar policy, \"Imperial Preference\"; Neville Chamberlain laid his bill before the House of Commons on 4 February 1932, and concluded his address by noting the appropriateness of his seeking to enact his father's proposal. At the end of the speech, Austen Chamberlain walked down from the backbenches and shook his brother's hand. The Import Duties Act 1932 passed Parliament easily.\nChamberlain presented his first budget in April 1932. He maintained the severe budget cuts that had been agreed at the inception of the National Government. Interest on the war debt was a major cost. Chamberlain reduced the annual interest rate on most of Britain's war debt from 5% to 3.5%. Between 1932 and 1938, Chamberlain halved the percentage of the budget devoted to interest on the war debt.\nWar debt.\nChamberlain hoped that a cancellation of the war debt owed to the United States could be negotiated. In June 1933, Britain hosted the World Monetary and Economic Conference, which came to nothing as US president Franklin D. Roosevelt sent word that he would not consider any war debt cancellation. By 1934, Chamberlain was able to declare a budget surplus and reverse many of the cuts in unemployment compensation and civil servant salaries he had made after taking office. He told the Commons, \"We have now finished the story of \"Bleak House\" and are sitting down this afternoon to enjoy the first chapter of \"Great Expectations\".\"\nWelfare spending.\nThe Unemployed Assistance Board (UAB, established by the Unemployment Act 1934) was largely Chamberlain's creation, and he wished to see the issue of unemployment assistance removed from party political argument. Moreover, Chamberlain \"saw the importance of 'providing some interest in life for the large numbers of men never likely to get work', and out of this realisation was to come the responsibility of the UAB for the 'welfare', not merely the maintenance, of the unemployed.\"\nDefence spending.\nDefence spending had been heavily cut in Chamberlain's early budgets. By 1935, faced with a resurgent Germany under Hitler's leadership, he was convinced of the need for rearmament. Chamberlain especially urged the strengthening of the Royal Air Force, realising that Britain's historical bulwark, the English Channel, was no defence against air power.\nIn 1935, MacDonald stood down as prime minister, and Baldwin became prime minister for the third time. In the 1935 general election, the Conservative-dominated National Government lost 90\u00a0seats from its massive 1931 majority, but still retained an overwhelming majority of 255 in the House of Commons. During the campaign, deputy Labour leader Arthur Greenwood had attacked Chamberlain for spending money on rearmament, saying that the rearmament policy was \"the merest scaremongering; disgraceful in a statesman of Mr Chamberlain's responsible position, to suggest that more millions of money needed to be spent on armaments.\"\nRole in the abdication crisis.\nChamberlain is believed to have had a significant role in the 1936 abdication crisis. He wrote in his diary that Wallis Simpson, Edward VIII's intended wife, was \"an entirely unscrupulous woman who is not in love with the King but is exploiting him for her own purposes. She has already ruined him in money and jewels\u00a0...\" In common with the rest of the Cabinet, except Duff Cooper, he agreed with Baldwin that the King should abdicate if he married Simpson, and on 6 December he and Baldwin both stressed that the King should make his decision before Christmas; by one account, he believed that the uncertainty was \"hurting the Christmas trade\". The King abdicated on 10 December, four days after the meeting.\nSoon after the abdication Baldwin announced that he would remain until shortly after the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. On 28 May, two weeks after the Coronation, Baldwin resigned, advising the King to send for Chamberlain. Austen did not live to see his brother's appointment as prime minister having died two months earlier.\nPremiership (1937\u20131940).\nAppointment.\nUpon his appointment, Chamberlain considered calling a general election, but with three and a half years remaining in the current Parliament's term he decided to wait. At 68 he was the second-oldest person in the 20th century (after Henry Campbell-Bannerman) to become prime minister for the first time, and was widely seen as a caretaker who would lead the Conservative Party until the next election and then step down in favour of a younger man, with Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden a likely candidate. From the start of Chamberlain's premiership a number of would-be successors were rumoured to be jockeying for the position.\nChamberlain had disliked what he considered to be the overly sentimental attitude of both Baldwin and MacDonald on Cabinet appointments and reshuffles. Although he had worked closely with the President of the Board of Trade, Walter Runciman, on the tariff issue, Chamberlain dismissed him from his post, instead offering him the token position of Lord Privy Seal, which an angry Runciman declined. Chamberlain thought Runciman, a member of the Liberal National Party, to be lazy. Soon after taking office Chamberlain instructed his ministers to prepare two-year policy programmes. These reports were to be integrated with the intent of co-ordinating the passage of legislation through the current Parliament, the term of which was to expire in November 1940.\nAt the time of his appointment, Chamberlain's personality was not well known to the public, though he had made annual budget broadcasts for six years. According to Chamberlain biographer Robert Self, these appeared relaxed and modern, showing an ability to speak directly to the camera. Chamberlain had few friends among his parliamentary colleagues; an attempt by his parliamentary private secretary, Lord Dunglass (later prime minister himself as Alec Douglas-Home), to bring him to the Commons Smoking Room to socialise with colleagues ended in embarrassing silence. Chamberlain compensated for these shortcomings by devising the most sophisticated press management system employed by a prime minister up to that time, with officials at Number 10, led by his chief of press George Steward, convincing members of the press that they were colleagues sharing power and insider knowledge, and should espouse the government line.\nDomestic policy.\nChamberlain saw his elevation to the premiership as the final glory in a career as a domestic reformer, not realising that he would be remembered for foreign policy decisions. One reason he sought the settlement of European issues was the hope it would allow him to concentrate on domestic affairs.\nSoon after attaining the premiership, Chamberlain obtained passage of the Factories Act 1937. This Act was aimed at bettering working conditions in factories, and placed limits on the working hours of women and children. In 1938, Parliament enacted the Coal Act 1938, which allowed for nationalisation of coal deposits. Another major law passed that year was the Holidays with Pay Act 1938. Though the Act only recommended that employers give workers a week off with pay, it led to a great expansion of holiday camps and other leisure accommodation for the working classes. \nThe Housing Act 1938 provided subsidies aimed at encouraging slum clearance and maintained rent control. Chamberlain's plans for the reform of local government were shelved because of the outbreak of war in 1939. Likewise, the raising of the school-leaving age to 15, scheduled for implementation on 1 September 1939, did not go into effect.\nRelations with Ireland.\nRelations between the United Kingdom and the Irish Free State had been strained since the 1932 appointment of \u00c9amon de Valera as President of the Executive Council. The Anglo-Irish Trade War, sparked by the withholding of money that Ireland had agreed to pay the United Kingdom, had caused economic losses on both sides, and the two nations were anxious for a settlement. The de Valera government also sought to sever the remaining ties between Ireland and the UK, such as ending the King's status as Irish Head of State. As chancellor, Chamberlain had taken a hard-line stance against concessions to the Irish, but as premier sought a settlement with Ireland, being persuaded that the strained ties were affecting relations with other Dominions.\nTalks had been suspended under Baldwin in 1936 but resumed in November 1937. De Valera sought not only to alter the constitutional status of Ireland, but to overturn other aspects of the Anglo-Irish Treaty, most notably the issue of partition, as well as obtaining full control of the three Treaty Ports which had remained in British control. Britain, on the other hand, wished to retain the Treaty Ports, at least in time of war, and to obtain the money that Ireland had agreed to pay.\nThe Irish proved very tough negotiators, so much so that Chamberlain complained that one of de Valera's offers had \"presented United Kingdom ministers with a three-leafed shamrock, none of the leaves of which had any advantages for the UK.\" With the talks facing deadlock, Chamberlain made the Irish a final offer in March 1938 which acceded to many Irish positions, though he was confident that he had \"only given up the small things\", and the agreements were signed on 25 April 1938. The issue of partition was not resolved, but the Irish agreed to pay \u00a310\u00a0million to the British. There was no provision in the treaties for British access to the Treaty Ports in time of war, but Chamberlain accepted de Valera's oral assurance that in the event of war the British would have access. Conservative backbencher Winston Churchill attacked the agreements in Parliament for surrendering the Treaty Ports, which he described as the \"sentinel towers of the Western Approaches\". When war came, de Valera denied Britain access to the Treaty Ports under Irish neutrality. Churchill railed against these treaties in \"The Gathering Storm\", stating that he \"never saw the House of Commons more completely misled\" and that \"members were made to feel very differently about it when our existence hung in the balance during the Battle of the Atlantic.\" Chamberlain believed that the Treaty Ports were unusable if Ireland was hostile, and deemed their loss worthwhile to assure friendly relations with Dublin.\nForeign policy.\nEarly days (May 1937 \u2013 March 1938).\nChamberlain sought to conciliate Germany and make the Nazi state a partner in a stable Europe. He believed Germany could be satisfied by the restoration of some of its colonies, and during the Rhineland crisis of March 1936 he had stated that \"if we were in sight of an all-round settlement the British government ought to consider the question\" of restoration of colonies.\nThe new prime minister's attempts to secure such a settlement were frustrated because Germany was in no hurry to talk to Britain. Foreign Minister Konstantin von Neurath was supposed to visit Britain in July 1937 but cancelled his visit. Lord Halifax, the Lord President of the Council, visited Germany privately in November and met Hitler and other German officials. Both Chamberlain and British Ambassador to Germany Nevile Henderson pronounced the visit a success. Foreign Office officials complained that the Halifax visit made it appear Britain was too eager for talks, and the Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden, felt that he had been bypassed.\nChamberlain also bypassed Eden while the latter was on holiday by opening direct talks with Italy, an international pariah for its invasion and conquest of Ethiopia. At a Cabinet meeting on 8 September 1937, Chamberlain indicated that he saw \"the lessening of the tension between this country and Italy as a very valuable contribution toward the pacification and appeasement of Europe\" which would \"weaken the Rome\u2013Berlin axis.\" Chamberlain also set up a private line of communication with the Italian \"Duce\" Benito Mussolini through the Italian Ambassador, Count Dino Grandi.\nIn February 1938, Hitler began to press the Austrian government to accept \"Anschluss\" or joining Germany and Austria into a single state. Chamberlain believed that it was essential to cement relations with Italy in the hope that an Anglo\u2013Italian alliance would forestall Hitler from imposing his rule over Austria. Eden believed that Chamberlain was being too hasty in talking with Italy and holding out the prospect of \"de jure\" recognition of Italy's conquest of Ethiopia. Chamberlain concluded that Eden would have to accept his policy or resign. The Cabinet heard both men out but unanimously decided for Chamberlain, and despite efforts by other Cabinet members to prevent it, Eden resigned from office. In later years, Eden tried to portray his resignation as a stand against appeasement (Churchill described him in \"The Second World War\" as \"one strong young figure standing up against long, dismal, drawling tides of drift and surrender\") but many ministers and MPs believed there was no issue at stake worth resignation. Chamberlain appointed Lord Halifax as foreign secretary in Eden's place.\nRoad to Munich (March 1938 \u2013 September 1938).\nIn March 1938, Austria became a part of Germany in the \"Anschluss\". Though some Austrians requested help from Britain, none was forthcoming. Britain did send Berlin a strong note of protest without specifying any actual action that the British government might take. In addressing the Cabinet shortly after German forces crossed the border, Chamberlain placed blame on both Germany and Austria. Chamberlain noted,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is perfectly evident now that force is the only argument Germany understands and that \"collective security\" cannot offer any prospect of preventing such events until it can show a visible force of overwhelming strength backed by the determination to use it.\u00a0... Heaven knows I don't want to get back to alliances but if Germany continues to behave as she has done lately she may drive us to it.\nOn 14 March, the day after the \"Anschluss\", Chamberlain addressed the House of Commons and strongly condemned the methods used by the Germans in the takeover of Austria. Chamberlain's address met with the approval of the House.\nWith Austria absorbed by Germany, attention turned to Hitler's obvious next target, the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia. With three million ethnic Germans, the Sudetenland represented the largest German population outside the \"Reich\" and Hitler began to call for the union of the region with Germany. Britain had no military obligations toward Czechoslovakia, but France and Czechoslovakia had a mutual assistance pact and both the French and Czechoslovaks also had an alliance with the Soviet Union. After the fall of Austria, the Cabinet's Foreign Policy Committee considered seeking a \"grand alliance\" to thwart Germany or, alternatively, an assurance to France of assistance if the French went to war. Instead, the committee chose to advocate that Czechoslovakia be urged to make the best terms it could with Germany. The full Cabinet agreed with the committee's recommendation, influenced by a report from the chiefs of staff stating that there was little that Britain could do to help the Czechs in the event of a German invasion. Chamberlain reported to an amenable House that he was unwilling to limit his government's discretion by giving commitments.\nBritain and Italy signed an agreement on 16 April 1938. In exchange for \"de jure\" recognition of Italy's Ethiopian conquest, Italy agreed to withdraw some Italian \"volunteers\" from the Nationalist (pro-Franco) side of the Spanish Civil War. By this point, the Nationalists strongly had the upper hand in that conflict, and they completed their victory the following year. Later that month, the new French prime minister, \u00c9douard Daladier, came to London for talks with Chamberlain, and agreed to follow the British position on Czechoslovakia.\nIn May, Czech border guards shot two Sudeten German farmers who were trying to cross the border from Germany into Czechoslovakia without stopping for border controls. This incident caused unrest among the Sudeten Germans, and Germany was then said to be moving troops to the border. In response to the report, Prague moved troops to the German border. Halifax sent a note to Germany warning that if France intervened in the crisis on Czechoslovakia's behalf, Britain might support France. Tensions appeared to calm, and Chamberlain and Halifax were applauded for their \"masterly\" handling of the crisis. Though it was not known at the time, it later became clear that Germany had had no plans for a May invasion of Czechoslovakia. Nonetheless, the Chamberlain government received strong and almost unanimous support from the British press.\nNegotiations between the Czech government and the Sudeten Germans dragged on through mid-1938. They achieved little result; Sudeten leader Konrad Henlein was under private instructions from Hitler not to reach an agreement. On 3 August, Walter Runciman (by now Lord Runciman) travelled to Prague as a mediator sent by the British government. Over the next two weeks, Runciman met separately with Henlein, Czechoslovak president Edvard Bene\u0161, and other leaders, but made no progress. On 30 August, Chamberlain met his Cabinet and Ambassador Henderson and secured their backing\u2014with only First Lord of the Admiralty Duff Cooper dissenting against Chamberlain's policy to pressure Czechoslovakia into making concessions, on the grounds that Britain was then in no position to back up any threat to go to war.\nChamberlain realised that Hitler would likely signal his intentions in his 12 September speech at the annual Nuremberg Rally, and so he discussed with his advisors how to respond if war seemed likely. In consultation with his close advisor Horace Wilson, Chamberlain set out \"Plan Z\". If war seemed inevitable, Chamberlain would fly to Germany to negotiate directly with Hitler.\nSeptember 1938: Munich.\nPreliminary meetings.\nLord Runciman continued his attempts to pressure the Czechoslovak government into concessions. On 7 September there was an altercation involving Sudeten members of the Czechoslovak parliament in the North Moravian city of Ostrava (\"M\u00e4hrisch-Ostrau\" in German). The Germans made considerable propaganda out of the incident, though the Prague government tried to conciliate them by dismissing Czech police who had been involved. As the tempest grew, Runciman concluded that there was no point in attempting further negotiations until after Hitler's speech. The mission never resumed.\nThere was tremendous tension in the final days before Hitler's speech on the last day of the Rally, as Britain, France, and Czechoslovakia all partially mobilised their troops. Thousands gathered outside 10 Downing Street on the night of the speech. At last Hitler addressed his wildly enthusiastic followers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The condition of the Sudeten Germans is indescribable. It is sought to annihilate them. As human beings they are oppressed and scandalously treated in an intolerable fashion\u00a0... The depriving of these people of their rights must come to an end.\u00a0... I have stated that the \"Reich\" would not tolerate any further oppression of these three and a half million Germans, and I would ask the statesmen of foreign countries to be convinced that this is no mere form of words.\nThe following morning, 13 September, Chamberlain and the Cabinet were informed by Secret Service sources that all German embassies had been told that Germany would invade Czechoslovakia on 25 September. Convinced that the French would not fight (Daladier was privately proposing a three-Power summit to settle the Sudeten question), Chamberlain decided to implement \"Plan Z\" and sent a message to Hitler that he was willing to come to Germany to negotiate. Hitler accepted and Chamberlain flew to Germany on the morning of 15 September; this was the first time, excepting a short jaunt at an industrial fair, that Chamberlain had ever flown. Chamberlain flew to Munich and then travelled by rail to Hitler's retreat at Berchtesgaden (see Berchtesgaden meeting).\nThe face-to-face meeting lasted about three hours. Hitler demanded the annexation of the Sudetenland, and through questioning him, Chamberlain was able to obtain assurances that Hitler had no designs on the remainder of Czechoslovakia or on the areas in Eastern Europe which had German minorities. After the meeting Chamberlain returned to London, believing that he had obtained a breathing space during which agreement could be reached and the peace preserved. Under the proposals made at Berchtesgaden the Sudetenland would be annexed by Germany if a plebiscite in the Sudetenland favoured it. Czechoslovakia would receive international guarantees of its independence which would replace existing treaty obligations\u2014principally the French pledge to the Czechoslovaks. The French agreed to the requirements. Under considerable pressure the Czechoslovaks also agreed, causing the Czechoslovak government to fall.\nChamberlain flew back to Germany, meeting Hitler in Bad Godesberg on 22 September. Hitler brushed aside the proposals of the previous meeting, saying \"that won't do any more\". Hitler demanded immediate occupation of the Sudetenland and that Polish and Hungarian territorial claims on Czechoslovakia be addressed. Chamberlain objected strenuously, telling Hitler that he had worked to bring the French and Czechoslovaks into line with Germany's demands, so much so that he had been accused of giving in to dictators and had been booed on his departure that morning. Hitler was unmoved.\nThat evening, Chamberlain told Lord Halifax that the \"meeting with Herr Hitler had been most unsatisfactory\". The following day, Hitler kept Chamberlain waiting until mid-afternoon, when he sent a five-page letter, in German, outlining the demands he had made orally the previous day. Chamberlain replied by offering to act as an intermediary with the Czechoslovaks, and suggested that Hitler put his demands in a memorandum which could be circulated to the French and Czechoslovaks.\nThe leaders met again late on the evening of 23 September\u2014a meeting that stretched into the early morning hours. Hitler demanded that fleeing Czechs in the zones to be occupied take nothing with them. He extended his deadline for occupation of the Sudetenland to 1 October\u2014the date he had long before secretly set for the invasion of Czechoslovakia. The meeting ended amicably, with Chamberlain confiding to Hitler his hopes they would be able to work out other problems in Europe in the same spirit. Hitler hinted that the Sudetenland fulfilled his territorial ambitions in Europe. Chamberlain flew back to London, saying \"It is up to the Czechs now.\"\nMunich conference.\nHitler's proposals met with resistance not only from the French and Czechoslovaks, but also from some members of Chamberlain's cabinet. With no agreement in sight, war seemed inevitable. Chamberlain issued a press statement calling on Germany to abandon the threat of force in exchange for British help in obtaining the concessions it sought. On the evening of 27 September, Chamberlain addressed the nation by radio, and after thanking those who wrote to him, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How horrible, fantastic, incredible it is that we should be digging trenches and trying on gas-masks here because of a quarrel in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing. It seems still more impossible that a quarrel that has already been settled in principle should be the subject of war.\nOn 28 September, Chamberlain called on Hitler to invite him to Germany again to seek a solution through a summit involving the British, French, Germans, and Italians. Hitler replied favourably, and word of this response came to Chamberlain as he was winding up a speech in the House of Commons which sat in gloomy anticipation of war. Chamberlain informed the House of this in his speech. The response was a passionate demonstration, with members cheering Chamberlain wildly. Even diplomats in the galleries applauded. Lord Dunglass later commented, \"There were a lot of appeasers in Parliament that day.\"\nOn the morning of 29 September Chamberlain left Heston Aerodrome (to the east of today's Heathrow Airport) for his third and final visit to Germany. On arrival in Munich the British delegation was taken directly to the \"F\u00fchrerbau\", where Daladier, Mussolini, and Hitler soon arrived. The four leaders and their translators held an informal meeting; Hitler said that he intended to invade Czechoslovakia on 1 October. Mussolini distributed a proposal similar to Hitler's Bad Godesberg terms. In reality, the proposal had been drafted by German officials and transmitted to Rome the previous day. The four leaders debated the draft and Chamberlain raised the question of compensation for the Czechoslovak government and citizens, but Hitler refused to consider this.\nThe leaders were joined by advisors after lunch, and hours were spent on long discussions of each clause of the \"Italian\" draft agreement. Late that evening the British and French left for their hotels, saying that they had to seek advice from their respective capitals. Meanwhile, the Germans and Italians enjoyed the feast which Hitler had intended for all the participants. During this break, Chamberlain advisor Horace Wilson met with the Czechoslovaks; he informed them of the draft agreement and asked which districts were particularly important to them. The conference resumed at about 10\u00a0pm and was mostly in the hands of a small drafting committee. At 1:30\u00a0am the Munich Agreement was ready for signing, though the signing ceremony was delayed when Hitler discovered that the ornate inkwell on his desk was empty.\nChamberlain and Daladier returned to their hotel and informed the Czechoslovaks of the agreement. The two prime ministers urged quick acceptance by the Czechoslovaks of the agreement, since the evacuation by the Czechs was to begin the following day. At 12:30\u00a0pm the Czechoslovak government in Prague objected to the decision but agreed to its terms.\nAftermath and reception.\nBefore leaving the \"F\u00fchrerbau\", Chamberlain requested a private conference with Hitler. Hitler agreed, and the two met at Hitler's apartment in the city later that morning. Chamberlain urged restraint in the implementation of the agreement and requested that the Germans not bomb Prague if the Czechs resisted, to which Hitler seemed agreeable. Chamberlain took from his pocket a paper headed \"Anglo\u2013German Agreement\", which contained three paragraphs, including a statement that the two nations considered the Munich Agreement \"symbolic of the desire of our two peoples never to go to war again.\" According to Chamberlain, Hitler interjected \"Ja! Ja!\" (\"Yes! Yes!\"). The two men signed the paper then and there. When, later that day, German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop remonstrated with Hitler for signing it, the F\u00fchrer replied, \"Oh, don't take it so seriously. That piece of paper is of no further significance whatever.\" Chamberlain, on the other hand, patted his breast pocket when he returned to his hotel for lunch and said, \"I've got it!\" Word leaked of the outcome of the meetings before Chamberlain's return, causing delight among many in London but gloom for Churchill and his supporters.\nChamberlain returned to London in triumph. Large crowds mobbed Heston, where he was met by the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Clarendon, who gave him a letter from King George VI assuring him of the Empire's lasting gratitude and urging him to come straight to Buckingham Palace to report. The streets were so packed with cheering people that it took Chamberlain an hour and a half to journey the from Heston to the Palace. After reporting to the King, Chamberlain and his wife appeared on the Palace balcony with the King and Queen. He then went to Downing Street; both the street and the front hall of Number 10 were packed. As he headed upstairs to address the crowd from a first-floor window, someone called to him, \"Neville, go up to the window and say 'peace for our time'.\" Chamberlain turned around and responded, \"No, I don't do that sort of thing.\" Nevertheless, in his statement to the crowd, Chamberlain recalled the words of his predecessor, Benjamin Disraeli, upon the latter's return from the Congress of Berlin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; My good friends, this is the second time there has come back from Germany to Downing Street peace with honour. I believe it is peace for our time. We thank you from the bottom of our hearts. Now I recommend you go home, and sleep quietly in your beds.\nKing George issued a statement to his people, \"After the magnificent efforts of the Prime Minister in the cause of peace it is my fervent hope that a new era of friendship and prosperity may be dawning among the peoples of the world.\" When the King met Duff Cooper, who resigned as First Lord of the Admiralty over the Munich Agreement, he told Cooper that he respected people who had the courage of their convictions, but could not agree with him. He wrote to his mother, Queen Mary, that \"the Prime Minister was delighted with the results of his mission, as are we all.\" She responded to her son with anger against those who spoke against Chamberlain: \"He brought home peace, why can't they be grateful?\" Most newspapers supported Chamberlain uncritically, and he received thousands of gifts, from a silver dinner service to many of his trademark umbrellas.\nThe Commons discussed the Munich Agreement on 3 October. Though Cooper opened by setting forth the reasons for his resignation and Churchill spoke harshly against the pact, no Conservative voted against the government. Only between 20 and 30 abstained, including Churchill, Eden, Cooper, and Harold Macmillan.\nPath to war (October 1938 \u2013 August 1939).\nIn the aftermath of Munich, Chamberlain continued to pursue a course of cautious rearmament. He told the Cabinet in early October 1938, \"[I]t would be madness for the country to stop rearming until we were convinced that other countries would act in the same way. For the time being, therefore, we should relax no particle of effort until our deficiencies had been made good.\" Later in October, he resisted calls to put industry on a war footing, convinced that such an action would show Hitler that Chamberlain had decided to abandon Munich. Chamberlain hoped that the understanding he had signed with Hitler at Munich would lead toward a general settlement of European disputes, but Hitler expressed no public interest in following up on the accord. Having considered a general election immediately following Munich, Chamberlain instead reshuffled his Cabinet. By the end of the year, public concerns caused Chamberlain to conclude that \"to get rid of this uneasy and disgruntled House of Commons by a General Election\" would be \"suicidal\".\nDespite Hitler's relative quietness as the \"Reich\" absorbed the Sudetenland, foreign policy concerns continued to preoccupy Chamberlain. He made trips to Paris and Rome, hoping to persuade the French to hasten their rearmament and Mussolini to be a positive influence on Hitler. Several of his Cabinet members, led by Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax, began to draw away from the appeasement policy. Halifax was by now convinced that Munich, though \"better than a European war,\" had been \"a horrid business and humiliating\". Public revulsion over the pogrom of \"Kristallnacht\" on 9 November 1938 made any attempt at a \"rapprochement\" with Hitler unacceptable, though Chamberlain did not abandon his hopes.\nStill hoping for reconciliation with Germany, Chamberlain made a major speech in Birmingham on 28 January 1939, in which he expressed his desire for international peace, and had an advance copy sent to Hitler at Berchtesgaden. Hitler seemed to respond; in his \"Reichstag\" speech on 30 January 1939, he stated that he wanted a \"long peace\". Chamberlain was confident that improvements in British defence since Munich would bring the dictator to the bargaining table. This belief was reinforced by a German official's conciliatory speech welcoming Ambassador Henderson back to Berlin after an absence for medical treatment in Britain. Chamberlain responded with a speech in Blackburn on 22 February hoping that the nations would resolve their differences through trade, and was gratified when his comments were printed in German newspapers. With matters appearing to improve, Chamberlain's rule over the House of Commons was firm and he was convinced the government would \"romp home\" in a late 1939 election.\nOn 15 March 1939, Germany invaded the Czech provinces of Bohemia and Moravia, including Prague. Though Chamberlain's initial parliamentary response was, according to biographer Nick Smart, \"feeble\", within 48\u00a0hours he had spoken more forcefully against the German aggression. In another Birmingham speech, on 17 March, Chamberlain warned that Hitler was attempting to \"dominate the world by force\" and that \"no greater mistake could be made than to suppose that because it believes war to be a senseless and cruel thing the nation has so lost its fibre that it will not take part to the utmost of its power in resisting such a challenge if it were ever made.\" The Prime Minister questioned whether the invasion of Czechoslovakia was \"the end of an old adventure, or the beginning of a new\" and whether it was \"a step in the direction of an attempt to dominate the world by force.\" Colonial Secretary Malcolm MacDonald said, \"whereas the Prime Minister was once a strong advocate of peace, he has now definitely swung around to the war point of view.\" This speech was met with widespread approval in Britain and recruitment for the armed services increased considerably.\nChamberlain set out to build an interlocking series of defence pacts among the remaining European countries as a means of deterring Hitler from war. He sought an agreement among Britain, France, the USSR, and Poland, whereby the first three would go to the assistance of Poland if her independence were threatened, but Polish mistrust of the Soviet Union caused those negotiations to fail. Instead, on 31 March 1939, Chamberlain informed an approving House of Commons of British and French guarantees that they would lend Poland all possible aid in the event of any action which threatened Polish independence. In the ensuing debate, Eden stated that the nation was now united behind the government. Even Churchill and Lloyd George praised Chamberlain's government for issuing the guarantee to Poland.\nThe Prime Minister took other steps to deter Hitler from aggression. He doubled the size of the Territorial Army, created a Ministry of Supply to expedite the provision of equipment to the armed forces, and instituted peacetime conscription. The Italian invasion of Albania on 7 April 1939 led to guarantees being given to Greece and Romania. On 17 June 1939, Handley Page received an order for 200 Hampden twin-engined medium bombers, and by 3 September 1939, the chain of radar stations girding the British coast was fully operational.\nChamberlain was reluctant to seek a military alliance with the Soviet Union; he distrusted Joseph Stalin ideologically and felt that there was little to gain, given the recent massive purges in the Red Army. Much of his Cabinet favoured such an alliance, and when Poland withdrew her objection to an Anglo\u2013Soviet alliance, Chamberlain had little choice but to proceed. The talks with Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov, to which Britain sent only a low-level delegation, dragged on over several months and eventually foundered on 14 August 1939 when Poland and Romania refused to allow Soviet troops to be stationed on their territories. A week after the failure of these talks, the Soviet Union and Germany signed the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, committing the countries to non-aggression toward each other. A secret agreement divided up Poland in the event of war. Chamberlain had disregarded rumours of a Soviet\u2013German \"rapprochement\" and was dismissive of the publicly announced pact, stating that it in no way affected British obligations toward Poland. On 23 August 1939, Chamberlain had Henderson deliver a letter to Hitler telling him that Britain was fully prepared to comply with its obligations to Poland. Hitler instructed his generals to prepare for an invasion of Poland, telling them, \"Our enemies are small worms. I saw them at Munich.\"\nWar leader (1939\u20131940).\nDeclaration of war.\nGermany invaded Poland in the early morning of 1 September 1939. The British Cabinet met late that morning and issued a warning to Germany that unless it withdrew from Polish territory the UK would carry out its obligations to Poland. When the House of Commons met at 6:00\u00a0pm, Chamberlain and Labour deputy leader Arthur Greenwood (deputising for the sick Clement Attlee) entered the chamber to loud cheers. Chamberlain spoke emotionally, laying the blame for the conflict on Hitler.\nNo formal declaration of war was immediately made. French foreign minister Georges Bonnet stated that France could do nothing until its parliament met on the evening of 2 September. Bonnet was trying to rally support for a Munich-style summit proposed by the Italians to be held on 5 September. The British Cabinet demanded that Hitler be given an ultimatum at once and if troops were not withdrawn by the end of 2 September, war would be declared forthwith. Chamberlain and Halifax were convinced by Bonnet's pleas, from Paris, that France needed more time for mobilisation and evacuation. Chamberlain postponed the expiry of the ultimatum which had, in fact, not yet been served. Chamberlain's lengthy statement to the House of Commons made no mention of an ultimatum and was consequently poorly received by the House. When Greenwood rose to \"speak for the working classes,\" Conservative backbencher and former First Lord of the Admiralty Leo Amery shouted, \"Speak for England, Arthur!\" implying that the Prime Minister was not doing so. Chamberlain replied that telephone difficulties were making it hard to communicate with Paris and tried to dispel fears that the French were weakening. He had little success; too many members knew of Bonnet's efforts. National Labour MP and diarist Harold Nicolson later wrote, \"In those few minutes he flung away his reputation.\" The seeming delay gave rise to fears that Chamberlain would again seek a settlement with Hitler. Chamberlain's last peacetime Cabinet met at 11:30 that night, with a thunderstorm raging outside, and determined that the ultimatum would be presented in Berlin at nine o'clock the following morning\u2014to expire two hours later, before the House of Commons convened at noon. At 11:15\u00a0am, 3 September 1939, Chamberlain addressed the nation by radio, stating that the United Kingdom was at war with Germany:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am speaking to you from the Cabinet Room at 10, Downing Street. This morning the British Ambassador in Berlin handed the German Government a final Note stating that unless we heard from them by 11 0'clock that they were prepared at once to withdraw their troops from Poland a state of war would exist between us. I have to tell you now that no such undertaking has been received, and that consequently this country is at war with Germany.\nYou can imagine what a bitter blow it is to me that all my long struggle to win peace has failed. Yet I cannot believe that there is anything more or anything different that I could have done and that would have been more successful.\nUp to the very last it would have been quite possible to have arranged a peaceful and honourable settlement between Germany and Poland. But Hitler would not have it. He had evidently made up his mind to attack Poland whatever happened, and although he now says he put forward reasonable proposals which were rejected by the Poles, that is not a true statement.\nThe proposals were never shown to the Poles, nor to us, and, though they were announced in a German broadcast on Thursday night, Hitler did not wait to hear comments on them, but ordered his troops to cross the Polish frontier. His action shows convincingly that there is no chance of expecting that this man will ever give up his practice of using force to gain his will. He can only be stopped by force.\nWe and France are to-day, in fulfillment of our obligations, going to the aid of Poland, who is so bravely resisting this wicked and unprovoked attack upon her people. We have a clear conscience. We have done all that any country could do to establish peace, but a situation in which no word given by Germany's ruler could be trusted and no people or country could feel themselves safe had become intolerable. And now that we have resolved to finish it, I know that you will all play your part with calmness and courage.\nThat afternoon Chamberlain addressed the House of Commons' first Sunday session in over 120 years. He spoke to a quiet House in a statement which even opponents termed \"restrained and therefore effective\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everything that I have worked for, everything that I have hoped for, everything that I have believed in during my public life has crashed into ruins. There is only one thing left for me to do: that is devote what strength and power I have to forwarding the victory of the cause for which we have sacrificed so much.\n\"Phoney War\".\nChamberlain instituted a War Cabinet and invited the Labour and Liberal parties to join his government, but they declined. He restored Churchill to the Cabinet as First Lord of the Admiralty, with a seat in the War Cabinet. Chamberlain also gave Eden a government post (dominions secretary) but not a seat in the small War Cabinet. The new First Lord deluged the Prime Minister with a sea of lengthy memos. Chamberlain castigated Churchill for sending so many memos, as the two met in War Cabinet every day. Chamberlain suspected, correctly as it proved after the war, that \"these letters are for the purpose of quotation in the Book that he will write hereafter.\" Chamberlain also deterred some of Churchill's plans, such as Operation Catherine, which would have sent three heavily armoured battleships into the Baltic Sea with an aircraft carrier and other support vessels as a means of stopping shipments of iron ore to Germany. With the naval war the only significant front involving the British in the early months of the conflict, the First Lord's obvious desire to wage a ruthless, victorious war established him as a leader-in-waiting in the public consciousness and among parliamentary colleagues.\nWith little land action in the west, the initial months of the war were dubbed the \"Bore War\", later renamed the \"Phoney War\" by journalists. Chamberlain, in common with most Allied officials and generals, felt the war could be won relatively quickly by keeping economic pressure on Germany through a blockade while continuing rearmament. The Prime Minister was reluctant to go too far in altering the British economy. The government submitted an emergency war budget about which Chamberlain stated, \"the only thing that matters is to win the war, though we may go bankrupt in the process.\" Government expenditures rose by little more than the rate of inflation between September 1939 and March 1940. Despite these difficulties, Chamberlain still enjoyed approval ratings as high as 68% and almost 60% in April 1940.\nDownfall.\nIn early 1940 the Allies approved a naval campaign designed to seize the northern part of Norway, a neutral country, including the key port of Narvik, and possibly also to seize the iron mines at G\u00e4llivare in northern Sweden, from which Germany obtained much of its iron ore. As the Baltic froze in winter, the iron ore was then sent south by ship from Narvik. The Allies planned to begin by mining Norwegian waters, thus provoking a German reaction in Norway, and then would occupy much of the country. Unforeseen by the Allies, Germany had also planned to occupy Norway, and on 9 April German troops occupied Denmark and began an invasion of Norway. German forces quickly overran much of the country. The Allies sent troops to Norway, but they met with little success, and on 26 April the War Cabinet ordered a withdrawal. The Prime Minister's opponents decided to turn the adjournment debate for the Whitsun recess into a challenge to Chamberlain, who soon heard about the plan. After initial anger, Chamberlain determined to fight.\nWhat became known as the \"Norway Debate\" opened on 7 May, and lasted for two days. The initial speeches, including Chamberlain's, were nondescript, but Admiral of the Fleet Roger Keyes, member for Portsmouth North, in full uniform, delivered a withering attack on the conduct of the Norway campaign, though he excluded Churchill from criticism. Leo Amery then delivered a speech which he concluded by echoing Oliver Cromwell's words on dissolving the Long Parliament: \"You have sat here too long for any good you are doing. Depart, I say, and let us have done with you. In the name of God, go!\" When Labour announced that they would call for a division of the House of Commons, Chamberlain called upon his \"friends\u2014and I still have some friends in this House\u2014to support the Government tonight.\" Because the use of the word \"friends\" was a conventional term to refer to party colleagues, and, according to biographer Robert Self, many MPs took it that way, it was an \"error of judgment\" for Chamberlain to refer to party loyalty \"when the gravity of the war situation required national unity.\" Lloyd George joined the attackers, and Churchill concluded the debate with a vigorous speech in support of the government. When the division took place, the government, which had a normal majority of over 200, prevailed by only 81, with 38\u00a0MPs in receipt of the government whip voting against it, with between 20 and 25 abstaining.\nChamberlain spent much of 9 May in meetings with his Cabinet colleagues. Many Conservative MPs, even those who had voted against the government, indicated on 9 May and in the days following that they did not wish Chamberlain to depart but rather would seek to reconstruct his government. Chamberlain decided that he would resign unless the Labour Party was willing to join his government, and so he met with Attlee later that day. Attlee was unwilling, but agreed to consult his National Executive then meeting in Bournemouth. Chamberlain favoured Halifax as the next prime minister, but Halifax proved reluctant to press his own claims thinking that his position in the House of Lords would limit his effectiveness in the House of Commons, and Churchill emerged as the choice. The following day, Germany invaded the Low Countries and Chamberlain considered remaining in office. Attlee confirmed that Labour would not serve under Chamberlain, though they were willing to serve under someone else. Accordingly, Chamberlain went to Buckingham Palace to resign and advise the King to send for Churchill. Churchill later expressed gratitude to Chamberlain for not advising the King to send for Halifax, who would have commanded the support of most government MPs. In a resignation broadcast that evening, Chamberlain told the nation,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the hour has now come when we are to be put to the test, as the innocent people of Holland, Belgium, and France are being tested already. And you and I must rally behind our new leader, and with our united strength, and with unshakable courage fight, and work until this wild beast, which has sprung out of his lair upon us, has been finally disarmed and overthrown.\nQueen Elizabeth told Chamberlain that her daughter, Princess Elizabeth, wept as she heard the broadcast. Churchill wrote to express his gratitude for Chamberlain's willingness to stand by him in the nation's hour of need, and Baldwin, the only living former prime minister besides Chamberlain and Lloyd George, wrote, \"You have passed through fire since we were talking together only a fortnight ago, and you have come out pure gold.\"\nLord President of the Council.\nIn a departure from usual practice, Chamberlain did not issue any resignation Honours list. With Chamberlain remaining leader of the Conservative Party, and with many MPs still supporting him and distrusting the new prime minister, Churchill refrained from any purge of Chamberlain loyalists. Churchill wished Chamberlain to return to the Exchequer, but he declined, convinced that this would lead to difficulties with the Labour Party. Instead, he accepted the post of Lord President of the Council with a seat in the shrunken five-member War Cabinet. When Chamberlain entered the House of Commons on 13 May 1940, for the first time since his resignation, \"MPs lost their heads, they shouted, they cheered, they waved their order papers, and his reception was a regular ovation.\" The House received Churchill coolly; some of his great speeches to the chamber, such as \"We shall fight on the beaches,\" met with only half-hearted enthusiasm.\nChamberlain's fall from power left him deeply depressed; he wrote, \"Few men can have known such a reversal of fortune in so short a time.\" He especially regretted the loss of Chequers as \"a place where I have been so happy,\" though after a farewell visit there by the Chamberlains on 19 June, he wrote, \"I am content now that I have done that, and shall put Chequers out of my mind.\" As lord president, Chamberlain assumed vast responsibilities over domestic issues and chaired the War Cabinet during Churchill's many absences. Attlee later remembered him as \"free from any of the rancour he might have felt against us. He worked very hard and well: a good chairman, a good committeeman, always very businesslike.\" As chairman of the Lord President's Committee, he exerted great influence over the wartime economy. Halifax reported to the War Cabinet on 26 May 1940, with the Low Countries conquered and French prime minister Paul Reynaud warning that France might have to sign an armistice, that diplomatic contacts with a still-neutral Italy offered the possibility of a negotiated peace. Halifax urged following up and seeing if a worthwhile offer could be obtained. The battle over the course of action within the war cabinet lasted three days; Chamberlain's statement on the final day, that there was unlikely to be an acceptable offer and that the matter should not be pursued at that time, helped persuade the War Cabinet to reject negotiations.\nTwice in May 1940, Churchill broached the subject of bringing Lloyd George into the government. Each time, Chamberlain indicated that due to their longtime antipathy he would immediately retire if Lloyd George were appointed a minister. Churchill did not appoint Lloyd George, but brought up the subject with Chamberlain again early in June. This time, Chamberlain agreed to Lloyd George's appointment provided Lloyd George gave a personal assurance to put aside the feud. Lloyd George declined to serve in Churchill's government.\nChamberlain worked to bring his Conservative Party in line behind Churchill, working with the Chief Whip, David Margesson, to overcome members' suspicions and dislikes of the Prime Minister. On 4 July, after the British attack on the French fleet, Churchill entered the chamber to a great cheer from Conservative MPs orchestrated by the two, and the Prime Minister was almost overcome with emotion at the first cheer he had received from his own party's benches since May. Churchill returned the loyalty, refusing to consider Labour and Liberal attempts to expel Chamberlain from the government. When criticisms of Chamberlain appeared in the press, and when Chamberlain learned that Labour intended to use an upcoming secret session of Parliament as a platform to attack him, he told Churchill that he could only defend himself by attacking Labour. The Prime Minister intervened with the Labour Party and the press and the criticism ceased, according to Chamberlain, \"like turning off a tap\".\nIn July 1940, a polemic titled \"Guilty Men\" was released by \"Cato\"\u2014a pseudonym for three journalists (future Labour leader Michael Foot, former Liberal MP Frank Owen, and the Conservative Peter Howard). It attacked the record of the National Government, alleging that it had failed to prepare adequately for war. It called for the removal of Chamberlain and other ministers who had allegedly contributed to the British disasters of the early part of the war. The short book sold more than 200,000 copies, many of which were passed from hand-to-hand, and went into 27 editions in the first few months, despite not being carried by several major bookshops. According to historian David Dutton, \"its impact upon Chamberlain's reputation, both among the general public and within the academic world, was profound indeed.\"\nChamberlain had long enjoyed excellent health, except for occasional attacks of gout, but by July 1940 he was in almost constant pain. He sought treatment, and later that month entered hospital for surgery. Surgeons discovered that he was suffering from terminal bowel cancer, but they concealed it from him, instead telling him that he would not require further surgery. Chamberlain resumed work in mid-August. He returned to his office on 9 September, but renewed pain, compounded by the night-time bombing of London which forced him to go to an air raid shelter and denied him rest, sapped his energy, and he left London for the last time on 19 September, returning to Highfield Park in Heckfield. Chamberlain offered his resignation to Churchill on 22 September 1940. The Prime Minister was initially reluctant to accept, but as both men realised that Chamberlain would never return to work, Churchill finally allowed him to resign. The Prime Minister asked if Chamberlain would accept the highest order of British chivalry, the Order of the Garter, of which his brother had been a member. Chamberlain refused, saying he would \"prefer to die plain 'Mr Chamberlain' like my father before me, unadorned by any title.\"\nIn the short time remaining to him, Chamberlain was angered by the \"short, cold and for the most part depreciatory\" press comments on his retirement, according to him written \"without the slightest sign of sympathy for the man or even any comprehension that there may be a human tragedy in the background.\" The King and Queen drove down from Windsor to visit the dying man on 14 October. Chamberlain received hundreds of sympathetic letters from friends and supporters. He wrote to John Simon, who had served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in Chamberlain's government:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[I]t was the hope of doing something to improve the conditions of life for the poorer people that brought me at past middle life into politics, and it is some satisfaction to me that I was able to carry out some part of my ambition even though its permanency may be challenged by the destruction of war. For the rest I regret nothing that I have done &amp; I can see nothing undone that I ought to have done. I am therefore content to accept the fate that has so suddenly overtaken me.\nDeath.\nChamberlain died of bowel cancer on 9 November 1940 at the age of 71. A funeral service took place at Westminster Abbey five days later on Thursday 14 November. Due to wartime security concerns, the date and time were not widely publicised. Chamberlain's former private secretary John Colville functioned as the service's usher, while both Winston Churchill and Lord Halifax acted as pallbearers. After cremation, his ashes were interred in the Abbey next to those of Bonar Law. Churchill eulogised Chamberlain in the House of Commons three days after his death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whatever else history may or may not say about these terrible, tremendous years, we can be sure that Neville Chamberlain acted with perfect sincerity according to his lights and strove to the utmost of his capacity and authority, which were powerful, to save the world from the awful, devastating struggle in which we are now engaged. This alone will stand him in good stead as far as what is called the verdict of history is concerned.\nAlthough some Chamberlain supporters found Churchill's oratory to be faint praise of the late prime minister, Churchill added less publicly, \"Whatever shall I do without poor Neville? I was relying on him to look after the Home Front for me.\" Amongst others who paid tribute to Chamberlain in the Commons and in the House of Lords on 12 November 1940 were Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax (1st Earl of Halifax, Edward Wood), the Leader of the Labour Party, Clement Attlee, and the Liberal Party leader and Air Minister, Archibald Sinclair. David Lloyd George, the only former prime minister remaining in the Commons, had been expected to speak, but absented himself from the proceedings. Ever close to his family, the executors of Chamberlain's will were his cousins, Wilfred Byng Kenrick and Wilfrid Martineau, both of whom, like Chamberlain, were lord mayors of Birmingham.\nLegacy and reputation.\nA few days before his death, Neville Chamberlain wrote,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;So far as my personal reputation is concerned, I am not in the least disturbed about it. The letters which I am still receiving in such vast quantities so unanimously dwell on the same point, namely without Munich the war would have been lost and the Empire destroyed in 1938\u00a0... I do not feel the opposite view\u00a0... has a chance of survival. Even if nothing further were to be published giving the true inside story of the past two years I should not fear the historian's verdict.\n\"Guilty Men\" was not the only Second World War tract that damaged Chamberlain's reputation. \"We Were Not All Wrong\", published in 1941, took a similar tack to \"Guilty Men\", arguing that Liberal and Labour MPs, and a small number of Conservatives, had fought against Chamberlain's appeasement policies. The author, Liberal MP Geoffrey Mander, had voted against conscription in 1939. Another polemic against Conservative policies was \"Why Not Trust the Tories\" (1944, written by \"Gracchus\", who was later revealed to be future Labour minister Aneurin Bevan), which castigated the Conservatives for the foreign policy decisions of Baldwin and Chamberlain. Though a few Conservatives offered their own versions of events, most notably MP Quintin Hogg in his 1945 \"The Left Was Never Right\", by the end of the war, there was a very strong public belief that Chamberlain was culpable for serious diplomatic and military misjudgements that had nearly caused Britain's defeat.\nChamberlain's reputation was devastated by these attacks from the left. In 1948, with the publication of \"The Gathering Storm\", the first volume of Churchill's six-volume set, \"The Second World War\", Chamberlain sustained an even more serious assault from the right. While Churchill stated privately, \"this is not history, this is my case\", his series was still hugely influential. Churchill depicted Chamberlain as well-meaning but weak, blind to the threat posed by Hitler, and oblivious to the fact that (according to Churchill) Hitler could have been removed from power by a grand coalition of European states. Churchill suggested that the year's delay between Munich and war worsened Britain's position, and criticised Chamberlain for both peacetime and wartime decisions. In the years following the publication of Churchill's books, few historians questioned his judgment.\nAnne Chamberlain, the former premier's widow, suggested that Churchill's work was filled with matters that \"are not real misstatements that could easily be corrected, but wholesale omissions and assumptions that certain things are now recognised as facts which actually have no such position\".\nMany of Chamberlain's family letters and his extensive personal papers were bequeathed by his family in 1974 to the Birmingham University Archives. During the war, the Chamberlain family had commissioned historian Keith Feiling to produce an official biography, and gave him access to Chamberlain's private diaries and papers. While Feiling had the right of access to official papers as the official biographer of a recently deceased person, he may not have been aware of the provision, and the Cabinet Secretary denied his requests for access.\nThough Feiling produced what historian David Dutton described in 2001 as \"the most impressive and persuasive single-volume biography\" of Chamberlain (completed during the war and published in 1946), he could not repair the damage already done to Chamberlain's reputation.\nConservative MP Iain Macleod's 1961 biography of Chamberlain was the first major biography of a revisionist school of thought on Chamberlain. The same year, A. J. P. Taylor, in his \"The Origins of the Second World War\", found that Chamberlain had adequately rearmed Britain for defence (though a rearmament designed to defeat Germany would have taken massive additional resources) and described Munich as \"a triumph for all that was best and most enlightened in British life\u00a0... [and] for those who had courageously denounced the harshness and short-sightedness of Versailles\".\nThe adoption of the \"thirty-year rule\" in 1967 made available many of the papers of the Chamberlain government over the subsequent three years, helping to explain why Chamberlain acted as he did. The resultant works greatly fuelled the revisionist school, although they also included books that strongly criticised Chamberlain, such as Keith Middlemas's 1972 \"Diplomacy of Illusion\" (which portrayed Chamberlain as a seasoned politician with strategic blindness when it came to Germany). Released papers indicated that, contrary to claims made in \"Guilty Men\", Chamberlain had neither ignored the advice of the Foreign Office nor had he disregarded and run roughshod over his Cabinet. Other released papers showed that Chamberlain had considered seeking a grand coalition amongst European governments like that later advocated by Churchill, but had rejected it on the grounds that the division of Europe into two camps would make war more, not less likely. They also showed that Chamberlain had been advised that the Dominions, pursuing independent foreign policies under the Statute of Westminster, had indicated that Chamberlain could not depend on their help in the event of a Continental war. The Chiefs of Staff report, which indicated that Britain could not forcibly prevent Germany from conquering Czechoslovakia, was first publicly known at this time. In reaction to the revisionist school of thought regarding Chamberlain a post-revisionist school emerged beginning in the 1990s, using the released papers to justify the initial conclusions of \"Guilty Men\". Oxford historian R. A. C. Parker argued that Chamberlain could have forged a close alliance with France after the \"Anschluss\", in early 1938, and begun a policy of containment of Germany under the auspices of the League of Nations. While many revisionist writers had suggested that Chamberlain had had few or no choices in his actions, Parker argued that Chamberlain and his colleagues had chosen appeasement over other viable policies. In his two volumes, \"Chamberlain and Appeasement\" (1993) and \"Churchill and Appeasement\" (2000), Parker stated that Chamberlain, due to his \"powerful, obstinate personality\" and his skill in debate, caused Britain to embrace appeasement instead of effective deterrence. Parker also suggested that had Churchill held high office in the second half of the 1930s Churchill would have built a series of alliances which would have deterred Hitler, and perhaps would have caused Hitler's domestic opponents to procure his removal.\nDutton observes that Chamberlain's reputation, for good or ill, will probably always be closely tied to evaluation of his policy toward Germany:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Whatever else may be said of Chamberlain's public life his reputation will in the last resort depend upon assessments of this moment [Munich] and this policy [appeasement]. This was the case when he left office in 1940 and it remains so sixty years later. To expect otherwise is rather like hoping that Pontius Pilate will one day be judged as a successful provincial administrator of the Roman Empire."}
{"id": "21454", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21454", "title": "Nicanor Parra", "text": "Chilean poet and physicist (1914\u20132018)\nNicanor Segundo Parra Sandoval (5 September 1914 \u2013 23 January 2018) was a Chilean physicist and poet. He has been considered one of the most influential Spanish-language Chilean poets of the 20th century. \nParra described himself as an \"anti-poet\" on account of his distaste for poetry's pompous pretences. After his recitations, he would say: \"Me retracto de todo lo dicho.\" (\"I take back everything I've said.\")\nLife.\nParra, the son of a schoolteacher, was born in 1914 in San Fabi\u00e1n de Alico, near Chill\u00e1n, in Chile. He came from the artistically prolific Parra family of performers, musicians, artists, and writers. His sister, Violeta Parra, was a folk singer, as was his brother Roberto Parra Sandoval.\nIn 1933, he entered the Instituto Pedag\u00f3gico of the University of Chile, where he qualified as a teacher of mathematics and physics in 1938, one year after the publication of his first book, \"Cancionero sin Nombre\". After teaching in Chilean secondary schools, in 1943 he enrolled in Brown University in the United States to study physics. In 1948, he attended Oxford University to study cosmology. He returned to Chile as a professor at the Universidad de Chile in 1952. Parra served as a professor of theoretical physics at the University of Chile from 1952 to 1991, and was a visiting professor at Louisiana State University, New York University, and Yale University. He read his poetry in England, France, Russia, Mexico, Cuba, and the United States. He published dozens of books.\nAs a young man, he was promoted by Gabriela Mistral and Pablo Neruda. He came to Mistral's attention when she visited Chill\u00e1n. The national anthem was played in her honor, as Latin America's first Nobel laureate; at its conclusion, Parra leapt onto the stage and recited a poem he'd written for her the previous night. Mistral, standing for the anthem, remained standing until Parra finished, and later introduced him to important people in Santiago as a poet of future global renown. Subsequently, Neruda arranged for Parra's collection \"Poemas y Antipoemas\" to be published in Buenos Aires, in 1954.\n\"Poemas y Antipoemas\" is a classic of Latin American literature, one of the most influential Spanish poetry collections of the twentieth century. It is cited as an inspiration by American Beat writers such as Allen Ginsberg.\nA fictionalized version of Parra appeared in Alejandro Jodorowsky's autobiographical film \"Endless Poetry\" (2016).\nDeath.\nParra died on 23 January 2018, at 7:00 am, in La Reina in Santiago, at the age of 103.\nAwards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nParra was proposed on four occasions for the Nobel Prize in Literature. On 1 December 2011, Parra won the Spanish Ministry of Culture's Cervantes Prize, the most important literary prize in the Spanish-speaking world. On 7 June 2012, he won the Pablo Neruda Ibero-American Poetry Award.\nList of works.\nEnglish translations\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21458", "revid": "50632760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21458", "title": "Norma MacMillan", "text": "Canadian actress (1921\u20132001)\nNorma MacMillan (September 15, 1921 \u2013 March 16, 2001) was a Canadian actress, best known for voicing numerous characters in animation and claymation, including Casper the Friendly Ghost on \"The New Casper Cartoon Show\", Gumby on \"The Gumby Show\", Sweet Polly Purebred on \"Underdog\", and Davey on \"Davey and Goliath\".\nEarly life.\nMacMillan was born on September 15, 1921, in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, and began her career there as a stage actress. It was in Vancouver that she met, worked with her then husband Thor Arngrim. In 1954, MacMillan, her husband and his business partner Stuart Baker, set out for Toronto where she began landing work voicing children's roles for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.\nCareer.\nAfter her husband and she moved to New York, MacMillan lent her voice talents to numerous roles; as \"Casper the Friendly Ghost\" on \"The New Casper Cartoon Show\", as \"Gumby\" on \"The Gumby Show\", as \"Sweet Polly Purebred\" in the \"Underdog\" cartoons, and as \"Davey\" on Seasons 4-5 of the claymation series \"Davey and Goliath\" among others. In addition to these roles, MacMillan also voiced the roles of John-John and Caroline Kennedy in the world record setting \"The First Family\" album of 1962. In 1991, she provided narration for Saban Entertainment's comedic \"Sugar &amp; Spice\" subset of \"Funky Fables\" cartoons, which included \"The Ugly Duckling\", \"Thumbelina\", \"Heidi\", \"Alice in Wonderland\", \"The Wizard of Oz\", \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\", \"Cinderella\", and \"The Secret Garden\".\nIn addition to her voice roles, MacMillan also appeared as an on-screen actress in various television and films roles. Her on-screen work included guest-starring roles on such television shows as \"Columbo\", \"She's the Sheriff\", \"Webster\" and \"Thirtysomething\". During this time, she also appeared in feature films, including \"Nightmare on the 13th Floor\", \"Big Business\", \"Love at Stake\", \"Dangerous Intentions\", \"Big Bully\", and \"Mrs. Delafield Wants to Marry\" with Katharine Hepburn.\nMacMillan appeared in numerous television commercials, but perhaps her most visible acting role was the part she played in the 1980s as the sweet, demure, naive \"Aunt Martha\" opposite Ruth Manning's \"Aunt Harriet\" for Kraft Foods mayonnaise commercials. Upon returning to Vancouver with her husband in the mid-1990s, MacMillan joined the Co-Op Radio's Sunday show for senior citizens and was a board member of the local 411 Seniors Centre.\nWhile in Canada, MacMillan went on to voice characters in a number of later animated series and films such as \"Funky Fables\", \"Fat Dog Mendoza\", \"Madeline\", \"Generation O!\", \"Milo's Bug Quest\" and \"The Animated Adventures of Tom Sawyer\".\nPersonal life.\nMacMillan and her husband producer/manager Thor Arngrim, were married in 1954, together they have two children, including Stefan Arngrim (born December 23, 1955), who played Barry Lockridge on \"Land of the Giants\", and Alison Arngrim (born January 18, 1962), who played Nellie Oleson on \"Little House on the Prairie\". MacMillan and her husband Thor returned to Canada in 1993.\nDeath.\nMacMillan died on March 16, 2001, at the age of 79, in Vancouver, British Columbia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21459", "revid": "50513120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21459", "title": "IMU Abacus Medal", "text": "The IMU Abacus Medal, known before 2022 as the Rolf Nevanlinna Prize, is awarded once every four years at the International Congress of Mathematicians, hosted by the International Mathematical Union (IMU), for outstanding contributions in Mathematical Aspects of Information Sciences including:\nThe prize was established in 1981 by the Executive Committee of the International Mathematical Union and named for the Finnish mathematician Rolf Nevanlinna. It consists of a gold medal and cash prize. The prize is targeted at young theoretical computer scientists, and only those younger than 40 on January 1, in the year the award is given away, are eligible. It is awarded along with other IMU prizes, including the Fields Medal.\nNaming.\nThe prize was originally named to honour the Finnish mathematician Rolf Nevanlinna who had died a year before the prize's creation in 1981. The medal featured a profile of Nevanlinna, the text \"Rolf Nevanlinna Prize\", and very small characters \"RH 83\" on its obverse. RH refers to Raimo Heino, the medal's designer, and 83 to the year of first minting. On the reverse, two figures related to the University of Helsinki, the prize sponsor, are engraved. The rim bears the name of the prizewinner.\nAlexander Soifer, president of the World Federation of National Mathematics Competitions, complained about the prize's honouring of Nevanlinna, as he was a supporter of Hitler and had acted as a representative for the Finnish Volunteer Battalion of the Waffen-SS during World War II. Soifer discussed Nevanlinna's wartime activities in a 2015 book, and forwarded his personal and his organization\u2019s requests to the Executive Committee of IMU to change the Prize's name. In July 2018, the 18th General Assembly of the IMU decided to remove the name of Rolf Nevanlinna from the prize. It was later announced that the prize would be named the IMU Abacus Medal.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21460", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21460", "title": "November 1", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 1 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21461", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21461", "title": "November 2", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"This date in recent years/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDay of the yearNovember 2 is the day of the year in the Gregorian calendar\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21462", "revid": "2136253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21462", "title": "Normal distribution", "text": "Probability distribution\n e^{-\\frac{(x - \\mu)^2}{2\\sigma^2}}&lt;/math&gt;\n | cdf = formula_1\n | quantile = formula_2\n | mean = formula_3\n | median = formula_3\n | mode = formula_3\n | variance = formula_6\n | mad = formula_7\n | aad = formula_8\n | skewness = formula_9\n | kurtosis = formula_9 \n | entropy = formula_11\n | mgf = formula_12\n | char = formula_13\n | fisher = formula_14\nformula_15\n | KLDiv = formula_16\n | ES = formula_17\nIn probability theory and statistics, a normal distribution or Gaussian distribution is a type of continuous probability distribution for a real-valued random variable. The general form of its probability density function is\nformula_18\nThe parameter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the mean or expectation of the distribution (and also its median and mode), while the parameter formula_19 is the variance. The standard deviation of the distribution is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (sigma). A random variable with a Gaussian distribution is said to be normally distributed and is called a normal deviate.\nNormal distributions are important in statistics and are often used in the natural and social sciences to represent real-valued random variables whose distributions are not known. Their importance is partly due to the central limit theorem. It states that, under some conditions, the average of many samples (observations) of a random variable with finite mean and variance is itself a random variable\u2014whose distribution converges to a normal distribution as the number of samples increases. Therefore, physical quantities that are expected to be the sum of many independent processes, such as measurement errors, often have distributions that are nearly normal.\nMoreover, Gaussian distributions have some unique properties that are valuable in analytic studies. For instance, any linear combination of a fixed collection of independent normal deviates is a normal deviate. Many results and methods, such as propagation of uncertainty and least squares parameter fitting, can be derived analytically in explicit form when the relevant variables are normally distributed.\nA normal distribution is sometimes informally called a bell curve. However, many other distributions are bell-shaped (such as the Cauchy, Student's \"t\", and logistic distributions). (For other names, see \"Naming\".)\nThe univariate probability distribution is generalized for vectors in the multivariate normal distribution and for matrices in the matrix normal distribution.\nDefinitions.\nStandard normal distribution.\nThe simplest case of a normal distribution is known as the standard normal distribution or unit normal distribution. This is a special case when formula_20 and formula_21, and it is described by this probability density function (or density):\nformula_22\nThe variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has a mean of 0 and a variance and standard deviation of 1. The density formula_23 has its peak formula_24 at formula_25 and inflection points at formula_26 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nAlthough the density above is most commonly known as the \"standard normal,\" a few authors have used that term to describe other versions of the normal distribution. Carl Friedrich Gauss, for example, once defined the standard normal as\nformula_27\nwhich has a variance of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, and Stephen Stigler once defined the standard normal as\nformula_28\nwhich has a simple functional form and a variance of formula_29\nGeneral normal distribution.\nEvery normal distribution is a version of the standard normal distribution whose domain has been stretched by a factor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (the standard deviation) and then translated by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (the mean value):\nformula_30\nThe probability density must be scaled by formula_31 so that the integral is still\u00a01.\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a standard normal deviate, then formula_32 will have a normal distribution with expected value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and standard deviation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This is equivalent to saying that the standard normal distribution &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be scaled/stretched by a factor of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and shifted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to yield a different normal distribution, called &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Conversely, if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a normal deviate with parameters &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and formula_19, then this &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; distribution can be re-scaled and shifted via the formula formula_34 to convert it to the standard normal distribution. This variate is also called the standardized form of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nNotation.\nThe probability density of the standard Gaussian distribution (standard normal distribution, with zero mean and unit variance) is often denoted with the Greek letter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (phi). The alternative form of the Greek letter phi, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is also used quite often.\nThe normal distribution is often referred to as formula_35 or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Thus when a random variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is normally distributed with mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and standard deviation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, one may write\nformula_36\nAlternative parameterizations.\nSome authors advocate using the precision &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the parameter defining the width of the distribution, instead of the standard deviation &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; or the variance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The precision is normally defined as the reciprocal of the variance, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The formula for the distribution then becomes\nformula_37\nThis choice is claimed to have advantages in numerical computations when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is very close to zero, and simplifies formulas in some contexts, such as in the Bayesian inference of variables with multivariate normal distribution.\nAlternatively, the reciprocal of the standard deviation formula_38 might be defined as the \"precision\", in which case the expression of the normal distribution becomes\nformula_39\nAccording to Stigler, this formulation is advantageous because of a much simpler and easier-to-remember formula, and simple approximate formulas for the quantiles of the distribution.\nNormal distributions form an exponential family with natural parameters formula_40 and formula_41, and natural statistics \"x\" and \"x\"2. The dual expectation parameters for normal distribution are \"\u03b7\"1 = \"\u03bc\" and \"\u03b7\"2 = \"\u03bc\"2 + \"\u03c3\"2.\nCumulative distribution function.\nThe cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the standard normal distribution, usually denoted with the capital Greek letter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is the integral\nformula_42\nError function.\nThe related error function formula_43 gives the probability of a random variable, with normal distribution of mean 0 and variance 1/2 falling in the range &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. That is:\nformula_44\nThese integrals cannot be expressed in terms of elementary functions, and are often said to be special functions. However, many numerical approximations are known; see below for more.\nThe two functions are closely related, namely\nformula_45\nFor a generic normal distribution with density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19, the cumulative distribution function is\nformula_47\nThe complement of the standard normal cumulative distribution function, formula_48, is often called the Q-function, especially in engineering texts. It gives the probability that the value of a standard normal random variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will exceed &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Other definitions of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-function, all of which are simple transformations of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, are also used occasionally.\nThe graph of the standard normal cumulative distribution function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has 2-fold rotational symmetry around the point (0,1/2); that is, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Its antiderivative (indefinite integral) can be expressed as follows:\nformula_49\nThe cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution can be expanded by integration by parts into a series:\nformula_50\nwhere formula_51 denotes the double factorial.\nAn asymptotic expansion of the cumulative distribution function for large \"x\" can also be derived using integration by parts. For more, see .\nA quick approximation to the standard normal distribution's cumulative distribution function can be found by using a Taylor series approximation:\nformula_52\nRecursive computation with Taylor series expansion.\nThe recursive nature of the formula_53family of derivatives may be used to easily construct a rapidly converging Taylor series expansion using recursive entries about any point of known value of the distribution,formula_54:\nformula_55\nwhere:\nformula_56\nUsing the Taylor series and Newton's method for the inverse function.\nAn application for the above Taylor series expansion is to use Newton's method to reverse the computation. That is, if we have a value for the cumulative distribution function, formula_57, but do not know the x needed to obtain the formula_57, we can use Newton's method to find x, and use the Taylor series expansion above to minimize the number of computations. Newton's method is ideal to solve this problem because the first derivative of formula_57, which is an integral of the normal standard distribution, is the normal standard distribution, and is readily available to use in the Newton's method solution.\nTo solve, select a known approximate solution, formula_60, to the desired &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. formula_60 may be a value from a distribution table, or an intelligent estimate followed by a computation of formula_54 using any desired means to compute. Use this value of formula_60 and the Taylor series expansion above to minimize computations.\nRepeat the following process until the difference between the computed formula_64 and the desired &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which we will call formula_65, is below a chosen acceptably small error, such as 10\u22125, 10\u221215, etc.:\nformula_66\nwhere\n formula_67 is the formula_57 from a Taylor series solution using formula_60 and formula_54\nformula_71\nWhen the repeated computations converge to an error below the chosen acceptably small value, \"x\" will be the value needed to obtain a formula_57 of the desired value, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nStandard deviation and coverage.\nAbout 68% of values drawn from a normal distribution are within one standard deviation \"\u03c3\" from the mean; about 95% of the values lie within two standard deviations; and about 99.7% are within three standard deviations. This is known as the 68\u201395\u201399.7 (empirical) rule, or the \"3-sigma rule\".\nMore precisely, the probability that a normal deviate lies in the range between formula_73 and formula_74 is given by\nformula_75\nTo 12 significant digits, the values for formula_76 are:\nFor large &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, one can use the approximation formula_77.\nQuantile function.\nThe quantile function of a distribution is the inverse of the cumulative distribution function. The quantile function of the standard normal distribution is called the probit function, and can be expressed in terms of the inverse error function:\nformula_78\nFor a normal random variable with mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19, the quantile function is\nformula_80\nThe quantile formula_81 of the standard normal distribution is commonly denoted as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. These values are used in hypothesis testing, construction of confidence intervals and Q\u2013Q plots. A normal random variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will exceed formula_82 with probability formula_83, and will lie outside the interval formula_84 with probability &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In particular, the quantile formula_85 is 1.96; therefore a normal random variable will lie outside the interval formula_86 in only 5% of cases.\nThe following table gives the quantile formula_87 such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will lie in the range formula_84 with a specified probability &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. These values are useful to determine tolerance interval for sample averages and other statistical estimators with normal (or asymptotically normal) distributions. The following table shows formula_89, not formula_81 as defined above.\nFor small &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the quantile function has the useful asymptotic expansion\nformula_91\nProperties.\nThe normal distribution is the only distribution whose cumulants beyond the first two (i.e., other than the mean and variance) are zero. It is also the continuous distribution with the maximum entropy for a specified mean and variance. Geary has shown, assuming that the mean and variance are finite, that the normal distribution is the only distribution where the mean and variance calculated from a set of independent draws are independent of each other.\nThe normal distribution is a subclass of the elliptical distributions. The normal distribution is symmetric about its mean, and is non-zero over the entire real line. As such it may not be a suitable model for variables that are inherently positive or strongly skewed, such as the weight of a person or the price of a share. Such variables may be better described by other distributions, such as the log-normal distribution or the Pareto distribution.\nThe value of the normal density is practically zero when the value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; lies more than a few standard deviations away from the mean (e.g., a spread of three standard deviations covers all but 0.27% of the total distribution). Therefore, it may not be an appropriate model when one expects a significant fraction of outliers\u2014values that lie many standard deviations away from the mean\u2014and least squares and other statistical inference methods that are optimal for normally distributed variables often become highly unreliable when applied to such data. In those cases, a more heavy-tailed distribution should be assumed and the appropriate robust statistical inference methods applied.\nThe Gaussian distribution belongs to the family of stable distributions which are the attractors of sums of independent, identically distributed distributions whether or not the mean or variance is finite. Except for the Gaussian which is a limiting case, all stable distributions have heavy tails and infinite variance. It is one of the few distributions that are stable and that have probability density functions that can be expressed analytically, the others being the Cauchy distribution and the L\u00e9vy distribution.\nSymmetries and derivatives.\nThe normal distribution with density formula_92 (mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_93) has the following properties:\nFurthermore, the density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of the standard normal distribution (i.e. formula_20 and formula_103) also has the following properties:\nMoments.\nThe plain and absolute moments of a variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the expected values of formula_110 and formula_111, respectively. If the expected value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is zero, these parameters are called \"central moments;\" otherwise, these parameters are called \"non-central moments.\" Usually we are interested only in moments with integer order &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has a normal distribution, the non-central moments exist and are finite for any &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; whose real part is greater than\u00a0\u22121. For any non-negative integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the plain central moments are:\nformula_112\nHere formula_113 denotes the double factorial, that is, the product of all numbers from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to\u00a01 that have the same parity as formula_114\nThe central absolute moments coincide with plain moments for all even orders, but are nonzero for odd orders. For any non-negative integer formula_115\nformula_116\nThe last formula is valid also for any non-integer formula_117 When the mean formula_118 the plain and absolute moments can be expressed in terms of confluent hypergeometric functions formula_119 and formula_120\nformula_121\nThese expressions remain valid even if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is not an integer. See also generalized Hermite polynomials.\nThe expectation of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; conditioned on the event that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; lies in an interval formula_122 is given by\nformula_123 this is known as the inverse Mills ratio. Note that above, density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is used instead of standard normal density as in inverse Mills ratio, so here we have formula_19 instead of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nFourier transform and characteristic function.\nThe Fourier transform of a normal density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; with mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19 is\nformula_126\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the imaginary unit. If the mean formula_20, the first factor is 1, and the Fourier transform is, apart from a constant factor, a normal density on the frequency domain, with mean 0 and variance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In particular, the standard normal distribution &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is an eigenfunction of the Fourier transform.\nIn probability theory, the Fourier transform of the probability distribution of a real-valued random variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is closely connected to the characteristic function formula_128 of that variable, which is defined as the expected value of formula_129, as a function of the real variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (the frequency parameter of the Fourier transform). This definition can be analytically extended to a complex-value variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The relation between both is:\nformula_130\nThe real and imaginary parts of formula_131 give:\nformula_132 and \nformula_133. \nSimilarly, \nformula_134 and \nformula_135.\nThese formulas evaluated at formula_136 give the expected value of these basic trigonometric and hyperbolic functions over a Gaussian random variable formula_137, which also could be seen as consequences of the Isserlis's theorem.\nMoment- and cumulant-generating functions.\nThe moment generating function of a real random variable &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the expected value of formula_138, as a function of the real parameter &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For a normal distribution with density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19, the moment generating function exists and is equal to\nformula_140\nFor any &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the coefficient of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in the moment generating function (expressed as an exponential power series in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) is the normal distribution's expected value &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe cumulant generating function is the logarithm of the moment generating function, namely\nformula_141\nThe coefficients of this exponential power series define the cumulants, but because this is a quadratic polynomial in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, only the first two cumulants are nonzero, namely the mean\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the variance\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nSome authors prefer to instead work with the characteristic function E[\"e\"\"itX\"] = \"e\"\"i\u03bct\" \u2212 \"\u03c3\"2\"t\"2/2 and ln E[\"e\"\"itX\"] = \"i\u03bct\" \u2212 \"\u03c3\"2\"t\"2.\nStein operator and class.\nWithin Stein's method the Stein operator and class of a random variable formula_142 are formula_143 and formula_144 the class of all absolutely continuous functions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nZero-variance limit.\nIn the limit when formula_19 approaches zero, the probability density formula_146 approaches zero everywhere except at formula_147, where it approaches formula_148, while its integral remains equal to 1. An extension of the normal distribution to the case with zero variance can be defined using the Dirac delta measure formula_149, although the resulting random variables are not absolutely continuous and thus do not have probability density functions.\nThe cumulative distribution function of such a random variable is then the Heaviside step function translated by the mean formula_147, namely\nformula_151\nMaximum entropy.\nOf all probability distributions over the reals with a specified finite mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and finite variance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the normal distribution formula_35 is the one with maximum entropy. To see this, let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; be a continuous random variable with probability density &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The entropy of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is defined as\nformula_153\nwhere formula_154 is understood to be zero whenever &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This functional can be maximized, subject to the constraints that the distribution is properly normalized and has a specified mean and variance, by using variational calculus. A function with three Lagrange multipliers is defined:\nformula_155\nAt maximum entropy, a small variation formula_156 about formula_92 will produce a variation formula_158 about &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; which is equal to 0:\nformula_159\nSince this must hold for any small &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the factor multiplying &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; must be zero, and solving for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; yields:\nformula_160\nThe Lagrange constraints that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is properly normalized and has the specified mean and variance are satisfied if and only if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are chosen so that\nformula_161\nThe entropy of a normal distribution formula_162 is equal to\nformula_163\nwhich is independent of the mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nOther properties.\n \\exp\\left(-\\frac{1}{4}\\frac{(\\mu_1-\\mu_2)^2}{\\sigma_1^2+\\sigma_2^2}\\right)\n&lt;/math&gt;\nRelated distributions.\nCentral limit theorem.\nThe central limit theorem states that under certain (fairly common) conditions, the sum of many random variables will have an approximately normal distribution. More specifically, where formula_175 are independent and identically distributed random variables with the same arbitrary distribution, zero mean, and variance formula_19 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is their\nmean scaled by formula_177\nformula_178\nThen, as &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; increases, the probability distribution of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will tend to the normal distribution with zero mean and variance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe theorem can be extended to variables formula_179 that are not independent and/or not identically distributed if certain constraints are placed on the degree of dependence and the moments of the distributions.\nMany test statistics, scores, and estimators encountered in practice contain sums of certain random variables in them, and even more estimators can be represented as sums of random variables through the use of influence functions. The central limit theorem implies that those statistical parameters will have asymptotically normal distributions.\nThe central limit theorem also implies that certain distributions can be approximated by the normal distribution, for example:\nWhether these approximations are sufficiently accurate depends on the purpose for which they are needed, and the rate of convergence to the normal distribution. It is typically the case that such approximations are less accurate in the tails of the distribution.\nA general upper bound for the approximation error in the central limit theorem is given by the Berry\u2013Esseen theorem, improvements of the approximation are given by the Edgeworth expansions.\nThis theorem can also be used to justify modeling the sum of many uniform noise sources as Gaussian noise. See AWGN.\nOperations and functions of normal variables.\nOperations on a single normal variable.\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is distributed normally with mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19, then\nOperations on two independent standard normal variables.\nIf formula_203 and formula_204 are two independent standard normal random variables with mean 0 and variance 1, then\nOperations on the density function.\nThe split normal distribution is most directly defined in terms of joining scaled sections of the density functions of different normal distributions and rescaling the density to integrate to one. The truncated normal distribution results from rescaling a section of a single density function.\nInfinite divisibility and Cram\u00e9r's theorem.\nFor any positive integer n, any normal distribution with mean &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and variance formula_19 is the distribution of the sum of n independent normal deviates, each with mean formula_249 and variance formula_250. This property is called infinite divisibility.\nConversely, if formula_203 and formula_204 are independent random variables and their sum formula_253 has a normal distribution, then both formula_203 and formula_204 must be normal deviates.\nThis result is known as Cram\u00e9r's decomposition theorem, and is equivalent to saying that the convolution of two distributions is normal if and only if both are normal. Cram\u00e9r's theorem implies that a linear combination of independent non-Gaussian variables will never have an exactly normal distribution, although it may approach it arbitrarily closely.\nThe Kac\u2013Bernstein theorem.\nThe Kac\u2013Bernstein theorem states that if formula_256 and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are independent and formula_213 and formula_214 are also independent, then both \"X\" and \"Y\" must necessarily have normal distributions.\nMore generally, if formula_259 are independent random variables, then two distinct linear combinations formula_260 and formula_261will be independent if and only if all formula_262 are normal and formula_263, where formula_264 denotes the variance of formula_262.\nExtensions.\nThe notion of normal distribution, being one of the most important distributions in probability theory, has been extended far beyond the standard framework of the univariate (that is one-dimensional) case (Case 1). All these extensions are also called \"normal\" or \"Gaussian\" laws, so a certain ambiguity in names exists.\n \u221e. A random element \"h\" \u2208 \"H\" is said to be normal if for any constant \"a\" \u2208 \"H\" the scalar product (\"a\", \"h\") has a (univariate) normal distribution. The variance structure of such Gaussian random element can be described in terms of the linear \"covariance operator\" \"K\": \"H\" \u2192 \"H\". Several Gaussian processes became popular enough to have their own names:\nA random variable X has a two-piece normal distribution if it has a distribution\nformula_266\nwhere \u03bc is the mean and and are the variances of the distribution to the left and right of the mean respectively.\nThe mean E(\"X\"), variance V(\"X\"), and third central moment T(\"X\") of this distribution have been determined\nformula_267\nOne of the main practical uses of the Gaussian law is to model the empirical distributions of many different random variables encountered in practice. In such case a possible extension would be a richer family of distributions, having more than two parameters and therefore being able to fit the empirical distribution more accurately. The examples of such extensions are:\nStatistical inference.\nEstimation of parameters.\nIt is often the case that we do not know the parameters of the normal distribution, but instead want to estimate them. That is, having a sample formula_268 from a normal formula_269 population we would like to learn the approximate values of parameters &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and formula_19. The standard approach to this problem is the maximum likelihood method, which requires maximization of the \"log-likelihood function\":\nformula_271\nTaking derivatives with respect to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and formula_19 and solving the resulting system of first order conditions yields the \"maximum likelihood estimates\":\nformula_273\nThen formula_274 is as follows:\nformula_275\nSample mean.\nEstimator formula_276 is called the \"sample mean\", since it is the arithmetic mean of all observations. The statistic formula_277 is complete and sufficient for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and therefore by the Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem, formula_276 is the uniformly minimum variance unbiased (UMVU) estimator. In finite samples it is distributed normally:\nformula_279\nThe variance of this estimator is equal to the \"\u03bc\u03bc\"-element of the inverse Fisher information matrix formula_280. This implies that the estimator is finite-sample efficient. Of practical importance is the standard error of formula_276 being proportional to formula_282, that is, if one wishes to decrease the standard error by a factor of 10, one must increase the number of points in the sample by a factor of 100. This fact is widely used in determining sample sizes for opinion polls and the number of trials in Monte Carlo simulations.\nFrom the standpoint of the asymptotic theory, formula_276 is consistent, that is, it converges in probability to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as formula_284. The estimator is also asymptotically normal, which is a simple corollary of it being normal in finite samples:\nformula_285\nSample variance.\nThe estimator formula_286 is called the \"sample variance\", since it is the variance of the sample (formula_268). In practice, another estimator is often used instead of the formula_286. This other estimator is denoted formula_289, and is also called the \"sample variance\", which represents a certain ambiguity in terminology; its square root &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is called the \"sample standard deviation\". The estimator formula_289 differs from formula_286 by having (\"n\" \u2212 1) instead of\u00a0\"n\" in the denominator (the so-called Bessel's correction):\nformula_292\nThe difference between formula_289 and formula_286 becomes negligibly small for large \"n\"'s. In finite samples however, the motivation behind the use of formula_289 is that it is an unbiased estimator of the underlying parameter formula_19, whereas formula_286 is biased. Also, by the Lehmann\u2013Scheff\u00e9 theorem the estimator formula_289 is uniformly minimum variance unbiased (UMVU), which makes it the \"best\" estimator among all unbiased ones. However it can be shown that the biased estimator formula_286 is better than the formula_289 in terms of the mean squared error (MSE) criterion. In finite samples both formula_289 and formula_286 have scaled chi-squared distribution with (\"n\" \u2212 1) degrees of freedom:\nformula_303\nThe first of these expressions shows that the variance of formula_289 is equal to formula_305, which is slightly greater than the \"\u03c3\u03c3\"-element of the inverse Fisher information matrix formula_280, which is formula_307. Thus, formula_289 is not an efficient estimator for formula_19, and moreover, since formula_289 is UMVU, we can conclude that the finite-sample efficient estimator for formula_19 does not exist.\nApplying the asymptotic theory, both estimators formula_289 and formula_286 are consistent, that is they converge in probability to formula_19 as the sample size formula_284. The two estimators are also both asymptotically normal:\nformula_316\nIn particular, both estimators are asymptotically efficient for formula_19.\nConfidence intervals.\nBy Cochran's theorem, for normal distributions the sample mean formula_276 and the sample variance \"s\"2 are independent, which means there can be no gain in considering their joint distribution. There is also a converse theorem: if in a sample the sample mean and sample variance are independent, then the sample must have come from the normal distribution. The independence between formula_276 and \"s\" can be employed to construct the so-called \"t-statistic\":\nformula_320\nThis quantity \"t\" has the Student's t-distribution with (\"n\" \u2212 1) degrees of freedom, and it is an ancillary statistic (independent of the value of the parameters). Inverting the distribution of this \"t\"-statistics will allow us to construct the confidence interval for \"\u03bc\"; similarly, inverting the \"\u03c7\"2 distribution of the statistic \"s\"2 will give us the confidence interval for \"\u03c3\"2:\nformula_321\nformula_322\nwhere \"tk,p\" and are the \"p\"th quantiles of the \"t\"- and \"\u03c7\"2-distributions respectively. These confidence intervals are of the \"confidence level\" 1 \u2212 \"\u03b1\", meaning that the true values \"\u03bc\" and \"\u03c3\"2 fall outside of these intervals with probability (or significance level) \"\u03b1\". In practice people usually take \"\u03b1\" \n 5%, resulting in the 95% confidence intervals. The confidence interval for \"\u03c3\" can be found by taking the square root of the interval bounds for \"\u03c3\"2.\nApproximate formulas can be derived from the asymptotic distributions of formula_276 and \"s\"2:\nformula_324\nformula_325\nThe approximate formulas become valid for large values of \"n\", and are more convenient for the manual calculation since the standard normal quantiles \"z\"\"\u03b1\"/2 do not depend on \"n\". In particular, the most popular value of \"\u03b1\" \n 5%, results in |\"z\"0.025| \n 1.96.\nNormality tests.\nNormality tests assess the likelihood that the given data set {\"x\"1, ..., \"xn\"} comes from a normal distribution. Typically the null hypothesis \"H\"0 is that the observations are distributed normally with unspecified mean \"\u03bc\" and variance \"\u03c3\"2, versus the alternative \"Ha\" that the distribution is arbitrary. Many tests (over 40) have been devised for this problem. The more prominent of them are outlined below:\nDiagnostic plots are more intuitively appealing but subjective at the same time, as they rely on informal human judgement to accept or reject the null hypothesis.\nGoodness-of-fit tests:\n\"Moment-based tests\":\n\"Tests based on the empirical distribution function\":\nBayesian analysis of the normal distribution.\nBayesian analysis of normally distributed data is complicated by the many different possibilities that may be considered:\nThe formulas for the non-linear-regression cases are summarized in the conjugate prior article.\nSum of two quadratics.\nScalar form.\nThe following auxiliary formula is useful for simplifying the posterior update equations, which otherwise become fairly tedious.\nformula_327\nThis equation rewrites the sum of two quadratics in \"x\" by expanding the squares, grouping the terms in \"x\", and completing the square. Note the following about the complex constant factors attached to some of the terms:\nVector form.\nA similar formula can be written for the sum of two vector quadratics: If x, y, z are vectors of length \"k\", and A and B are symmetric, invertible matrices of size formula_331, then\nformula_332\nwhere\nformula_333\nThe form x\u2032 A x is called a quadratic form and is a scalar:\nformula_334\nIn other words, it sums up all possible combinations of products of pairs of elements from x, with a separate coefficient for each. In addition, since formula_335, only the sum formula_336 matters for any off-diagonal elements of A, and there is no loss of generality in assuming that A is symmetric. Furthermore, if A is symmetric, then the form formula_337\nSum of differences from the mean.\nAnother useful formula is as follows:\nformula_338\nwhere formula_339\nWith known variance.\nFor a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size \"n\" where each individual point \"x\" follows formula_340 with known variance \u03c32, the conjugate prior distribution is also normally distributed.\nThis can be shown more easily by rewriting the variance as the precision, i.e. using \u03c4 = 1/\u03c32. Then if formula_341 and formula_342 we proceed as follows.\nFirst, the likelihood function is (using the formula above for the sum of differences from the mean):\nformula_343\nThen, we proceed as follows:\nformula_344\nIn the above derivation, we used the formula above for the sum of two quadratics and eliminated all constant factors not involving\u00a0\"\u03bc\". The result is the kernel of a normal distribution, with mean formula_345 and precision formula_346, i.e.\nformula_347\nThis can be written as a set of Bayesian update equations for the posterior parameters in terms of the prior parameters:\nformula_348\nThat is, to combine \"n\" data points with total precision of \"n\u03c4\" (or equivalently, total variance of \"n\"/\"\u03c3\"2) and mean of values formula_349, derive a new total precision simply by adding the total precision of the data to the prior total precision, and form a new mean through a \"precision-weighted average\", i.e. a weighted average of the data mean and the prior mean, each weighted by the associated total precision. This makes logical sense if the precision is thought of as indicating the certainty of the observations: In the distribution of the posterior mean, each of the input components is weighted by its certainty, and the certainty of this distribution is the sum of the individual certainties. (For the intuition of this, compare the expression \"the whole is (or is not) greater than the sum of its parts\". In addition, consider that the knowledge of the posterior comes from a combination of the knowledge of the prior and likelihood, so it makes sense that we are more certain of it than of either of its components.)\nThe above formula reveals why it is more convenient to do Bayesian analysis of conjugate priors for the normal distribution in terms of the precision. The posterior precision is simply the sum of the prior and likelihood precisions, and the posterior mean is computed through a precision-weighted average, as described above. The same formulas can be written in terms of variance by reciprocating all the precisions, yielding the more ugly formulas\nformula_350\nWith known mean.\nFor a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size \"n\" where each individual point \"x\" follows formula_340 with known mean \u03bc, the conjugate prior of the variance has an inverse gamma distribution or a scaled inverse chi-squared distribution. The two are equivalent except for having different parameterizations. Although the inverse gamma is more commonly used, we use the scaled inverse chi-squared for the sake of convenience. The prior for \u03c32 is as follows:\nformula_352\nThe likelihood function from above, written in terms of the variance, is:\nformula_353\nwhere\nformula_354\nThen:\nformula_355\nThe above is also a scaled inverse chi-squared distribution where\nformula_356\nor equivalently\nformula_357\nReparameterizing in terms of an inverse gamma distribution, the result is:\nformula_358\nWith unknown mean and unknown variance.\nFor a set of i.i.d. normally distributed data points X of size \"n\" where each individual point \"x\" follows formula_340 with unknown mean \u03bc and unknown variance \u03c32, a combined (multivariate) conjugate prior is placed over the mean and variance, consisting of a normal-inverse-gamma distribution.\nLogically, this originates as follows:\nThe priors are normally defined as follows:\nformula_360\nThe update equations can be derived, and look as follows:\nformula_361The respective numbers of pseudo-observations add the number of actual observations to them. The new mean hyperparameter is once again a weighted average, this time weighted by the relative numbers of observations. Finally, the update for formula_362 is similar to the case with known mean, but in this case the sum of squared deviations is taken with respect to the observed data mean rather than the true mean, and as a result a new interaction term needs to be added to take care of the additional error source stemming from the deviation between prior and data mean.\nOccurrence and applications.\nThe occurrence of normal distribution in practical problems can be loosely classified into four categories:\nExact normality.\nA normal distribution occurs in some physical theories:\nApproximate normality.\n\"Approximately\" normal distributions occur in many situations, as explained by the central limit theorem. When the outcome is produced by many small effects acting \"additively and independently\", its distribution will be close to normal. The normal approximation will not be valid if the effects act multiplicatively (instead of additively), or if there is a single external influence that has a considerably larger magnitude than the rest of the effects.\nAssumed normality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I can only recognize the occurrence of the normal curve \u2013 the Laplacian curve of errors \u2013 as a very abnormal phenomenon. It is roughly approximated to in certain distributions; for this reason, and on account for its beautiful simplicity, we may, perhaps, use it as a first approximation, particularly in theoretical investigations.\nThere are statistical methods to empirically test that assumption; see the above Normality tests section.\nMethodological problems and peer review.\nJohn Ioannidis argued that using normally distributed standard deviations as standards for validating research findings leave falsifiable predictions about phenomena that are not normally distributed untested. This includes, for example, phenomena that only appear when all necessary conditions are present and one cannot be a substitute for another in an addition-like way and phenomena that are not randomly distributed. Ioannidis argues that standard deviation-centered validation gives a false appearance of validity to hypotheses and theories where some but not all falsifiable predictions are normally distributed since the portion of falsifiable predictions that there is evidence against may and in some cases are in the non-normally distributed parts of the range of falsifiable predictions, as well as baselessly dismissing hypotheses for which none of the falsifiable predictions are normally distributed as if they were unfalsifiable when in fact they do make falsifiable predictions. It is argued by Ioannidis that many cases of mutually exclusive theories being accepted as validated by research journals are caused by failure of the journals to take in empirical falsifications of non-normally distributed predictions, and not because mutually exclusive theories are true, which they cannot be, although two mutually exclusive theories can both be wrong and a third one correct.\nComputational methods.\nGenerating values from normal distribution.\nIn computer simulations, especially in applications of the Monte-Carlo method, it is often desirable to generate values that are normally distributed. The algorithms listed below all generate the standard normal deviates, since a \"N\"(\"\u03bc\", \"\u03c3\"2) can be generated as \"X\" = \"\u03bc\" + \"\u03c3Z\", where \"Z\" is standard normal. All these algorithms rely on the availability of a random number generator \"U\" capable of producing uniform random variates.\nNumerical approximations for the normal cumulative distribution function and normal quantile function.\nThe standard normal cumulative distribution function is widely used in scientific and statistical computing.\nThe values \u03a6(\"x\") may be approximated very accurately by a variety of methods, such as numerical integration, Taylor series, asymptotic series and continued fractions. Different approximations are used depending on the desired level of accuracy.\nformula_375\nShore (1982) introduced simple approximations that may be incorporated in stochastic optimization models of engineering and operations research, like reliability engineering and inventory analysis. Denoting \"p\" = \u03a6(\"z\"), the simplest approximation for the quantile function is:\nformula_376\nThis approximation delivers for \"z\" a maximum absolute error of 0.026 (for 0.5 \u2264 \"p\" \u2264 0.9999, corresponding to 0 \u2264 \"z\" \u2264 3.719). For \"p\" &lt; 1/2 replace \"p\" by 1 \u2212 \"p\" and change sign. Another approximation, somewhat less accurate, is the single-parameter approximation:\nformula_377\nThe latter had served to derive a simple approximation for the loss integral of the normal distribution, defined by\nformula_378\nThis approximation is particularly accurate for the right far-tail (maximum error of 10\u22123 for \"z\" \u2265 1.4). Highly accurate approximations for the cumulative distribution function, based on Response Modeling Methodology (RMM, Shore, 2011, 2012), are shown in Shore (2005).\nSome more approximations can be found at: Error function#Approximation with elementary functions. In particular, small \"relative\" error on the whole domain for the cumulative distribution function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the quantile function formula_379 as well, is achieved via an explicitly invertible formula by Sergei Winitzki in 2008.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nSome authors attribute the discovery of the normal distribution to de Moivre, who in 1738 published in the second edition of his \"The Doctrine of Chances\" the study of the coefficients in the binomial expansion of (\"a\" + \"b\")\"n\". De Moivre proved that the middle term in this expansion has the approximate magnitude of formula_380, and that \"If \"m\" or \"n\" be a Quantity infinitely great, then the Logarithm of the Ratio, which a Term distant from the middle by the Interval \"\u2113\", has to the middle Term, is formula_381.\" Although this theorem can be interpreted as the first obscure expression for the normal probability law, Stigler points out that de Moivre himself did not interpret his results as anything more than the approximate rule for the binomial coefficients, and in particular de Moivre lacked the concept of the probability density function.\nIn 1823 Gauss published his monograph \"Theoria combinationis observationum erroribus minimis obnoxiae\" where among other things he introduces several important statistical concepts, such as the method of least squares, the method of maximum likelihood, and the \"normal distribution\". Gauss used \"M\", \"M\"\u2032, \"M\"\u2033, ... to denote the measurements of some unknown quantity\u00a0\"V\", and sought the most probable estimator of that quantity: the one that maximizes the probability \"\u03c6\"(\"M\" \u2212 \"V\") \u00b7 \"\u03c6\"(\"M\"\u2032 \u2212 \"V\") \u00b7 \"\u03c6\"(\"M\"\u2033 \u2212 \"V\") \u00b7 ... of obtaining the observed experimental results. In his notation \u03c6\u0394 is the probability density function of the measurement errors of magnitude \u0394. Not knowing what the function \"\u03c6\" is, Gauss requires that his method should reduce to the well-known answer: the arithmetic mean of the measured values. Starting from these principles, Gauss demonstrates that the only law that rationalizes the choice of arithmetic mean as an estimator of the location parameter, is the normal law of errors:\nformula_382 \nwhere \"h\" is \"the measure of the precision of the observations\". Using this normal law as a generic model for errors in the experiments, Gauss formulates what is now known as the non-linear weighted least squares method.\nAlthough Gauss was the first to suggest the normal distribution law, Laplace made significant contributions. It was Laplace who first posed the problem of aggregating several observations in 1774, although his own solution led to the Laplacian distribution. It was Laplace who first calculated the value of the integral \u222b \"e\"\u2212\"t\"2\u00a0\"dt\" \n[[Category:Pages which use a template in place of a magic word|TNormal distribution]] \u221a in 1782, providing the normalization constant for the normal distribution. For this accomplishment, Gauss acknowledged the priority of Laplace. Finally, it was Laplace who in 1810 proved and presented to the academy the fundamental central limit theorem, which emphasized the theoretical importance of the normal distribution.\nIt is of interest to note that in 1809 an Irish-American mathematician Robert Adrain published two insightful but flawed derivations of the normal probability law, simultaneously and independently from Gauss. His works remained largely unnoticed by the scientific community, until in 1871 they were exhumed by Abbe.\nIn the middle of the 19th century Maxwell demonstrated that the normal distribution is not just a convenient mathematical tool, but may also occur in natural phenomena: The number of particles whose velocity, resolved in a certain direction, lies between \"x\" and \"x\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"dx\" is\nformula_383 \nNaming.\nToday, the concept is usually known in English as the normal distribution or Gaussian distribution. Other less common names include Gauss distribution, Laplace\u2013Gauss distribution, the law of error, the law of facility of errors, Laplace's second law, and Gaussian law.\nGauss himself apparently coined the term with reference to the \"normal equations\" involved in its applications, with normal having its technical meaning of orthogonal rather than usual. However, by the end of the 19th century some authors had started using the name \"normal distribution\", where the word \"normal\" was used as an adjective\u00a0\u2013 the term now being seen as a reflection of this distribution being seen as typical, common\u00a0\u2013 and thus normal. Peirce (one of those authors) once defined \"normal\" thus: \"...\u00a0the 'normal' is not the average (or any other kind of mean) of what actually occurs, but of what \"would\", in the long run, occur under certain circumstances.\" Around the turn of the 20th century Pearson popularized the term \"normal\" as a designation for this distribution.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many years ago I called the Laplace\u2013Gaussian curve the \"normal\" curve, which name, while it avoids an international question of priority, has the disadvantage of leading people to believe that all other distributions of frequency are in one sense or another 'abnormal'.\nAlso, it was Pearson who first wrote the distribution in terms of the standard deviation \"\u03c3\" as in modern notation. Soon after this, in year 1915, Fisher added the location parameter to the formula for normal distribution, expressing it in the way it is written nowadays:\nformula_384\nThe term \"standard normal distribution\", which denotes the normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance came into general use around the 1950s, appearing in the popular textbooks by P.\u00a0G. Hoel (1947) \"Introduction to Mathematical Statistics\" and Alexander M. Mood (1950) \"Introduction to the Theory of Statistics\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "21463", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21463", "title": "Niels Henrik David Bohr", "text": ""}
{"id": "21464", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21464", "title": "NiklasLuhmann", "text": ""}
{"id": "21465", "revid": "36409631", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21465", "title": "Niklas Luhmann", "text": "German sociologist (1927\u20131998)\nNiklas Luhmann (; ; December 8, 1927 \u2013 November 11, 1998) was a German sociologist, philosopher of social science, and systems theorist.\nNiklas Luhmann is one of the most influential German sociologists of the 20th century. His thinking was based on the philosophical tradition and at the same time the reception of a wide variety of concepts from modern science. From this foundation he developed a functionalist-oriented systems theory, which claims to be able to describe all social phenomena in a theoretically consistent language. \nSocial systems are understood as communication contexts that have autonomy from the actors involved in them. On this basis, three types of social systems can be distinguished: interaction, organization and society. \nOn his general theory he developed a social theory, which describes modern society as a global society that is characterized by an internal differentiation into various autonomously working \"functional areas\" such as politics, law, economics, science, religion and art. According to Luhmann, their operations can not be coordinated centrally.\nBiography.\nLuhmann was born in L\u00fcneburg, Free State of Prussia, where his father's family had been running a brewery for several generations. He entered the Gymnasium Johanneum at Luneburg in 1937. In 1943, he was conscripted as a Luftwaffenhelfer in World War II and served for two years until, at the age of 17, he was taken prisoner of war by American troops in 1945. After the war Luhmann studied law at the University of Freiburg from 1946 to 1949, where he obtained a law degree, and then began a career in L\u00fcneburg's public administration. During a sabbatical in 1961, he went to Harvard, where he met and studied under Talcott Parsons, then the world's most influential social systems theorist.\nIn later days, Luhmann dismissed Parsons' theory, developing a rival approach of his own. Leaving the civil service in 1962, he lectured at the national Deutsche Hochschule f\u00fcr Verwaltungswissenschaften (University for Administrative Sciences) in Speyer, Germany. In 1965, he was offered a position at the Sozialforschungsstelle an der Universit\u00e4t M\u00fcnster (Social Research Centre of the University of M\u00fcnster), led by Helmut Schelsky.\nFrom 1965/66 he studied one semester of sociology at the University of M\u00fcnster.\nTwo earlier books were retroactively accepted as a PhD thesis and habilitation at the University of M\u00fcnster in 1966, qualifying him for a university professorship. In 1968/1969, he briefly served as a lecturer at Theodor Adorno's former chair at the University of Frankfurt and then was appointed full professor of sociology at the newly founded University of Bielefeld, Germany (until 1993). When asked about his research plan, he said, \"The theory of modern society. Duration 30 years. No costs.\"\nHe continued to publish after his retirement, when he finally found the time to complete his magnum opus, \"Die Gesellschaft der Gesellschaft\" (literally, \"The Society of Society\"), which was published in 1997, and has been translated into English as \"Theory of Society\" (volume I in 2012 and volume II in 2013). This work describes segmented societies divided into specialized functional subsystems.\nWorks.\nLuhmann wrote prolifically, with more than 70 books and nearly 400 scholarly articles published on a variety of subjects, including law, economy, politics, art, religion, ecology, mass media, and love. While his theories have yet to make a major mark in American sociology, his theory is currently well known and popular in German sociology, and has also been rather intensively received in Japan, Scandinavia, Latin America and Eastern Europe, including in Russia. His relatively low profile elsewhere is partly due to the fact that translating his work is a difficult task, since his writing presents a challenge even to readers of German, including many sociologists.\nMuch of Luhmann's work directly deals with the operations of the legal system and his autopoietic theory of law is regarded as one of the more influential contributions to the sociology of law and socio-legal studies.\nLuhmann is probably best known to North Americans for his debate with the critical theorist J\u00fcrgen Habermas over the potential of social systems theory. Like his erstwhile mentor Talcott Parsons, Luhmann is an advocate of \"grand theory\", although neither in the sense of philosophical foundationalism nor in the sense of \"meta-narrative\" as often invoked in the critical works of post-modernist writers. Rather, Luhmann's work tracks closer to complexity theory, broadly speaking, in that it aims to address any aspect of social life within a universal theoretical framework\u2014as the diversity of subjects he wrote on indicates. Luhmann's theory is sometimes dismissed as highly abstract and complex, particularly within the Anglophone world, whereas his work has had a more lasting influence on scholars from German-speaking countries, Scandinavia and Italy.\nLuhmann himself described his theory as \"labyrinthine\" or \"non-linear\", and claimed he was deliberately keeping his prose enigmatic to prevent it from being understood \"too quickly\", which would only produce simplistic misunderstandings.\nSystems theory.\nLuhmann's systems theory focuses on three topics, which are interconnected in his entire work.\nThe core element of Luhmann's theory pivots around the problem of the contingency of meaning, and thereby it becomes a theory of communication. Social systems are systems of communication, and society is the most encompassing social system. Being the social system that comprises all (and only) communication, today's society is a world society. A system is defined by a boundary between itself and its environment, dividing it from an infinitely complex, or (colloquially) chaotic, exterior. The interior of the system is thus a zone of reduced complexity: communication within a system operates by selecting only a limited amount of all information available outside. This process is also called \"reduction of complexity\". The criterion according to which information is selected and processed is meaning (in German, \"Sinn\"). Meaning being thereby referral from one set of potential space to another set of potential space. Both social systems and psychic systems (see below for an explanation of this distinction) operate by processing meaning.\nFurthermore, each system has a distinctive identity that is constantly reproduced in its communication and depends on what is considered meaningful and what is not. If a system fails to maintain that identity, it ceases to exist as a system and dissolves back into the environment it emerged from. Luhmann called this process of reproduction from elements previously filtered from an over-complex environment autopoiesis (pronounced \"auto-poy-E-sis\"; literally: self-creation), using a term coined in cognitive biology by Chilean thinkers Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela. Social systems are \"operationally closed\" in that while they use and rely on resources from their environment, those resources do not become part of the systems' operation. Both thought and digestion are important preconditions for communication, but neither appears in communication as such.\nMaturana, however, argued very vocally that this appropriation of autopoietic theory was conceptually unsound, as it presupposes the autonomy of communications from actual persons. That is, by describing social systems as operationally closed networks of communications, Luhmann (according to Maturana) ignores the fact that communications presuppose human communicators. Autopoiesis only applies to networks of processes that reproduce themselves, but communications are reproduced by humans. For this reason, the analogy from biology to sociology does not, in this case, hold. On the other hand, Luhmann explicitly stressed that he does not refer to a \"society without humans\", but to the fact that communication is autopoietic. Communication is made possible by human bodies and consciousness, but this does not make communication operationally open. To \"participate\" in communication, one must be able to render one's thoughts and perceptions into elements of communication. This can only ever occur as a communicative operation (thoughts and perceptions cannot be directly transmitted) and must therefore satisfy internal system conditions that are specific to communication: intelligibility, reaching an addressee and gaining acceptance.\nLuhmann likens the operation of autopoiesis (the filtering and processing of information from the environment) to a program; making a series of logical distinctions (in German, \"Unterscheidungen\"). Here, Luhmann refers to the British mathematician G. Spencer-Brown's logic of distinctions that Maturana and Varela had earlier identified as a model for the functioning of any cognitive process. The supreme criterion guiding the \"self-creation\" of any given system is a defining binary code. This binary code is not to be confused with a computer's operation: Luhmann (following Spencer-Brown and Gregory Bateson) assumes that auto-referential systems are continuously confronted with the dilemma of disintegration/continuation. This dilemma is framed with an ever-changing set of available choices; every one of those potential choices can be the system's selection or not (a binary state, selected/rejected). The influence of Spencer-Brown's book, \"Laws of Form\", on Luhmann can hardly be overestimated.\nAlthough Luhmann first developed his understanding of social systems theory under Parsons' influence, he soon moved away from the Parsonian concept. The most important difference is that Parsons framed systems as forms of action, in accordance with the AGIL paradigm. Parsons' systems theory treats systems as operationally open, and interactive through an input and output schema. Influenced by second-order cybernetics, Luhmann instead treats systems as autopoietic and operationally closed. Systems must continually construct themselves and their perspective of reality through processing the distinction between system and environment, and self-reproduce themselves as the product of their own elements. Social systems are defined by Luhmann not as action but as recursive communication. Modern society is defined as a world system consisting of the sum total of all communication happening at once, and individual function systems (such as the economy, politics, science, love, art, the media, etc.) are described as social subsystems which have \"outdifferentiated\" from the social system and achieved their own operational closure and autopoiesis.\nAnother difference is that Parsons asks how certain subsystems contribute to the functioning of overall society. Luhmann starts with the differentiation of the systems themselves out of a nondescript environment. While he does observe how certain systems fulfill functions that contribute to \"society\" as a whole, he dispenses with the assumption of \"a priori\" cultural or normative consensus or \"complimentary purpose\" which was common to Durkheim and Parsons' conceptualization of a social function. For Luhmann, functional differentiation is a consequence of selective pressure under temporalized complexity, and it occurs as function systems independently establish their own ecological niches by performing a function. Functions are therefore not the coordinated components of the organic social whole, but rather contingent and selective responses to reference problems which obey no higher principle of order and could have been responded to in other ways.\nFinally, the systems' autopoietic closure is another fundamental difference from Parsons' concept. Each system works strictly according to its very own code and can observe other systems only by applying its code to their operations. For example, the code of the economy involves the application of the distinction between payment and non-payment. Other system operations appear within the economic field of references only insofar as this economic code can be applied to them. Hence, a political decision becomes an economic operation when it is observed as a government spending money or not. Likewise, a legal judgement may also be an economic operation when settlement of a contractual dispute obliges one party to pay for the goods or services they had acquired. The codes of the economy, politics and law operate autonomously, but their \"interpenetration\" is evident when observing \"events\" which simultaneously involve the participation of more than one system.\nOne seemingly peculiar, but, within the overall framework, strictly logical, axiom of Luhmann's theory is the human being's position outside the strict boundaries of any social system, as initially developed by Parsons. Consisting of, but not being solely constituted by, \"communicative actions\" (a reference to J\u00fcrgen Habermas), any social system requires human consciousnesses (personal or psychical systems) as an obviously necessary, but nevertheless environmental resource. In Luhmann's terms, human beings are neither part of society nor of any specific system, just as they are not part of a conversation. People make conversation possible. Luhmann himself once said concisely that he was \"not interested in people\". That is not to say that people were not a matter for Luhmann, but rather alluding to the scope of the theory where, the communicative behavior of people is constituted (but not defined) by the dynamics of the social system, and society is constituted (but not defined) by the communicative behavior of people: society is people's environment, and people are society's environment.\nThus, sociology can explain how persons can change society; the influence of the environment (the people) on a given social system (a society), the so-called \"structural coupling\" of \"partially interpenetrating systems\". \nIn fact Luhmann himself replied to the relevant criticism by stating that, \"In fact the theory of autopoietic systems could bear the title \"Taking Individuals Seriously\", certainly more seriously than our humanistic tradition\" (Niklas Luhmann, \"Operational Closure and Structural Coupling: The Differentiation of the Legal System\", Cardozo Law Review, vol. 13: 1422). \nLuhmann was devoted to the ideal of non-normative science introduced to sociology in the early 20th century by Max Weber and later re-defined and defended against its critics by Karl Popper. However, in an academic environment that never strictly separated descriptive and normative theories of society, Luhmann's sociology has widely attracted criticism from various intellectuals, including J\u00fcrgen Habermas.\nLuhmann's reception.\nLuhmann's systems theory is not without its critics; his definitions of \"autopoietic\" and \"social system\" differ from others.\nAt the same time, his theory is being applied worldwide by sociologists and other scholars. It is often used in analyses dealing with corporate social responsibility, organisational legitimacy, governance structures as well as with sociology of law, and of course general sociology. His systems theory has also been used to study media discourse of various energy technologies throughout the US, including smart grids, carbon capture and storage, and wind energy, but also to highlight how diplomacy differs from politics as these two may pose two distinct systems with distinct functions and distinct media (peace and power, respectively).\nHis approach has attracted criticism from those who argue that Luhmann has at no point demonstrated the operational closure of social systems, or in fact that autopoietic social systems actually exist. He has instead taken this as a premise or presupposition, resulting in the logical need to exclude humans from social systems, which prevents the social systems view from accounting for the individual behavior, action, motives, or indeed existence of any individual person.\nNote-taking system (\"Zettelkasten\").\nLuhmann was famous for his extensive use of the \"slip box\" or \"Zettelkasten\" note-taking method. The notes were probably created between 1952 and the beginning of 1997. He used them to systematically organize the results of his extensive and broadly interdisciplinary reading. Luhmann built up a zettelkasten of some 90,000 index cards for his research, and credited it with making his extraordinarily prolific writing possible. \nThe notes were digitized and made available online by his former University Bielefeld in 2019. Luhmann described the zettelkasten as part of his research into systems theory in the essay \"Kommunikation mit Zettelk\u00e4sten\" (\"Communication with slip boxes)\" (probably published in 1980/81).\nMiscellaneous.\nLuhmann also appears as a character in Paul W\u00fchr's work of literature \"Das falsche Buch\", along with Ulrich Sonnemann, Johann Georg Hamann, Richard Buckminster Fuller and others.\nLuhmann owned a pub called \"Pons\" in his parents' house in his native town of L\u00fcneburg. The house, which also contained his father's brewery, had been in his family since 1857.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21466", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21466", "title": "Natacha Atlas", "text": "Egyptian-Belgian singer\nNatacha Atlas (, , ; born 20 March 1964) is an Egyptian-Belgian singer known for her fusion of Arabic and Western music, particularly hip-hop. She once termed her music \"cha'abi moderne\" (modern folk music). Her music has been influenced by many styles including Maghrebain, hip hop, drum and bass and reggae.\nAtlas began her career as part of the world fusion group Transglobal Underground. In 1995, she began to focus on her solo career with the release of \"Diaspora\". She has since released seven solo albums and been a part of numerous collaborations. Her version of \"Mon amie la rose\" became a surprise success in France, reaching 16 on the French Singles Charts in 1999. Her most recent album, \"Strange Days\", was released in 2019.\nEarly life.\nNatacha Atlas was born on 20 March 1964, in Schaerbeek, Brussels-Capital, Belgium. Her British mother was raised Christian before adopting Buddhism in the 1970s. Her father, of Egyptian descent, was deeply interested in Sufi mysticism and the Gurdjieff philosophy of the Fourth Way. He also studied Chinese medicine and Taoism.\nAtlas was raised listening to eclectic music from both Eastern and Western traditions. After her parents separated, Atlas went to live in Northampton, England, with her mother.\nAtlas grew up speaking French and English, and later learned Arabic and Spanish. She sings in several languages, including modern colloquial Arabic, although she admits that she is not entirely at ease with it.\nEarly career and Transglobal Underground.\nAtlas returned to Belgium at age 24 and began her career with two jobs: belly dancing and being the lead singer of a Belgian salsa band. In April 1989, she made her recording d\u00e9but as guest vocalist on Balearic beat-band \u00a1Loca!'s \"Encantador\" (Nation Records).\nIn 1991, Atlas co-wrote/recorded the \u00a1Loca! single \"Timbal\" and co-wrote/guested with Jah Wobble's Invaders of the Heart composing five tracks for their \"Rising Above Bedlam\" album. Through recording with \u00a1Loca!, she met Nation-labelmates Transglobal Underground, a British ethnic electronica band with a Middle Eastern/South Asian focus. At the time, Transglobal Underground had a top 40 hit, \"Templehead\", and Atlas became their lead singer and belly dancer. Additionally in 1991, Atlas collaborated with Bauhaus/Love and Rockets/Tones on Tail guitarist and vocalist Daniel Ash on his debut solo album \"Coming Down\". She contributed extensive vocal work as well as keyboards and bass guitar.\nSolo career.\nMost of Atlas' earlier albums were produced by Tim Whelan and Hamilton Lee from Transglobal Underground. These albums include \"Diaspora\" (1995), \"Halim\" (1997) (in honour of Egyptian singer Abdel Halim Hafez), \"Gedida\" (1998), and \"Ayeshteni\" (2001).\nAtlas has always spoken her mind about the way both she and Transglobal Underground were seen by the UK press back in the late 1990s and early 2000s. \"Someone from the \"New Musical Express\" rang us about a feature we're to do with them and said 'We don't want it to be about the multi-cultural angle'. In other words that fad is over. And I'm personally insulted... what other angle is there for us?! I get sick of it all.\"\nIn 1999, Atlas collaborated with David Arnold on the song \"One Brief Moment\". The single featured a cover version of the theme song from the James Bond film \"You Only Live Twice\". Two years earlier, Atlas collaborated with Arnold on the album \"Shaken and Stirred\", recording the song \"From Russia with Love\" for the eponymous film (originally performed by Matt Monro).\nAlso in 1999, she collaborated with Jean-Michel Jarre for the track \"C'est la vie\" on his album \"M\u00e9tamorphoses\". The track was released as a single.\nIn 2003, Atlas provided vocals for the Kolo folk dance song \"'Ajde Jano\" on Nigel Kennedy and Kroke's album, \"East Meets East\". In 2005, she contributed the song \"Just Like A Dream\" (from \"Something Dangerous\") to the charity album \"Voyces United for UNHCR\".\nHer music has been used in a number of soundtracks. Her song \"Kidda\" was featured on the \"Sex and the City 2\" soundtrack and in the 2005 video game \"\" on . In 2003, her voice can be heard in the film \"Hulk\" on the song \"Captured\". Additionally, her song \"Bathaddak\" is one of the songs included in the 2007 Xbox 360 video game \"Project Gotham Racing 4\". Her cover of \"I Put a Spell on You\" was used in the 2002 film \"Divine Intervention\" by Palestinian director Elia Suleiman.\nAtlas was originally billed to star in and provide the soundtrack to the film \"Whatever Lola Wants\", directed by Nabil Ayouch. However, shooting delays caused Atlas to only be involved in the film's soundtrack. Her song \"Gafsa\" from her 1997 album \"Halim\" was used in the main soundtrack of the 2004 Korean film \"Bin-Jip\" (also known as \"3-Iron\") by Kim Ki-Duk. She participated in the piece \"Light of Life (Ibelin Reprise)\" for the soundtrack of Ridley Scott's \"Kingdom of Heaven\".\nIn 2007, Atlas collaborated with Belinda Carlisle for Carlisle's seventh album \"Voil\u00e0\". She contributed additional vocals on songs \"Ma jeunesse fout le camp,\" \"La Vie en rose\", \"Bonnie et Clyde\" and \"Des ronds dans l'eau.\" \"Voil\u00e0\" was released via Rykodisc in the U.K. on 5 February 2007 and in the U.S. the following day.\nThe 2007 film \"Brick Lane\" features four songs with vocals by Atlas, \"Adam's Lullaby\", \"Running Through the Night\", \"Love Blossoms\" and \"Rite of Passage\". On 23 May 2008 Atlas released a new album, \"Ana Hina\", which was well received by critics.\nIn 2008, two of Atlas' songs, \"Kidda\" and \"Ghanwa Bossanova\", were used in Shamim Sarif's romantic comedy about two women, \"I Can't Think Straight\". In 2008, she sang lead in the song \"Habibe\" from Peter Gabriel's long-awaited album and project, \"Big Blue Ball\". On 20 September 2010 Atlas released \"Mounqaliba\". Co-produced by Samy Bishai, it explored classical instrumentation, jazz and traditional Arabic styles and was inspired by the poems of Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore.\nIn May 2013, Natacha Atlas released \"Expressions: Live in Toulouse\", an album which showcased her expressive voice using largely orchestral arrangements augmented by Middle Eastern percussion.\nAtlas moved into the jazz genre with the albums \"Myriad Road\" (2015), which was produced by French Lebanese musician Ibrahim Maalouf, and \"Strange Days\" (2019).\nIn 2020, she rejoined Transglobal Underground for their album \"Walls Have Ears\" and has been touring steadily with the band since 2021.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1999, Atlas married Syrian kanun player Abdullah Chhadeh. The couple divorced in 2005.\nAs of 2009[ [update]], Atlas was in a relationship with British Egyptian violinist Samy Bishai, who produced her 2010 release \"Mounqaliba\". The couple divide their time between London and France.\nAtlas has said in the past that she is \"technically Muslim\" and that she identifies with Sufism. She also stated that her father has some Sephardic Jewish ancestry. Atlas said more recently, \"These days I prefer to say that I'm Anglo-Middle Eastern and leave the religion out of it.\" She is, however, open to other forms of spirituality because \"it's important to be tolerant\".\nIn 2001, she was appointed by Mary Robinson as a Goodwill Ambassador for the United Nations Conference Against Racism. Robinson chose Atlas because \"she embodies the message that there is a strength in diversity. That our differences \u2013 be they ethnic, racial or religious \u2013 are a source of riches to be embraced rather than feared\".\nAtlas has been a proponent of The Zeitgeist Movement. She included clips from \"\" in her 2010 album \"Mounqaliba\".\nPolitical views on Israel.\nIn a joint interview with the Israeli singer Yasmin Levy, Atlas noted the risk of the collaboration because feelings of anti-Zionism across the Arab world can spill over into anti-Semitism: \"Some Arabic artists wouldn't even consider working with anyone Jewish.\" Of her experience of working with Levy, Atlas said: \"We spent a lot of time in this little room, just talking and drinking wine\", recalls Natacha, \"and it was like I\u2019d known her all my life. I\u2019d missed that female Middle Eastern company, as most of the Middle Eastern people I know here are men.\"\nIn March 2011, Atlas announced that she had joined the boycott of Israel and had withdrawn from a scheduled performance in Israel. She gave her reasoning as follows:\n\"I would have personally asked my Israeli fans face-to-face to fight this apartheid with peace in their hearts, but after much deliberation I now see that it would be more effective a statement to not go to Israel until this systemized apartheid is abolished once and for all.\"\nBy May 2014, when she gave a concert at the M\u00e9diterran\u00e9e Festival in Ashdod, Atlas had clearly changed her mind on the issue of boycott:\n\"For years,\" Natacha Atlas told me, \"I boycotted Israel and refused to perform here. But when I met a Palestinian fellow who\u2019s married to an Israeli Jewish woman, something in me changed. Suddenly, this chance personal acquaintanceship made me think that maybe there should be another way. There\u2019s nothing easier than to boycott and say that I don\u2019t want to see Israel or meet Israelis or come here and perform. But then what? Where does that get you?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21470", "revid": "31876559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21470", "title": "List of national anthems", "text": "Most nation states have an anthem, defined as \"a song, as of praise, devotion, or patriotism\"; most anthems are either marches or hymns in style. A song or hymn can become a national anthem under the state's constitution, by a law enacted by its legislature, or simply by tradition. A royal anthem is a patriotic song similar to a national anthem, but it specifically praises or prays for a monarch or royal dynasty. Such anthems are usually performed at public appearances by the monarch or during other events of royal importance. Some states use their royal anthem as the national anthem, such as the state anthem of Jordan.\nAnthems became increasingly popular among European states in the 18th century. In 1795, the French First Republic adopted \"La Marseillaise\" as its national anthem by decree, making France the first country in history to have an official national anthem. Some anthems are older in origin but were not officially adopted until the 19th or 20th century. For example, the Japanese anthem, \"Kimigayo\", employs the oldest lyrics of any national anthem, taking its words from the \"Kokin Wakash\u016b\", which was first published in 905, yet these words were not set to music until 1880. The national anthem of the Netherlands, the \"Wilhelmus\", contains a melody and lyrics dating back to the 16th century, but it was not officially adopted as the country's national anthem until 1932.\nNational anthems are usually written in the most common language of the state, whether \"de facto\" or official. States with multiple national languages may offer several versions of their anthem. For instance, Switzerland's national anthem has different lyrics for each of the country's four official languages: French, German, Italian, and Romansh. One of New Zealand's two national anthems is commonly sung with the first verse in M\u0101ori (\"Aotearoa\") and the second in English (\"God Defend New Zealand\"). The tune is the same but the lyrics have different meanings. South Africa's national anthem is unique in that it is two different songs put together with five of the country's eleven official languages being used, in which each language comprises a stanza.\nDenmark and New Zealand are two countries with two official national anthems of equal status. Denmark has two anthems, Der er et yndigt land (\"There is a Lovely Country\") and Kong Christian stod ved h\u00f8jen mast (\"King Christian stood by the lofty mast\"). Der er et yndigt land is considered the civil national anthem and is often played at civil and sports events. Kong Christian stod ved h\u00f8jen mast is both a royal and national anthem. New Zealand has two anthems, God Defend New Zealand and God Save the King. God Defend New Zealand was added in 1977 after a petition to Parliament and Queen Elizabeth II's approval. The two anthems are almost never sung together. Usually the first verse of God Defend New Zealand is sung in M\u0101ori (\"Aotearoa\") and the second in English.\nIndia has both a national anthem, Jana-gana-mana, and a national song, Vande Mataram. Jana-gana-mana was originally written in Bengali by Rabindranath Tagore in 1911 and adopted as the national anthem in 1950. Vande Mataram was composed in Sanskritised Bengali by Bankimchandra Chatterjee in the 1870s and inspired people during their fight for freedom.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21473", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21473", "title": "Nikola Tesla", "text": "Serbian-American engineer and inventor (1856\u20131943)\nNikola Tesla (10 July 1856\u00a0\u2013 7 January 1943) was a Serbian-American engineer, futurist, and inventor. He is known for his contributions to the design of the modern alternating current (AC) electricity supply system.\nBorn and raised in the Austrian Empire, Tesla first studied engineering and physics in the 1870s without receiving a degree. He then gained practical experience in the early 1880s working in telephony and at Continental Edison in the new electric power industry. In 1884, he immigrated to the United States, where he became a naturalized citizen. He worked for a short time at the Edison Machine Works in New York City before he struck out on his own. With the help of partners to finance and market his ideas, Tesla set up laboratories and companies in New York to develop a range of electrical and mechanical devices. His AC induction motor and related polyphase AC patents, licensed by Westinghouse Electric in 1888, earned him a considerable amount of money and became the cornerstone of the polyphase system, which that company eventually marketed.\nAttempting to develop inventions he could patent and market, Tesla conducted a range of experiments with mechanical oscillators/generators, electrical discharge tubes, and early X-ray imaging. He also built a wirelessly controlled boat, one of the first ever exhibited. Tesla became well known as an inventor and demonstrated his achievements to celebrities and wealthy patrons at his lab, and was noted for his showmanship at public lectures. Throughout the 1890s, Tesla pursued his ideas for wireless lighting and worldwide wireless electric power distribution in his high-voltage, high-frequency power experiments in New York and Colorado Springs. In 1893, he made pronouncements on the possibility of wireless communication with his devices. Tesla tried to put these ideas to practical use in his unfinished Wardenclyffe Tower project, an intercontinental wireless communication and power transmitter, but ran out of funding before he could complete it.\nAfter Wardenclyffe, Tesla experimented with a series of inventions in the 1910s and 1920s with varying degrees of success. Having spent most of his money, Tesla lived in a series of New York hotels, leaving behind unpaid bills. He died in New York City in January 1943. Tesla's work fell into relative obscurity following his death, until 1960, when the General Conference on Weights and Measures named the International System of Units (SI) measurement of magnetic flux density the tesla in his honor. There has been a resurgence in popular interest in Tesla since the 1990s. In 2013, \"Time\" named Tesla one of the 100 most significant figures of all time.\nEarly years.\nChildhood.\nNikola Tesla was born on 10 July 1856 in the village of Smiljan, in the Military Frontier of the Austrian Empire (present-day Croatia) into an ethnic Serb family. His father, Milutin Tesla (1819\u20131879), was a priest of the Eastern Orthodox Church. His father's brother Josif was a lecturer at a military academy who wrote several textbooks on mathematics.\nTesla's mother, Georgina \"\u0110uka\" Mandi\u0107 (1822\u20131892), whose father was also an Eastern Orthodox priest, had a talent for making home craft tools and mechanical appliances and the ability to memorize Serbian epic poems. \u0110uka had never received a formal education. Tesla credited his eidetic memory and creative abilities to his mother's genetics and influence.\nTesla was the fourth of five children. In 1861, Tesla attended primary school in Smiljan where he studied German, arithmetic, and religion. In 1862, the Tesla family moved to the nearby town of Gospi\u0107, where Tesla's father worked as parish priest. Nikola completed primary school, followed by middle school. Later in his patent applications, before he obtained American citizenship, Tesla would identify himself as \"of Smiljan, Lika, border country of Austria-Hungary\".\nEducation.\nIn 1870, Tesla moved to Karlovac to attend high school at the Higher Real Gymnasium where the classes were held in German, as it was usual throughout schools within the Austro-Hungarian Military Frontier. Tesla later wrote that he became interested in his physics professor's demonstrations of electricity. The \"mysterious phenomena\" made him want \"to know more of this wonderful force\". He was able to perform integral calculus in his head, prompting his teachers to believe that he was cheating. He finished a four-year term in three years, graduating in 1873.\nAfter graduating Tesla returned to Smiljan but soon contracted cholera, was bedridden for nine months and was near death several times. In a moment of despair, Tesla's father (who had originally wanted him to enter the priesthood), promised to send him to the best engineering school if he recovered from the illness. Tesla later said that he had read Mark Twain's earlier works while recovering from his illness.\nThe next year Tesla evaded conscription into the Austro-Hungarian Army in Smiljan by running away southeast of Lika to Tomingaj, near Gra\u010dac. There he explored the mountains wearing hunter's garb. Tesla said that this contact with nature made him stronger, both physically and mentally. He enrolled at the Imperial-Royal Technical College in Graz in 1875 on a Military Frontier scholarship. Tesla passed nine exams (nearly twice as many as required) and received a letter of commendation from the dean of the technical faculty to his father, which stated, \"Your son is a star of first rank.\" At Graz, Tesla was fascinated by the lectures on electricity presented by professor Jakob P\u00f6schl. But by his third year he was failing in school and never graduated, leaving Graz in December 1878. One biographer suggests Tesla was not studying and may have been expelled for gambling and womanizing.\nTesla's family did not hear from him after he left school. There was a rumor among his classmates that he had drowned in the nearby river Mur but in January one of them ran into Tesla in the town of Maribor and reported that encounter to Tesla's family. It turned out Tesla had been working there as a draftsman for 60 florins per month. In March 1879, Milutin finally located his son and tried to convince him to return home and take up his education in Prague. Tesla returned to Gospi\u0107 later that month when he was deported for not having a residence permit. Tesla's father died the next month, on 17 April 1879, at the age of 60 after an unspecified illness.\nIn January 1880, two of Tesla's uncles paid for him to leave Gospi\u0107 for Prague, where he was to study. He arrived too late to enroll at Charles-Ferdinand University; he had never studied Greek, a required subject; and he was illiterate in Czech, another required subject. He attended lectures in philosophy at the university as an auditor, but he did not receive grades for the courses.\nBudapest Telephone Exchange.\nTesla moved to Budapest, Hungary, in 1881 to work under Tivadar Pusk\u00e1s at a telegraph company, the Budapest Telephone Exchange. Upon arrival, Tesla realized that the company, then under construction, was not functional, so he worked as a draftsman in the Central Telegraph Office instead. Within a few months, the Budapest Telephone Exchange became functional, and Tesla was allocated the chief electrician position. Tesla later described how he made many improvements to the Central Station equipment including an improved telephone repeater or amplifier.\nWorking at Edison.\nIn 1882, Tivadar Pusk\u00e1s got Tesla another job in Paris with the Continental Edison Company. Tesla began working in what was then a brand new industry, installing indoor incandescent lighting citywide in large scale electric power utility. The company had several subdivisions and Tesla worked at the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Electrique Edison, the division in the Ivry-sur-Seine suburb of Paris in charge of installing the lighting system. There he gained a great deal of practical experience in electrical engineering. Management took notice of his advanced knowledge in engineering and physics and soon had him designing and building improved versions of generating dynamos and motors. \nMoving to the United States.\nIn 1884, Edison manager Charles Batchelor, who had been overseeing the Paris installation, was brought back to the United States to manage the Edison Machine Works, a manufacturing division situated in New York City, and asked that Tesla be brought to the United States as well. In June 1884, Tesla emigrated and began working almost immediately at the Machine Works on Manhattan's Lower East Side, an overcrowded shop with a workforce of several hundred machinists, laborers, managing staff, and 20 \"field engineers\" struggling with the task of building the large electric utility in that city. As in Paris, Tesla was working on troubleshooting installations and improving generators. \nHistorian W. Bernard Carlson notes Tesla may have met company founder Thomas Edison only a couple of times. One of those times was noted in Tesla's autobiography where, after staying up all night repairing the damaged dynamos on the ocean liner , he ran into Batchelor and Edison, who made a quip about their \"Parisian\" being out all night. After Tesla told them he had been up all night fixing the \"Oregon\", Edison commented to Batchelor that \"this is a damned good man\". One of the projects given to Tesla was to develop an arc lamp\u2013based street lighting system. Arc lighting was the most popular type of street lighting but it required high voltages and was incompatible with the Edison low-voltage incandescent system, causing the company to lose contracts in some cities. Tesla's designs were never put into production, possibly because of technical improvements in incandescent street lighting or because of an installation deal that Edison made with an arc lighting company.\nTesla had been working at the Machine Works for a total of six months when he quit. What event precipitated his leaving is unclear. It may have been over a bonus he did not receive, either for redesigning generators or for the arc lighting system that was shelved. Tesla had previous run-ins with the Edison company over unpaid bonuses he believed he had earned. In his autobiography, Tesla stated the manager of the Edison Machine Works offered a $50,000 bonus to design \"twenty-four different types of standard machines\" \"but it turned out to be a practical joke\". Later versions of this story have Thomas Edison himself offering and then reneging on the deal, quipping: \"Tesla, you don't understand our American humor\". The size of the bonus in either story has been noted as odd, since Machine Works manager Batchelor was stingy with pay, and the company did not have that amount of cash (equal to $ today) on hand. Tesla's diary contains just one comment on what happened at the end of his employment, a note he scrawled across the two pages covering 7 December 1884, to 4 January 1885, saying \"Good By to the Edison Machine Works\".\nTesla Electric Light and Manufacturing.\nSoon after leaving the Edison company, Tesla was working on patenting an arc lighting system, possibly the same one he had developed at Edison. In March 1885, he met with patent attorney Lemuel W. Serrell, the same attorney used by Edison, to obtain help with submitting the patents. Serrell introduced Tesla to two businessmen, Robert Lane and Benjamin Vail, who agreed to finance an arc lighting manufacturing and utility company in Tesla's name, the Tesla Electric Light and Manufacturing Company. Tesla worked for the rest of the year obtaining the patents that included an improved DC generator, the first patents issued to Tesla in the US, and building and installing the system in Rahway, New Jersey. \nThe investors showed little interest in Tesla's ideas for new types of alternating current motors and electrical transmission equipment. After the utility was up and running in 1886, they decided that the manufacturing side of the business was too competitive and opted to simply run an electric utility. They formed a new utility company, abandoning Tesla's company and leaving the inventor penniless. Tesla even lost control of the patents he had generated, since he had assigned them to the company in exchange for stock. He had to work at various electrical repair jobs and as a ditch digger for $2 per day. Later in life, Tesla recounted that part of 1886 as a time of hardship, writing \"My high education in various branches of science, mechanics and literature seemed to me like a mockery\".\nAC and the induction motor.\nIn late 1886, Tesla met Alfred S. Brown, a Western Union superintendent, and New York attorney Charles Fletcher Peck. The two men were experienced in setting up companies and promoting inventions and patents for financial gain. Based on Tesla's new ideas for electrical equipment, including a thermo-magnetic motor idea, they agreed to back the inventor financially and handle his patents. Together they formed the Tesla Electric Company in April 1887, with an agreement that profits from generated patents would go &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 to Tesla, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 to Peck and Brown, and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 to fund development. They set up a laboratory for Tesla at 89 Liberty Street in Manhattan, where he worked on improving and developing new types of electric motors, generators, and other devices.\nIn 1887, Tesla developed an induction motor that ran on alternating current (AC), a power system format that was rapidly expanding in Europe and the United States because of its advantages in long-distance, high-voltage transmission. The motor used polyphase current, which generated a rotating magnetic field to turn the motor (a principle that Tesla claimed to have conceived in 1882). This innovative electric motor, patented in May 1888, was a simple self-starting design that did not need a commutator, thus avoiding sparking and the high maintenance of constantly servicing and replacing mechanical brushes.\nAlong with getting the motor patented, Peck and Brown arranged to get the motor publicized, starting with independent testing to verify it was a functional improvement, followed by press releases sent to technical publications for articles to run concurrently with the issue of the patent. Physicist William Arnold Anthony (who tested the motor) and \"Electrical World\" magazine editor Thomas Commerford Martin arranged for Tesla to demonstrate his AC motor on 16 May 1888 at the American Institute of Electrical Engineers. Engineers working for the Westinghouse Electric &amp; Manufacturing Company reported to George Westinghouse that Tesla had a viable AC motor and related power system\u2014something Westinghouse needed for the alternating current system he was already marketing. Westinghouse looked into getting a patent on a similar commutator-less, rotating magnetic field-based induction motor developed in 1885 and presented in a paper in March 1888 by Italian physicist Galileo Ferraris, but decided that Tesla's patent would probably control the market.\nIn July 1888, Brown and Peck negotiated a licensing deal with George Westinghouse for Tesla's polyphase induction motor and transformer designs for $60,000 in cash and stock and a royalty of $2.50 per AC horsepower produced by each motor. Westinghouse also hired Tesla for one year for the large fee of $2,000 ($ in today's dollars) per month to be a consultant at the Westinghouse Electric &amp; Manufacturing Company's Pittsburgh labs.\nDuring that year, Tesla worked in Pittsburgh, helping to create an alternating current system to power the city's streetcars. He found it a frustrating period because of conflicts with the other Westinghouse engineers over how best to implement AC power. Between them, they settled on a 60-cycle AC system that Tesla proposed (to match the working frequency of Tesla's motor), but they soon found that it would not work for streetcars, since Tesla's induction motor could run only at a constant speed. They ended up using a DC traction motor instead.\nMarket turmoil.\nTesla's demonstration of his induction motor and Westinghouse's subsequent licensing of the patent, both in 1888, came at the time of extreme competition between electric companies. The three big firms, Westinghouse, Edison, and Thomson-Houston Electric Company, were trying to grow in a capital-intensive business while financially undercutting each other. There was even a \"war of currents\" propaganda campaign going on, with Edison Electric claiming their direct current system was better and safer than the Westinghouse alternating current system and Thomson-Houston sometimes siding with Edison. Competing in this market meant Westinghouse would not have the cash or engineering resources to develop Tesla's motor and the related polyphase system right away.\nTwo years after signing the Tesla contract, Westinghouse Electric was in trouble. The near collapse of Barings Bank in London triggered the financial panic of 1890, causing investors to call in their loans to Westinghouse Electric. The sudden cash shortage forced the company to refinance its debts. The new lenders demanded that Westinghouse cut back on what looked like excessive spending on acquisition of other companies, research, and patents, including the per motor royalty in the Tesla contract. At that point, the Tesla induction motor had been unsuccessful and was stuck in development. Westinghouse was paying a $15,000-a-year guaranteed royalty even though operating examples of the motor were rare and polyphase power systems needed to run it were even rarer. \nIn early 1891, George Westinghouse explained his financial difficulties to Tesla in stark terms, saying that, if he did not meet the demands of his lenders, he would no longer be in control of Westinghouse Electric and Tesla would have to \"deal with the bankers\" to try to collect future royalties. The advantages of having Westinghouse continue to champion the motor probably seemed obvious to Tesla and he agreed to release the company from the royalty payment clause in the contract. Six years later Westinghouse purchased Tesla's patent for a lump sum payment of $216,000 as part of a patent-sharing agreement signed with General Electric (a company created from the 1892 merger of Edison and Thomson-Houston).\nNew York laboratories.\nThe money Tesla made from licensing his AC patents made him independently wealthy and gave him the time and funds to pursue his own interests. In 1889, Tesla moved out of the Liberty Street shop Peck and Brown had rented and for the next dozen years worked out of a series of workshop/laboratory spaces in Manhattan. These included a lab at 175 Grand Street (1889\u20131892), the fourth floor of 33\u201335 South Fifth Avenue (1892\u20131895), and sixth and seventh floors of 46 &amp; 48 East Houston Street (1895\u20131902). \nTesla coil.\nIn the summer of 1889, Tesla traveled to the 1889 Exposition Universelle in Paris and learned of Heinrich Hertz's 1886\u20131888 experiments that proved the existence of electromagnetic radiation, including radio waves. In repeating and then expanding on these experiments Tesla tried powering a Ruhmkorff coil with a high speed alternator he had been developing as part of an improved arc lighting system but found that the high-frequency current overheated the iron core and melted the insulation between the primary and secondary windings in the coil. To fix this problem Tesla came up with his \"oscillating transformer\", with an air gap instead of insulating material between the primary and secondary windings and an iron core that could be moved to different positions in or out of the coil. Later called the Tesla coil, it would be used to produce high-voltage, low-current, high frequency alternating-current electricity. He would use this resonant transformer circuit in his later wireless power work.\nWireless lighting.\nAfter 1890, Tesla experimented with transmitting power by inductive and capacitive coupling using high AC voltages generated with his Tesla coil. He attempted to develop a wireless lighting system based on near-field inductive and capacitive coupling and conducted a series of public demonstrations where he lit Geissler tubes and even incandescent light bulbs from across a stage. He spent most of the decade working on variations of this new form of lighting with the help of various investors but none of the ventures succeeded in making a commercial product out of his findings.\nIn 1893 at St. Louis, Missouri, the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the National Electric Light Association, Tesla told onlookers that he was sure a system like his could eventually conduct \"intelligible signals or perhaps even power to any distance without the use of wires\" by conducting it through the Earth.\nOn 30 July 1891, aged 35, Tesla became a naturalized citizen of the United States. In the same year, he patented his Tesla coil. \nHe served as a vice-president of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers from 1892 to 1894, the forerunner of the modern-day Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) (along with the Institute of Radio Engineers).\nPolyphase system and the Columbian Exposition.\nBy the beginning of 1893, Westinghouse engineer Charles F. Scott and then Benjamin G. Lamme had made progress on an efficient version of Tesla's induction motor. Lamme found a way to make the polyphase system it would need compatible with older single-phase AC and DC systems by developing a rotary converter. Westinghouse Electric now had a way to provide electricity to all potential customers and started branding their polyphase AC system as the \"Tesla Polyphase System\". They believed that Tesla's patents gave them patent priority over other polyphase AC systems.\nWestinghouse Electric asked Tesla to participate in the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago where the company had a large space in the \"Electricity Building\" devoted to electrical exhibits. Westinghouse Electric won the bid to light the Exposition with alternating current and it was a key event in the history of AC power, as the company demonstrated to the American public the safety, reliability, and efficiency of an alternating current system that was polyphase and could also supply the other AC and DC exhibits at the fair.\nA special exhibit space was set up to display various forms and models of Tesla's induction motor. The rotating magnetic field that drove them was explained through a series of demonstrations including an \"Egg of Columbus\" that used the two-phase coil found in an induction motor to spin a copper egg making it stand on end.\nTesla visited the fair for a week during its six-month run to attend the International Electrical Congress and put on a series of demonstrations at the Westinghouse exhibit. A specially darkened room had been set up where Tesla showed his wireless lighting system, using a demonstration he had previously performed throughout America and Europe; these included using high-voltage, high-frequency alternating current to light wireless gas-discharge lamps.\nSteam-powered oscillating generator.\nDuring his presentation at the International Electrical Congress in the Columbian Exposition Agriculture Hall, Tesla introduced his steam-powered reciprocating electricity generator that he patented that year, something he thought was a better way to generate alternating current. Steam was forced into the oscillator and rushed out through a series of ports, pushing a piston up and down that was attached to an armature. The magnetic armature vibrated up and down at high speed, producing an alternating magnetic field. This induced alternating electric current in the wire coils located adjacent. It did away with the complicated parts of a steam engine/generator, but never caught on as a feasible engineering solution to generate electricity.\nConsulting on Niagara.\nIn 1893, Edward Dean Adams, who headed the Niagara Falls Cataract Construction Company, sought Tesla's opinion on what system would be best to transmit power generated at the falls. Over several years, there had been a series of proposals and open competitions on how best to do it. Among the systems proposed by several US and European companies were two-phase and three-phase AC, high-voltage DC, and compressed air. Adams asked Tesla for information about the current state of all the competing systems. Tesla advised Adams that a two-phased system would be the most reliable and that there was a Westinghouse system to light incandescent bulbs using two-phase alternating current. The company awarded a contract to Westinghouse Electric for building a two-phase AC generating system at the Niagara Falls, based on Tesla's advice and Westinghouse's demonstration at the Columbian Exposition. At the same time, a further contract was awarded to General Electric to build the AC distribution system.\nThe Nikola Tesla Company.\nIn 1895, Edward Dean Adams, impressed with what he saw when he toured Tesla's lab, agreed to help found the Nikola Tesla Company, set up to fund, develop, and market a variety of previous Tesla patents and inventions as well as new ones. Alfred Brown signed on, bringing along patents developed under Peck and Brown. The board was filled out with William Birch Rankine and Charles F. Coaney.\nOn 13 March 1895, the South Fifth Avenue building that housed Tesla's lab caught fire. It started in the basement of the building and was so intense Tesla's fourth-floor lab burned and collapsed into the second floor. The fire set back Tesla's ongoing projects, and destroyed a collection of early notes and research material, models, and demonstration pieces, including many that had been exhibited at the 1893 Worlds Colombian Exposition. Tesla told \"The New York Times\" \"I am in too much grief to talk. What can I say?\".\nX-ray experimentation.\nStarting in 1894, Tesla began investigating what he referred to as radiant energy of \"invisible\" kinds after he had noticed damaged film in his laboratory in previous experiments (later identified as \"Roentgen rays\" or \"X-rays\"). His early experiments were with Crookes tubes, a cold cathode electrical discharge tube. Tesla may have inadvertently captured an X-ray image\u2014predating, by a few weeks, Wilhelm R\u00f6ntgen's December 1895 announcement of the discovery of X-rays\u2014when he tried to photograph Mark Twain illuminated by a Geissler tube, an earlier type of gas discharge tube. The only thing captured in the image was the metal locking screw on the camera lens.\nIn March 1896, Tesla conducted experiments in X-ray imaging, developing a high-energy single-terminal vacuum tube that had no target electrode and that worked from the output of the Tesla coil (the modern term for the phenomenon produced by this device is \"bremsstrahlung\" or \"braking radiation\"). In his research, Tesla devised several experimental setups to produce X-rays. Tesla held that, with his circuits, the \"instrument will\u00a0... enable one to generate Roentgen rays of much greater power than obtainable with ordinary apparatus\".\nTesla noted the hazards of working with his circuit and single-node X-ray-producing devices. In his many notes on the early investigation of this phenomenon, he attributed the skin damage to various causes. He believed early on that damage to the skin was not caused by the Roentgen rays, but by the ozone generated in contact with the skin, and to a lesser extent, by nitrous acid. Tesla incorrectly believed that X-rays were longitudinal waves, such as those produced in waves in plasmas. These plasma waves can occur in force-free magnetic fields.\nRadio remote control.\nIn 1898, Tesla demonstrated a boat that used a coherer-based radio control\u2014which he dubbed \"telautomaton\"\u2014to the public during an electrical exhibition at Madison Square Garden. Tesla tried to sell his idea to the US military as a type of radio-controlled torpedo, but they showed little interest. Tesla took the opportunity to further demonstrate \"Teleautomatics\" in an address to a meeting of the Commercial Club in Chicago, while he was traveling to Colorado Springs, on 13 May 1899.\nWireless power.\nFrom the 1890s through 1906, Tesla spent a great deal of his time and fortune on a series of projects trying to develop the transmission of electrical power without wires. At the time, there was no feasible way to wirelessly transmit communication signals over long distances, let alone large amounts of power. Tesla had studied radio waves early on, and came to the conclusion that part of the existing study on them, by Hertz, was incorrect. Tesla noted that, even if theories on radio waves were true, they were worthless for his intended purposes, since this form of \"invisible light\" would diminish over a distance just like any other radiation and would travel in straight lines out into space, becoming \"hopelessly lost\". He worked on the idea that he might be able to conduct electricity long distance through the Earth or the atmosphere, and began working on experiments to test this idea including setting up a large resonance transformer magnifying transmitter in his East Houston Street lab. \nColorado Springs.\nTo further study the conductive nature of low-pressure air, Tesla set up an experimental station at high altitude in Colorado Springs during 1899. There he could safely operate much larger coils than in his New York lab, and the El Paso Electric Light Company supplied alternating current free of charge. To fund his experiments, he convinced John Jacob Astor IV to invest $100,000 ($ in today's dollars) to become a majority shareholder in the Nikola Tesla Company. Upon his arrival, he told reporters that he planned to conduct wireless telegraphy experiments, transmitting signals from Pikes Peak to Paris.\nThere, he experimented with a large coil operating in the megavolts range, producing artificial lightning (and thunder) consisting of millions of volts and discharges of up to in length, and, at one point, inadvertently burned out the generator in El Paso, causing a power outage. The observations he made of the electronic noise of lightning strikes led him to (incorrectly) conclude that he could use the entire globe of the Earth to conduct electrical energy.\nDuring his time at his laboratory, Tesla observed unusual signals from his receiver which he speculated to be communications from another planet. He mentioned them in a letter to a reporter in December 1899 and to the Red Cross Society in December 1900. Reporters treated it as a sensational story and jumped to the conclusion Tesla was hearing signals from Mars. He expanded on the signals he heard in a 9 February 1901 \"Collier's Weekly\" article entitled \"Talking With Planets\", where he said it had not been immediately apparent to him that he was hearing \"intelligently controlled signals\" and that the signals could have come from Mars, Venus, or other planets.\nTesla had an agreement with the editor of \"The Century Magazine\" to produce an article on his findings. The magazine sent a photographer to Colorado to photograph the work being done there. The article, titled \"The Problem of Increasing Human Energy\", appeared in the June 1900 edition of the magazine. He explained the superiority of the wireless system he envisioned but the article was more of a lengthy philosophical treatise than an understandable scientific description of his work.\nWardenclyffe.\nTesla made the rounds in New York trying to find investors for what he thought would be a viable system of wireless transmission, wining and dining them at the Waldorf-Astoria's Palm Garden (the hotel where he was living at the time), The Players Club, and Delmonico's. In March 1901, he obtained $150,000 ($ in today's dollars) from J. P. Morgan in return for a 51% share of any generated wireless patents, and began planning the Wardenclyffe Tower facility to be built in Shoreham, New York, east of the city on the North Shore of Long Island.\nBy July 1901, Tesla had expanded his plans to build a more powerful transmitter to leap ahead of Marconi's radio-based system, which Tesla thought was a copy of his own. In December 1901, Marconi transmitted the letter S from England to Newfoundland, defeating Tesla in the race to be first to complete such a transmission. In June 1902, Tesla moved his lab operations from Houston Street to Wardenclyffe.\nInvestors on Wall Street put money into Marconi's system, and some in the press began turning against Tesla's project, claiming it was a hoax. The project came to a halt in 1905, perhaps contributing to what biographer Marc J. Seifer suspects was a nervous breakdown on Tesla's part in 1906. Tesla mortgaged the Wardenclyffe property to cover his debts at the Waldorf-Astoria, which eventually amounted to $20,000 ($ in today's dollars).\nLater years.\nAfter Wardenclyffe closed, Tesla continued to write to Morgan; after \"the great man\" died, Tesla wrote to Morgan's son Jack, trying to get further funding for the project. In 1906, Tesla opened offices at 165 Broadway in Manhattan, trying to raise further funds by developing and marketing his patents. He went on to have offices at the Metropolitan Life Tower from 1910 to 1914; rented for a few months at the Woolworth Building, moving out because he could not afford the rent; and then to office space at 8 West 40th Street from 1915 to 1925. After moving to 8 West 40th Street, he was effectively bankrupt. Most of his patents had run out and he was having trouble with the new inventions he was trying to develop.\nBladeless turbine.\nOn his 50th birthday, in 1906, Tesla demonstrated a 16,000\u00a0rpm bladeless turbine. During 1910\u20131911, at the Waterside Power Station in New York, several of his bladeless turbine engines were tested at 100\u20135,000\u00a0hp. Tesla worked with several companies including from 1919 to 1922 in Milwaukee, for Allis-Chalmers. Tesla licensed the idea to a precision instrument company, and it found use in the form of luxury car speedometers and other instruments.\nWireless lawsuits.\nWhen World War I broke out, the British cut the transatlantic telegraph cable linking the US to Germany in order to control the flow of information between the two countries. They also tried to shut off German wireless communication to and from the US by having the US Marconi Company sue the German radio company Telefunken for patent infringement. Telefunken brought in the physicists Jonathan Zenneck and Karl Ferdinand Braun for their defense, and hired Tesla as a witness for two years for $1,000 a month. The case stalled and then went moot when the US entered the war against Germany in 1917.\nIn 1915, Tesla attempted to sue the Marconi Company for infringement of his wireless tuning patents. Marconi's initial radio patent had been awarded in the US in 1897, but his 1900 patent submission covering improvements to radio transmission had been rejected several times on the grounds that it infringed on other existing patents, including two 1897 Tesla wireless power tuning patents, before it was finally approved in 1904. Tesla's 1915 case went nowhere, but in a related case, where the Marconi Company tried to sue the US government over WWI patent infringements, a Supreme Court of the United States 1943 decision restored the prior patents of Oliver Lodge, John Stone, and Tesla. The court declared that their decision had no bearing on Marconi's claim as the first to achieve radio transmission, just that since Marconi's claim to certain patented improvements were questionable, the company could not claim infringement on those same patents.\nOther ideas.\nTesla attempted to market several devices based on the production of ozone. These included his 1900 Tesla Ozone Company selling an 1896 patented device based on his Tesla coil, used to bubble ozone through different types of oils to make a therapeutic gel. He tried to develop a variation of this a few years later as a room sanitizer for hospitals. \nHe theorized that the application of electricity to the brain enhanced intelligence. In 1912, he crafted \"a plan to make dull students bright by saturating them unconsciously with electricity,\" wiring the walls of a schoolroom and, \"saturating [the schoolroom] with infinitesimal electric waves vibrating at high frequency. The whole room will thus, Mr. Tesla claims, be converted into a health-giving and stimulating electromagnetic field or 'bath.'\" The plan was, at least provisionally, approved by then superintendent of New York City schools, William H. Maxwell.\nIn the August 1917 edition of the magazine \"Electrical Experimenter\", Tesla postulated that electricity could be used to locate submarines via using the reflection of an \"electric ray\" of \"tremendous frequency,\" with the signal being viewed on a fluorescent screen (a system that has been noted to have a superficial resemblance to modern radar). Tesla was incorrect in his assumption that high-frequency radio waves would penetrate water. \u00c9mile Girardeau, who helped develop France's first radar system in the 1930s, noted in 1953 that Tesla's general speculation that a very strong high-frequency signal would be needed was correct. Girardeau said, \"(Tesla) was prophesying or dreaming, since he had at his disposal no means of carrying them out, but one must add that if he was dreaming, at least he was dreaming correctly\".\nIn 1928, Tesla received patent, https://, for a biplane design capable of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL), which \"gradually tilted through manipulation of the elevator devices\" in flight until it was flying like a conventional plane. This impractical design was something Tesla thought would sell for less than $1,000.\nLiving circumstances.\nTesla lived at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York City from 1900 and ran up a large bill. He moved to the St. Regis Hotel in 1922 and followed a pattern from then on of moving to a different hotel every few years and leaving unpaid bills behind.\nTesla walked to the park every day to feed the pigeons. He began feeding them at the window of his hotel room and nursed injured birds back to health. He said that he had been visited by a certain injured white pigeon daily. He spent over $2,000 () to care for the bird, including a device he built to support her comfortably while her broken wing and leg healed. Tesla's unpaid bills, as well as complaints about the mess made by pigeons, led to his eviction from St. Regis in 1923. He was forced to leave the Hotel Pennsylvania in 1930 and the Hotel Governor Clinton in 1934. At one point he took rooms at the Hotel Marguery. \nTesla moved to the Hotel New Yorker in 1934. At this time Westinghouse Electric &amp; Manufacturing Company began paying him $125 () per month in addition to paying his rent. Accounts of how this came about vary. Several sources claim that Westinghouse was concerned, or possibly warned, about potential bad publicity arising from the impoverished conditions in which their former star inventor was living. The payment has been described as being couched as a \"consulting fee\" to get around Tesla's aversion to accepting charity. Tesla biographer Marc Seifer described the Westinghouse payments as a type of \"unspecified settlement\".\nBirthday press conferences.\nIn 1931, a young journalist whom Tesla befriended, Kenneth M. Swezey, organized a celebration for the inventor's 75th birthday. Tesla received congratulations from figures in science and engineering such as Albert Einstein, and he was also featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine. The cover caption \"All the world's his power house\" noted his contribution to electrical power generation. The party went so well that Tesla made it an annual event, an occasion where he would put out a large spread of food and drink\u2014featuring dishes of his own creation. He invited the press in order to see his inventions and hear stories about his past exploits, views on current events, and sometimes baffling claims.\nAt the 1932 party, Tesla claimed he had invented a motor that would run on cosmic rays.\nIn 1933, at age 77, Tesla told reporters at the event that, after 35 years of work, he was on the verge of producing proof of a new form of energy. He claimed it was a theory of energy that was \"violently opposed\" to Einsteinian physics and could be tapped with an apparatus that would be cheap to run and last 500 years. He also told reporters he was working on a way to transmit individualized private radio wavelengths, working on breakthroughs in metallurgy, and developing a way to photograph the retina to record thought.\nAt the 1934 occasion, Tesla told reporters he had designed a superweapon he claimed would end all war. He called it \"teleforce\", but was usually referred to as his death ray. In 1940, the \"New York Times\" gave a range for the ray of , with an expected development cost of US$2\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). Tesla described it as a defensive weapon that would be put up along the border of a country and be used against attacking ground-based infantry or aircraft. Tesla never revealed detailed plans of how the weapon worked during his lifetime but, in 1984, they surfaced at the Nikola Tesla Museum archive in Belgrade. The treatise, \"The New Art of Projecting Concentrated Non-dispersive Energy through the Natural Media\", described an open-ended vacuum tube with a gas jet seal that allows particles to exit, a method of charging slugs of tungsten or mercury to millions of volts, and directing them in streams (through electrostatic repulsion). Tesla tried to attract interest of the US War Department, United Kingdom, Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia in the device.\nIn 1935, at his 79th birthday party, Tesla covered many topics. He claimed to have discovered the cosmic ray in 1896 and invented a way to produce direct current by induction, and made many claims about his mechanical oscillator. Describing the device (which he expected would earn him $100 million within two years) he told reporters that a version of his oscillator had caused an earthquake in his 46 East Houston Street lab and neighboring streets in Lower Manhattan in 1898. He went on to tell reporters his oscillator could destroy the Empire State Building with of air pressure. He also proposed using his oscillators to transmit vibrations into the ground. He claimed it would work over any distance and could be used for communication or locating underground mineral deposits, a technique he called \"telegeodynamics\".\nIn 1937, at his event in the Grand Ballroom of the Hotel New Yorker, Tesla received the Order of the White Lion from the Czechoslovak ambassador and a medal from the Yugoslav ambassador. On questions concerning the death ray, Tesla stated: \"But it is not an experiment\u00a0... I have built, demonstrated and used it. Only a little time will pass before I can give it to the world.\"\nAwards.\nTesla won numerous medals and awards. They include:\nDeath.\nIn the fall of 1937 at the age of 81, after midnight one night, Tesla left the Hotel New Yorker to make his regular commute to St. Patrick's Cathedral and the Public Library to feed the pigeons. While crossing a street a couple of blocks from the hotel, Tesla was struck by a moving taxicab and was thrown to the ground. His back was severely wrenched and three of his ribs were broken in the accident. The full extent of his injuries was never known; Tesla refused to consult a doctor, an almost lifelong custom, and never fully recovered. On the night of 7 January 1943, at the age of 86, Tesla died alone in his hotel room. His body was found by a maid on the next day when she entered his room, ignoring the \"do not disturb\" sign that had been placed on his door three days earlier. An assistant medical examiner examined the body, estimated the time of death as 10:30p.m. and ruled that the cause of death had been coronary thrombosis.\nTwo days later the Federal Bureau of Investigation ordered the Alien Property Custodian to seize Tesla's belongings. John G. Trump, a professor at M.I.T. and a well-known electrical engineer serving as a technical aide to the National Defense Research Committee, was called in to analyze the Tesla items. After a three-day investigation, Trump's report concluded that there was nothing which would constitute a hazard in unfriendly hands. In a box purported to contain a part of Tesla's \"death ray\", Trump found a 45-year-old multidecade resistance box. On 10 January 1943, New York City mayor Fiorello La Guardia read a eulogy for Tesla at his funeral at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine.\nPersonal life and character.\nTesla was a lifelong bachelor, who had once explained that his chastity was very helpful to his scientific abilities. In an interview with the \"Galveston Daily News\" on 10 August 1924 he stated, \"Now the soft-voiced gentlewoman of my reverent worship has all but vanished. In her place has come the woman who thinks that her chief success in life lies in making herself as much as possible like man\u2014in dress, voice and actions...\" He told a reporter in later years that he sometimes felt that by not marrying, he had made too great a sacrifice to his work.\nTesla was a good friend of Francis Marion Crawford, Robert Underwood Johnson, Stanford White, Fritz Lowenstein, George Scherff, and Kenneth Swezey. In middle age, Tesla became a close friend of Mark Twain; they spent a lot of time together in his lab and elsewhere. Twain notably described Tesla's induction motor invention as \"the most valuable patent since the telephone\". At a party thrown by actress Sarah Bernhardt in 1896, Tesla met Indian Hindu monk Swami Vivekananda. Vivekananda later wrote that Tesla said he could demonstrate mathematically the relationship between matter and energy, something Vivekananda hoped would give a scientific foundation to Vedantic cosmology. The meeting with Swami Vivekananda stimulated Tesla's interest in Eastern Science, which led to Tesla studying Hindu and Vedic philosophy for a number of years. Tesla later wrote an article titled \"Man's Greatest Achievement\" using Sanskrit terms akasha and prana to describe the relationship between matter and energy. In the late 1920s, Tesla befriended George Sylvester Viereck, a poet, writer, mystic, and later a Nazi propagandist. Tesla occasionally attended dinner parties held by Viereck and his wife.\nTesla could be harsh at times and openly expressed disgust for overweight people, such as when he fired a secretary because of her weight. He was quick to criticize clothing; on several occasions, Tesla directed a subordinate to go home and change her dress. When Thomas Edison died in 1931, Tesla contributed the only negative opinion to \"The New York Times\". He became a vegetarian in his later years, living on only milk, bread, honey, and vegetable juices.\nViews and beliefs.\nOn experimental and theoretical physics.\nTesla disagreed with the theory that atoms were composed of smaller subatomic particles, stating there was no such thing as an electron creating an electric charge. He believed that if electrons existed at all, they were some fourth state of matter or \"sub-atom\" that could exist only in an experimental vacuum, and that they had nothing to do with electricity. Tesla believed that atoms are immutable\u2014they could not change state or be split in any way. He was a believer in the 19th-century concept of an all-pervasive ether that transmitted electrical energy.\nTesla opposed the equivalence of matter and energy. He was critical of Einstein's theory of relativity, saying \"I hold that space cannot be curved, for the simple reason that it can have no properties. It might as well be said that God has properties.\" In 1935 he described relativity as \"a beggar wrapped in purple whom ignorant people take for a king\" and said his own experiments had measured the speed of cosmic rays from Antares as fifty times the speed of light. Tesla claimed to have developed his own physical principle regarding matter and energy that he started working on in 1892, and in 1937, at age 81, claimed in a letter to have completed a \"dynamic theory of gravity\" that \"[would] put an end to idle speculations and false conceptions, as that of curved space\". He stated that the theory was \"worked out in all details\" and that he hoped to soon give it to the world. Further elucidation of his theory was never found in his writings.\nOn society.\nTesla is widely considered by his biographers to have been a humanist in philosophical outlook. He expressed the belief that human \"pity\" had come to interfere with the natural \"ruthless workings of nature\". Though his argumentation did not depend on a concept of a \"master race\" or the inherent superiority of one person over another, he advocated for eugenics. In 1926, Tesla commented on the ills of the social subservience of women and the struggle of women for gender equality. He indicated that humanity's future would be run by \"Queen Bees\". He believed that women would become the dominant sex in the future. He made predictions about the relevant issues of a post-World War I environment in an article entitled \"Science and Discovery are the great Forces which will lead to the Consummation of the War\" (20 December 1914).\nOn religion.\nTesla was raised in the faith of the Eastern Orthodox Church. Later in life he did not consider himself to be a \"believer in the orthodox sense\", said he opposed religious fanaticism, and said \"Buddhism and Christianity are the greatest religions both in number of disciples and in importance.\" He also said \"To me, the universe is simply a great machine which never came into being and never will end\" and \"what we call 'soul' or 'spirit,' is nothing more than the sum of the functionings of the body. When this functioning ceases, the 'soul' or the 'spirit' ceases likewise.\"\nLiterary works.\nTesla wrote a number of books and articles for magazines and journals. Among his books are \"\", compiled and edited by Ben Johnston in 1983 from a series of 1919 magazine articles by Tesla which were republished in 1977; \"The Fantastic Inventions of Nikola Tesla\" (1993), compiled and edited by David Hatcher Childress; and \"The Tesla Papers\". Many of his writings are freely available online, including the article \"The Problem of Increasing Human Energy\", published in \"The Century Magazine\" in 1900, and the article \"Experiments with Alternate Currents of High Potential and High Frequency\", published in his book \"Inventions, Researches and Writings of Nikola Tesla\".\nLegacy.\nIn 1952, following pressure from Tesla's nephew, Yugoslav politician Sava Kosanovi\u0107, Tesla's entire estate was shipped to Belgrade in 80 trunks marked \"N.T.\". In 1957, Kosanovi\u0107's secretary Charlotte Muzar transported Tesla's ashes from the United States to Belgrade. They are displayed in a gold-plated sphere on a marble pedestal in the Nikola Tesla Museum. His archive consists of over 160,000 documents and is included in the UNESCO Memory of the World Programme.\nTesla obtained around 300 patents worldwide for his inventions. Some of Tesla's patents are not accounted for, and some that have lain hidden in patent archives have been rediscovered. There are at least 278 known patents issued to Tesla in 26 countries. Many were in the United States, Britain, and Canada, but many others were approved in countries around the globe.\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPublications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21474", "revid": "50464908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21474", "title": "Natural number", "text": "Number used for counting\nIn mathematics, the natural numbers are the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, and so on, possibly excluding 0. The terms positive integers, non-negative integers, whole numbers, and counting numbers are also used. The set of the natural numbers is commonly denoted by a bold N or a blackboard bold &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe natural numbers are used for counting, and for labeling the result of a count, like \"there are \"seven\" days in a week\", in which case they are called \"cardinal numbers\". They are also used to label places in an ordered series, like \"the \"third\" day of the month\", in which case they are called \"ordinal numbers\". Natural numbers may also be used to label, like the jersey numbers of a sports team; in this case, they have no specific mathematical properties and are called \"nominal numbers\".\nTwo natural operations are defined on natural numbers, addition and multiplication. Arithmetic is the study of the ways to perform these operations. Number theory is the study of the properties of these operations and their generalizations. Much of combinatorics involves counting mathematical objects, patterns and structures that are defined using natural numbers.\nMany number systems are built from the natural numbers and contain them. For example, the integers are made by including 0 and negative numbers. The rational numbers add fractions, and the real numbers add all infinite decimals. Complex numbers add the square root of \u22121. This makes up natural numbers as foundational for all mathematics.\nTerminology and notation.\nThe term \"natural numbers\" has two common definitions: either 0, 1, 2, ... or 1, 2, 3, ... Because there is no universal convention, the definition can be chosen to suit the context of use. To eliminate ambiguity, the sequences 1, 2, 3, ... and 0, 1, 2, ... are often called the positive integers and the non-negative integers, respectively.\nThe phrase whole numbers is frequently used for the natural numbers that include 0, although it may also mean all integers, positive and negative. In primary education, counting numbers usually refer to the natural numbers starting at 1, though this definition can vary.\nThe set of all natural numbers is typically denoted N or in blackboard bold as formula_1 Whether 0 is included is often determined by the context but may also be specified by using formula_2 or formula_3 (the set of all integers) with a subscript or superscript. Examples include formula_4, or formula_5 (for the set starting at 1) and formula_6 or formula_7 (for the set including 0).\nIntuitive concept.\nAn intuitive and implicit understanding of natural numbers is developed \"naturally\" through using numbers for counting, ordering and basic arithmetic. Within this are two closely related aspects of what a natural number is: the \"size of a collection;\" and \"a\" \"position in a sequence\".\nSize of a collection.\nNatural numbers can be used to answer questions like: \"how many apples are on the table?\". A natural number used in this way describes a characteristic of a \"collection of objects\". This characteristic, the \"size of a collection\" is called cardinality and a natural number used to describe or measure it is called a cardinal number.\nTwo collections have the same size or cardinality if there is a one-to-one correspondence between the objects in each collection to the objects in the other. For example, in the image to the right every apple can be paired off with one orange and every orange can be paired off with one apple. From this, even without counting or using numbers it can be seen that the group of apples has the \"same\" cardinality as the group of oranges, meaning they are both assigned the same cardinal number. \nThe natural number 3 is the thing used for the particular cardinal number described above and for the cardinal number of any other collection of objects that could be paired off in the same way to one of these groups.\nPosition in a sequence.\nThe natural numbers have a fixed progression, which is the familiar sequence beginning with 1, 2, 3, and so on. A natural number can be used to denote a specific position in any other sequence, in which case it is called an ordinal number. To have a specific position in a sequence means to come either before or after every other position in the sequence in a defined way, which is the concept of order.\nThe natural number 3 then is the thing that \"comes after\" 2 and 1, and \"before\" 4, 5 and so on. The number 2 is the thing that \"comes after\" 1, and 1 is the first element in the sequence. Each number represents the relation that position bears to the rest of the infinite sequence.\nCounting.\nThe process of counting involves both the cardinal and ordinal use of the natural numbers and illustrates the way the two fit together. To count the number of objects in a collection, each object is paired off with a natural number, usually by mentally or verbally saying the name of the number and assigning it to a particular object. The numbers must be assigned in order starting with 1 (they are ordinal) but the order of the objects chosen is arbitrary as long as each object is assigned one and only one number. When all of the objects have been assigned a number, the ordinal number assigned to the final object gives the result of the count, which is the cardinal number of the whole collection.\nHistory.\nAncient roots.\nThe most primitive method of representing a natural number is to use one's fingers, as in finger counting. Putting down a tally mark for each object is another primitive method. Later, a set of objects could be tested for equality, excess or shortage\u2014by striking out a mark and removing an object from the set.\nThe first major advance in abstraction was the use of numerals to represent numbers. This allowed systems to be developed for recording large numbers. The ancient Egyptians developed a powerful system of numerals with distinct hieroglyphs for\u00a01, 10, and all powers of\u00a010 up to over 1\u00a0million. A stone carving from Karnak, dating back from around 1500\u00a0BCE and now at the Louvre in Paris, depicts\u00a0276 as 2\u00a0hundreds, 7\u00a0tens, and 6\u00a0ones; and similarly for the number\u00a04,622. The Babylonians had a place-value system based essentially on the numerals for\u00a01 and\u00a010, using base sixty, so that the symbol for sixty was the same as the symbol for one\u2014its value being determined from context.\nA much later advance was the development of the idea that\u00a00 can be considered as a number, with its own numeral. The use of a\u00a00 digit in place-value notation (within other numbers) dates back as early as 700\u00a0BCE by the Babylonians, who omitted such a digit when it would have been the last symbol in the number. The Olmec and Maya civilizations used\u00a00 as a separate number as early as the 1st century BCE, but this usage did not spread beyond Mesoamerica. The use of a numeral\u00a00 in modern times originated with the Indian mathematician Brahmagupta in 628\u00a0CE. However, 0 had been used as a number in the medieval computus (the calculation of the date of Easter), beginning with Dionysius Exiguus in 525\u00a0CE, without being denoted by a numeral. Standard Roman numerals do not have a symbol for\u00a00; instead, \"nulla\" (or the genitive form \"nullae\") from , the Latin word for \"none\", was employed to denote a\u00a00 value.\nThe first systematic study of numbers as abstractions is usually credited to the Greek philosophers Pythagoras and Archimedes. Some Greek mathematicians treated the number\u00a01 differently than larger numbers, sometimes even not as a number at all. Euclid, for example, defined a unit first and then a number as a multitude of units, thus by his definition, a unit is not a number and there are no unique numbers (e.g., any two units from indefinitely many units is a 2). However, in the definition of perfect number which comes shortly afterward, Euclid treats 1 as a number like any other.\nIndependent studies on numbers also occurred at around the same time in India, China, and Mesoamerica.\nEmergence as a term.\nNicolas Chuquet used the term \"progression naturelle\" (natural progression) in 1484. The earliest known use of \"natural number\" as a complete English phrase is in 1763. The 1771 Encyclopaedia Britannica defines natural numbers in the logarithm article.\nStarting at 0 or 1 has long been a matter of definition. In 1727, Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle wrote that his notions of distance and element led to defining the natural numbers as including or excluding 0. In 1889, Giuseppe Peano used N for the positive integers and started at 1, but he later changed to using N0 and N1. Historically, most definitions have excluded 0, but many mathematicians such as George A. Wentworth, Bertrand Russell, Nicolas Bourbaki, Paul Halmos, Stephen Cole Kleene, and John Horton Conway have preferred to include 0. This approach gained wider adoption in the 1960s and was formalized in ISO 31-11 (1978), which defines natural numbers to include zero, a convention retained in the current ISO 80000-2 standard.\nFormal construction.\nIn 19th century Europe, there was mathematical and philosophical discussion about the exact nature of the natural numbers. Henri Poincar\u00e9 stated that axioms can only be demonstrated in their finite application, and concluded that it is \"the power of the mind\" which allows conceiving of the indefinite repetition of the same act. Leopold Kronecker summarized his belief as \"God made the integers, all else is the work of man\".\nThe constructivists saw a need to improve upon the logical rigor in the foundations of mathematics. In the 1860s, Hermann Grassmann suggested a recursive definition for natural numbers, thus stating they were not really natural\u2014but a consequence of definitions. Later, two classes of such formal definitions emerged, using set theory and Peano's axioms respectively. Later still, they were shown to be equivalent in most practical applications.\nSet-theoretical definitions of natural numbers were initiated by Frege. He initially defined a natural number as the class of all sets that are in one-to-one correspondence with a particular set. However, this definition turned out to lead to paradoxes, including Russell's paradox. To avoid such paradoxes, the formalism was modified so that a natural number is defined as a particular set, and any set that can be put into one-to-one correspondence with that set is said to have that number of elements.\nIn 1881, Charles Sanders Peirce provided the first axiomatization of natural-number arithmetic. In 1888, Richard Dedekind proposed another axiomatization of natural-number arithmetic, and in\u00a01889, Peano published a simplified version of Dedekind's axioms in his book \"The principles of arithmetic presented by a new method\" (). This approach is now called Peano arithmetic. It is based on an axiomatization of the properties of ordinal numbers: each natural number has a successor and every non-zero natural number has a unique predecessor. Peano arithmetic is equiconsistent with several weak systems of set theory. One such system is ZFC with the axiom of infinity replaced by its negation. Theorems that can be proved in ZFC but cannot be proved using the Peano Axioms include Goodstein's theorem.\nFormal definitions.\nFormal definitions of the natural numbers take the existing, intuitive notion of natural numbers and the rules of arithmetic and define them both in the more fundamental terms of mathematical logic. The two standard methods for doing this are: the Peano axioms; and set theory.\nThe Peano axioms (named for Giuseppe Peano) do not explicitly define what the natural numbers \"are\", but instead comprise a list of statements or axioms that must be true of natural numbers, however they are defined. In contrast, set theory defines each natural number as a particular set, in which a set can be generally understood as a collection of distinct objects or elements. While the two approaches are different, they are consistent in that the natural number sets collectively \"satisfy\" the Peano axioms.\nPeano axioms.\nThe five Peano axioms are the following:\nThese are not the original axioms published by Peano, but are named in his honor. Some forms of the Peano axioms have 1 in place of 0. In ordinary arithmetic, the successor of formula_10 is formula_13.\nSet-theoretic definition.\nIn set theory each natural number n is defined as an explicitly defined set, whose elements allow counting the elements of other sets. A variety of different constructions have been proposed, however the standard solution (due to John von Neumann) is to define each natural number n as a set containing n elements in the following way:\n {}, the empty set.\n \"a\" \u222a {\"a\"}.\nThis produces an iterative definition of the natural numbers satisfying the Peano axioms, sometimes called von Neumann ordinals:\n 0 \u222a {0} \n {0} \n 1 \u222a {1} \n {0, 1} \n {{}, }{{#invoke:Check for unknown parameters|check\n 2 \u222a {2} \n {0, 1, 2} \n {{}, , {{}, }{{#if:|{{!}}{{)}}|{{)}}}}{{#invoke:Check for unknown parameters|check\n \"n\"\u22121 \u222a {\"n\"\u22121} \n {0, 1, ..., \"n\"\u22121} \n {{}, , ..., {{}, , ...}{{#if:|{{!}}{{)}}|{{)}}}}{{#invoke:Check for unknown parameters|check\nIn this definition each natural number is equal to the set of all natural numbers less than it. Given a natural number \"n\", the sentence \"a set S has n elements\" can be formally defined as \"there exists a bijection from n to S.\" This formalizes the operation of \"counting\" the elements of S. Also, \"n\" \u2264 \"m\" if and only if \"n\" is a subset of \"m\". In other words, the set inclusion defines the usual total order on the natural numbers. This order is a well-order.\nAnother construction sometimes called &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Zermelo ordinals defines 0 \n {} and \"S\"(\"a\") \n {\"a\"} and is now largely only of historical interest.\nProperties.\nThis section uses the convention formula_14.\nAddition.\nGiven the set formula_15 of natural numbers and the successor function formula_16 sending each natural number to the next one, one can define addition of natural numbers recursively by setting \"a\" + 0 \n \"a\" and \"a\" + \"S\"(\"b\") \n \"S\"(\"a\" + \"b\") for all \"a\", \"b\". Thus, \"a\" + 1 \n \"a\" + S(0) \n S(\"a\"+0) \n S(\"a\"), \"a\" + 2 \n \"a\" + S(1) \n S(\"a\"+1) \n S(S(\"a\")), and so on. The algebraic structure formula_17 is a commutative monoid with identity element\u00a00. It is a free monoid on one generator. This commutative monoid satisfies the cancellation property, so it can be embedded in a group. The smallest group containing the natural numbers is the integers.\nIf 1 is defined as \"S\"(0), then \"b\" + 1 \n \"b\" + \"S\"(0) \n \"S\"(\"b\" + 0) \n \"S\"(\"b\"). That is, \"b\" + 1 is simply the successor of \"b\".\nMultiplication.\nAnalogously, given that addition has been defined, a multiplication operator formula_18 can be defined via \"a\" \u00d7 0 \n 0 and \"a\" \u00d7 S(\"b\") \n (\"a\" \u00d7 \"b\") + \"a\". This turns formula_19 into a free commutative monoid with identity element\u00a01; a generator set for this monoid is the set of prime numbers.\nRelationship between addition and multiplication.\nAddition and multiplication are compatible, which is expressed in the distribution law: \"a\" \u00d7 (\"b\" + \"c\") \n (\"a\" \u00d7 \"b\") + (\"a\" \u00d7 \"c\"). These properties of addition and multiplication make the natural numbers an instance of a commutative semiring. Semirings are an algebraic generalization of the natural numbers where multiplication is not necessarily commutative. The lack of additive inverses, which is equivalent to the fact that formula_15 is not closed under subtraction (that is, subtracting one natural from another does not always result in another natural), means that formula_15 is \"not\" a ring; instead it is a semiring (also known as a \"rig\").\nIf the natural numbers are taken as \"excluding 0\", and \"starting at 1\", the definitions of + and \u00d7 are as above, except that they begin with \"a\" + 1 \n \"S\"(\"a\") and \"a\" \u00d7 1 \n \"a\". Furthermore, formula_22 has no identity element.\nOrder.\nIn this section, juxtaposed variables such as \"ab\" indicate the product \"a\" \u00d7 \"b\", and the standard order of operations is assumed.\nA total order on the natural numbers is defined by letting \"a\" \u2264 \"b\" if and only if there exists another natural number \"c\" where \"a\" + \"c\" \n \"b\". This order is compatible with the arithmetical operations in the following sense: if \"a\", \"b\" and \"c\" are natural numbers and \"a\" \u2264 \"b\", then \"a\" + \"c\" \u2264 \"b\" + \"c\" and \"ac\" \u2264 \"bc\".\nAn important property of the natural numbers is that they are well-ordered: every non-empty set of natural numbers has a least element. The rank among well-ordered sets is expressed by an ordinal number; for the natural numbers, this is denoted as \"\u03c9\" (omega).\nDivision.\nIn this section, juxtaposed variables such as \"ab\" indicate the product \"a\" \u00d7 \"b\", and the standard order of operations is assumed.\nWhile it is in general not possible to divide one natural number by another and get a natural number as result, the procedure of \"division with remainder\" or Euclidean division is available as a substitute: for any two natural numbers \"a\" and \"b\" with \"b\" \u2260 0 there are natural numbers \"q\" and \"r\" such that\nformula_23\nThe number \"q\" is called the \"quotient\" and \"r\" is called the \"remainder\" of the division of \"a\" by\u00a0\"b\". The numbers \"q\" and \"r\" are uniquely determined by \"a\" and\u00a0\"b\". This Euclidean division is key to the several other properties (divisibility), algorithms (such as the Euclidean algorithm), and ideas in number theory.\nAlgebraic properties satisfied by the natural numbers.\nThe addition (+) and multiplication (\u00d7) operations on natural numbers as defined above have several algebraic properties:\n (\"a\" + \"b\") + \"c\" and \"a\" \u00d7 (\"b\" \u00d7 \"c\") \n (\"a\" \u00d7 \"b\") \u00d7 \"c\".\n \"b\" + \"a\" and \"a\" \u00d7 \"b\" \n \"b\" \u00d7 \"a\".\n \"a\" and \"a\" \u00d7 1 \n \"a\". \n \"a\". However, the \"existence of additive identity element\" property is not satisfied\n (\"a\" \u00d7 \"b\") + (\"a\" \u00d7 \"c\").\n 0, then \"a\" \n 0 or \"b\" \n 0 (or both).\nGeneralizations.\nNatural numbers are broadly used in two ways: to quantify and to order. A number used to represent the quantity of objects in a collection (\"there are 6 coins on the table\") is called a cardinal numeral, while a number used to order individual objects within a collection (\"she finished 6th in the race\") is an ordinal numeral. \nThese two uses of natural numbers apply only to finite sets. Georg Cantor discovered at the end of the 19th century that both uses of natural numbers can be generalized to infinite sets, but that they lead to two different concepts of \"infinite\" numbers, the cardinal numbers and the ordinal numbers.\nOther generalizations of natural numbers are discussed in .\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21476", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21476", "title": "Natural logarithm", "text": "Logarithm to the base of the mathematical constant e\nThe natural logarithm of a number is its logarithm to the base of the mathematical constant e, which is an irrational and transcendental number approximately equal to . The natural logarithm of x is generally written as ln \"x\", log\"e\" \"x\", or sometimes, if the base e is implicit, simply log \"x\". Parentheses are sometimes added for clarity, giving ln(\"x\"), log\"e\"(\"x\"), or log(\"x\"). This is done particularly when the argument to the logarithm is not a single symbol, so as to prevent ambiguity.\nThe natural logarithm of x is the power to which e would have to be raised to equal x. For example, ln 7.5 is 2.0149..., because \"e\"2.0149... = 7.5. The natural logarithm of e itself, ln \"e\", is 1, because \"e\"1 = \"e\", while the natural logarithm of 1 is 0, since \"e\"0 = 1.\nThe natural logarithm can be defined for any positive real number a as the area under the curve \"y\" = 1/\"x\" from 1 to a (with the area being negative when 0 &lt; \"a\" &lt; 1). The simplicity of this definition, which is matched in many other formulas involving the natural logarithm, leads to the term \"natural\". The definition of the natural logarithm can then be extended to give logarithm values for negative numbers and for all non-zero complex numbers, although this leads to a multi-valued function: see complex logarithm for more.\nThe natural logarithm function, if considered as a real-valued function of a positive real variable, is the inverse function of the exponential function, leading to the identities:\nformula_1\nLike all logarithms, the natural logarithm maps multiplication of positive numbers into addition:\nformula_2\nLogarithms can be defined for any positive base other than 1, not only e. However, logarithms in other bases differ only by a constant multiplier from the natural logarithm, and can be defined in terms of the latter, formula_3.\nLogarithms are useful for solving equations in which the unknown appears as the exponent of some other quantity. For example, logarithms are used to solve for the half-life, decay constant, or unknown time in exponential decay problems. They are important in many branches of mathematics and scientific disciplines, and are used to solve problems involving compound interest.\nHistory.\nThe concept of the natural logarithm was worked out by Gregoire de Saint-Vincent and Alphonse Antonio de Sarasa before 1649. Their work involved quadrature of the hyperbola with equation \"xy\" = 1, by determination of the area of hyperbolic sectors. Their solution generated the requisite \"hyperbolic logarithm\" function, which had the properties now associated with the natural logarithm.\nAn early mention of the natural logarithm was by Nicholas Mercator in his work \"Logarithmotechnia\", published in 1668, although the mathematics teacher John Speidell had already compiled a table of what in fact were effectively natural logarithms in 1619. It has been said that Speidell's logarithms were to the base e, but this is not entirely true due to complications with the values being expressed as integers.152\nNotational conventions.\nThe notations ln \"x\" and log\"e\" \"x\" both refer unambiguously to the natural logarithm of x, and log \"x\" without an explicit base may also refer to the natural logarithm. This usage is common in mathematics, along with some scientific contexts as well as in many programming languages. In some other contexts such as chemistry, however, log \"x\" can be used to denote the common (base 10) logarithm. It may also refer to the binary (base 2) logarithm in the context of computer science, particularly in the context of time complexity.\nGenerally, the notation for the logarithm to base \"b\" of a number \"x\" is shown as log\"b\" \"x\". So the log of 8 to the base 2 would be log2 8 = 3.\nDefinitions.\nThe natural logarithm can be defined in several equivalent ways.\nInverse of exponential.\nThe most general definition is as the inverse function of formula_4, so that formula_5. Because formula_4 is positive and invertible for any real input formula_7, this definition of formula_8 is well defined for any positive x.\nIntegral definition.\nThe natural logarithm of a positive, real number a may be defined as the area under the graph of the hyperbola with equation \"y\" = 1/\"x\" between \"x\" = 1 and \"x\" = \"a\". This is the integral\nformula_9\nIf a is in formula_10, then the region has negative area, and the logarithm is negative.\nThis function is a logarithm because it satisfies the fundamental multiplicative property of a logarithm:\nformula_11\nThis can be demonstrated by splitting the integral that defines ln \"ab\" into two parts, and then making the variable substitution \"x\" = \"at\" (so \"dx\" = \"a\" \"dt\") in the second part, as follows:\nformula_12\nIn elementary terms, this is simply scaling by 1/\"a\" in the horizontal direction and by a in the vertical direction. Area does not change under this transformation, but the region between a and \"ab\" is reconfigured. Because the function \"a\"/(\"ax\") is equal to the function 1/\"x\", the resulting area is precisely ln \"b\".\nThe number e can then be defined to be the unique real number a such that ln \"a\" = 1.\nProperties.\nThe natural logarithm has the following mathematical properties:\nDerivative.\nThe derivative of the natural logarithm as a real-valued function on the positive reals is given by\nformula_24\nHow to establish this derivative of the natural logarithm depends on how it is defined firsthand. If the natural logarithm is defined as the integral\nformula_25\nthen the derivative immediately follows from the first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus.\nOn the other hand, if the natural logarithm is defined as the inverse of the (natural) exponential function, then the derivative (for \"x\" &gt; 0) can be found by using the properties of the logarithm and a definition of the exponential function.\nFrom the definition of the number formula_26 the exponential function can be defined as\nformula_27 where formula_28\nThe derivative can then be found from first principles.\nformula_29\nAlso, we have:\nformula_30\nso, unlike its inverse function formula_31, a constant in the function doesn't alter the differential.\nSeries.\nSince the natural logarithm is undefined at 0, formula_8 itself does not have a Maclaurin series, unlike many other elementary functions. Instead, one looks for Taylor expansions around other points. For example, if formula_33 then\nformula_34\nThis is the Taylor series for formula_35 around 1. A change of variables yields the Mercator series:\nformula_36\nvalid for formula_37 and formula_38\nLeonhard Euler, disregarding formula_39, nevertheless applied this series to formula_40 to show that the harmonic series equals the natural logarithm of formula_41; that is, the logarithm of infinity. Nowadays, more formally, one can prove that the harmonic series truncated at N is close to the logarithm of N, when N is large, with the difference converging to the Euler\u2013Mascheroni constant.\nThe figure is a graph of ln(1 + \"x\") and some of its Taylor polynomials around 0. These approximations converge to the function only in the region \u22121 &lt; \"x\" \u2264 1; outside this region, the higher-degree Taylor polynomials devolve to \"worse\" approximations for the function.\nA useful special case for positive integers n, taking formula_42, is:\nformula_43\nIf formula_44 then\nformula_45\nNow, taking formula_46 for positive integers n, we get:\nformula_47\nIf formula_48 then\nformula_49\nSince\nformula_50 \nwe arrive at\nformula_51\nUsing the substitution formula_46 again for positive integers n, we get: \nformula_53\nThis is, by far, the fastest converging of the series described here.\nThe natural logarithm can also be expressed as an infinite product:\nformula_54\nTwo examples might be:\nformula_55\nformula_56\nFrom this identity, we can easily get that:\nformula_57\nFor example:\nformula_58\nThe natural logarithm in integration.\nThe natural logarithm allows simple integration of functions of the form formula_59: an antiderivative of \"g\"(\"x\") is given by formula_60. This is the case because of the chain rule and the following fact:\nformula_61\nIn other words, when integrating over an interval of the real line that does not include formula_62, then\nformula_63\nwhere C is an arbitrary constant of integration.\nLikewise, when the integral is over an interval where formula_64, \nformula_65\nFor example, consider the integral of formula_66 over an interval that does not include points where formula_66 is infinite:\nformula_68\nThe natural logarithm can be integrated using integration by parts:\nformula_69\nLet:\nformula_70\nformula_71\nthen:\nformula_72\nEfficient computation.\nFor formula_73 where \"x\" &gt; 1, the closer the value of x is to 1, the faster the rate of convergence of its Taylor series centered at 1. The identities associated with the logarithm can be leveraged to exploit this:\nformula_74\nSuch techniques were used before calculators, by referring to numerical tables and performing manipulations such as those above.\nNatural logarithm of 10.\nThe natural logarithm of 10, approximately equal to , plays a role for example in the computation of natural logarithms of numbers represented in scientific notation, as a mantissa multiplied by a power of 10:\nformula_75\nThis means that one can effectively calculate the logarithms of numbers with very large or very small magnitude using the logarithms of a relatively small set of decimals in the range [1, 10).\nHigh precision.\nTo compute the natural logarithm with many digits of precision, the Taylor series approach is not efficient since the convergence is slow. Especially if x is near 1, a good alternative is to use Halley's method or Newton's method to invert the exponential function, because the series of the exponential function converges more quickly. For finding the value of y to give formula_76 using Halley's method, or equivalently to give formula_77 using Newton's method, the iteration simplifies to\nformula_78\nwhich has cubic convergence to formula_73.\nAnother alternative for extremely high precision calculation is the formula\nformula_80\nwhere M denotes the arithmetic-geometric mean of 1 and 4/\"s\", and\nformula_81\nwith m chosen so that p bits of precision is attained. (For most purposes, the value of 8 for m is sufficient.) In fact, if this method is used, Newton inversion of the natural logarithm may conversely be used to calculate the exponential function efficiently. (The constants formula_82 and \u03c0 can be pre-computed to the desired precision using any of several known quickly converging series.) Or, the following formula can be used:\nformula_83\nwhere\nformula_84\nare the Jacobi theta functions.\nBased on a proposal by William Kahan and first implemented in the Hewlett-Packard HP-41C calculator in 1979 (referred to under \"LN1\" in the display, only), some calculators, operating systems (for example Berkeley UNIX 4.3BSD), computer algebra systems and programming languages (for example C99) provide a special natural logarithm plus 1 function, alternatively named LNP1, or log1p to give more accurate results for logarithms close to zero by passing arguments x, also close to zero, to a function log1p(\"x\"), which returns the value ln(1+\"x\"), instead of passing a value y close to 1 to a function returning ln(\"y\"). The function log1p avoids in the floating point arithmetic a near cancelling of the absolute term 1 with the second term from the Taylor expansion of the natural logarithm. This keeps the argument, the result, and intermediate steps all close to zero where they can be most accurately represented as floating-point numbers.\nIn addition to base e, the IEEE 754-2008 standard defines similar logarithmic functions near 1 for binary and decimal logarithms: log2(1 + \"x\") and log10(1 + \"x\").\nSimilar inverse functions named \"expm1\", \"expm\" or \"exp1m\" exist as well, all with the meaning of expm1(\"x\") = exp(\"x\") \u2212 1.\nAn identity in terms of the inverse hyperbolic tangent,\nformula_85\ngives a high precision value for small values of x on systems that do not implement log1p(\"x\").\nComputational complexity.\nThe computational complexity of computing the natural logarithm using the arithmetic-geometric mean (for both of the above methods) is formula_86. Here, n is the number of digits of precision at which the natural logarithm is to be evaluated, and \"M\"(\"n\") is the computational complexity of multiplying two n-digit numbers.\nContinued fractions.\nWhile no simple continued fractions are available, several generalized continued fractions exist, including:\nformula_87\nformula_88\nThese continued fractions\u2014particularly the last\u2014converge rapidly for values close to\u00a01. However, the natural logarithms of much larger numbers can easily be computed, by repeatedly adding those of smaller numbers, with similarly rapid convergence.\nFor example, since 2 = 1.253 \u00d7 1.024, the natural logarithm of 2 can be computed as:\nformula_89\nFurthermore, since 10 = 1.2510 \u00d7 1.0243, even the natural logarithm of 10 can be computed similarly as:\nformula_90\nThe reciprocal of the natural logarithm can be also written in this way:\nformula_91\nFor example:\nformula_92\nComplex logarithms.\nThe exponential function can be extended to a function which gives a complex number as \"e\"\"z\" for any arbitrary complex number z; simply use the infinite series with x=z complex. This exponential function can be inverted to form a complex logarithm that exhibits most of the properties of the ordinary logarithm. There are two difficulties involved: no x has \"e\"\"x\" = 0; and it turns out that \"e\"2\"i\u03c0\" = 1 = \"e\"0. Since the multiplicative property still works for the complex exponential function, \"e\"\"z\" = \"e\"\"z\"+2\"ki\u03c0\", for all complex z and integers\u00a0k.\nSo the logarithm cannot be defined for the whole complex plane, and even then it is multi-valued\u2014any complex logarithm can be changed into an \"equivalent\" logarithm by adding any integer multiple of 2\"i\u03c0\" at will. The complex logarithm can only be single-valued on the cut plane. For example, ln \"i\" \n or or \u2212, etc.; and although \"i\"4 \n 1, 4 ln \"i\" can be defined as 2\"i\u03c0\", or 10\"i\u03c0\" or \u22126\"i\u03c0\", and so on.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21477", "revid": "38472774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21477", "title": "Neogene", "text": "Second geologic period in the Cenozoic Era\nThe Neogene ( ,) is a geologic period and system that spans 20.45 million years from the end of the Paleogene Period Ma (million years ago) to the beginning of the present Quaternary Period Ma. It is the second period of the Cenozoic and the eleventh period of the Phanerozoic. The Neogene is sub-divided into two epochs, the earlier Miocene and the later Pliocene. Some geologists assert that the Neogene cannot be clearly delineated from the modern geological period, the Quaternary. The term \"Neogene\" was coined in 1853 by the Austrian palaeontologist Moritz H\u00f6rnes (1815\u20131868). The earlier term Tertiary Period was used to define the span of time now covered by Paleogene and Neogene and, despite no longer being recognized as a formal stratigraphic term, \"Tertiary\" still sometimes remains in informal use.\nDuring this period, mammals and birds continued to evolve into modern forms, while other groups of life remained relatively unchanged. The first humans (\"Homo habilis\") appeared in Africa near the end of the period. Some continental movements took place, the most significant event being the connection of North and South America at the Isthmus of Panama, late in the Pliocene. This cut off the warm ocean currents from the Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean, leaving only the Gulf Stream to transfer heat to the Arctic Ocean. The global climate cooled considerably throughout the Neogene, culminating in a series of continental glaciations in the Quaternary Period that followed.\nDivisions.\nIn ICS terminology, from upper (later, more recent) to lower (earlier):\nThe Pliocene Epoch is subdivided into two ages:\nThe Miocene Epoch is subdivided into six ages:\nIn different geophysical regions of the world, other regional names are also used for the same or overlapping ages and other timeline subdivisions.\nThe terms \"Neogene System\" (formal) and \"Upper Tertiary System\" (informal) describe the rocks deposited during the \"Neogene Period\".\nPaleogeography.\nThe continents in the Neogene were very close to their current positions. The Isthmus of Panama formed, connecting North and South America. The Indian subcontinent continued to collide with Asia, forming the Himalayas. Sea levels fell, creating land bridges between Africa and Eurasia and between Eurasia and North America.\nClimate.\nThe global climate became more seasonal and continued an overall drying and cooling trend which began during the Paleogene. The Early Miocene was relatively cool; Early Miocene mid-latitude seawater and continental thermal gradients were already very similar to those of the present. During the Middle Miocene, Earth entered a warm phase known as the Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum (MMCO), which was driven by the emplacement of the Columbia River Basalt Group. Around 11 Ma, the Middle Miocene Warm Interval gave way to the much cooler Late Miocene. The ice caps on both poles began to grow and thicken, a process enhanced by positive feedbacks from increased formation of sea ice. Between 7 and 5.3 Ma, a decrease in global temperatures termed the Late Miocene Cooling (LMC) ensued, driven by decreases in carbon dioxide concentrations. During the Pliocene, from about 5.3 to 2.7 Ma, another warm interval occurred, being known as the Pliocene Warm Interval (PWI), interrupting the longer-term cooling trend. The Pliocene Thermal Maximum (PTM) occurred between 3.3 and 3.0 Ma. During the Pliocene, Green Sahara phases of wet conditions in North Africa were frequent and occurred about every 21 kyr, being especially intense when Earth's orbit's eccentricity was high. The PWI had similar levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide to contemporary times and is often seen as an analogous climate to the projected climate of the near future as a result of anthropogenic global warming. Towards the end of the Pliocene, decreased heat transport towards the Antarctic resulting from a weakening of the Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) cooled the Earth, a process that exacerbated itself in a positive feedback as sea levels dropped and the ITF diminished and further limited the heat transported southward by the Leeuwin Current. By the end of the period the first of a series of glaciations of the current Ice Age began.\nFlora and fauna.\nMarine and continental flora and fauna have a modern appearance. The reptile group Choristodera went extinct in the early part of the period, while the amphibians known as Allocaudata disappeared at the end of it. Neogene also marked the end of the reptilian genera \"Langstonia\" and \"Barinasuchus\", terrestrial predators that were the last surviving members of Sebecosuchia, a group related to crocodiles. The oceans were dominated by large carnivores like megalodons and livyatans, and 19 million years ago about 70% of all pelagic shark species disappeared. Mammals and birds continued to be the dominant terrestrial vertebrates, and took many forms as they adapted to various habitats. Ungulates in North America became noticeably more cursorial and increased their stride lengths across the Oligocene-Miocene boundary, likely in response to the increased habitat openness during the Miocene. An explosive radiation of ursids took place at the Miocene-Pliocene boundary. The first hominins, the ancestors of humans, appeared near the end of the period.\nAbout 20 Ma gymnosperms in the form of some conifer and cycad groups started to diversify and produce more species due to the changing conditions. In response to the cooler, seasonal climate, tropical plant species gave way to deciduous ones and grasslands replaced many forests. Grasses therefore greatly diversified, and herbivorous mammals evolved alongside it, creating the many grazing animals of today such as horses, antelope, and bison. Ice age mammals like the mammoths and woolly rhinoceros were common in Pliocene. With lower levels of CO2 in the atmosphere, C4 plants expanded and reached ecological dominance in grasslands during the last 10 million years. Also Asteraceae (daisies) went through a significant adaptive radiation. \"Eucalyptus\" fossil leaves occur in the Miocene of New Zealand, where the genus is not native today, but have been introduced from Australia.\nDisagreements.\nThe Neogene traditionally ended at the end of the Pliocene Epoch, just before the older definition of the beginning of the Quaternary Period; many time scales show this division.\nHowever, there was a movement amongst geologists (particularly marine geologists) to also include ongoing geological time (Quaternary) in the Neogene, while others (particularly terrestrial geologists) insist the Quaternary to be a separate period of distinctly different record. The somewhat confusing terminology and disagreement amongst geologists on where to draw what hierarchical boundaries is due to the comparatively fine divisibility of time units as time approaches the present, and due to geological preservation that causes the youngest sedimentary geological record to be preserved over a much larger area and to reflect many more environments than the older geological record. By dividing the Cenozoic Era into three (arguably two) periods (Paleogene, Neogene, Quaternary) instead of seven epochs, the periods are more closely comparable to the duration of periods in the Mesozoic and Paleozoic Eras.\nThe International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) once proposed that the Quaternary be considered a sub-era (sub-erathem) of the Neogene, with a beginning date of 2.58 Ma, namely the start of the Gelasian Stage. In the 2004 proposal of the ICS, the Neogene would have consisted of the Miocene and Pliocene Epochs. The International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA) counterproposed that the Neogene and the Pliocene end at 2.58 Ma, that the Gelasian be transferred to the Pleistocene, and the Quaternary be recognized as the third period in the Cenozoic, citing key changes in Earth's climate, oceans, and biota that occurred 2.58 Ma and its correspondence to the Gauss-Matuyama magnetostratigraphic boundary. In 2006 ICS and INQUA reached a compromise that made Quaternary a sub-era, subdividing Cenozoic into the old classical Tertiary and Quaternary, a compromise that was rejected by International Union of Geological Sciences because it split both Neogene and Pliocene in two.\nFollowing formal discussions at the 2008 International Geological Congress in Oslo, Norway, the ICS decided in May 2009 to make the Quaternary the youngest period of the Cenozoic Era with its base at 2.58 Ma and including the Gelasian Age, which was formerly considered part of the Neogene Period and Pliocene Epoch. Thus the Neogene Period ends bounding the succeeding Quaternary Period at 2.58 Ma.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "21479", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21479", "title": "Non empty", "text": ""}
{"id": "21481", "revid": "50969625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21481", "title": "Notary public", "text": "Civil position that certifies documents and administers oral oaths and affirmations\nA notary public (a.k.a. notary or public notary; pl.\u2009notaries public) of the common law is a public officer constituted by law to serve the public in non-contentious matters usually concerned with general financial transactions, estates, deeds, powers-of-attorney, and foreign and international business. A notary's main functions are to validate the signature of a person (for purposes of signing a document); administer oaths and affirmations; take affidavits and statutory declarations, including from witnesses; authenticate the execution of certain classes of documents; take acknowledgments (e.g., of deeds and other conveyances); provide notice of foreign drafts; provide exemplifications and notarial copies; and, to perform certain other official acts depending on the jurisdiction. Such transactions are known as notarial acts, or more commonly, notarizations. The term \"notary public\" only refers to common-law notaries and should not be confused with civil-law notaries.\nWith the exceptions of Louisiana, Puerto Rico, Quebec (whose private law is based on civil law), and British Columbia (whose notarial tradition stems from scrivener notary practice), a notary public in the rest of the United States and most of Canada has powers that are far more limited than those of civil-law or other common-law notaries, both of whom are qualified lawyers admitted to the bar: such notaries may be referred to as notaries-at-law or lawyer notaries. Therefore, at common law, notarial service is distinctly different from the practice of law, and giving legal advice and preparing legal instruments is forbidden to lay notaries such as those appointed throughout most of the United States. Despite these distinctions, lawyers in the United States may apply to become notaries, and this class of notary is allowed to provide legal advice, such as determining the type of act required (affidavit, acknowledgment, etc.).\nOverview.\nNotaries are appointed by a government authority, such as a court, governor, county commissioners, or lieutenant governor, or by a regulating body often known as a society or faculty of notaries public. For lawyer notaries, an appointment may be for life, while lay notaries are usually commissioned for a briefer term (often 3 to 5 years in the U.S.), with the possibility of renewal.\nIn most common law countries, appointments and their number for a given notarial district are highly regulated. However, since the majority of American notaries are lay persons who provide officially required services, commission numbers are not regulated, which is part of the reason why there are far more notaries in the United States than in other countries (4.5 million vs. approx. 740 in England and Wales and approx. 1,250 in Australia and New Zealand). Furthermore, all U.S. and some Canadian notarial functions are applied to domestic affairs and documents, where fully systematized attestations of signatures and acknowledgment of deeds are a universal requirement for document authentication. In the U.S., notaries public do not authenticate \"documents\" in a traditional sense: instead, they authenticate that the \"signature(s)\" on a document belongs to the person(s) claiming to be the signer(s), thus ensuring trust among interested parties. By contrast, outside North American common law jurisdictions, notarial practice is restricted to international legal matters or where a foreign jurisdiction is involved, and almost all notaries are also qualified lawyers.\nFor the purposes of authentication, most countries require commercial or personal documents which originate from or are signed in another country to be notarized before they can be used or officially recorded or before they can have any legal effect. To these documents a notary affixes a \"notarial certificate\"\u2013a separate document stating the notarial act performed and upon which the party(ies) and notary sign\u2013which attests to the execution of the document, usually by the person who appears before the notary, known as an \"appearer\" or \"constituent\" (U.S.). In the U.S., many documents include the notarial wording within the document, thus eliminating the need for an additional page for the certificate only (i.e., the document is signed and notarized, including application of the Notary's seal). In cases where notaries are also lawyers, such a notary may also draft legal instruments known as \"notarial acts\" or \"deeds\" which have probative value and executory force, as they do in civil law jurisdictions. Originals or secondary originals are then filed and stored in the notary's archives, or \"protocol\". As noted, \"lay\" notaries public in the U.S. are forbidden to advise signers as to which type of act suits the signer's situation: instead, the signer must provide the certificate/wording that is appropriate.\nNotaries are generally required to undergo special training in the performance of their duties, often culminating in an examination and ongoing education/re-examination upon commission renewal. Some states have no training for their notaries public. Some must also first serve as an apprentice before being commissioned or licensed to practice their profession. In some countries, even licensed lawyers, e.g., barristers or solicitors, must follow a prescribed specialized course of study and be mentored for two years before being allowed to practice as a notary (e.g., British Columbia, England). However, notaries public in the U.S., of which the vast majority are lay people, require only a brief training seminar and are expressly forbidden to engage in any activities that could be construed as the unlicensed practice of law unless they are also qualified attorneys. That said, even lay notaries public must know all applicable laws in their jurisdiction (e.g., state) to practice, and a commission could be revoked for a single deviation from such laws. Notarial practice is universally considered to be distinct and separate from that of an attorney (solicitor/barrister). In England and Wales, there is a course of study for notaries which is conducted under the auspices of the University of Cambridge and the Society of Notaries of England and Wales. In the State of Victoria, Australia, applicants for appointment must first complete a Graduate Diploma of Notarial Practice which is administered by the Sir Zelman Cowen Centre in Victoria University, Melbourne. The United States is a notable exception to these practices: lawyer-notaries need only be approved by their jurisdiction and possibly by a local court or bar association.\nIn bi-juridical jurisdictions, such as South Africa or Louisiana, the office of notary public is a legal profession with educational requirements similar to those for attorneys. Many even have institutes of higher learning that offer degrees in notarial law. Therefore, despite their name, \"notaries public\" in these jurisdictions are in effect civil law notaries.\nHistory.\nNotaries public (also called \"notaries\", \"notarial officers\", or \"public notaries\") hold an office that can trace its origins back to the ancient Roman Republic, when they were called \"scribae\" (\"scribes\"), \"tabelliones forenses\", or \"personae publicae\".\nThe history of notaries is set out in detail in Chapter 1 of \"Brooke's Notary\" (13th edition):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The office of a public notary is a public office. It has a long and distinguished history. The office has its origin in the civil institutions of ancient Rome. Public officials, called \"scribae\", that is to say, scribes, rose in rank from being mere recorders of facts and judicial proceedings, copiers and transcribers to a learned profession prominent in private and public affairs. Some were permanent officials attached to the Senate and courts of law whose duties were to record public proceedings, transcribe state papers, supply magistrates with legal forms, and register the decrees and judgments of magistrates.\nIn the last century of the Republic, probably in the time of Cicero, and apparently by his adoptive son Marcus Tullius Tiro, after whom they were named 'notae Tironianae' a new form of shorthand was invented and certain arbitrary marks and signs, called \"notae\", were substituted for words in common use. A writer who adopted the new method was called a \"notarius\". Originally, a notary was one who took down statements in shorthand using these notes, and wrote them out in the form of memoranda or minutes. Later, the title \"notarius\" was applied almost exclusively to registrars attached to high government officials, including provincial governors and secretaries to the Emperor.\nNotwithstanding the collapse of the Western Empire in the 5th century AD, the notary remained a figure of some importance in many parts of continental Europe throughout the Dark Ages. When the civil law experienced its renaissance in medieval Italy from the 12th century onwards, the notary was established as a central institution of that law, a position which still exists in countries whose legal systems are derived from the civil law, including most of Europe and South America. The office of notary reached its apogee in the Italian city of Bologna in the twelfth century, its most distinguished scion being Rolandino Passeggeri generally known as Rolandino of Bologna, who died in 1300 AD, whose masterwork was the Summa Artis Notariae.\nThe separate development of the common law in England, free from most of the influences of Roman law, meant that notaries were not introduced into England until later in the 13th and 14th centuries. At first, notaries in England were appointed by the Papal Legate. In 1279 the Archbishop of Canterbury was authorized by the Pope to appoint notaries. Not surprisingly, in those early days, many of the notaries were members of the clergy. In the course of time, members of the clergy ceased to take part in secular business and laymen, especially in towns and trading centers, began to assume the official character and functions of a modern common law notary.\nThe Reformation produced no material change in the position and functions of notaries in England. However, in 1533 the enactment of \"the Act Concerning Peter's Pence and Dispensations\" (the Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533) terminated the power of the Pope to appoint notaries and vested that power in the King who then transferred it to the Archbishop of Canterbury who in turn assigned it to the Court of Faculties and the Master of the Faculties.\nTraditionally, notaries recorded matters of judicial importance as well as private transactions or events where an officially authenticated record or a document drawn up with professional skill or knowledge was required.\nCommon law jurisdictions.\nThe duties and functions of notaries public are described in \"Brooke's Notary\" on page 19 in these terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Generally speaking, a notary public [...] may be described as an officer of the law [...] whose public office and duty it is to draw, attest or certify under his/her official seal deeds and other documents, including wills or other testamentary documents, conveyances of real and personal property and powers of attorney; to authenticate such documents under his signature and official seal in such a manner as to render them acceptable, as proof of the matters attested by him, to the judicial or other public authorities in the country where they are to be used, whether by means of issuing a notarial certificate as to the due execution of such documents or by drawing them in the form of public instruments; to keep a protocol containing originals of all instruments which he makes in the public form and to issue authentic copies of such instruments; to administer oaths and declarations for use in proceedings [...] to note or certify transactions relating to negotiable instruments, and to draw up protests or other formal papers relating to occurrences on the voyages of ships and their navigation as well as the carriage of cargo in ships.\" [Footnotes omitted.]\nA notary, in almost all common law jurisdictions other than most of North America, is a practitioner trained in the drafting and execution of legal documents. Historically, notaries recorded matters of judicial importance in addition to private transactions or events where an officially authenticated record or a document drawn up with professional skill or knowledge was required. The functions of notaries specifically include the preparation of certain types of documents (including international contracts, deeds, wills, and powers of attorney) and certification of their due execution, administering of oaths, witnessing affidavits and statutory declarations, certification of copy documents, noting and protesting of bills of exchange, and the preparation of ships' protests.\nDocuments certified by notaries are sealed with the notary's seal (which may be a traditional embossed marking or a modern stamp) and are often, as a matter of best practice or else jurisdictional law, recorded by the notary in a register (also called a \"protocol\") maintained and permanently kept by him or her. The use of a seal by definition means a \"notarial act\" was performed. \nIn countries subscribing to the Hague Convention Abolishing the Requirement of Legalization for Foreign Public Documents or Apostille Convention, additional steps are required for use of documents across international borders. Some documents must be notarized locally and then sealed by the regulating authority (e.g., in the U.S., the Secretary of State of the state in which the notary is commissioned)\u2013sometimes, documents may skip directly to this level\u2013and then a final act of certification is required, known as an apostille. The apostille is issued by a government department (usually the Foreign Affairs Department; the Department of State in the U.S.; or similar). For countries which are not subscribers to that convention, an \"authentication\" or \"legalization\" must be provided by one of a number of methods, including by the Foreign Affairs Ministry of the country from which the document is being sent or the embassy, Consulate-General, consulate or High Commission of the country to which it is being sent.\nInformation on individual countries.\nAustralia.\nIn all Australian states and territories (except Queensland) notaries public are appointed by the Supreme Court of the relevant state or territory. Very few have been appointed as a notary for more than one state or territory.\nQueensland, like New Zealand, continues the practice of appointment by the Archbishop of Canterbury acting through the Master of the Faculties.\nAustralian notaries are lawyers and are members of the Australian and New Zealand College of Notaries, the Society of Notaries of New South Wales Inc., the Public Notaries Society of Western Australia Inc, and other state-based societies. The overall number of lawyers who choose to become a notary is relatively low. For example, in South Australia (a state with a population of 1.5 million), of the over 2,500 lawyers in that state only about 100 are also notaries and most of those do not actively practice as such. In Melbourne, Victoria, in 2002 there were only 66 notaries for a city with a population of 3.5 million and only 90 for the entire state. In Western Australia, there are approximately 58 notaries as at 2017 for a city with a population of 2.07 million people. Compare this with the United States where it has been estimated that there are nearly 5 million notaries for a nation with a population of 296 million.\nAs Justice Debelle of the Supreme Court of South Australia said in the case of \"In The Matter of an Application by Marilyn Reys Bos to be a Public Notary\" [2003] SASC 320, delivered 12 September 2003, in refusing the application by a non-lawyer for appointment as a notary:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As a general rule, an applicant [for appointment as a notary] should be a legal practitioner of several years standing at least. Even a cursory perusal of texts on the duties and functions of a public notary demonstrates that a number of those functions and duties require at the very least a sound working knowledge of Australian law and commercial practice. In other words, the preparation of a notarial act plainly requires a sound knowledge of law and practice in Australia especially of the due preparation and execution of commercial and contractual instruments. It is essential that notaries in this state have a sufficient level of training, qualification and status to enable them efficiently and effectively to discharge the functions of the office.\nHistorically there have been some very rare examples of patent attorneys or accountants being appointed, but that now seems to have ceased.\nHowever, there are three significant differences between notaries and other lawyers.\nTheir principal duties include:\nIt is usual for Australian notaries to use an embossed seal with a red wafer, and now some notaries also use an inked stamp replicating the seal. It is also common for the seal or stamp to include the notary's chosen logo or symbol.\nIn South Australia and Scotland, it is acceptable for a notary to use the letters \"NP\" after their name. Thus a South Australian notary may have \"John Smith LLB NP\" or similar on his business card or letterhead.\nAustralian notaries do not hold \"commissions\" which can expire. Generally, once appointed they are authorized to act as a notary for life and can only be \"struck off\" the Roll of Notaries for proven misconduct. In certain states, for example, New South Wales and Victoria, they cease to be qualified to continue as a notary once they cease to hold a practicing certificate as a legal practitioner. Even judges, who do not hold practicing certificates, are not eligible to continue to practice as notaries.\nNotaries in some states of Australia are regulated by legislation. In New South Wales the Public Notaries Act 1997 applies and in Victoria the Public Notaries Act 2001 applies.\nThere are also Notary Societies throughout Australia and the societies keep a searchable list of their members. In New South Wales, The Society of Notaries of New South Wales Inc.; in Queensland The Society of Notaries Queensland Inc.; in South Australia the Notaries' Society of South Australia Inc. and in Victoria, The Society of Notaries of Victoria Inc..\nNotaries collecting information for the purposes of verification of the signature of the deponent might retain the details of documents which identify the deponent, and this information is subject to the Privacy Act 1988. A notary must protect the personal information the notary holds from misuse and loss and from unauthorised access, modification or disclosure.\nAll Australian jurisdictions also have justices of the peace (JP) or commissioners for affidavits and other unqualified persons who are qualified to take affidavits or statutory declarations and to certify documents. However they can only do so if the relevant affidavit, statutory declaration or copy document is to be used only in Australia and not in a foreign country, with the possible exception of a few Commonwealth countries not including the United Kingdom or New Zealand except for very limited purposes. Justices of the peace (JPs) are (usually) laypersons who have minimal, if any, training (depending on the jurisdiction) but are of proven good character. Therefore, a US notary resembles an Australian JP rather than an Australian notary.\nBrazil.\nNotaries in Brazil need to pass stringent exams in addition to holding law degrees. Civil life in Brazil relies upon the notary public system heavily. Brazilian notaries public specialize in seven main areas: 1. Civil Records; 2. Notes. 3. Real Estate Records; 4. Credit Notes and Documents; 5. Protest of Credit Notes; 6. Business Enterprises Records; and 7. Central Notaries (a.k.a. \"Distribution Notaries). Brazilian notaries have a hybrid nature. They are private but appointed by the Judiciary and are recognized as an official authority (\"dotado de f\u00e9 p\u00fablica\").\nCanada.\nCanadian notaries public (except in the province of British Columbia and Quebec) are very much like their American counterparts, generally restricted to administering oaths, witnessing signatures on affidavits and statutory declarations, providing acknowledgements, certifying true copies, and so forth.\nBritish Columbia.\nIn British Columbia, a notary public is more like a British or Australian notary. Notaries are appointed for life by the Supreme Court of British Columbia and as a self-regulating profession, the Society of Notaries Public of British Columbia is the regulatory body overseeing and setting standards to maintain public confidence. A BC notary is also a commissioner for taking affidavits for British Columbia, by reason of office. Furthermore, BC notaries exercise far greater power, able to dispense legal advice and draft public instruments including:\nNova Scotia.\nIn Nova Scotia a person may be a notary public, a commissioner of oaths, or both. A notary public and a commissioner of oaths are regulated by the provincial Notaries and Commissioners Act. Individuals hold a commission granted to them by the Minister of Justice.\nUnder the Act a notary public in has the \"power of drawing, passing, keeping and issuing all deeds and contracts, charter-parties and other mercantile transactions in this Province, and also of attesting all commercial instruments brought before him for public protestation, and otherwise of acting as is usual in the office of notary, and may demand, receive and have all the rights, profits and emoluments rightfully appertaining and belonging to the said calling of notary during pleasure.\"\nUnder the Act a commissioner of oaths is \"authorized to administer oaths and take and receive affidavits, declarations and affirmations within the Province in and concerning any cause, matter or thing, depending or to be had in the Supreme Court, or any other court in the Province.\"\nEvery barrister of the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia is a commissioner of oaths but must receive an additional commission to act as a notary public.\n\"A Commissioner of Oaths is deemed to be an officer of the Supreme Court of Nova Scotia. Commissioners take declarations concerning any matter to come before a court in the Province.\". Additionally, individuals with other specific qualifications, such as being a current Member of the Legislative Assembly, commissioned officer of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police or Canadian Forces may act as if explicitly being a commissioner of oaths.\nQuebec.\nSince Quebec uses a civil law system for non-criminal matters, notaries in that province are civil-law notaries (\"notaires\") that are full lawyers licensed to practice notarial law and regulated by the Chamber of Notaries of Quebec. Quebec notaries draft and prepare major legal instruments (notarial acts), provide complex legal advice, represent clients (out of court) and make appearances on their behalf, act as arbitrator, mediator, or conciliator, and even act as a court commissioner in non-contentious matters. To become a notary in Quebec, a candidate must hold a bachelor's degree in civil law and a one-year Master's in notarial law and serve a traineeship (\"stage\") before being admitted to practice.\nThe concept of notaries public in Quebec does not exist. Instead, the province has Commissioners of Oaths (\"Commissaires \u00e0 l'assermentation\") who may administer oaths in Quebec (and outside of Quebec, if authorized) for a procedure or a document intended for Quebec (or Federal matters). A Quebec commissioner for oaths can not certify documents or attest that a copy of a document is in accordance to the original; only a \"notaire\" can do it.\nHong Kong.\nIn Hong Kong, the appointment and regulation of notaries public (\u516c\u8b49\u4eba, often referred to locally as \u570b\u969b\u516c\u8b49\u4eba) are governed by the \"Legal Practitioners Ordinance\" (Cap. 159). Only solicitors with at least seven years of post\u2011qualification experience may apply to become a notary public, and candidates must pass the examination administered by the Hong Kong Society of Notaries. The Chief Judge of the High Court formally appoints successful applicants to the office.\nHong Kong is covered by the Hague Apostille Convention (as extended by China\u2019s accession), under which notarial acts may be legalised by apostille for use in other contracting states. However, the Convention does not apply to documents intended for use in Mainland China, where a separate system through China Appointed Attesting Officers (\u4e2d\u570b\u59d4\u8a17\u516c\u8b49\u4eba) is required.\nHistory.\nDuring the colonial era, appointments of notaries public were made directly by the Archbishop of Canterbury in England, exercising powers delegated under the \"Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533\". \nFollowing the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong to the People\u2019s Republic of China in 1997, the system was localised. The power of appointment was vested in the Chief Judge of the High Court of Hong Kong, acting under the \"Legal Practitioners Ordinance\". The professional oversight and examination of notaries have since been administered by the Hong Kong Society of Notaries.\nThe Hong Kong Society of Notaries, established in 1977, continues to function as the professional body overseeing notarial practice, maintaining standards, and representing notaries within the jurisdiction.\nQualifications.\nPursuant to Section 40A of the Legal Practitioners Ordinance, to be appointed as a notary public in Hong Kong, an applicant must satisfy the following requirements\u2014\nPowers and functions.\nThe powers of a notary public in Hong Kong are primarily exercised for the authentication of documents for use abroad. Common notarial acts include:\nNotarial instruments issued by a Hong Kong notary may be recognised internationally, and in some jurisdictions are subject to further authentication, such as legalisation by consulates or apostille under the Hague Apostille Convention. However, Hong Kong notaries public do not have authority to authenticate documents for cross\u2011border use between Mainland China and Hong Kong.\nChina Appointed Attesting Officers.\nCross\u2011border legal authentication between Mainland China and Hong Kong falls under the jurisdiction of China Appointed Attesting Officers. These are Hong Kong solicitors who have been specially appointed by the Ministry of Justice of the People\u2019s Republic of China.\nIndia.\nThe central government appoints notaries for the whole or any part of the country. State governments, too, appoint notaries for the whole or any part of the states. On an application being made, any person who had been practicing as a Lawyer for at least ten years is eligible to be appointed a notary. The applicant, if not a legal practitioner, should be a member of the Indian Legal Service or have held an office under the central or state government, requiring special knowledge of law, after enrollment as an advocate or held an office in the department of Judge, Advocate-General or in the armed forces.\nIran.\nNotary public is a trained lawyer that should pass some special examinations to be able to open their office and start their work. Persian meaning of this word is means head of the office and their assistant called . Both these persons should have bachelor's degree in law or master's degree in civil-law.\nIreland.\nThere is archival evidence showing that public notaries, acting pursuant to papal and imperial authority, practised in Ireland in the 13th century, and it is reasonable to assume that notaries functioned here before that time. In Ireland, public notaries were at various times appointed by the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Archbishop of Armagh. The position remained so until the Reformation.\nAfter the Reformation, persons appointed to the office of public notary either in Great Britain or Ireland received the faculty by royal authority, and appointments under faculty from the Pope and the emperor ceased.\nIn 1871, under the Matrimonial Causes and Marriage Law (Ireland) Amendment 1870, the jurisdiction previously exercised by the Archbishop of Armagh in the appointment of notaries was vested in and became exercisable by the Lord Chancellor of Ireland.\nIn 1920, the power to appoint notaries public was transferred to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. The position in Ireland changed once again in 1924 following the establishment of the Irish Free State. Under the Courts of Justice Act, 1924 the jurisdiction over notaries public was transferred to the Chief Justice of the Irish Free State.\nIn 1961, under the Courts (Supplemental Provisions) Act of that year, and the power to appoint notaries public became exercisable by the Chief Justice. This remains the position in Ireland, where notaries are appointed on petition to the Supreme Court, after passing prescribed examinations. The governing body is the Faculty of Notaries Public in Ireland. The vast majority of notaries in Ireland are also solicitors. A non-solicitor, who was successful in the examinations as set by the governing body, applied in the standard way to the Chief Justice to be appointed a notary public. The Chief Justice heard the adjourned application on 3 March 2009 and appointed the non-solicitor as a notary on 18 July 2011.\nIn Ireland notaries public cannot agree on a standard fee due to competition law. In practice the price per signature appears to be \u20ac100. A cheaper alternative is to visit a commissioner for oaths who will charge less per signature, but that is only possible where whoever is to receive a document will recognize the signature of a commissioner for oaths.\nMalaysia.\nIn Malaysia, a notary public is appointed from amongst the pool of advocates &amp; solicitors (i.e. practicing lawyers) by the Attorney General. To be appointed as a notary public, it is a criteria amongst others, that the advocate &amp; solicitor must be in legal practice for at least 15 years. The fees are regulated by the Notary Public (Fees) Rules 1954.\nPerhaps it is germane to consider comparatively to another similar office known as the Commissioner for Oaths (locally knows as a \"Pesuruhjaya Sumpah\"), whom are persons appointed by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court of Malaysia under section 11 of Court of Judicature Act 1964 and are principally regulated by the Commissioners for Oaths Rules 2018. Similar to notary publics, Commissioners for Oaths in Malaysia largely administer oaths and attestation (where permitted by specific legislation). The distinction of function between both offices are however drawn from where notary publics are authorized to attest to foreign documents and can also attest to most instruments as a witness, as well as to certify true copy to documents. \nNew Zealand.\nA notary public in New Zealand is a lawyer authorised by the Archbishop of Canterbury in England to officially witness signatures on legal documents, collect sworn statements, administer oaths and certify the authenticity of legal documents usually for use overseas.\nThe Master of the Faculties appoints notaries in the exercise of the general authorities granted by s 3 of the Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533 and Public Notaries Act 1833. Recommendations are made by the New Zealand Society of Notaries, which normally requires and applicant to have 10 years' experience post admission as a lawyer and 5 years as a Law Firm Partner or equivalent.\nSingapore.\nA Notary Public in Singapore must be appointed by the Board of Commissioners for Oaths and Notaries Public. A Notary Public must be a qualified lawyer who is at least 40 years old, with at least 15 years of experience in active legal practice. The Notary Public is responsible for certifying the authenticity and valid execution of documents.\nSri Lanka.\nNotaries in Sri Lanka are more akin to civil law notaries, their main functions are conveyancing, drafting of legal instruments, etc. They are appointed under the Notaries Ordinance No 1 of 1907. They must pass exam held by the Ministry of Justice and apprentice under senior notary for a period of two years. Alternatively, attorneys at law who pass the conveyancing exam are also admitted as a notary public under warrant of the Minister. The Minister of Justice may appoint any attorney at law as a commissioner for oaths, authorized to certify and authenticate the affidavit/documents and any such other certificates that are submitted by the general public with the intention of certifying by the commissioner for oath.\nUnited Kingdom.\nEngland and Wales.\nAfter the passage of the Ecclesiastical Licences Act 1533, which was a direct result of the Reformation in England, all notary appointments were issued directly through the Court of Faculties. The Court of Faculties is attached to the office of the Archbishop of Canterbury.\nIn England and Wales there are two main classes of notaries: general notaries and scrivener notaries. Their functions are almost identical. All notaries, like solicitors, barristers, legal executives, costs lawyers and licensed conveyancers, are also \"commissioners for oaths\". They also acquire the same powers as solicitors and other law practitioners, with the exception of the right to represent others before the courts (unless also members of the bar or admitted as a solicitor) once they are commissioned notaries. In practice almost all English notaries, and all Scottish ones, are also solicitors, and usually practise as solicitors.\nCommissioners of oaths are able to undertake the bulk of routine domestic attestation work in England and Wales. Many documents, including signatures for normal property transactions, do not need professional attestation of signature at all, a lay witness being sufficient.\nIn practice the need for notaries in purely English legal matters is very small; for example they are not involved in normal property transactions. Since a great many solicitors also perform the function of commissioners for oaths and can witness routine declarations etc. (all are qualified to do so, but not all offer the service), most work performed by notaries relates to international matters in some way. They witness or authenticate documents to be used abroad. Many English notaries have strong foreign language skills and often a foreign legal qualification. The work of notaries and solicitors in England is separate although most notaries are solicitors. The Notaries Society gives the number of notaries in England and Wales as \"about 1,000\", all but seventy of whom are also solicitors.\nScrivener notaries get their name from the Worshipful Company of Scriveners. Until 1999, when they lost this monopoly, they were the only notaries permitted to practise in the City of London. They used not to have to first qualify as solicitors, but they had knowledge of foreign laws and languages.\nCurrently to qualify as a notary public in England and Wales it is necessary to have earned a law degree or qualified as a solicitor or barrister in the past five years, and then to take a two-year distance-learning course styled the Postgraduate Diploma in Notarial Practice. At the same time, any applicant must also gain practical experience. The few who go on to become scrivener notaries require further study of two foreign languages and foreign law and a two-year mentorship under an active scrivener notary.\nThe other notaries in England are either ecclesiastical notaries whose functions are limited to the affairs of the Church of England or other qualified persons who are not trained as solicitors or barristers but satisfy the Master of the Faculties of the Archbishop of Canterbury that they possess an adequate understanding of the law. Both the latter two categories are required to pass examinations set by the Master of Faculties.\nThe regulation of notaries was modernised by section 57 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.\nNotarial services generally include: \nScotland.\nNotaries public have existed in Scotland since the 13th century and developed as a distinct element of the Scottish legal profession. Those who wish to practice as a notary must petition the Court of Session. This petition is usually presented at the same time as a petition to practice as a solicitor, but can sometimes be earlier or later. However, to qualify, a notary must hold a current Practising Certificate from the Law Society of Scotland, a new requirement from 2007, before which all Scottish solicitors were automatically notaries.\nWhilst notaries in Scotland are always solicitors, the profession remains separate in that there are additional rules and regulations governing notaries and it is possible to be a solicitor, but not a notary. Since 2007 an additional Practising Certificate is required, so now most, but not all, solicitors in Scotland are notaries \u2013 a significant difference from the English profession. They are also separate from notaries in other jurisdictions of the United Kingdom.\nThe profession is administered by the Council of the Law Society of Scotland under the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Scotland) Act 1990.\nIn Scotland, the duties and services provided by the notary are similar to England and Wales, although they are needed for some declarations in divorce matters for which they are not in England. Their role declined following the Law Agents (Scotland) Amendment Act 1896 which stipulated only enrolled law agents could become notaries and the Conveyancing (Scotland) Act 1924 which extended notarial execution to law agents. The primary functions of a Scottish notary are:\nCivil law jurisdictions.\nThe role of notaries in civil law countries is much greater than in common law countries. Civilian notaries are full-time lawyers and holders of a public office who routinely undertake non-contentious transactional work done in common law countries by attorneys/solicitors, as well as, in some countries, those of government registries, title offices, and public recorders. The qualifications imposed by civil law countries are much greater, requiring generally an undergraduate law degree, a graduate degree in notarial law and practice, three or more years of practical training (\"articles\") under an established notary, and the sitting of a national examination, to be admitted to practice. Typically, notaries work in private practice and earn fees, but a small minority of countries have salaried public service (or \"government\" / \"state\") notaries (e.g., Ukraine, Russia, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in Germany (until 2017), certain cantons of Switzerland, and Portugal).\nNotaries in civil law countries have had a critical historical role in providing archives. A considerable amount of historical data of tremendous value is available in France, Spain and Italy thanks to notarial minutes, contracts and conveyances, some of great antiquity which have survived in spite of losses, deterioration and willful destruction.\nCivil law notaries have jurisdiction over strictly non-contentious domestic civil-private law in the areas of property law, family law, agency, wills and succession, and company formation. The point to which a country's notarial profession monopolizes these areas can vary greatly. On one extreme is France (and French-derived systems) which statutorily give notaries a monopoly over their reserved areas of practice, as opposed to Austria where there is no discernible monopoly whatsoever and notaries are in direct competition with attorneys/solicitors.\nIn the few United States jurisdictions where trained notaries are allowed (such as Louisiana and Puerto Rico), the practice of these legal practitioners is limited to legal advice on purely non-contentious matters that fall within the purview of a notary's reserved areas of practice.\nNotable notaries.\nUpon the death of President Warren G. Harding in 1923, Calvin Coolidge was sworn in as president by his father, John Calvin Coolidge, Sr., a Vermont notary public. As there was some controversy as to whether a state notary public had the authority to administer the presidential oath of office, Coolidge took the oath, again, upon returning to Washington.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nAustralia\nEngland and Wales\nIndia\nIreland\nSouth Africa"}
{"id": "21482", "revid": "51049978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21482", "title": "Nairobi", "text": "Capital and largest city of Kenya\nNairobi (abbreviated as NBO, NBI or NRB) is the capital and largest city of Kenya, located in the south-central part of the country. As of 2024, it has a population of 4.8 million and a metropolitan population of 5.7 million, making it the 11th most populous city in Africa. Nicknamed the \u201c\"Green City in the Sun,\"\u201d Nairobi is uniquely notable for being the only capital city in the world that hosts a national park within its boundaries, and its name originates from the Maasai phrase \"Enkare Nyirobi\", meaning \u201cplace of cool waters.\"\nAs the capital of the country, Nairobi is home to the Kenyan Parliament Buildings, the State House and the Supreme Court Building. It is the major financial and economic hub of East Africa, hosting thousands of Kenyan businesses and international companies and organisations, including the United Nations Environment Programme (UN Environment) and the United Nations Office at Nairobi (UNON). The Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE) is one of the largest stock exchanges in Africa and the second-oldest exchange on the continent. It is Africa's fourth-largest stock exchange in terms of trading volume, capable of making 10 million trades a day. Nairobi is considered a global city and was ranked as a \"Beta World City\" by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network as of 2024.\nNairobi was founded in 1898 by colonial authorities in British East Africa, as a rail depot on the Uganda\u2013Kenya Railway. It was favoured by the authorities as an ideal resting place due to its high elevation, temperate climate, and adequate water supply. The town quickly grew to replace Mombasa as the capital of Kenya in 1907.\nAfter independence in 1963, Nairobi became the capital of the Republic of Kenya. During Kenya's early period, the city became a centre for the coffee, tea and sisal industries. The successive post-independence governments have built and turned Nairobi into a modern metropolitan city with a diverse population and a growing economy.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nThe site of Nairobi was originally a swamp land occupied by a pastoralist people, the Maasai, the long-distance trader community, Akamba People, as well as the agriculturalist Kikuyu people. The name Nairobi comes from the Maasai expression meaning 'cool waters', referring to the cold water stream which flowed through the area. With the arrival of the Uganda Railway, the site was identified by Sir George Whitehouse for a store depot, shunting ground and camping ground for the Indian labourers working on the railway.\nWhitehouse, chief engineer of the railway, favoured the site as an ideal resting place due to its high elevation, temperate climate, adequate water supply and being situated before the steep ascent of the Limuru escarpments. His choice was criticised by officials within the Protectorate government who felt the site was too flat, poorly drained and relatively infertile.\nIn the pre-colonial era, the people of modern Kenya mostly lived in villages amongst their tribes and cultural groups, where they had rulers within their communities rather than one singular government or leader.\nIn 1898, Arthur Church was first and foremost commissioned to design the first town layout for the railway depot. It constituted two streets \u2013 Victoria Street and Station Street, ten avenues, staff quarters and an Indian commercial area. The railway arrived at Nairobi on 30 May 1899, and soon Nairobi replaced Machakos as the headquarters of the provincial administration for the Ukamba province. \nOn the arrival of the railway, Whitehouse remarked that \"Nairobi itself will in the course of the next two years become a large and flourishing place and already there are many applications for sites for hotels, shops and houses.\" The town's early years were however beset with problems of malaria leading to at least one attempt to have the town moved. In the early 1900s, Bazaar Street, now Biashara Street, was completely rebuilt after an outbreak of plague and the burning of the original town.\nBetween 1902 and 1910, the town's population rose from 5,000 to 16,000 and grew around administration and tourism, initially in the form of big game hunting. In 1907, Nairobi replaced Mombasa as the capital of the East Africa Protectorate. In 1919, Nairobi was declared to be a municipality.\nGrowth.\nIn 1921, Nairobi had 24,000 residents, of which circa 12,000 were native Africans. The next decade saw growth in native African communities in Nairobi, and they began to constitute a majority for the first time. This growth caused planning issues, described by Thorntorn White and his planning team as the \"Nairobi Problem\". In February 1926, colonial officer Eric Dutton passed through Nairobi on his way to Mount Kenya, and said of the city:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter World War II, continuous expansion of the city angered both the indigenous Maasai and Kikuyu. This led to the Mau Mau Uprising in the 1950s, and the Lancaster House Conferences, which initiated a transition to Kenyan independence in 1963.\nIn the spring of 1950, the East African Trades Union Congress (EAUTC) led a nine-day general strike in the city.\nPost independence.\nNairobi remained the capital of Kenya after independence, and its continued rapid growth put pressure on the city's infrastructure with power cuts and water shortages becoming a common occurrence.\nIn September 1973, the Kenyatta International Conference Centre (KICC) was open to the public. The 28-storey building at the time was designed by the Norwegian architect Karl Henrik N\u00f8stvik and Kenyan David Mutiso. It is the only building within the city with a helipad that is open to the public. Of the buildings built in the Seventies, the KICC was the most eco-friendly and most environmentally conscious structure. Its main frame was constructed with locally available materials gravel, sand, cement and wood, and it had wide open spaces which allowed for natural aeration and natural lighting. Cuboids made up the plenary hall, the tower consisted of a cylinder composed of several cuboids, and the amphitheater and helipad both resembled cones. The tower was built around a concrete core and it had no walls but glass windows, which allowed for maximum natural lighting. It had the largest halls in eastern and central Africa.\nIn 1972, the World Bank approved funds for further expansion of the then Nairobi Airport (now Jomo Kenyatta International Airport), including a new international and domestic passenger terminal building, the airport's first dedicated cargo and freight terminal, new taxiways, associated aprons, internal roads, car parks, police and fire stations, a State Pavilion, airfield and roadway lighting, fire hydrant system, water, electrical, telecommunications and sewage systems, a dual carriageway passenger access road, security, drainage and the building of the main access road to the airport (Airport South Road). The cost of the project was more than US$29 million, US$111.8 million in 2013 dollars. On 14 March 1978, construction of the terminal building was completed on the other side of the airport's single runway and opened by President Jomo Kenyatta less than five months before his death. The airport was renamed Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in memory of its first president.\nThe Giraffe Centre, an animal sanctuary on the southwestern outskirts of Nairobi, was opened in 1983. To this day, it breeds the endangered species of Rothschild's giraffe.\nThe United States Embassy, then located in downtown Nairobi, was bombed in August 1998 by Al-Qaeda and the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, as one of a series of US embassy bombings. It is now the site of a memorial park.\n21st century.\nIn October 2011, a memorial statue was unveiled in Nairobi in memory to Tom Mboya, a former Kenyan Independence politician and assassination victim.\nIn November 2012, President Mwai Kibaki opened the KES 31 billion Thika Superhighway. This mega-project of Kenya started in 2009 and ended in 2011. It involved expanding the four-lane carriageway to eight lanes, building underpasses, providing interchanges at roundabouts, erecting flyovers and building underpasses to ease congestion. The 50.4-kilometre road was built in three phases: Uhuru Highway to Muthaiga Roundabout; Muthaiga Roundabout to Kenyatta University and; Kenyatta University to Thika Town.\nIn May 2017, President Uhuru Kenyatta inaugurated the Standard Gauge Railway which connects Nairobi to Mombasa. It was primarily built by a Chinese firm with about 90% of total funding from China and about 10% from the Kenyan government. A second phase is also being built which will link Naivasha to the existing route and also the Uganda border.\nIn August 2020, Nairobi County Assembly Speaker Beatrice Elachi resigned. In December 2020, recently elected Nairobi County Assembly Speaker Benson Mutura was sworn in as acting Nairobi Governor four days after the previous Nairobi Governor Mike Sonko was impeached and removed from office. At the time of Mutura's swearing in as acting Governor, which he will hold for at least 60 days, Nairobi did not have a Deputy Governor as well.\nRecent Developments.\nNairobi has seen several major infrastructure projects in recent years. The Nairobi Expressway, completed in 2022, was developed to reduce traffic congestion along Mombasa Road. In 2021, the Green Park Bus Terminal, part of efforts to improve public transport, began operations. In line with the Kenyan government's Affordable Housing Program, various housing developments are underway to accommodate the city's growing population.\nGeography.\nNairobi is situated at and and occupies .\nNairobi is situated between the cities of Kampala and Mombasa. As Nairobi is adjacent to the eastern edge of the Rift Valley, minor earthquakes and tremors occasionally occur. The Ngong Hills, located to the west of the city, are the most prominent geographical feature of the Nairobi area. Mount Kenya is situated north of Nairobi, and Mount Kilimanjaro is towards the south-east.\nThe Nairobi River and its tributaries traverse through the Nairobi County and joins the larger River Athi on the eastern edge of the county.\nNobel Peace Prize laureate Wangari Maathai fought fiercely to save the indigenous Karura Forest in northern Nairobi which was under threat of being replaced by housing and other infrastructure.\nNairobi's western suburbs stretch all the way from the Kenyatta National Hospital in the south to the UN headquarters at Gigiri suburb in the north, a distance of about . The city is centred on the City Square, which is located in the Central Business District. The Kenyan Parliament buildings, the Holy Family Cathedral, Nairobi City Hall, Nairobi Law Courts, and the Kenyatta Convention Centre all surround the square.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Nairobi has a subtropical highland climate (Cwb). At above sea level, evenings may be cool, especially in the June/July season, when the temperature can drop to . The sunniest and warmest part of the year is from December to March, when temperatures average in the high-twenties Celsius during the day. The mean maximum temperature for this period is .\nThere are rainy seasons, but rainfall can be moderate. The cloudiest part of the year is just after the first rainy season, when, until September, conditions are usually overcast with drizzle. As Nairobi is situated close to the equator, the differences between the seasons are minimal. The seasons are referred to as the wet season and dry season. The timing of sunrise and sunset varies little throughout the year for the same reason.\nNairobi metropolitan region.\nNairobi is found within the Greater Nairobi Metropolitan region, which consists of parts of 5 out of 47 counties in Kenya, which generate about 40% of the entire nation's GDP as per 2022 data by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Nairobi County on its contributes to 27.5% of the country's GDP according to the same report while Kiambu county comes second with 5.9%.\nDistricts and neighbourhoods.\nNairobi is divided into a series of constituencies with each being represented by members of Parliament in the National Assembly. The initial constituencies before the 2010 constitution which led to the county electoral boundaries being redrawn were: Makadara, Kamukunji, Starehe, Langata, Dagoretti, Westlands, Kasarani, and Embakasi. The new electoral boundaries after this were revised to Embakasi North, Embakasi South, Embakasi Central, Embakasi East, Embakasi West, Makadara, Kamukunji, Starehe, Mathare, Westlands, Dagoretti North, Dagoretti South, Langata, Kibra, Ruaraka, Roysambu and Kasarani.\nThe main administrative divisions of Nairobi are Central, Dagoretti, Embakasi, Kasarani, Kibera, Makadara, Pumwani, and Westlands. Most of the upmarket suburbs are situated to the west and north-central of Nairobi, where most European settlers resided during the colonial times AKA 'Ubabini'. These include Karen, Langata, Lavington, Gigiri, Muthaiga, Brookside, Spring Valley, Loresho, Kilimani, Kileleshwa, Hurlingham, Runda, Kitisuru, Nyari, Kyuna, Lower Kabete, Westlands, and Highridge, although Kangemi, Kawangware, and Dagoretti are lower income areas close to these affluent suburbs. The city's colonial past is commemorated by many English place-names.\nMost lower-middle and upper middle income neighbourhoods are located in the north-central areas such as Highridge, Parklands, Ngara, Pangani, and areas to the southwest and southeast of the metropolitan area near the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport. The most notable ones include Avenue Park, Fedha, Pipeline, Donholm, Greenfields, Nyayo, Taasia, Baraka, Nairobi West, Madaraka, Siwaka, South B, South C, Mugoya, Riverbank, Hazina, Buru Buru, Uhuru, Harambee Civil Servants', Akiba, Kimathi, Pioneer, and Koma Rock to the centre-east and Kasarani to northeast area among others. \nThe low and lower income estates are located mainly in far eastern Nairobi. These include, Umoja, Kariokor, Dandora, Kariobangi, Kayole, Ruai, Kamulu, Embakasi, and Huruma. Kitengela suburb, though located further southeast, Ongata Rongai and Kiserian further southwest, and Ngong/Embulbul suburbs also known as 'Diaspora' to the far west are considered part of the Greater Nairobi Metropolitan area. More than 90% of Nairobi residents work within the Nairobi Metropolitan area, in the formal and informal sectors. Many Somali immigrants have also settled in Eastleigh, nicknamed \"Little Mogadishu\". A complete list of Nairobi postal codes by area and constituency is available online.\nKibera slum.\nThe Kibera slum in Nairobi is claimed by the Kenyan government to have a population of 185,777. However, non-governmental sources generally estimate the slum to have a population of 500,000 to 1,000,000, depending on what areas are defined as comprising Kibera.\nParks and Gardens.\nNairobi has many parks and open spaces throughout the city. Much of the city has dense tree-cover and plenty of green spaces. \nThe most famous park in Nairobi is Uhuru Park. The park borders the central business district and the neighbourhood Upper Hill. Uhuru (\"Freedom\" in Swahili) Park is a centre for outdoor speeches, services, and rallies. The park was to be built over by former President Daniel arap Moi, who wanted the 62-storey headquarters of his party, the Kenya African National Union, situated in the park. However, the park was saved following a campaign by Nobel Peace Prize winner Wangari Maathai.\nCentral Park is adjacent to Uhuru Park, and includes a memorial for Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya, and the Moi Monument, built in 1988 to commemorate the second president's first decade in power.\nBoth Uhuru Park and Central Park were renovated by the-then Nairobi Metropolitan Services (NMS) together with the Kenya Defence Forces. The process started in September 2023 and incorporates several key elements, including a cascading water feature, upgraded sanitation facilities, a skateboarding zone, and pedestrian-friendly paths. It also highlights statues of native wildlife, carefully groomed lawns, thriving trees, improved footpaths, and expanded green zones. A botanical section has been established as well, showcasing a diverse collection of flowers and plant species to reflect Kenya's abundant floral heritage.\nJeevanjee Gardens is located within the Central Business District and is easily accessible via foot, private vehcles and public transport. Among Nairobi's most historic and oldest public green spaces, the park was created in the early 20th century by Asian industrialist A.M. Jeevanjee.\nThe John Michuki Memorial Park is situated along the Nairobi River, stretching from Globe Cinema Roundabout to Museum Bridge. It was previously known as the Mazingira Park, and was reopened in August 2020 by President Uhuru Kenyatta after renovation by the Kenya Forest Service, Kenya Forestry Research Institute (KEFRI), and National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). The park is named in tribute to the late former Cabinet Minister John Michuki, who was instrumental in the restoration of the Nairobi River and its surroundings during his time as Minister for Environment.\nNairobi Arboretum, founded in 1907 by E. Batiscombe as a trial site for forestry tree species, is a 30-hectare botanical reserve that hosts more than 350 types of trees and functions as both a leisure destination and a research hub. It is located near the State House.\nKarura Forest, the city-based nature reserve, features nature trails, picnic spots, caves and waterfalls. It is an excellent destination for birdwatching as the area is home to over 200 documented bird species. While strolling along the trails, visitors may also catch glimpses of monkeys and bushbucks.\nNairobi City Park, is located between Forest Road and Limuru Road. As one of Nairobi's oldest and most expansive urban green spaces, spanning over 60 hectares, City Park holds considerable ecological value. It preserves one of the last remaining patches of indigenous forest that once blanketed the region. The park is home to a rich array of biodiversity, including Sykes' monkeys, various bird species, and a wide assortment of native plant life. City Park also carries historical weight, because it hosts cemeteries for veterans of World War I and II and is the final resting place of notable figures such as freedom fighter Pio Gama Pinto and former Vice President Joseph Murumbi, whose memorial garden is located within the park grounds.\nOloolua Nature Trail is situated in Oloolua Forest in the Karen area of Nairobi. It is under the management of Kenya Institute of Primate Research (KIPRE) and provides opportunities for nature walks, bird watching, and enjoying the natural environment. Key attractions include a 37-meter deep natural cave that was historically used by Mau Mau fighters, a beautiful waterfall draining into the Mbagathi River, a bamboo resting point, and a papyrus swamp.\nNgong Road Forest Sanctuary contains winding walking and jogging paths that pass through tall trees inhabited by various bird species, with occasional sightings of Sykes monkeys. The area also includes a picnic site and a playground for children. Additionally, Ngong Road Forest has cycling trails that run beneath the indigenous tree canopy.\nLangata Botanical Gardens is a private recreational garden located along Langata South Road. The area comprises numerous native trees, expansive well-maintained lawns, and a lagoon inhabited by a diverse range of fish species.\nOther private botanical gardens include Maarifa Park Botanical Garden, located in Kitisuru and the Five Senses Botanical Gardens by Enaki, located in Nyari, Nairobi.\nNairobi Botanical Gardens is located within the National Museum of Kenya. The Nairobi Botanical Gardens are organized into themed sections, each highlighting a particular conservation topic. For example, the Children's Garden focuses on botany and habitat, providing a space where visitors can learn about indigenous and exotic plants while enjoying open lawns and an outdoor amphitheater. Other sections include the Grass Gardens, which showcase important food and beverage plants, the Herbal Garden dedicated to medicinal and food plants, the Succulent Gardens illustrating plant adaptations to arid environments, the Quarry Garden transformed from a former quarry, and the Memorial Garden commemorating World War II with symbolic plants and a water feature.\nThe August 7th Memorial Park is located at the site of the 1998 US Embassy bombing and features a green space that offers tranquility.\nThreats to Public Spaces.\nThe colonial 1948 Master Plan for Nairobi still acts as the governing mechanism when it comes to making decisions related to urban planning. The Master Plan at the time, which was designed for 250,000 people, allocated 28% of Nairobi's land to public space, but because of rapid population growth, much of the vitality of public spaces within the city are increasingly threatened. City Park, the only natural park in Nairobi, for example, was originally , but has since lost approximately of land to private development through squatting and illegal alienation which began in the 1980s.\nPolitical divisions.\nThe City of Nairobi has the status of a full administrative county.\nInitially, Nairobi was one of the eight provinces in Kenya before 2013. The Nairobi province differed in several ways from other Kenyan regions. Nairobi Province was not divided into \"districts\" until 2007, when three districts were created. In 2010, along with the new constitution, Nairobi was renamed a county and consolidated into a city-county. The county is entirely urban. It had only one local council, Nairobi City Council, which was replaced by Nairobi City County after the new constitution was effected in March 2013.\nNairobi County has 17 constituencies. Constituency name may differ from division name, such that Starehe Constituency is equal to Central Division, Lang'ata Constituency to Kibera division, and Kamukunji Constituency to Pumwani Division in terms of boundaries.\nConstituencies.\nNairobi is divided into 17 constituencies and 85 wards, mostly named after residential estates. Kibera Division, for example, includes Kibera, Kenya's largest slum, and the affluent estates of Karen and Langata.\nThe Nairobi GPO (General Post Office) Postal code is 00100.\nEconomy.\nNairobi is home to the Nairobi Securities Exchange (NSE), one of Africa's largest stock exchanges. The NSE was officially recognised as an overseas stock exchange by the London Stock Exchange in 1953. The exchange is Africa's fourth largest in terms of trading volumes, and fifth largest in terms of Market Capitalization as a percentage of GDP.\nNairobi is the regional headquarters of several international companies and organisations. In 2007, General Electric, Young &amp; Rubicam, Google, Coca-Cola, IBM Services, and Cisco Systems relocated their African headquarters to the city. The United Nations Office at Nairobi hosts UN Environment and UN-Habitat headquarters.\nSeveral of Africa's largest companies are headquartered in Nairobi. Safaricom, the largest company in Kenya by assets and profitability is headquartered in Nairobi, KenGen, which is the largest African stock outside South Africa, is based in the city. Kenya Airways, Africa's fourth largest airline, uses Nairobi's Jomo Kenyatta International Airport as a hub.\nNairobi has not been left behind by the FinTech phenomenon that has taken over worldwide. It has produced a couple of tech firms like Craft Silicon, Kangai Technologies, Jambo Pay and https:// . which have been in the forefront of technology, innovation and cloud based computing services. Their products are widely used and have considerable market share presence within Kenya and outside its borders.\nGoods manufactured in Nairobi include clothing, textiles, building materials, processed foods, beverages, and cigarettes. Several foreign companies have factories based in and around the city. These include Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, General Motors, Toyota, and The Coca-Cola Company.\nNairobi has a large tourist industry, being both a tourist destination and a transport hub.\nCentral Business District (CBD).\nNairobi has grown around its central business district, usually referred to colloquially as \"the CBD\". This takes a pentagonal shape, around the Uhuru Highway, Haile Selassie Avenue, Moi Avenue, and University Way. It features many of Nairobi's important buildings, including the City Hall and Parliament Building. The city square is also located within the perimeter.\nMost of the skyscrapers in this region are the headquarters of businesses and corporations, such as I&amp;M and the Kenyatta International Conference Centre. The United States Embassy bombing took place in this district, prompting the building of a new embassy building in the suburbs.\nIn 2011, the city was considered to have about 4 million residents. A large beautification project took place in the Central Business District, as the city prepared to host the 2006 Afri-Cities summit. Iconic buildings such as the Kenyatta International Conference Centre had their exteriors cleaned and repainted.\nNairobi downtown area or central business district is bordered to the southwest by Uhuru Park and Central Park. The Mombasa to Kampala railway runs to the southeast of the district.\nUpper Hill.\nTwo areas outside the Central Business District that are seeing growth in companies and office space are Upper Hill, which is located, approximately from the Central Business District and Westlands, about the same distance from the city centre.\nCompanies that have moved from the Central Business District to Upper Hill include Citibank, and in 2007 Coca-Cola began construction of their East and Central African headquarters in Upper Hill, cementing the district as the preferred location for office space in Nairobi. The largest office development in this area is UAP Tower, completed in 2015 and opened for business in July 2016. It is a 33-storey tower 163 meters high. The World Bank and International Finance Corporation, part of the World Bank Group, are also located in Upper Hill at the Delta Center, Menegai Road. Earlier on, they were located in the Hill Park Building and CBA Building respectively, both in Upper Hill, and prior to that in View Park towers in the Central Business District.\nTo accommodate the large demand for floor space in Nairobi, various commercial projects are being constructed. New business parks are being built in the city, including the flagship Nairobi Business Park.\nConstruction boom and real estate development projects.\nNairobi is undergoing a construction boom. Major real estate projects and skyscrapers are coming up in the city. Among them are the pinnacle twin towers which will tower at 314 m, Britam Tower (200 m), Avic International Africa headquarters (176 m), Prism tower (140 m), Pan Africa insurance towers, Pallazzo offices, and many other projects. Shopping malls are also being constructed like the recently completed Garden city Mall, Centum's Two rivers Mall, The Hub in Karen, Karen waterfront, Thika Greens, and the recently reconstructed Westgate Mall. \nHigh-class residential apartments for living are coming up like Le Mac towers, a residential tower in Westlands Nairobi with 23 floors. Avic International is also putting up a total of four residential apartments on Waiyaki way: a 28-level tower, two 24-level towers, and a 25-level tower. Hotel towers are also being erected in the city. \nAvic International is putting up a 30-level hotel tower of 141 m in the Westlands. The hotel tower will be operated by Marriot group. Jabavu limited is constructing a 35 floor hotel tower in Upper Hill which will be high over 140 metres in the city skyline. Arcon Group Africa has also announced plans to erect a skyscraper in Upper hill which will have 66 floors and tower over 290 metres, further cementing Upper hill as the preferred metropolis for multinational corporations launching their operations in the Kenyan capital.\nAlso see List of tallest buildings in Kenya\nDemographics.\nPopulation of Nairobi between 1906 and 2019\nNairobi has experienced one of the highest growth rates of any city in Africa. Since its foundation in 1899, Nairobi has grown to become the second-largest city in the African Great Lakes, despite being one of the youngest cities in the region. The growth rate of Nairobi was estimated in 2023 to be 2.09% a year. It is estimated that Nairobi's population will reach 5 million people in 2025.\nGiven this high population growth, owing itself both to urban migration and high birth rates, the economy has yet to catch up. Unemployment is estimated at 5.5% within the city, mainly in the high-density, low-income areas of the city which can make them seem even denser than the higher-income neighbourhoods.\nIn the 2019 Census, Christianity was the most widely practiced religion in Nairobi, accounting for 89% of the population, of which the majority belong to Protestant and Evangelical churches. In 2019, Muslims were 7.6% of the population.\nA population projection in the 21st century is listed below:\nCulture.\nNairobi is a diverse melting pot of African cultures. As a cosmopolitan African city, it hosts all the diverse tribes that make up Kenya, and hosts a large immigrant population from other African countries.\nNairobi has two informal nicknames. The first is \"The Green City in the Sun\", which is derived from the city's foliage and warm climate. The second is the \"Safari Capital of the World\", which is used due to Nairobi's prominence as a hub for safari tourism.\nLiterature and film.\n\"Kwani?\" is Kenya's first literary journal and was established by writers living in Nairobi. Nairobi's publishing houses have also produced the works of some of Kenya's authors, including Ng\u0169g\u0129 wa Thiong'o and Meja Mwangi who were part of post-colonial writing.\nMany film makers also practice their craft out of Nairobi. Film-making is still young in the country, but people like producer Njeri Karago and director Judy Kibinge are paving the way for others.\nPerhaps the most famous book and film set in Nairobi is \"Out of Africa\". The book was written by Karen Blixen, whose pseudonym was Isak Dinesen, and it is her account of living in Kenya. Karen Blixen lived in the Nairobi area from 1917 to 1931. The neighbourhood in which she lived, Karen, is named after her.\nIn 1985, \"Out of Africa\" was made into a film, directed by Sydney Pollack. The film won 28 awards, including seven Academy Awards. The popularity of the film prompted the opening of Nairobi's Karen Blixen Museum.\nNairobi is the setting of many of the novels of Ng\u0169g\u0129 wa Thiong'o, Kenya's foremost writer.\nNairobi has been the set of several other American and British films. The most recent of these was \"The Constant Gardener\" (2005), a large part of which was filmed in the city. The story revolves around a British diplomat in Nairobi whose wife is murdered in northern Kenya. Much of the filming was in the Kibera slum.\nAmong the latest Kenyan actors in Hollywood who identify with Nairobi is Lupita Nyong'o. Lupita received an Oscar award for best supporting actress in her role as Patsy in the film \"12 Years a Slave\" during the \"86th Academy Awards\" at the Dolby theatre in Los Angeles. Lupita is the daughter of Kenyan politician Peter Anyang' Nyong'o.\nMost new Hollywood films are nowadays screened at Nairobi's cinemas. Up until the early 1990s, there were only a few film theatres and the repertoire was limited. There are also two drive-in cinemas in Nairobi.\nIn 2015 and 2016, Nairobi was the focus point for the American television series \"Sense8\" which shot its first and second seasons partly in the city. The TV series has high reviews in The Internet Movie Database (IMDb).\nIn 2015 Nairobi was featured in the British thriller film \"Eye in the Sky\", which is a story about a lieutenant general and a colonel who faced political opposition after ordering a drone missile strike to take out a group of suicide bombers in Nairobi.\nIn 2017, the name \"Nairobi\" was taken as a code-name by a female main character in the famous Spanish TV series \"Money Heist\".\nFood.\nIn Nairobi, there are a range of restaurants. Besides being home to \"nyama choma\" which is a local term used to refer to roasted meat, there are American fast food restaurants such as KFC, Subway, Domino's Pizza, Pizza Hut, Hardee's and Burger King, and the longer established South African chains, Galito's, Steers, PizzaMojo, and Spur Steak Ranches. \nCoffee houses, doubling up as restaurants and mostly frequented by the upper middle classes, such as Artcaffe Nairobi Java House and Dormans, have become increasingly popular in recent days. Traditional food joints such as the popular K'osewe's in the city centre and Amaica, which specialize in African delicacies, are widespread. \nThe Kenchic franchise which specialized in old-school chicken and chips meals was popular, particularly among the lower classes and students, with restaurants all over the city and its suburbs. However, as of February 2016, Kenchic stopped operating its eatery business. Upscale restaurants often specialize in specific cuisines such as Italian, Lebanese, Ethiopian, and French, but are more likely to be found in five star hotels and the wealthier suburbs in the West and South of the city.\nNairobi has an annual restaurant week (NRW) at the beginning of the year, January\u2013February. Nairobi's restaurants offer dining packages at reduced prices. NRW is managed by Eatout Kenya which is an online platform that lists and reviews restaurants in Nairobi, and provides a platform for Kenyan foodies to congregate and share.\nMusic.\nNairobi is the centre of Kenya's music scene. Benga is a Kenyan genre which was developed in Nairobi. The style is a fusion of jazz and Luo music forms. Mugithi is another popular genre in Kenya, with its origins in the central parts of the country. A majority of music videos of leading local musicians are also filmed in the city.\nIn the 1970s, Nairobi became the prominent centre for music in the African Great Lakes. During this period, Nairobi was established as a hub of soukous music. This genre was originally developed in Kinshasa and Brazzaville. After the political climate in the region deteriorated, many Congolese artists relocated to Nairobi. Artists such as Orchestra Super Mazembe moved from Congo to Nairobi and found great success. Virgin records became aware of the popularity of the genre and signed recording contracts with several soukous artists.\nMore recently, Nairobi has become the centre of the Kenyan hip hop scene. The genre has become very popular amongst local youth, and domestic musicians have become some of the most popular in the region. Successful artists based in Nairobi include Jua Cali, Nonini, Camp Mulla, Juliani, Eric Wainaina, and Nameless. Popular record labels include Ogopa DJs and Calif Records.\nNairobi, including the coastal towns of Mombasa and Diani, have recently become the centre of EDM in Kenya, producing DJs as well as producers like DJ Fita.\nMany nightclubs in and around the city have witnessed a growth in the population that exclusively listen to Electronic Dance Music, especially amongst the younger generations. Gospel music is also popular in Nairobi just as in the rest of Kenya, with gospel artists having a great impact in the mostly Christian city. \nMusical group Sauti Sol performed for U.S. President Barack Obama when he was in the city for the 2015 Global Entrepreneurship Summit.\nSports.\nNairobi is the African Great Lakes region's sporting centre. Notable annual events staged in Nairobi include Safari Rally, Safari Sevens rugby union tournament, and Nairobi Marathon.\nFacilities.\nThe premier sports facility in Nairobi and generally in Kenya is the Moi International Sports Centre in the suburb of Kasarani. The complex was completed in 1987, and was used to host the 1987 All Africa Games. The complex comprises a 60,000 seater stadium, the second largest in the African Great Lakes (after Tanzania's new national stadium), a 5,000 seater gymnasium, and a 2,000 seater aquatics centre.\nThe Nyayo National Stadium is Nairobi's second largest stadium renowned for hosting global rugby event under the \"Safaricom Sevens\". Completed in 1983, the stadium has a capacity of 30,000. This stadium is primarily used for football. The facility is located close to the Central Business District, which makes it a convenient location for political gatherings.\nNairobi City Stadium is Nairobi's first stadium, and used for club football.\nNairobi Gymkhana is the home of the Kenyan cricket team, and was a venue for the 2003 Cricket World Cup.\nUlinzi Sports Complex was officially opened by President Uhuru Kenyatta in 2022 after its construction that started in 2020. It has a capacity of 7,500, an 8-lane Athletics track, training grounds and an indoor arena.\nDandora Stadium, a 4,000 capacity stadium opened in 2024, hosts some of the top flight national league football tournaments. The stadium has seats in the VIP section and regular stands.\nTalanta Sports Stadium, with a capacity of 60,000, is currently under construction with an estimated completion date of February 2026.\nFootball.\nFootball is the most popular sport in the city by viewership and participation. This is highlighted by the number of football clubs in the city, including Kenyan Premier League sides Gor Mahia, A.F.C. Leopards Sports Club, Tusker F. C. and Mathare United.\nKenya, together with Tanzania and Uganda will be cohosting the 2025 CHAN competition. Also, the three countries will jointly host the 2027 AFCON football competition.\nGolf.\nThere are several golf courses within a 20\u00a0km radius of Nairobi. The oldest 18-hole golf course in the city is the Royal Nairobi Golf Club. It was established in 1906 by the British, just seven years after the city was founded. Other notable golf clubs include the Windsor Golf Hotel and Country Club, Karen Country Club, VetLab Sports Club, Golf Park Golf Club, Kenya Railways Golf Club, Sigona Golf Club and Muthaiga Golf Club.\nThe Kenya Open golf tournament, which is part of the European Tour, takes place in Nairobi.\nEquestrian Sports.\nThe Ngong Racecourse in Nairobi is the centre of horse racing in Kenya.\nThe Kenya Open Polo tournament and other polo games are often hosted at the Nairobi Polo Club.\nThe Horse Association of Kenya offices are located in Nairobi, at Racecourse.\nRugby.\nRugby is a popular sport in Nairobi with 8 of the 12 top flight clubs based here.\nThe Rugby Football Union of East Africa (RFUEA) is hosted in Nairobi.\nBasketball.\nBasketball is a popular sport played in the city's primary, Secondary and college leagues. Many of the city's urban youth are basketball fans and watch the American NBA.\nMarathons.\nNairobi often hosts a number of marathons including:\nPlaces of worship.\nThe places of worship are predominantly Christian churches and temples: Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Nairobi (Catholic Church), Anglican Church of Kenya (Anglican Communion), Presbyterian Church of East Africa (World Communion of Reformed Churches), Baptist Convention of Kenya (Baptist World Alliance), and Assemblies of God. There are also Muslim mosques including Jamia Mosque.\nEducation.\nThe majority of schools follow the Kenyan competence based curriculum (CBC). Nairobi Innovation Week (NIW) is an annual that was started in 2015. It is organized by the University of Nairobi and in collaboration with government agencies. It focuses on partnerships, innovations, incubation, and startups. It promotes an entrepreneurial culture. It is an event for local and international innovators to showcase innovations, and to network.\nHigher education.\nNairobi is home to several Universities and Colleges.\nNumerous other universities have opened satellite campuses in Nairobi. The Railways Training Institute established in 1956, is a notable institution of higher learning with a campus in Nairobi.\nInfrastructure.\nTransport.\nMajor plans are being implemented in the need to decongest the city's traffic and the completion of Thika Road has given the city a much needed face-lift attributed to road's enhancement of global standards. Several projects have been completed, such as Syokimau Rail Station, the Eastern and Northern Bypasses, while numerous other projects are still underway.\nThe development of these critical transport facilities will, besides reducing transport costs due to faster movement of goods and people within the region, also increase trade, improve the socio-economic welfare of Northern Kenya and boost the country's potential in attracting investments from all over the world.\nAirports.\nJomo Kenyatta International Airport is the largest airport in Kenya. Domestic travelers made up 40% of overall passengers in 2016, an increase of 32% since 2012. JKIA had more than 7 million passengers pass through it in 2016. In February 2017, JKIA received a Category One Status from the FAA, boosting the airport's status as a Regional Aviation hub.\nWilson Airport is a general-aviation airport handling smaller aircraft, mostly propeller-driven. In July 2016, construction of a new air traffic control tower commenced at a cost of KES 163 million (approximately US$1.63 million).\nMoi Air Base is a military airport. In its earlier years, it was utilised as a landing strip in the pre-jet airline era. It was mostly used as a British passenger and mail route from Southampton to Cape Town in the 1930s and 1940s. This route was served by flying boats between Britain and Kisumu and then by land-based aircraft on the routes to the south.\nMatatu.\nMatatus are the most common form of public transport in Nairobi. Matatu, which literally translates to \"three cents for a ride\" (nowadays much more) are privately owned minibuses. They generally seat 14 to 33 riders. Matatus operate within Nairobi, its environs and suburbs and from Nairobi to other towns around the country. The matatu's route is imprinted along a yellow stripe on the side of the bus, and matatus plying specific routes have specific route numbers.\nIn 2004, a law was passed, requiring all matatus to include seat belts, speed governors and to be painted with a yellow stripe. At first, this caused a furore amongst Matatu operators, but they were pressured by government and the public to make the changes. Matatus are now limited to .\nIn November 2014 President Uhuru Kenyatta lifted the ban on the yellow stripe and allowed matatus to maintain the colourful graphics in an effort to support the youth in creating employment. Matatus in Nairobi were easily distinguishable by their extravagant paint schemes, as owners would paint their matatu with various colourful decorations, such as their favourite football team or hip hop artist. They are notorious for their poor safety records, which are a result of overcrowding and reckless driving. Due to the intense competition between matatus, many are equipped with powerful sound systems and television screens to attract more customers.\nBuses.\nBuses are increasingly becoming common in the city with some even going to the extents of installing complimentary WiFi systems in partnership with the leading mobile service provider. There are four major bus companies operating the city routes and are the traditional Kenya Bus Service (KBS), and newer private operators Citi Hoppa, Compliant MOA and Double M. The Citi Hoppa buses are distinguishable by their green livery, the Double M buses are painted purple, Compliant MOA by their distinctively screaming names and mix of white, blue colours while the KBS buses are painted blue.\nCompanies such as Easy Coach, Guardian Angel, Transline, Tahmeed, NorthWest, Kisii Classic and Ena coach scheduled buses and luxury coaches to other cities and towns.\nA Bus rapid transit will commence operating with 100 high capacity buses along Thika Road in July 2022 between Kasarani and the Kenyatta National Hospital. After the pilot, Nairobi Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (Namata) will implement another 300 buses as the first phase that will expand the BRT line to run from Ruiru to Kenyatta National Hospital. A second phase will later extend the line to run between Kenol in Murang'a County to Ongata Rongai in Kajiado County.\nTrains.\nNairobi was founded as a railway town, and the main headquarters of Kenya Railways (KR) is still situated at Nairobi railway station, which is located near the city centre. The line runs through Nairobi, from Mombasa to Kampala. Its main use is freight traffic connecting Nairobi to Mombasa and Kisumu. A number of morning and evening commuter trains connect the centre with the suburbs, but the city has no proper light rail, tramway, or rapid transit lines. A proposal has been passed for the construction of a commuter rail line. \nIn November 2012, President Mwai Kibaki launched the Syokimau Rail Service, marking a major milestone in the history of railway development in Kenya. The opening of the station marked another milestone in efforts to realise various projects envisaged under the Vision 2030 Economic Blueprint. The new station has a train that ferries passengers from Syokimau to the city centre cutting travel time by half. \nThe opening of the station marks the completion of the first phase of the Sh24b Nairobi Commuter Rail Network that is geared at easing traffic congestion in Nairobi, blamed for huge economic losses. Other modern stations include Imara Daima Railway Station and Makadara Railway Station.\nThe new Mombasa\u2013Nairobi Standard Gauge Railway connects the port city of Mombasa and Nairobi. The new railway line has virtually replaced the old metre-gauge railway. The Nairobi Terminus is located at Syokimau, some 20\u00a0km from the city centre. Passengers travelling from Mombasa are transferred the short distance into the CBD with the metre-gauge trains.\nRoads.\nTwo trans-African automobile routes pass through Nairobi: the Cairo-Cape Town Highway and the Lagos-Mombasa Highway. Nairobi is served by highways that link Mombasa to Kampala in Uganda and Arusha in Tanzania. These are earmarked to ease the daily motor traffic within and surrounding the metro area. However, driving in Nairobi is chaotic. Most of the roads are tarmacked and there are signs showing directions to certain neighbourhoods. \nNairobi is connected to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport by the Mombasa Highway, which passes through Industrial Area, South B, South C and Embakasi. Ongata Rongai, Langata and Karen are connected to the city centre by Langata Road, which runs to the south. Lavington, Riverside, and Westlands are connected by Waiyaki Way. Kasarani, Eastlands, and Embakasi are connected by Thika Road, Jogoo Road, and Outer Ring Road.\nHighways connect the city with other major towns such as Mombasa, Machakos, Voi, (A109), Eldoret, Kisumu, Nakuru, Naivasha, and Namanga Border Tanzania (A104).\nNairobi is undergoing major road constructions to update its infrastructure network. The new system of roads, flyovers, and bridges are intended to better cope with high traffic levels. It is also a major component of Kenya's Vision 2030 and Nairobi Metropolis plans. Most roads now are well lit and surfaced with adequate signage.\nIn 2020, the construction of The Nairobi Expressway began. The Nairobi expressway is a 27\u00a0km toll road connecting the Eastern Nairobi neighbourhood of Mulolongo to the uptown neighbourhood of Westlands at James Gichuru junction through Nairobi CBD. The road is directly to the Jomo Kenyatta International Airport enabling travellers to access the airport faster avoiding the heavy traffic on Mombasa Road and Waiyaki Way. The road has an 11.025\u00a0km elevated section between Airtel Center and Westlands.\nThis road, is intended to ease traffic from Jomo Kenyatta International Airport that accesses Nairobi city center. Also traffic from Central Nairobi is expected to be facilitated, to reduce the number of departing passengers who miss their fights, while stuck in road traffic jams on the city streets.[5] The work involves expansion of the existing road to four-lanes one-way, (8 lanes total), with foot paths, drainage channels, overpass bridges and street lighting. It was opened to the public in May 2022.\nWater supply and sanitation.\n94% of the piped water supply for Nairobi comes from rivers and reservoirs in the Aberdare Range north of the city, of which the reservoir of the Thika Dam is the most important one. Water distribution losses \u2013 technically called non-revenue water \u2013 are 40%, and only 40% of those with house connections receive water continuously. Slum residents receive water through water kiosks and end up paying much higher water prices than those fortunate enough to have access to piped water at their residence.\nHousing.\nThere is a wide variety of housing options in Nairobi. The options range from privately owned housing units/apartments, rented units, leased spaces and even houses on mortgage. Most wealthy Kenyans live in Nairobi, but the majority of Nairobians are of average and low income. Half of the population has been estimated to live in slums which cover just 5% of the city area. The growth of these slums is a result of urbanisation, poor town planning, lack of good governance and proper leadership in these settlements and lack of empowerment and social capital among other factors.\nKibera is one of the largest slums in Africa, and is situated to the west of Nairobi. (Kibera comes from the Nubian word Kibra, meaning \"forest\" or \"jungle\"). The slums cover two square kilometres and are on government land. Kibera has been the setting for several films, the most recent being \"The Constant Gardener\".\nOther notable slums include Mathare and Korogocho. Altogether, 66 areas are counted as slums within Nairobi.\nMany Nairobi non-slum-dwellers live in relatively good housing conditions. Large houses can be found in many of the upmarket neighbourhoods, especially to the west of Nairobi. Middle and high income estates include Gigiri, Muthaiga, Langata and Karen. Other middle and high income estates include Parklands, Westlands, Hurlingham, Kilimani, Milimani, Spring Valley, Lavington, Rosslyn, Kitisuru, and Nairobi Hill.\nTo accommodate the growing middle class, many new apartments and housing developments are being built in and around the city. The most notable development is \"Greenpark\", at Athi River, Machakos County from Nairobi's Central Business District. Over 5,000 houses, villas and apartments are being constructed at this development, including leisure, retail and commercial facilities. The development is being marketed to families, as are most others within the city. Eastlands also houses most of the city's middle class and includes South C, South B, Embakasi, Buru Buru, Komarock, Donholm, Umoja, Saika, Ruai, Kasarani and various others.\nCrime and law enforcement.\nCrime levels and safety have very much improved in Nairobi over recent years. Violent crime is rare but petty crime can still be an issue. In general, petty crime in Nairobi mostly involves pickpocketing and theft, and on rare occasions can be confrontational. Although there have been a handful of isolated attacks in Kenya by Al Shaabab from neighbouring Somalia, these incidences are rare.\nMedia.\nNairobi is home to most of Kenya's news and media organisations. The city is also home to the region's largest newspapers: the \"Daily Nation\" and \"The Standard\". These are circulated within Kenya and cover a range of domestic and regional issues. Both newspapers are published in English. People Daily is also the leading free newspaper distributed on the streets of Nairobi. It is published by Mediamax Limited.\nKenya Broadcasting Corporation, a state-run television and radio station, is headquartered in the city. Kenya Television Network is part of the Standard Group and was Kenya's first privately owned TV station. The Nation Media Group runs NTV which is based in Nairobi, The Royal Media Services (RMS). There are also a number of prominent radio stations located in Kenya's capital including Citizen radio, Inooro fm, KISS 100, Capital FM, East FM, Kameme FM, Metro FM, and Family FM, among others.\nSeveral multinational media organisations have their regional headquarters in Nairobi. These include the BBC, CNN, Agence France-Presse, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, and the Associated Press. The East African bureau of CNBC Africa is located in Nairobi's city centre, while the Nairobi bureau of \"The New York Times\" is located in the suburb of Gigiri. The broadcast headquarters of CCTV Africa are located in Nairobi.\nPop culture.\n\"Rise and Fall of Idi Amin\", also referred to as, \"Amin: The Rise and Fall\", is a 1981 biographical film by Sharad Patel. The movie details the controversial actions and atrocities of the once dictator of Uganda, Idi Amin, in the time of his violent rise to power in 1971 until he descends in 1979 as the result of Uganda\u2013Tanzania uprising. The movie depicts some of the roles Nairobi as the political hub of Kenya served in opposing the Ugandan dictator, including the coordination between Tel Aviv and Nairobi during operation Entebe.\nIn 2012, a Kenyan drama film directed by David \"Tosh\" Gitonga named \"Nairobi Half Life\" came to the big screen. The film was selected as the Kenyan entry for the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the 85th Academy Awards, but did not make the final shortlist, and is the first time Kenya has submitted a film in this category.\nNairobi inspired the nicknaming of the character \u00c1gata Jim\u00e9nez as 'Nairobi'; a fictional character in the Netflix series \"Money Heist\", portrayed by Alba Flores. She serves as the quality manager of the group, in charge of printing money in the Royal Mint of Spain in parts 1 and 2, and overseeing the melting of gold in the Bank of Spain in parts 3 and 4. She is widely considered to be the show's most popular character.\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nNairobi is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nhttps:// \u2013 Complete directory of all 45 post offices and postal codes in Nairobi\nhttps:// \u2013 Official Kenya Postal Corporation website"}
{"id": "21483", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21483", "title": "Numeral (linguistics)", "text": "Word or phrase which describes a numerical quantity\nIn linguistics, a numeral in the broadest sense is a word or phrase that describes a numerical quantity. Some theories of grammar use the word \"numeral\" to refer to cardinal numbers that act as a determiner that specify the quantity of a noun, for example the \"two\" in \"two hats\". Some theories of grammar do not include determiners as a part of speech and consider \"two\" in this example to be an adjective. Some theories consider \"numeral\" to be a synonym for \"number\" and assign all numbers (including ordinal numbers like \"first\") to a part of speech called \"numerals\". Numerals in the broad sense can also be analyzed as a noun (\"three is a small number\"), as a pronoun (\"the two went to town\"), or for a small number of words as an adverb (\"I rode the slide twice\").\nNumerals can express relationships like quantity (cardinal numbers), sequence (ordinal numbers), frequency (once, twice), and part (fraction).\nIdentifying numerals.\nNumerals may be attributive, as in \"two dogs\", or pronominal, as in \"I saw two (of them)\".\nWords across various parts of speech often denote number or quantity. Such words are called quantifiers. Examples are words such as \"every\", \"most\", \"least\", \"some\", etc. Numerals are distinguished from other quantifiers by the fact that they designate a specific number. Examples are words such as \"five, ten, fifty, one hundred, etc.\" They may or may not be treated as a distinct part of speech; this may vary, not only with the language, but with the choice of word. For example, \"dozen\" serves the function of a noun, \"first\" serves the function of an adjective, and \"twice\" serves the function of an adverb. In Old Church Slavonic, the cardinal numbers 5 to 10 were feminine nouns; when quantifying a noun, that noun was declined in the genitive plural like other nouns that followed a noun of quantity (one would say the equivalent of \"five of people\"). In English grammar, the classification \"numeral\" (viewed as a part of speech) is reserved for those words which have distinct grammatical behavior: when a numeral modifies a noun, it may replace the article: the/some dogs played in the park\" \u2192 twelve dogs played in the park\". (*\"dozen dogs played in the park\" is not grammatical, so \"dozen\" is not a numeral in this sense.) English numerals indicate cardinal numbers. However, not all words for cardinal numbers are necessarily numerals. For example, \"million\" is grammatically a noun, and must be preceded by an article or numeral itself.\nNumerals may be simple, such as 'eleven', or compound, such as 'twenty-three'.\nIn linguistics, however, numerals are classified according to purpose: examples are ordinal numbers (\"first\", \"second\", \"third\", etc.; from 'third' up, these are also used for fractional numerals in English, but other languages distinguish the two completely), multiplicative (adverbial) numbers (\"once\", \"twice\", and \"thrice\"), multipliers (\"single\", \"double\", and \"triple\"), and distributive numbers (\"singly\", \"doubly\", and \"triply\"). Georgian, Latin, and Romanian (see Romanian distributive numbers) have regular distributive numbers, such as Latin \"one-by-one\", \"in pairs, two-by-two\", \"three each\", etc. In languages other than English, there may be other kinds of number words. For example, in Slavic languages there are collective numbers (monad, pair/dyad, triad) which describe sets, such as \"pair\" or \"dozen\" in English (see Russian numerals, Polish numerals).\nSome languages have a very limited set of numerals, and in some cases they arguably do not have any numerals at all, but instead use more generic quantifiers, such as 'pair' or 'many'. However, by now most such languages have borrowed the numeral system or part of the numeral system of a national or colonial language, though in a few cases (such as Guarani), a numeral system has been invented internally rather than borrowed. Other languages had an indigenous system but borrowed a second set of numerals anyway. Two examples are Japanese and Korean, which use either native or Chinese-derived numerals depending on what is being counted.\nIn many languages, such as Chinese, numerals require the use of numeral classifiers. Many sign languages, such as ASL, incorporate numerals.\nLarger numerals.\nEnglish has derived numerals for multiples of its base (\"fifty, sixty,\" etc.), and some languages have simplex numerals for these, or even for numbers between the multiples of its base. Balinese, for example, currently has a decimal system, with words for 10, 100, and 1000, but has additional simplex numerals for 25 (with a second word for 25 only found in a compound for 75), 35, 45, 50, 150, 175, 200 (with a second found in a compound for 1200), 400, 900, and 1600. In Hindustani, the numerals between 10 and 100 have developed to the extent that they need to be learned independently.\nIn many languages, numerals up to the base are a distinct part of speech, while the words for powers of the base belong to one of the other word classes. In English, these higher words are hundred 102, thousand 103, million 106, and higher powers of a thousand (short scale) or of a million (long scale\u2014see names of large numbers). These words cannot modify a noun without being preceded by an article or numeral (*\"hundred dogs played in the park\"), and so are nouns.\nIn East Asia, the higher units are hundred, thousand, myriad 104, and powers of myriad. In the Indian subcontinent, they are hundred, thousand, lakh 105, crore 107, and so on. The Mesoamerican system, still used to some extent in Mayan languages, was based on powers of 20: \"bak\u2019\" 400 (202), \"pik\" 8000 (203), \"kalab\" 160,000 (204), etc.\nNumerals of cardinal numbers.\nThe cardinal numbers have numerals. In the following tables, [and] indicates that the word \"and\" is used in some dialects (such as British English), and omitted in other dialects (such as American English).\nThis table demonstrates the standard English construction of some cardinal numbers. (See next table for names of larger cardinals.)\nEnglish names for powers of 10.\nThis table compares the English names of cardinal numbers according to various American, British, and Continental European conventions. See English numerals or names of large numbers for more information on naming numbers.\nThere is no consistent and widely accepted way to extend cardinals beyond centillion (centilliard).\nMyriad, Octad, and -yllion systems.\nThe following table details the myriad, octad, Ancient Greek Archimedes's notation, Chinese myriad, Chinese long and -yllion names for powers of 10.\nThere is also a Knuth-proposed system notation of numbers, named the -yllion system. In this system, a new word is invented for every \"2n\"-th power of ten. \nFractional numerals.\nThis is a table of English names for non-negative rational numbers less than or equal to 1. It also lists alternative names, but there is no widespread convention for the names of extremely small positive numbers.\nKeep in mind that rational numbers like 0.12 can be represented in infinitely many ways, e.g. \"zero-point-one-two\" (0.12), \"twelve percent\" (12%), \"three twenty-fifths\" (), \"nine seventy-fifths\" (), \"six fiftieths\" (), \"twelve hundredths\" (), \"twenty-four two-hundredths\" (), etc.\nOther specific quantity terms.\nVarious terms have arisen to describe commonly used measured quantities.\nBasis of counting system.\nNot all peoples use counting, at least not verbally. Specifically, there is not much need for counting among hunter-gatherers who do not engage in commerce. Many languages around the world have no numerals above two to four (if they are actually numerals at all, and not some other part of speech)\u2014or at least did not before contact with the colonial societies\u2014and speakers of these languages may have no tradition of using the numerals they did have for counting. Indeed, several languages from the Amazon have been independently reported to have no specific number words other than 'one'. These include Nad\u00ebb, pre-contact Mocov\u00ed and Pilag\u00e1, Culina and pre-contact Jarawara, Jabut\u00ed, Canela-Krah\u00f4, Botocudo (Kren\u00e1k), Chiquitano, the Campa languages, Arabela, and Achuar. Some languages of Australia, such as Warlpiri, do not have words for quantities above two, and neither did many Khoisan languages at the time of European contact. Such languages do not have a word class of 'numeral'.\nMost languages with both numerals and counting use base 8, 10, 12, or 20. Base 10 appears to come from counting one's fingers, base 20 from the fingers and toes, base 8 from counting the spaces between the fingers (attested in California), and base 12 from counting the knuckles (3 each for the four fingers).\nNo base.\nMany languages of Melanesia have (or once had) counting systems based on parts of the body which do not have a numeric base; there are (or were) no numerals, but rather nouns for relevant parts of the body\u2014or simply pointing to the relevant spots\u2014were used for quantities. For example, 1\u20134 may be the fingers, 5 'thumb', 6 'wrist', 7 'elbow', 8 'shoulder', etc., across the body and down the other arm, so that the opposite little finger represents a number between 17 (Torres Islands) to 23 (Eleman). For numbers beyond this, the torso, legs and toes may be used, or one might count back up the other arm and back down the first, depending on the people.\n2: binary.\nBinary systems are based on the number 2, using zeros and ones. Due to its simplicity, only having two distinct digits, binary is commonly used in computing, with zero and one often corresponding to \"off/on\" respectively.\n3: ternary.\nTernary systems are based on the number 3, having practical usage in some analog logic, in baseball scoring and in self\u2013similar mathematical structures.\n4: quaternary.\nQuaternary systems are based on the number 4. Some Austronesian, Melanesian, Sulawesi, and Papua New Guinea ethnic groups, count with the base number four, using the term \"asu\" or \"aso\", the word for dog, as the ubiquitous village dog has four legs. This is argued by anthropologists to be also based on early humans noting the human and animal shared body feature of two arms and two legs as well as its ease in simple arithmetic and counting. As an example of the system's ease a realistic scenario could include a farmer returning from the market with fifty \"asu\" heads of pig (200), less 30 \"asu\" (120) of pig bartered for 10 \"asu\" (40) of goats noting his new pig count total as twenty \"asu\": 80 pigs remaining. The system has a correlation to the dozen counting system and is still in common use in these areas as a natural and easy method of simple arithmetic.\n5: quinary.\nQuinary systems are based on the number 5. It is almost certain the quinary system developed from counting by fingers (five fingers per hand). An example are the Epi languages of Vanuatu, where 5 is \"luna\" 'hand', 10 \"lua-luna\" 'two hand', 15 \"tolu-luna\" 'three hand', etc. 11 is then \"lua-luna tai\" 'two-hand one', and 17 \"tolu-luna lua\" 'three-hand two'.\n5 is a common \"auxiliary base\", or \"sub-base\", where 6 is 'five and one', 7 'five and two', etc. Aztec was a vigesimal (base-20) system with sub-base 5.\n6: senary.\nSenary systems are based on the number 6. The Morehead-Maro languages of Southern New Guinea are examples of the rare base 6 system with monomorphemic words running up to 66. Examples are Kanum and K\u00f3mnzo. The Sko languages on the North Coast of New Guinea follow a base-24 system with a sub-base of 6.\n7: septenary.\nSeptenary systems are based on the number 7. Septenary systems are very rare, as few natural objects consistently have seven distinctive features. Traditionally, it occurs in week-related timing. It has been suggested that the Palik\u00far language has a base-seven system, but this is dubious.\n8: octal.\nOctal systems are based on the number 8. Examples can be found in the Yuki language of California and in the Pamean languages of Mexico, because the Yuki and Pame keep count by using the four spaces between their fingers rather than the fingers themselves.\n9: nonary.\nNonary systems are based on the number 9. It has been suggested that Nenets has a base-nine system.\n10: decimal.\nDecimal systems are based on the number 10. A majority of traditional number systems are decimal. This dates back at least to the ancient Egyptians, who used a wholly decimal system. Anthropologists hypothesize this may be due to humans having five digits per hand, ten in total. There are many regional variations including:\n12: duodecimal.\nDuodecimal systems are based on the number 12.\nThese include:\nDuodecimal numeric systems have some practical advantages over decimal. It is much easier to divide the base digit twelve (which is a highly composite number) by many important divisors in market and trade settings, such as the numbers 2, 3, 4 and 6.\nBecause of several measurements based on twelve, many Western languages have words for base-twelve units such as \"dozen\", \"gross\" and \"great gross\", which allow for rudimentary duodecimal nomenclature, such as \"two gross six dozen\" for 360. Ancient Romans used a decimal system for integers, but switched to duodecimal for fractions, and correspondingly Latin developed a rich vocabulary for duodecimal-based fractions (see Roman numerals). A notable fictional duodecimal system was that of J. R. R. Tolkien's Elvish languages, which used duodecimal as well as decimal.\n16: hexadecimal.\nHexadecimal systems are based on the number 16.\nThe traditional Chinese units of measurement were base-16. For example, one j\u012bn\u00a0(\u65a4) in the old system equals sixteen taels. The suanpan (Chinese abacus) can be used to perform hexadecimal calculations such as additions and subtractions.\nSouth Asian monetary systems were base-16. One rupee in Pakistan and India was divided into 16 annay. A single anna was subdivided into four paisa or twelve pies (thus there were 64 paise or 192 pies in a rupee). The anna was demonetised as a currency unit when India decimalised its currency in 1957, followed by Pakistan in 1961.\n20: vigesimal.\nVigesimal systems are based on the number 20. Anthropologists are convinced the system originated from digit counting, as did bases five and ten, twenty being the number of human fingers and toes combined.\nThe system is in widespread use across the world. Some include the classical Mesoamerican cultures, still in use today in the modern indigenous languages of their descendants, namely the Nahuatl and Mayan languages (see Maya numerals). A modern national language which uses a full vigesimal system is Dzongkha in Bhutan.\nPartial vigesimal systems are found in some languages: Basque, Celtic languages, French (from Celtic), Danish, and Georgian. In these languages the systems are vigesimal up to 99, then decimal from 100 up. That is, 140 is 'one hundred two score', not *seven score, and there is no numeral for 400 (great score).\nThe term \"score\" originates from tally sticks, and is perhaps a remnant of Celtic vigesimal counting. It was widely used to learn the pre-decimal British currency in this idiom: \"a dozen pence and a score of bob\", referring to the 20 shillings in a pound. For Americans the term is most known from the opening of the Gettysburg Address: \"Four score and seven years ago our fathers...\".\n24: quadrovigesimal.\nQuadrovigesimal systems are based on the number 24. The Sko languages have a base-24 system with a sub-base of 6.\n32: duotrigesimal.\nDuotrigesimal systems are based on the number 32. The Ngiti ethnolinguistic group uses a base 32 numeral system.\n60: sexagesimal.\nSexagesimal systems are based on the number 60. Ekari has a base-60 system. Sumeria had a base-60 system with a decimal sub-base (with alternating cycles of 10 and 6), which was the origin of the numbering of modern degrees, minutes, and seconds.\n80: octogesimal.\nOctogesimal systems are based on the number 80. Supyire is said to have a base-80 system; it counts in twenties (with 5 and 10 as sub-bases) up to 80, then by eighties up to 400, and then by 400s (great scores).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Interlinear/styles.css\" /&gt;\n799 [i.e. 400 + (4 x 80) + (3 x 20) + {10 + (5 + 4)}]\u2019\nSee also.\nNumerals in various languages.\nA database https:// compiled by Eugene S.L. Chan of Hong Kong is hosted by the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Leipzig, Germany. The database currently contains data for about 4000 languages.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
