{"id": "23971", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23971", "title": "Pilus", "text": "Proteinaceous hair-like appendage on the surface of bacteria\nA pilus (Latin for 'hair'; pl.: pili) is a hair-like cell-surface appendage found on many bacteria and archaea. The terms \"pilus\" and \"fimbria\" (Latin for 'fringe'; plural: \"fimbriae\") can be used interchangeably, although some researchers reserve the term \"pilus\" for the appendage required for bacterial conjugation. All conjugative pili are primarily composed of pilin \u2013 fibrous proteins, which are oligomeric.\nDozens of these structures can exist on the bacterial and archaeal surface. Some bacteria, viruses or bacteriophages attach to receptors on pili at the start of their reproductive cycle.\nPili are antigenic. They are also fragile and constantly replaced, sometimes with pili of different composition, resulting in altered antigenicity. Specific host responses to old pili structures are not effective on the new structure. Recombination between genes of some (but not all) pili code for variable (V) and constant (C) regions of the pili (similar to immunoglobulin diversity). As the primary antigenic determinants, virulence factors and impunity factors on the cell surface of a number of species of gram-negative and some gram-positive bacteria, including \"Enterobacteriaceae\", \"Pseudomonadaceae\", and \"Neisseriaceae\", there has been much interest in the study of pili as an organelle of adhesion and as a vaccine component. The first detailed study of pili was done by Brinton and co-workers who demonstrated the existence of two distinct phases within one bacterial strain: pileated (p+) and non-pileated)\nTypes by function.\nA few names are given to different types of pili by their function. The classification does not always overlap with the structural or evolutionary-based types, as convergent evolution occurs. \nConjugative pili.\nConjugative pili allow for the transfer of DNA between bacteria, in the process of bacterial conjugation. They are sometimes called \"sex pili\", in analogy to sexual reproduction, because they allow for the exchange of genes via the formation of \"mating pairs\". Perhaps the most well-studied is the F-pilus of \"Escherichia coli\", encoded by the F sex factor.\nA sex pilus is typically 6 to 7 nm in diameter. During conjugation, a pilus emerging from the donor bacterium ensnares the recipient bacterium, draws it in close, and eventually triggers the formation of a mating bridge, which establishes direct contact and the formation of a controlled pore that allows transfer of DNA from the donor to the recipient. Typically, the DNA transferred consists of the genes required to make and transfer pili (often encoded on a plasmid), and so is a kind of selfish DNA; however, other pieces of DNA are often co-transferred and this can result in dissemination of genetic traits throughout a bacterial population, such as antibiotic resistance. The connection established by the F-pilus is extremely mechanically and thermochemically resistant thanks to the robust properties of the F-pilus, which ensures successful gene transfer in a variety of environments. Not all bacteria can make conjugative pili, but conjugation can occur between bacteria of different species.\nHyperthermophilic archaea encode pili structurally similar to the bacterial conjugative pili. However, unlike in bacteria, where conjugation apparatus typically mediates the transfer of mobile genetic elements, such as plasmids or transposons, the conjugative machinery of hyperthermophilic archaea, called Ced (Crenarchaeal system for exchange of DNA) and Ted (Thermoproteales system for exchange of DNA), appears to be responsible for the transfer of cellular DNA between members of the same species. It has been suggested that in these archaea the conjugation machinery has been fully domesticated for promoting DNA repair through homologous recombination rather than spread of mobile genetic elements.\nFimbriae.\nFimbria (Latin for 'fringe', pl.: fimbriae) is a term used for a short pilus, an appendage that is used to attach the bacterium to a surface, sometimes also called an \"attachment pilus\" or adhesive pilus. The term \"fimbria\" can refer to many different (structural) types of pilus. Indeed, many different types of pili have been used for adhesion, a case of convergent evolution. The Gene Ontology system does not treat fimbriae as a distinct type of appendage, using the generic pilus (GO:0009289) type instead.\nThis appendage ranges from 3\u201310 nanometers in diameter and can be as much as several micrometers long. Fimbriae are used by bacteria to adhere to one another and to adhere to animal cells and some inanimate objects. A bacterium can have as many as 1,000 fimbriae. Fimbriae are only visible with the use of an electron microscope. They may be straight or flexible.\nFimbriae possess adhesins which attach them to some sort of substratum so that the bacteria can withstand shear forces and obtain nutrients. For example, \"E. coli\" uses them to attach to mannose receptors. \nSome aerobic bacteria form a very thin layer at the surface of a broth culture. This layer, called a pellicle, consists of many aerobic bacteria that adhere to the surface by their fimbriae. Thus, fimbriae allow the aerobic bacteria to remain both on the broth, from which they take nutrients, and near the air.\nFimbriae are required for the formation of biofilm, as they attach bacteria to host surfaces for colonization during infection. Fimbriae are either located at the poles of a cell or are evenly spread over its entire surface.\nThis term was also used in a lax sense to refer to all pili, by those who use \"pilus\" to specifically refer to sex pili.\nTypes by assembling system or structure.\nTransfer.\nThe Tra (transfer) family includes all known sex pili (as of 2010). They are related to the type IV secretion system (T4SS). They can be classified into the F-like type (after the F-pilus) and the P-like type. Like their secretion counterparts, the pilus injects material, DNA in this case, into another cell.\nType IV pili.\nSome pili, called type IV pili (T4P), generate motile forces. The external ends of the pili adhere to a solid substrate, either the surface to which the bacterium is attached or to other bacteria. Then, when the pili contract, they pull the bacterium forward like a grappling hook. Movement produced by type IV pili is typically jerky, so it is called twitching motility, as opposed to other forms of bacterial motility such as that produced by flagella. However, some bacteria, for example \"Myxococcus xanthus\", exhibit gliding motility. Bacterial type IV pili are similar in structure to the component proteins of archaella (archaeal flagella), and both are related to the Type II secretion system (T2SS); they are unified by the group of Type IV filament systems. Besides archaella, many archaea produce adhesive type 4 pili, which enable archaeal cells to adhere to different substrates. The N-terminal alpha-helical portions of the archaeal type 4 pilins and archaellins are homologous to the corresponding regions of bacterial T4P; however, the C-terminal beta-strand-rich domains appear to be unrelated in bacterial and archaeal pilins.\nGenetic transformation is the process by which a recipient bacterial cell takes up DNA from a neighboring cell and integrates this DNA into its genome by homologous recombination. In \"Neisseria meningitidis\" (also called meningococcus), DNA transformation requires the presence of short DNA uptake sequences (DUSs) which are 9\u201310 monomers residing in coding regions of the donor DNA. Specific recognition of DUSs is mediated by a type IV pilin. Menningococcal type IV pili bind DNA through the minor pilin ComP via an electropositive stripe that is predicted to be exposed on the filament's surface. ComP displays an exquisite binding preference for selective DUSs. The distribution of DUSs within the \"N. meningitidis\" genome favors certain genes, suggesting that there is a bias for genes involved in genomic maintenance and repair. Bacteria of the Pasteurellaceae family, such as \"Haemophilus influenzae\", possess uptake signal sequences in their DNA that are not related to those of Neisseriaceae but also mediate efficient transformation.\nThis family was originally identified as the \"type IV fimbriae\" by their appearance under the microscope. This classification survived as it happens to correspond to a clade. It has been shown that some archaeal type IV pilins can exist in four different conformations, yielding two pili with dramatically different structures. Remarkably, the two pili were produced by the same secretion machinery. However, which of the two pili is formed appears to depend on the growth conditions, suggesting that the two pili are functionally distinct.\nType 1 fimbriae.\nAnother type are called type 1 fimbriae. They contain FimH adhesins at the \"tips\". The chaperone-usher pathway is responsible for moving many types of fimbriae out of the cell, including type 1 fimbriae and the P fimbriae.\nCurli.\n\"Gram-negative bacteria assemble functional amyloid surface fibers called curli.\" Curli are a type of fimbriae. Curli are composed of proteins called curlins. Some of the genes involved are \"CsgA\", \"CsgB\", \"CsgC\", \"CsgD\", \"CsgE\", \"CsgF\", and \"CsgG\".\nVirulence.\nPili are responsible for virulence in the pathogenic strains of many bacteria, including \"E. coli\", \"Vibrio cholerae\", and many strains of \"Streptococcus\". This is because the presence of pili greatly enhances bacteria's ability to bind to body tissues, which then increases replication rates and ability to interact with the host organism. If a species of bacteria has multiple strains but only some are pathogenic, it is likely that the pathogenic strains will have pili while the nonpathogenic strains do not.\nThe development of attachment pili may then result in the development of further virulence traits. Fimbriae are one of the primary mechanisms of virulence for \"E. coli\", \"Bordetella pertussis\", \"Staphylococcus\" and \"Streptococcus\" bacteria. Their presence greatly enhances the bacteria's ability to attach to the host and cause disease. Nonpathogenic strains of \"V. cholerae\" first evolved pili, allowing them to bind to human tissues and form microcolonies. These pili then served as binding sites for the lysogenic bacteriophage that carries the disease-causing toxin. The gene for this toxin, once incorporated into the bacterium's genome, is expressed when the gene coding for the pilus is expressed (hence the name \"toxin mediated pilus\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23972", "revid": "16052450", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23972", "title": "Porsche 928", "text": "The Porsche 928 is a grand touring car which was manufactured and marketed by Porsche AG of Germany from 1977 to 1995 across a single generation with an intermediate facelift. It is a 2+2 coup\u00e9 with a rear hatchback. The 928 has a water-cooled engine which is mounted in the front and drives the rear wheels. It was Porsche's first production car with a V8 engine.\nInitially conceived to address changes in the automotive market, it represented Porsche's first fully in-house design for a production vehicle and was intended to potentially replace the Porsche 911 as the company's flagship model. The 928 aimed to blend the performance and handling characteristics of a sports car with the comfort, spaciousness, and ride quality of a luxury car. Porsche executives believed that the 928 would have broader appeal compared to the compact, somewhat outdated, and slow-selling air-cooled 911.\nIt achieved high top speeds, and earned recognition upon its 1978 release by winning the European Car of the Year award.\nConception.\nIn the late 1960s, Porsche had solidified its reputation as a manufacturer of high-performance sports cars. Amidst the 1970s oil crisis, there were discussions among executives regarding the potential addition of a more fuel-efficient luxury touring car to the company's lineup. Managing director Ernst Fuhrmann advocated for the development of this new model, expressing concerns about the 911, Porsche's flagship model at the time, nearing its performance limits. Fuhrmann believed that expanding into grand touring cars with conventional engines could be essential for the company's future, contrasting with the unconventional sports cars like the 911. The declining sales of the 911 in the mid-1970s suggested a possible downturn in its market appeal. Fuhrmann envisioned the new range-topping grand tourer as a blend of sports coup\u00e9 and luxury sedan, distinguishing it from the 911 with its more utilitarian interior and pure sports car performance. In the view to please the very important USA market, it switched to front-engined, V8 power and a more spacious interior that included two real child seats (rather than the dog seats in the 911). The goal was to create a model that could compete with offerings from Mercedes-Benz and BMW while also appealing to the American market, which was Porsche's primary market at the time.\nOrdered by Ferdinand Porsche to develop a production-feasible concept for the new model, Fuhrmann commenced a design study in 1971, resulting in the creation of the 928. This model marked Porsche's first clean-sheet design for its own model. Previous Porsche models had been iterations or collaborations: the 356 bore similarities to the Volkswagen Beetle, the 911 evolved from the 356, the 914 was a joint venture aimed at replacing the Volkswagen Karmann Ghia and 912, and the 924 stemmed from a discontinued Volkswagen and Audi project.\nVarious drivetrain layouts were considered during early development, including rear- and mid-engine configurations, but many were dismissed due to technical and regulatory challenges. Issues with emissions and noise control, similar to those experienced with the 911, arose from cramming the engine, transmission, catalytic converter(s), and exhaust into a small rear engine bay. After determining that the mid-engine layout lacked sufficient space in the passenger compartment, Porsche opted for a front-engine, rear-wheel drive configuration.\nPorsche engineers sought a large-displacement engine for the 928, and prototype units were initially equipped with a 5-liter V8 engine producing 300 PS (220\u00a0kW; 300\u00a0hp). There were discussions about utilizing a 4.6-liter 90-degree V10 engine with 88\u00a0mm bore spacing, which was a derivative of the Audi 5-cylinder engine (also used in the Lamborghini Gallardo) and based on the Volkswagen EA827 unit. However, this proposal faced objections from the Porsche board due to concerns that it might lead to rumors of a new 911 model with a front-mounted Volkswagen-based engine. Additionally, it is speculated that the board aimed to maintain some separation from the Volkswagen Group.\nThe resulting all-alloy M28 engine incorporated several distinctive features. Its bore spacing was 122\u00a0mm, indicating the use of thick, all-aluminum cylinder barrels without steel liners. The water jackets were notably large, hinting at the engine's potential for racing applications. To maintain a low hood line, the engine prioritized airflow, resulting in the placement of spark plugs at the top of the head. The four-bolt bearings were substantial and received oil via grooves in the block's bottom surface. They were supported by a large one-piece structure forming a lower block, with the cast aluminum oil pan bolted onto this component.\nThe oil and water pumps were driven by a timing belt. In 1985, DOHC engines introduced a hybrid timing system where the timing belt operated only the exhaust camshafts, while the intake camshafts were driven via an internally-mounted simplex roller chain from the exhaust camshaft. This approach simplified the timing belt layout, requiring fewer components and leading to easier and less costly maintenance. This timing system was later adopted by Porsche 944 and also by Audi and Volkswagen in their belt-driven DOHC engines.\nThe first two running prototypes of Porsche's M28 V8 initially utilized a single four-barrel carburetor for initial testing. However, the production cars ultimately employed the planned Bosch K-Jetronic fuel injection system. As concerns over fuel prices and availability during the 1970s oil crisis grew within the company, discussions emerged regarding the feasibility of smaller engines to improve fuel economy. There was a proposal for the development of a 3.3 L 182 PS (134\u00a0kW; 180\u00a0hp) powerplant, suggested by Fuhrmann, but this was met with resistance from company engineers. Eventually, both sides reached a consensus on a 4.5 L, SOHC per bank 16-valve V8 engine producing 240 PS (180\u00a0kW; 240\u00a0hp) (219\u00a0hp (163\u00a0kW) in North America). This engine was considered to strike an acceptable balance between performance and fuel efficiency.\nBy 1973, essential development was finished and a prototype was built and under testing. At this moment, Arab-Israeli war broke out and brought the threat of energy crisis. Sales of large and thirsty cars plunged. It was a big hit to both 928 and Porsche. The project was put into low gear and production postponed until 1977.\nThe finished car made its debut at the 1977 Geneva Motor Show and was subsequently released for sale later that year as a 1978 model. Despite earning early acclaim for its comfort, power, and futuristic design, sales were initially sluggish. The base prices of the 928 were considerably higher than the previous range-topping 911 model, and the shift to a front-engined, water-cooled design unsettled some traditional Porsche enthusiasts.\nFollowing the departure of Fuhrmann, Peter Schutz, his successor, opted to continue selling both models concurrently, believing that the 911 still had a place in the company's lineup. However, legislative restrictions against rear-engined vehicles never materialized. Although the 928 didn't achieve the sales targets envisioned by Fuhrmann, it garnered a devoted following and enjoyed an 18-year production run.\nDesign and specifications.\nDuring its 18-year production run, the fundamentals of the 928's design remained the same, though the engine and styling underwent several changes, with a distinct \u2018facelift\u2019 separating the first generation and second generation cars.\nThe original 928 design was seen in both 1978 and 1979, with the body lacking both front and rear spoilers. From 1980 (1983 in North America) through 1986, front and rear spoilers were present on \"S\" and \"S2\" models, being integrated into the fastback. The first generation cars, which terminated in 1986 with the \"S\"/\"S2\" models, all featured a sharper, more angular front end with a distinct 'Shark Nose' profile. From 1987 the overall exterior design was revised and it was this shape that followed the 928 through to final production in 1995. The 1987 redesign integrated the front spoiler into the nose, smoothing out the overall nose profile to fit in with the tastes of contemporary car design &amp; ditching the more angular, shark-nose wedge of the original cars. The rear spoiler became a separate wing rather than an integrated piece and side skirts were also added. The rear tail-light configuration was also different from previous models, with more modern light covers that brought the rear light cluster away from the inset design of the original. GTS models featured flared rear wheel arches to give more room for wider 9-inch wide wheels. Another easily noticeable visual difference between versions is the style of the wheels. Early 928s had 15-inch or 16-inch \"phone dial\"-style wheels, while most 1980s 928s had 16-inch slotted \"flat disc\" wheels, with other wheels available as an option. CSs, SEs and 1989 GTs had 16-inch \"Club Sport\" wheels, later GTs had 16-inch \"Design 90\" style wheels which were also option on same period S4s (shared with the 944 as well), the GTS used two variations of the 17-inch \"CUP\" wheels.\nThe 928 featured a front-mounted and water-cooled V8 engine driving the rear wheels. Power was transmitted according to the transaxle principle. Originally displacing 4.5\u00a0L and featuring a single overhead camshaft design, it was rated at in Europe, while smog equipment reduced the output to for cars sold in the North American market. The car would first see an increase in both displacement and output for the 1980 model year, with the introduction of the 4.7\u00a0L 928 S. The original 16v engine would continue to be developed until its final iteration in the 1985 model year with the S/S2 model, which produced a in European specification, thanks to higher compression, twin distributors with EZK ignition and Bosch LH-Jetronic fuel injection. After 1986 the 16v engine was replaced by the Porsche 32v 5.0\u00a0L V8, which Porsche used until the 928 ceased production in 1995.\nIn combination with the water-cooled V8 engine, Porsche utilised a transaxle in the 928 to help achieve 50/50 front/rear weight distribution. Performance of early cars were similar to the contemporary 911, despite being heavier. By the time the S/S2 specification was in production, the 928 was outperforming even the 911 Turbo in top speed tests. Early cars came with either a five-speed dog leg manual transmission, or a 3 speed Mercedes-Benz-derived automatic transmission. A four-speed automatic transmission replaced the three-speed option from 1983 in North America and 1984 in other markets. Of cars produced in 1978 and 1979, the majority were fitted with the 5 speed manual gearbox while the optional 3 speed automatic was specified less regularly. Later model years number of automatic cars was larger. 1980-95 percentage of manual cars was 34%. As so many 1978 and 1979 were with manual gearbox actual split can be 60% automatic and 40% manual.\nThe body, styled by Wolfgang M\u00f6bius under the guidance of Anatole Lapine used aluminium for the doors, front wing, front fenders, and bonnet to save weight, while the underlying chassis was made from galvanised steel. It had a substantial luggage area accessed via a large hatchback. Newly developed polyurethane elastic bumpers were integrated into the nose and tail and covered in body-coloured plastic; an advanced feature for the time that aided the car visually and reduced its drag. The distinctive pop-up headlamps, which remained visible in the wings even when they were retracted, completed the 928's shark-like appearance and were based on the units found on the Lamborghini Miura.\nThe Porsche 928 was classified as a 2+2, featuring two small rear seats. Both rear seats were designed to fold down, providing additional space in the luggage area. Sun visors were available for both front and rear occupants. However, the rear seats were limited in size due to the transmission hump, resulting in minimal legroom. They were generally suitable for short trips or for accommodating children rather than adults.\nOne notable feature of the 928 was its innovative instrument cluster, which moved along with the adjustable steering wheel to ensure maximum visibility for the driver.\nThe 928 also incorporated the \"Weissach Axle\", a passive rear-wheel steering system aimed at enhancing stability while braking and during turns. The engine was distinguished by its unsleeved, silicon alloy engine block made of aluminum, contributing to reduced weight and durable cylinder bore.\nPorsche's design and development efforts were recognized when the 928 won the European Car of the Year award in 1978, surpassing competitors like the BMW 7 Series and the Ford Granada. It remains the only sports car to have received this accolade.\nLater variants.\nPorsche introduced a refreshed 928 S into the European market in the 1980 model year, although it was the summer of 1982 and MY 1983 before the model reached North America. Externally, the S wore new front and rear spoilers and sported wider wheels and tires than the older variant, but the main change for the 928 S was under the hood, where a revised 4.7 L engine was used. European versions debuted with , and were upgraded to for the 1984 model year. From 1984 to 1986, the S model was called S2 in United Kingdom. These cars used Bosch LH-Jetronic fuel injection system and purely electronic Bosch ignition, the same systems used on the later 32-valve cars. North American-spec 1983 and 1984 S models used among other differences, smaller valves, milder camshafts, smaller diameter intake manifolds, and additional pollution equipment in order to meet emissions regulations, and were limited to as a result. Due to low-grade fuel, the 16-valve low compression S engine was made for the Australian market in the 1985 model year. It had a 9.3:1 compression ratio pistons as opposed to the normal 10.4:1 but used the same large intake, high lift cams, large valves, etc. of other S engines.\nDuring the initial three years of its production, the faster European variant of the Porsche 928 was not available in the United States and Canada. To address this, Porsche introduced a \"Competition Group\" option for North American customers, offering them a package that mimicked the appearance of the S model. This package included front and rear spoilers, 16-inch flat disc wheels, sport seats, sport springs, and Bilstein Shock Absorbers. Customers had the flexibility to choose paint and interior colors just like with a standard 928. Only two cars were produced with this option in the late 1980 model year for the U.S. market. The package officially became available for the 1981 and 1982 model years but was discontinued in 1983 with the introduction of the S model in these markets. Over time, many cars have been modified by subsequent owners to include S model features, making original \"Competition Group\" cars difficult to identify without checking option codes.\nIn the 1982 model year, two special models were introduced for different markets. North America received 202 \"Weissach Edition\" cars, featuring champagne gold metallic paint, matching brushed gold flat disc wheels, two-tone leather interior, a production number plaque on the dashboard, and a three-piece Porsche luggage set. It's worth noting that these cars were believed not to be equipped with S spoilers, despite the availability of S spoilers in the U.S. during this period as part of the \"Competition Group\" option. The \"Weissach Edition\" option was also offered for the US market 911 for the 1980 model year and the 924 for the 1981 model year.\n141 special \"50th Jubilee\" 928 S models were available outside the U.S. and Canada to celebrate the company's 50-year existence as a car manufacturer. This model is also sometimes referred to as the \"Ferry Porsche Edition\" because his signature was embroidered into the front seats. It featured meteor metallic paint and was fitted with flat disc wheels, wine red leather and special striped fabric seat centers. Similar 911 and 924 specials were also made for world markets.\nPorsche updated the North American 928 S for 1985, replacing the 4.7 L SOHC engine with a new 5.0 L DOHC unit sporting four valves per cylinder and producing . Seats were also updated to a new style, these cars are sometimes unofficially called S3 to distinguish them from 16-valve \"S\" models. European models kept a 4.7 L engine, which was somewhat more powerful as standard, though lower 9.3:1 compression 32-valve engine together with catalytic converters became an option in some European countries and Australia for 1986. In 1986, revised suspension settings, larger brakes with 4-piston callipers, and a modified exhaust system was available on the 928S, marking the final changes to old body style cars. These were straight from the 928S4, which was to debut a few months later. These changes came starting from VIN 1001, which means that the first thousand 1986 cars had the old brakes, but later cars had this equipment available. This later 1986 model is sometimes referred to as a 1986&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 or 1986.5 because of these changes. The name is a little misleading as more than 3/4 of the 1986 production had these updates.\nThe 928 S4 variant debuted in the second half of 1986 as a 1987 model, an updated version of the 5.0 L V8 for all markets producing , sporting a new single-disc clutch in manual transmission cars, a larger torque converter in automatic transmission cars and fairly significant styling updates which gave the car a cleaner, sleeker look. The 928 S4 had a rounded front end with air intakes. The rear had a slope between the wide, flush-fitting rear lights and a Black rear spoiler standing up from the body. S4 was much closer to being a true world car than previous models as the only major differences for North American models were instrumentation in either kilometers or miles, lighting, front and rear bumper shocks, and the availability of catalytic converters in many other markets. The Australian market version was the only one with different horsepower rating at due to preparation for possible low grade fuel. Even this was achieved without engine changes.\nA Club Sport variant which was up to lighter became available to continental Europe and U.S. in 1988. This model was the toned down version of the 1987 factory prototype which had a lightened body. Also in 1987, the factory made five white lightweight S4 models with a manual transmission for racecar drivers who were on their payroll at the time (Derek Bell, Jochen Mass, Hans Stuck, Bob Wollek and Jacky Ickx). These were close to same as later actual Club Sport models and can also be considered prototypes for it. An SE (sometimes called the S4 Sport due to model designation on rear bumper), a sort of halfway point between a normally equipped S4 and the more race-oriented Club Sport, became available for the UK market. It's generally believed that these cars have more power than the usual S4. They utilize parts which later became known as GT pistons, cams and engine ECU programs. Some of them had stronger, short ratio manual transmission. The automatic transmission was not available for this model.\nFor the 1989 model year, a visible change inside was digital trip computer in the dashboard. At the same time Australian models received the same engine management setup as other markets. Porsche debuted the 928 GT in the late winter 1988/89 after dropping the slow-selling CS and SE. In terms of equipment, the GT was like the 928 SE, having more equipment than a Club Sport model but less than a 928 S4 to keep the weight down somewhat. It had the ZF 40% limited-slip differential as standard like the Club Sport and SE before it. Also, like the CS and SE, the GT was only available with a manual gearbox. European 1989 CS and GT wheels had an RDK tire pressure monitoring system as standard, which was also optional for the same year S4. For the 1990 model year Porsche made RDK and a 0-100% variable ratio limited-slip called PSD (Porsche Sperr Differential) standard in both GT and S4 models for all markets. This system is much like the one from the flagship 959 and gives the vehicle even more grip on the track. In 1990, the S4 was no longer available with a manual transmission.\nThe S4 and GT variants halted production at the end of the 1991 model year, making way for the final version of the 928. The 928 GTS was available for sale in late 1991 as a 1992 model in Europe and in spring of 1992 as an early 1993 model in North America. Changed bodywork, larger front brakes and a new, more powerful 5.4 L, 350 PS (257\u00a0kW/345\u00a0hp) engine were the big advertised changes; what Porsche wasn't advertising was the price. Loaded GTS models could eclipse US$100,000 in 1995, making them among the most expensive cars on the road at the time. This severely hampered sales despite the model's high competency and long standard equipment list. Porsche discontinued the GTS model that year after shipping only 77 of them to the United States. Total worldwide production for all years was a little over 61,000 cars.\nSecond-hand models' value decreased as a result of high maintenance costs due to spare parts that are expensive to manufacture. Many parts suppliers and enthusiast networks exist, especially in the United States, Germany and the UK.\nRoad &amp; Track magazine published a speculative piece in their April 2006 issue regarding the possibility of a new, 928-esque coup\u00e9 that may debut on a shortened version of the Panamera's platform sometime around 2011 or 2012 model year but this speculation remained uncredible as Porsche denied the possibility of any such model reaching production stage.\nEvolution.\nAnnual changes to the 928 included:\n1978\n1979\n1980\n1981\n1982\n1983\n1984\n1985\n1986\n1987\n1988\n1989\n1990\n1991\n1992\n1993\n1994\n1995\nWorldwide production numbers.\nAll production numbers are approximate figures collected from several sources. Porsche hasn't published actual numbers.\n1) Count contains 2 1980, 458 1981 and 1,084 1982 US \"Competition Group\" models made.&lt;br&gt;\n2) Count contains 202 US \"Weissach edition\" models made in 1982 model year. 205 is official number which don't seem to be correct. Cars with higher production number than 202 or 205 exist. 217 is known existing plaque number but there were only 202 cars made with M462 option code.&lt;br&gt;\n3) Count contains 141 European \"50th Jubilee\" models made in 1982 model year.&lt;br&gt;\n4) Count contains 44 M151 low compression 16V 4.7L S engine models made in 1985 model year for Australian market.&lt;br&gt;\n5) Count contains 2,219 so-called S3 US models made in 1985 model year and 877 1986 models made in early part of 1986 model year up to November 1985.&lt;br&gt;\n6) Count contains 517 1986 European 32-valve S models. Most were Australian and Japanese models. 266 were optional M298/M299 catalytic converter models sold in Germany, Switzerland and Austria.&lt;br&gt;\n7) Count contains 2,071 so-called S3.5 US models made in later part of 1986 model year starting from November 1985.&lt;br&gt;\n8) Count contains 6 Club Sport prototypes made in the 1987 model year.&lt;br&gt;\n9) Count contains 10 European models and 2 US models made in 1988 model year and 7 European models made in early part of 1989 model year. Last Club Sport cars were made in early winter 1988/89.&lt;br&gt;\n10) Count contains 358 European and 115 US/CDN model made in 1989 model year, 808 European and 142 US made in 1990, 516 European and 145 US made in 1991 resulting 1682 European and 396 US model made over two and half year time period. GT production started in around February 1989. &lt;br&gt;\n11) Count contains 955 1992, 621 1993, 523 1994 and 399 1995 European models resulting 2,498 cars made. Count contains 88 early VIN 1993, 102 late VIN 1993, 19 + 120 1994 and 77 1995 US models resulting 406 cars made.\nSpecial versions.\nPorsche 942.\nThe Porsche 942 was a special edition 928 presented by the company as a gift to Ferry Porsche on his 75th birthday in 1984. It's also known as the 928\u20134. It featured a longer wheelbase than the normal 928 production model, including an extended roof above the rear seats to better accommodate tall passengers, and what were at the time very advanced projector headlights. The weight increased marginally, by . It also received the new front and rear bumpers two years before they entered production on the S4 and the 5.0-litre 32-valve engine before it was introduced in the US market. This early model of the engine was slightly less powerful, producing and of torque at 2700\u00a0rpm.\n\"Study H50\" Four-door 928 based prototype.\nThree years later, in 1987, the lengthened 928 that had been presented to the company's founder on his 75th birthday turned up as a \"Feasibility Study\", now with a second (rather narrow) set of doors, apparently opening in the same way as the suicide doors seen on the later Mazda RX-8. At the time \"Study H50\" appeared to sink with little trace, but two decades later, with the launch of the larger four-door Porsche Panamera saloon, the 928 based four-door saloon prototype from 1987 acquired greater significance.\n928 long wheelbase specials.\nIn 1986 Porsche together with tuning company AMG made a few long-wheelbase 928 specials. Unlike the 942, these had normal 928 headlights. One was presented to American Sunroof Corporation (ASC) founder and CEO Heinz Prechter. ASC was later partly responsible for manufacturing Porsche 944 S2 cabriolets.\nRacing.\nThe Max Moritz 'Semi Works' 928 GTR.\nPorsche's Racing Department never officially entered or prepared a racing 928 for a pure works entry. Porsche did arrange for the creation of a 928\u00a0GTR, to compete against the then-dominant 911 (993 GTR) on the race track. In order not to offend the sensibilities of their traditional 911 customers by openly challenging them with a works offering, Porsche asked Max Moritz Racing, their longtime private racing partner from nearby Reutlingen to enter a 928GTR Cup as a 'semi-works' car.\nAll-aluminium 928.\nFor the 1984 24 hours of Daytona, Porsche sent one of its experimental \"All-aluminium\" 928S to the Brumos Racing Team to be prepared with specific instruction not to modify the car in any way. Porsche wanted to promote the performance of the 928 to North America. The drivers Richard Attwood (GB), Vic Elford (GB), Howard Meister (USA) and Bob Hagestad (USA) were told to just \"drive the car\". During practice for the 24-hour race the drivers found the car to be somewhat unstable on the high banks of Daytona and wanted to add a rear wing to the car; Porsche denied the request. The Brumos team tinkered with the suspension set up to make the car more stable. The car finished in 15th overall and 4th in the GTO class. One driver stated in an interview later on, that were it not for a lengthy pit stop to fix some body damage, they would have finished in the top 5 overall. The car was then returned to Porsche and is now in the Porsche Museum. A 928S from Raymond Boutinaud also competed at the 24 Hours of Le Mans in 1983 &amp; 1984 with a 22nd-place finish in 1984. The same car also competed in 1000k races at Spa, Brands Hatch and Silverstone in 1984, but with little success.\nClosed Course Speed Record.\nA new closed course speed record was set for the Porsche 928 at the Transportation Research Center (TRC) proving grounds in Ohio on October 5, 2020. Race car builder and driver Carl Fausett reached 234.434 MPH (377.28\u00a0km/h) on the high-banked paved oval. The vehicle was the same car he took to Bonneville (above) with further enhancements. At the time of this race, it had 1134 BHP from a specially constructed and supercharged Porsche 928 V8 and had been named \"The Meg\" in reference to the Megalodon. Speeds were measured by Tag/Heuer laser traps and certified by TRC staff. The 234.434 MPH (377.28\u00a0km/h) top speed eclipsed the previous record of 216.635 MPH (348.62\u00a0km/h) and made the Meg the worlds' fastest 928, and set a new Porsche closed-course record.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nGeneral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorkshop manuals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23974", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23974", "title": "Plasmid", "text": "Small DNA molecule within a cell\nA plasmid is a small, extrachromosomal DNA molecule within a cell that is physically separated from chromosomal DNA and can replicate independently. They are most commonly found as small circular, double-stranded DNA molecules in bacteria and archaea; however plasmids are sometimes present in eukaryotic organisms as well. Plasmids often carry useful genes, such as those involved in antibiotic resistance, virulence, secondary metabolism and bioremediation. While chromosomes are large and contain all the essential genetic information for living under normal conditions, plasmids are usually very small and contain additional genes for special circumstances.\nArtificial plasmids are widely used as vectors in molecular cloning, serving to drive the replication of recombinant DNA sequences within host organisms. In the laboratory, plasmids may be introduced into a cell via transformation. Synthetic plasmids are available for procurement over the internet by various vendors using submitted sequences typically designed with software, if a design does not work the vendor may make additional edits from the submission.\nPlasmids are considered \"replicons\", units of DNA capable of replicating autonomously within a suitable host. However, plasmids, like viruses, are not generally classified as life. Plasmids are transmitted from one bacterium to another (even of another species) mostly through conjugation. This host-to-host transfer of genetic material is one mechanism of horizontal gene transfer, and plasmids are considered part of the mobilome. Unlike viruses, which encase their genetic material in a protective protein coat called a capsid, plasmids are \"naked\" DNA and do not encode genes necessary to encase the genetic material for transfer to a new host; however, some classes of plasmids encode the conjugative \"sex\" pilus necessary for their own transfer. Plasmids vary in size from 1 to over 400 kbp, and the number of identical plasmids in a single cell can range from one up to thousands.\nHistory.\nThe term \"plasmid\" was coined in 1952 by the American molecular biologist Joshua Lederberg to refer to \"any extrachromosomal hereditary determinant.\" The term's early usage included any bacterial genetic material that exists extrachromosomally for at least part of its replication cycle, but because that description includes bacterial viruses, the notion of plasmid was refined over time to refer to genetic elements that reproduce autonomously.\nLater in 1968, it was decided that the term plasmid should be adopted as the term for extrachromosomal genetic element, and to distinguish it from viruses, the definition was narrowed to genetic elements that exist exclusively or predominantly outside of the chromosome, can replicate autonomously, and contribute to transferring mobile elements between unrelated bacteria.\nProperties and characteristics.\nIn order for plasmids to replicate independently within a cell, they must possess a stretch of DNA that can act as an origin of replication. The self-replicating unit, in this case, the plasmid, is called a replicon. A typical bacterial replicon may consist of a number of elements, such as the gene for plasmid-specific replication initiation protein (Rep), repeating units called iterons, DnaA boxes, and an adjacent AT-rich region. Smaller plasmids make use of the host replicative enzymes to make copies of themselves, while larger plasmids may carry genes specific for the replication of those plasmids. A few types of plasmids can also insert into the host chromosome, and these integrative plasmids are sometimes referred to as episomes in prokaryotes.\nPlasmids almost always carry at least one gene. Many of the genes carried by a plasmid are beneficial for the host cells, for example: enabling the host cell to survive in an environment that would otherwise be lethal or restrictive for growth. Some of these genes encode traits for antibiotic resistance or resistance to heavy metal, while others may produce virulence factors that enable a bacterium to colonize a host and overcome its defences or have specific metabolic functions that allow the bacterium to utilize a particular nutrient, including the ability to degrade recalcitrant or toxic organic compounds. Plasmids can also provide bacteria with the ability to fix nitrogen. Some plasmids, called cryptic plasmids, don't appear to provide any clear advantage to its host, yet still persist in bacterial populations. However, recent studies show that they may play a role in antibiotic resistance by contributing to heteroresistance within bacterial populations.\nNaturally occurring plasmids vary greatly in their physical properties. Their size can range from very small mini-plasmids of less than 1-kilobase pairs (kbp) to very large megaplasmids of several megabase pairs (Mbp). At the upper end, little differs between a megaplasmid and a minichromosome. Plasmids are generally circular, but examples of linear plasmids are also known. These linear plasmids require specialized mechanisms to replicate their ends.\nPlasmids may be present in an individual cell in varying number, ranging from one to several hundreds. The normal number of copies of plasmid that may be found in a single cell is called the plasmid copy number, and is determined by how the replication initiation is regulated and the size of the molecule. Larger plasmids tend to have lower copy numbers. Low-copy-number plasmids that exist only as one or a few copies in each bacterium are, upon cell division, in danger of being lost in one of the segregating bacteria. Such single-copy plasmids have systems that attempt to actively distribute a copy to both daughter cells. These systems, which include the parABS system and parMRC system, are often referred to as the partition system or partition function of a plasmid.\nPlasmids of \"linear\" form are unknown among phytopathogens with one exception, \"Rhodococcus fascians\".\nClassifications and types.\nPlasmids may be classified in a number of ways. Plasmids can be broadly classified into conjugative plasmids and non-conjugative plasmids. Conjugative plasmids contain a set of transfer genes which promote sexual conjugation between different cells. In the complex process of conjugation, plasmids may be transferred from one bacterium to another via sex pili encoded by some of the transfer genes (see figure). Non-conjugative plasmids are incapable of initiating conjugation, hence they can be transferred only with the assistance of conjugative plasmids. An intermediate class of plasmids are mobilizable, and carry only a subset of the genes required for transfer. They can parasitize a conjugative plasmid, transferring at high frequency only in its presence.\nPlasmids can also be classified into incompatibility groups. A microbe can harbour different types of plasmids, but different plasmids can only exist in a single bacterial cell if they are compatible. If two plasmids are not compatible, one or the other will be rapidly lost from the cell. Different plasmids may therefore be assigned to different incompatibility groups depending on whether they can coexist together. Incompatible plasmids (belonging to the same incompatibility group) normally share the same replication or partition mechanisms and can thus not be kept together in a single cell. Incompatibility typing (or Inc typing) was traditionally achieved by genetic phenotyping methods, testing whether cells stably transmit plasmid pairs to their progeny. This has largely been superseded by genetic methods such as PCR, and more recently by whole-genome sequencing methods with bioinformatic tools such as PlasmidFinder.\nAnother way to classify plasmids is by function. There are five main classes:\nPlasmids can belong to more than one of these functional groups.\nSequence-based plasmid typing.\nWith the wider availability of whole genome sequencing which is able to capture the genetic sequence of plasmids, methods have been developed to cluster or type plasmids based on their sequence content. Plasmid multi-locus sequence typing (pMLST) is based on chromosomal Multilocus sequence typing by matching the sequence of replication machinery genes to databases of previously classified sequences. If the sequence allele matches the database, this is used as the plasmid classification, and therefore has higher sensitivity than a simple presence or absence test of these genes.\nA related method is to use average nucleotide identity between plasmids to find close genetic neighbours. Tools which use this approach include COPLA and MOB-cluster.\nCreating typing classifications using unsupervised learning, that is without a pre-existing database or 'reference-free', has been shown to be useful in grouping plasmids in new datasets without biasing or being limited to representations in a pre-built database\u2014tools to do this include mge-cluster. As plasmid frequently change their gene content and order, modelling genetic distances between them using methods designed for point mutations can lead to poor estimates of the true evolutionary distance between plasmids. Tools such as pling find homologous sequence regions between plasmids, and more accurately reconstruct the number of evolutionary events (structural variants) between each pair, then use unsupervised clustering approaches to group plasmids.\nRNA plasmids.\nAlthough most plasmids are double-stranded DNA molecules, some consist of single-stranded DNA, or predominantly double-stranded RNA. RNA plasmids are non-infectious extrachromosomal linear RNA replicons, both encapsidated and unencapsidated, which have been found in fungi and various plants, from algae to land plants. In many cases, however, it may be difficult or impossible to clearly distinguish RNA plasmids from RNA viruses and other infectious RNAs.\nChromids.\nChromids are elements that exist at the boundary between a chromosome and a plasmid, found in about 10% of bacterial species sequenced by 2009. These elements carry core genes and have codon usage similar to the chromosome, yet use a plasmid-type replication mechanism such as the low copy number RepABC. As a result, they have been variously classified as minichromosomes or megaplasmids in the past. In \"Vibrio\", the bacterium synchronizes the replication of the chromosome and chromid by a conserved genome size ratio.\nVectors.\nArtificially constructed plasmids may be used as vectors in genetic engineering. These plasmids serve as important tools in genetics and biotechnology labs, where they are commonly used to clone and amplify (make many copies of) or express particular genes. A wide variety of plasmids are commercially available for such uses. The gene to be replicated is normally inserted into a plasmid that typically contains a number of features for their use. These include a gene that confers resistance to particular antibiotics (ampicillin is most frequently used for bacterial strains), an origin of replication to allow the bacterial cells to replicate the plasmid DNA, and a suitable site for cloning (referred to as a multiple cloning site).\nDNA structural instability can be defined as a series of spontaneous events that culminate in an unforeseen rearrangement, loss, or gain of genetic material. Such events are frequently triggered by the transposition of mobile elements or by the presence of unstable elements such as non-canonical (non-B) structures. Accessory regions pertaining to the bacterial backbone may engage in a wide range of structural instability phenomena. Well-known catalysts of genetic instability include direct, inverted, and tandem repeats, which are known to be conspicuous in a large number of commercially available cloning and expression vectors. Insertion sequences can also severely impact plasmid function and yield, by leading to deletions and rearrangements, activation, down-regulation or inactivation of neighboring gene expression. Therefore, the reduction or complete elimination of extraneous noncoding backbone sequences would pointedly reduce the propensity for such events to take place, and consequently, the overall recombinogenic potential of the plasmid.\nCloning.\nPlasmids are the most-commonly used bacterial cloning vectors. These cloning vectors contain a site that allows DNA fragments to be inserted, for example a multiple cloning site or polylinker which has several commonly used restriction sites to which DNA fragments may be ligated. After the gene of interest is inserted, the plasmids are introduced into bacteria by a process called transformation. These plasmids contain a selectable marker, usually an antibiotic resistance gene, which confers on the bacteria an ability to survive and proliferate in a selective growth medium containing the particular antibiotics. The cells after transformation are exposed to the selective media, and only cells containing the plasmid may survive. In this way, the antibiotics act as a filter to select only the bacteria containing the plasmid DNA. The vector may also contain other marker genes or reporter genes to facilitate selection of plasmids with cloned inserts. Bacteria containing the plasmid can then be grown in large amounts, harvested, and the plasmid of interest may then be isolated using various methods of plasmid preparation.\nA plasmid cloning vector is typically used to clone DNA fragments of up to 15 kbp. To clone longer lengths of DNA, lambda phage with lysogeny genes deleted, cosmids, bacterial artificial chromosomes, or yeast artificial chromosomes are used.\nSuicide Vectors (plasmids).\nSuicide vectors are plasmids that are unable to replicate in the host cell and therefore have to integrate in the chromosome or disappear. One example of these vectors are pMQ30 plasmid. This plasmid has SacB gene from \"Bacillus subtilis\" which can be induced by sucrose and will be lethal when expressed in Gram-negative bacteria. The benefit of this system( two-step success monitoring ) shows when the experiment design needs a target gene to be integrated into the chromosome of the bacterial host. In the first step after transforming the host cells with the plasmid, a media with specific antibiotic could be used to select for bacteria that contain the plasmid. The second step makes sure that only the bacteria with integrated plasmid would survive. Since the plasmid contain the SacB gene that will induce toxicity in presence of sucrose, only the bacteria would survive and grow that has the plasmid integrated in their chromosome.\nProtein Production.\nAnother major use of plasmids is to make large amounts of proteins. In this case, researchers grow bacteria containing a plasmid harboring the gene of interest. Just as the bacterium produces proteins to confer its antibiotic resistance, it can also be induced to produce large amounts of proteins from the inserted gene. This is a cheap and easy way of mass-producing the protein, for example, utilizing the rapid reproduction of E.coli with a plasmid containing the insulin gene leads to a large production of insulin.\nGene therapy.\nPlasmids may also be used for gene transfer as a potential treatment in gene therapy so that it may express the protein that is lacking in the cells. Some forms of gene therapy require the insertion of therapeutic genes at pre-selected chromosomal target sites within the human genome. Plasmid vectors are one of many approaches that could be used for this purpose. Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) offer a way to cause a site-specific double-strand break to the DNA genome and cause homologous recombination. Plasmids encoding ZFN could help deliver a therapeutic gene to a specific site so that cell damage, cancer-causing mutations, or an immune response is avoided.\nDisease models.\nPlasmids were historically used to genetically engineer the embryonic stem cells of rats to create rat genetic disease models. The limited efficiency of plasmid-based techniques precluded their use in the creation of more accurate human cell models. However, developments in adeno-associated virus recombination techniques, and zinc finger nucleases, have enabled the creation of a new generation of isogenic human disease models.\nBiosynthetic Gene Cluster (BGC).\nPlasmids assist in transporting biosynthetic gene clusters - a set of gene that contain all the necessary enzymes that lead to the production of special metabolites (formally known as secondary metabolite). A benefit of using plasmids to transfer BGC is demonstrated by using a suitable host that can mass produce specialized metabolites, some of these molecules are able to control microbial population. Plasmids can contain and express several BGCs with a few plasmids known to be exclusive for transferring BGCs. BGC's can also be transfers to the host organism's chromosome, utilizing a plasmid vector, which allows for studies in gene knockout experiments. By using plasmids for the uptake of BGCs, microorganisms can gain an advantage as production is not limited to antibiotic resistant biosynthesis genes but the production of toxins/antitoxins.\nEpisomes.\nThe term \"episome\" was introduced by Fran\u00e7ois Jacob and \u00c9lie Wollman in 1958 to refer to extra-chromosomal genetic material that may replicate autonomously or become integrated into the chromosome. Since the term was introduced, however, its use has changed, as \"plasmid\" has become the preferred term for autonomously replicating extrachromosomal DNA. At a 1968 symposium in London some participants suggested that the term \"episome\" be abandoned, although others continued to use the term with a shift in meaning.\nToday, some authors use \"episome\" in the context of prokaryotes to refer to a plasmid that is capable of integrating into the chromosome. The integrative plasmids may be replicated and stably maintained in a cell through multiple generations, but at some stage, they will exist as an independent plasmid molecule.\nIn the context of eukaryotes, the term \"episome\" is used to mean a non-integrated extrachromosomal closed circular DNA molecule that may be replicated in the nucleus. Viruses are the most common examples of this, such as herpesviruses, adenoviruses, and polyomaviruses, but some are plasmids. Other examples include aberrant chromosomal fragments, such as double minute chromosomes, that can arise during artificial gene amplifications or in pathologic processes (e.g., cancer cell transformation). Episomes in eukaryotes behave similarly to plasmids in prokaryotes in that the DNA is stably maintained and replicated with the host cell. Cytoplasmic viral episomes (as in poxvirus infections) can also occur. Some episomes, such as herpesviruses, replicate in a rolling circle mechanism, similar to bacteriophages (bacterial phage viruses). Others replicate through a bidirectional replication mechanism (\"Theta type\" plasmids). In either case, episomes remain physically separate from host cell chromosomes. Several cancer viruses, including Epstein-Barr virus and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, are maintained as latent, chromosomally distinct episomes in cancer cells, where the viruses express oncogenes that promote cancer cell proliferation. In cancers, these episomes passively replicate together with host chromosomes when the cell divides. When these viral episomes initiate lytic replication to generate multiple virus particles, they generally activate cellular innate immunity defense mechanisms that kill the host cell.\nPlasmid maintenance.\nSome plasmids or microbial hosts include an addiction system or postsegregational killing system (PSK), such as the hok/sok (host killing/suppressor of killing) system of plasmid R1 in \"Escherichia coli\". This variant produces both a long-lived poison and a short-lived antidote. Several types of plasmid addiction systems (toxin/ antitoxin, metabolism-based, ORT systems) were described in the literature and used in biotechnical (fermentation) or biomedical (vaccine therapy) applications. Daughter cells that retain a copy of the plasmid survive, while a daughter cell that fails to inherit the plasmid dies or suffers a reduced growth-rate because of the lingering poison from the parent cell. Finally, the overall productivity could be enhanced.\nIn contrast, plasmids used in biotechnology, such as pUC18, pBR322 and derived vectors, hardly ever contain toxin-antitoxin addiction systems, and therefore need to be kept under antibiotic pressure to avoid plasmid loss.\nPlasmids in eukaryotes.\nPlasmids replicated and expressed by the eukaryotic cell's machinery may reside in the cytoplasm or the cell nucleus, with different plasmids having different preferences. In addition, eukaryotes have two endosymbiotic organelles with their own genome and genetic machinery \u2013 the mitochondrion and the chloroplast \u2013 and each of these can carry plasmids in addition to the main organellar genome molecule.\nEukaryotic cytoplasmic plasmids.\nYeast cytoplasmic plasmids.\nThe natural linear pGKL plasmids from \"Kluyveromyces lactis\" are responsible for killer phenotypes. They can be put into the common baker's yeast \"S. cerevisiae\".\nEukaryotic nuclear plasmids.\nPlasmids enter the nucleus during cell division, being rolled up in the nuclear envelope as it is reformed. As a result, nuclear plasmids do not work in non-dividing cells.\nYeast nuclear plasmids.\nThe natural 2 micron plasmid (named after the fact that it is about 2\u00a0\u03bcm in size) is found in the common baker's yeast \"S. cerevisiae\". It resides in the nucleus in 30\u201340 copies per cell. It is often modified for genetic engineering of yeast.\nOther types of plasmids are often related to yeast cloning vectors that include:\nMammalian nuclear plasmids.\nArtificial plasmids are put into mammalian cells to make them produce a certain gene product. They are also used to identify and quantitatively study regulatory elements, with the assumption that these elements on a plasmid would act similarly to a copy on the chromosome.\nInteraction with chromatin.\nBeing DNA sequences in the nucleus, the plasmid molecule also interactes with histone proteins.\nEukaryotic organellar plasmids.\nNatural plant mitochondrial plasmids.\nThe mitochondria of many higher plants contain self-replicating, extra-chromosomal linear or circular DNA molecules which have been considered to be plasmids. These can range from 0.7 kb to 20 kb in size. The plasmids have been generally classified into two categories- circular and linear. Circular plasmids have been isolated and found in many different plants, with those in \"Vicia faba and Chenopodium album\" being the most studied and whose mechanism of replication is known. The circular plasmids can replicate using the \u03b8 model of replication (as in \"Vicia faba\") and through rolling circle replication (as in \"C.album\"). Linear plasmids have been identified in some plant species such as \"Beta vulgaris\", \"Brassica napus, Zea mays\", etc. but are rarer than their circular counterparts.\nThe function and origin of these plasmids remains largely unknown. It has been suggested that the circular plasmids share a common ancestor, some genes in the mitochondrial plasmid have counterparts in the nuclear DNA suggesting inter-compartment exchange. Meanwhile, the linear plasmids share structural similarities such as invertrons with viral DNA and fungal plasmids, like fungal plasmids they also have low GC content, these observations have led to some hypothesizing that these linear plasmids have viral origins, or have ended up in plant mitochondria through horizontal gene transfer from pathogenic fungi.\nStudy of plasmids.\nPlasmid DNA extraction.\nPlasmids are often used to purify a specific sequence, since they can easily be purified away from the rest of the genome. For their use as vectors, and for molecular cloning, plasmids often need to be isolated.\nThere are several methods to isolate plasmid DNA from bacteria, ranging from the plasmid extraction kits (miniprep to the maxiprep or bulkprep), alkaline lysis, enzymatic lysis, and mechanical lysis . The former can be used to quickly find out whether the plasmid is correct in any of several bacterial clones. The yield is a small amount of impure plasmid DNA, which is sufficient for analysis by restriction digest and for some cloning techniques.\nIn the latter, much larger volumes of bacterial suspension are grown from which a maxi-prep can be performed. In essence, this is a scaled-up miniprep followed by additional purification. This results in relatively large amounts (several hundred micrograms) of very pure plasmid DNA.\nMany commercial kits have been created to perform plasmid extraction at various scales, purity, and levels of automation.\nConformations.\nPlasmid DNA may appear in one of five conformations, which (for a given size) run at different speeds in a gel during electrophoresis. The conformations are listed below in order of electrophoretic mobility (speed for a given applied voltage) from slowest to fastest:\nThe rate of migration for small linear fragments is directly proportional to the voltage applied at low voltages. At higher voltages, larger fragments migrate at continuously increasing yet different rates. Thus, the resolution of a gel decreases with increased voltage.\nAt a specified, low voltage, the migration rate of small linear DNA fragments is a function of their length. Large linear fragments (over 20 kb or so) migrate at a certain fixed rate regardless of length. This is because the molecules 'respirate', with the bulk of the molecule following the leading end through the gel matrix. Restriction digests are frequently used to analyse purified plasmids. These enzymes specifically break the DNA at certain short sequences. The resulting linear fragments form 'bands' after gel electrophoresis. It is possible to purify certain fragments by cutting the bands out of the gel and dissolving the gel to release the DNA fragments.\nBecause of its tight conformation, supercoiled DNA migrates faster through a gel than linear or open-circular DNA.\nSoftware for bioinformatics and design.\nThe use of plasmids as a technique in molecular biology is supported by bioinformatics software. These programs record the DNA sequence of plasmid vectors, help to predict cut sites of restriction enzymes, and to plan manipulations. Examples of software packages that handle plasmid maps are ApE, Clone Manager, GeneConstructionKit, Geneious, Genome Compiler, LabGenius, Lasergene, MacVector, pDraw32, Serial Cloner, UGENE, VectorFriends, Vector NTI, and WebDSV. These pieces of software help conduct entire experiments in silico before doing wet experiments.\nPlasmid collections.\nMany plasmids have been created over the years and researchers have given out plasmids to plasmid databases such as the non-profit organisations https:// and https://. One can find and request plasmids from those databases for research.\nResearchers also often upload plasmid sequences to the https://, from which sequences of specific plasmids can be retrieved. There have been multiple efforts to create curated and quality controlled databases from these uploaded sequences; an early example is by Orlek \"et al\", which limited itself to \"Enterobacteriaceae\" plasmids, while COMPASS also encompassed plasmids from other bacteria. More recently, PLSDB was made as a more up to date curated database of NCBI plasmids, and as of 2024 contains over 72,000 entries. A similar database is pATLAS, which additionally includes visual analytics tools to show relationships between plasmids. The largest plasmid database made from publicly available data is IMG/PR, which not only contains full plasmid sequences retrieved from NCBI, but novel plasmid genomes found from metagenomes and metatranscriptomes.\nOther datasets have been created by sequencing and computing plasmid genomes from pre-existing bacterial collections, e.g. the NORM collection and the Murray Collection.\nmRNA vaccines.\nIn 2025, researchers from Canada and the US revealed that Covid-19 mRNA vaccines contain high amounts of residual DNA (371-1,548 ng/dose for Pfizer and 1,130-6,280 for Moderna), far exceeding the maximum level (10 ng/dose) that was recommended from the WHO and the FDA. SV40 sequences were observed in Pfizer products. They also analyzed data from VERS to examine an association between serious adverse events (SAEs) and mRNA products, suggesting a positive correlation between SAEs and residual DNA levels. The study concluded that transparent information about manufacturing processes should be provided by regulators and industry, and stricter guidelines should be set for safety.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEpisomes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23975", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23975", "title": "Parallelepiped", "text": "Hexahedron with parallelogram faces\nIn geometry, a parallelepiped is a three-dimensional figure formed by six parallelograms (the term \"rhomboid\" is also sometimes used with this meaning). By analogy, it relates to a parallelogram just as a cube relates to a square.\nThree equivalent definitions of \"parallelepiped\" are\nThe rectangular cuboid (six rectangular faces), cube (six square faces), and the rhombohedron (six rhombus faces) are all special cases of parallelepiped.\n\"Parallelepiped\" is now usually pronounced or ; traditionally it was because of its etymology in Greek \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bb\u03b5\u03c0\u03af\u03c0\u03b5\u03b4\u03bf\u03bd \"parallelepipedon\" (with short -i-), a body \"having parallel planes\".\nParallelepipeds are a subclass of the prismatoids.\nProperties.\nAny of the three pairs of parallel faces can be viewed as the base planes of the prism. A parallelepiped has three sets of four parallel edges; the edges within each set are of equal length.\nParallelepipeds result from linear transformations of a cube (for the non-degenerate cases: the bijective linear transformations).\nSince each face has point symmetry, a parallelepiped is a zonohedron. Also the whole parallelepiped has point symmetry \"Ci\" (see also triclinic). Each face is, seen from the outside, the mirror image of the opposite face. The faces are in general chiral, but the parallelepiped is not.\nA space-filling tessellation is possible with congruent copies of any parallelepiped.\nVolume.\nA parallelepiped is a prism with a parallelogram as base.\nHence the volume formula_1 of a parallelepiped is the product of the base area formula_2 and the height formula_3 (see diagram). With \nformula_11\nThe mixed product of three vectors is called triple product. It can be described by a determinant. Hence for formula_12 the volume is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother way to prove (V1) is to use the scalar component in the direction of formula_13 of vector formula_10:\nformula_15\nThe result follows.\nAn alternative representation of the volume uses geometric properties (angles and edge lengths) only:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_16, formula_17, formula_18, and formula_19 are the edge lengths. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_proof/styles.css\" /&gt; Proof of (V2)\nThe proof of (V2) uses properties of a determinant and the geometric interpretation of the dot product:\nLet formula_20 be the 3\u00d73-matrix, whose columns are the vectors formula_21 (see above). Then the following is true: \nformula_22\nThe volume of any tetrahedron that shares three converging edges of a parallelepiped is equal to one sixth of the volume of that parallelepiped (see proof).\nSurface area.\nThe surface area of a parallelepiped is the sum of the areas of the bounding parallelograms:\nformula_27\nPerfect parallelepiped.\nA \"perfect parallelepiped\" is a parallelepiped with integer-length edges, face diagonals, and space diagonals. In 2009, dozens of perfect parallelepipeds were shown to exist, answering an open question of Richard Guy. One example has edges 271, 106, and 103, minor face diagonals 101, 266, and 255, major face diagonals 183, 312, and 323, and space diagonals 374, 300, 278, and 272. \nSome perfect parallelepipeds having two rectangular faces are known. But it is not known whether there exist any with all faces rectangular; such a case would be called a perfect cuboid.\nParallelotope.\nCoxeter called the generalization of a parallelepiped in higher dimensions a parallelotope. In modern literature, the term parallelepiped is often used in higher (or arbitrary finite) dimensions as well.\nSpecifically in \"n\"-dimensional space it is called \"n\"-dimensional parallelotope, or simply n-parallelotope (or n-parallelepiped). Thus a parallelogram is a 2-parallelotope and a parallelepiped is a 3-parallelotope.\nThe diagonals of an \"n\"-parallelotope intersect at one point and are bisected by this point. Inversion in this point leaves the \"n\"-parallelotope unchanged. See also \"Fixed points of isometry groups in Euclidean space\".\nThe edges radiating from one vertex of a \"k\"-parallelotope form a \"k\"-frame formula_29 of the vector space, and the parallelotope can be recovered from these vectors, by taking linear combinations of the vectors, with weights between 0 and 1.\nThe \"n\"-volume of an \"n\"-parallelotope embedded in formula_30 where formula_31 can be computed by means of the Gram determinant. Alternatively, the volume is the norm of the exterior product of the vectors:\nformula_32\nIf \"m\" = \"n\", this amounts to the absolute value of the determinant of matrix formed by the components of the n vectors.\nA formula to compute the volume of an n-parallelotope \"P\" in formula_33, whose \"n\" + 1 vertices are formula_34, is \nformula_35 \nwhere formula_36 is the row vector formed by the concatenation of the components of formula_37 and 1. \nSimilarly, the volume of any \"n\"-simplex that shares \"n\" converging edges of a parallelotope has a volume equal to one 1/\"n\"! of the volume of that parallelotope.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"parallelepiped\" stems from Ancient Greek (\"parall\u0113lep\u00edpedon\", \"body with parallel plane surfaces\"), from \"parall\u0113l\" (\"parallel\") + \"ep\u00edpedon\" (\"plane surface\"), from \"ep\u00ed-\" (\"on\") + \"pedon\" (\"ground\"). Thus the faces of a parallelepiped are planar, with opposite faces being parallel.\nIn English, the term \"parallelipipedon\" is attested in a 1570 translation of Euclid's Elements by Henry Billingsley. The spelling \"parallelepipedum\" is used in the 1644 edition of Pierre H\u00e9rigone's \"Cursus mathematicus\". In 1663, the present-day \"parallelepiped\" is attested in Walter Charleton's \"Chorea gigantum\".\nCharles Hutton's Dictionary (1795) shows \"parallelopiped\" and \"parallelopipedon\", showing the influence of the combining form \"parallelo-\", as if the second element were \"pipedon\" rather than \"epipedon\". Noah Webster (1806) includes the spelling \"parallelopiped\". The 1989 edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" describes \"parallelopiped\" (and \"parallelipiped\") explicitly as incorrect forms, but these are listed without comment in the 2004 edition, and only pronunciations with the emphasis on the fifth syllable \"pi\" () are given.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23977", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23977", "title": "Plant cell", "text": "Type of eukaryotic cell present in green plants\nPlant cells are the cells present in green plants, photosynthetic eukaryotes of the kingdom Plantae. Their distinctive features include primary cell walls containing cellulose, hemicelluloses and pectin, the presence of plastids with the capability to perform photosynthesis and store starch, a large vacuole that regulates turgor pressure, the absence of flagella or centrioles, except in the gametes, and a unique method of cell division involving the formation of a cell plate or phragmoplast that separates the new daughter cells.\nTypes of plant cells and tissues.\nPlant cells differentiate from undifferentiated meristematic cells (analogous to the stem cells of animals) to form the major classes of cells and tissues of roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and reproductive structures, each of which may be composed of several cell types.\nParenchyma.\nParenchyma cells are living cells that have functions ranging from storage and support to photosynthesis (mesophyll cells) and phloem loading (transfer cells). Apart from the xylem and phloem in their vascular bundles, leaves are composed mainly of parenchyma cells. Some parenchyma cells, as in the epidermis, are specialized for light penetration and focusing or regulation of gas exchange, but others are among the least specialized cells in plant tissue, and may remain totipotent, capable of dividing to produce new populations of undifferentiated cells, throughout their lives. Parenchyma cells have thin, permeable primary walls enabling the transport of small molecules between them, and their cytoplasm is responsible for a wide range of biochemical functions such as nectar secretion, or the manufacture of secondary products that discourage herbivory. Parenchyma cells that contain many chloroplasts and are concerned primarily with photosynthesis are called chlorenchyma cells. Chlorenchyma cells are parenchyma cells involved in photosynthesis. Others, such as the majority of the parenchyma cells in potato tubers and the seed cotyledons of legumes, have a storage function.\nCollenchyma.\nCollenchyma cells are alive at maturity and have thickened cellulose cell walls. These cells mature from meristem derivatives that initially resemble parenchyma, but differences quickly become apparent. Plastids do not develop, and the secretory apparatus (ER and Golgi) proliferates to secrete additional primary wall. The wall is most commonly thickest at the corners, where three or more cells come in contact, and thinnest where only two cells come in contact, though other arrangements of the wall thickening are possible. Pectin and hemicellulose are the dominant constituents of collenchyma cell walls of dicotyledon angiosperms, which may contain as little as 20% of cellulose in \"Petasites\". Collenchyma cells are typically quite elongated, and may divide transversely to give a septate appearance. The role of this cell type is to support the plant in axes still growing in length, and to confer flexibility and tensile strength on tissues. The primary wall lacks lignin that would make it tough and rigid, so this cell type provides what could be called plastic support \u2013 support that can hold a young stem or petiole into the air, but in cells that can be stretched as the cells around them elongate. Stretchable support (without elastic snap-back) is a good way to describe what collenchyma does. Parts of the strings in celery are collenchyma.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nCross section of a leaf showing various plant cell types \nSclerenchyma.\nSclerenchyma is a tissue composed of two types of cells, sclereids and fibres that have thickened, lignified secondary walls laid down inside of the primary cell wall. The secondary walls harden the cells and make them impermeable to water. Consequently, sclereids and fibres are typically dead at functional maturity, and the cytoplasm is missing, leaving an empty central cavity. Sclereids or stone cells, (from the Greek skleros, \"hard\") are hard, tough cells that give leaves or fruits a gritty texture. They may discourage herbivory by damaging digestive passages in small insect larval stages. Sclereids form the hard pit wall of peaches and many other fruits, providing physical protection to the developing kernel. Fibres are elongated cells with lignified secondary walls that provide load-bearing support and tensile strength to the leaves and stems of herbaceous plants. Sclerenchyma fibres are not involved in conduction, either of water and nutrients (as in the xylem) or of carbon compounds (as in the phloem), but it is likely that they evolved as modifications of xylem and phloem initials in early land plants.\nXylem.\nXylem is a complex vascular tissue composed of water-conducting tracheids or vessel elements, together with fibres and parenchyma cells. Tracheids are elongated cells with lignified secondary thickening of the cell walls, specialised for conduction of water, and first appeared in plants during their transition to land in the Silurian period more than 425 million years ago (see \"Cooksonia\"). The possession of xylem tracheids defines the vascular plants or Tracheophytes. Tracheids are pointed, elongated xylem cells, the simplest of which have continuous primary cell walls and lignified secondary wall thickenings in the form of rings, hoops, or reticulate networks. More complex tracheids with valve-like perforations called bordered pits characterise the gymnosperms. The ferns and other pteridophytes and the gymnosperms have only xylem tracheids, while the flowering plants also have xylem vessels. Vessel elements are hollow xylem cells without end walls that are aligned end-to-end so as to form long continuous tubes. The bryophytes lack true xylem tissue, but their sporophytes have a water-conducting tissue known as the hydrome that is composed of elongated cells of simpler construction.\nPhloem.\nPhloem is a specialised tissue for food transport in higher plants, mainly transporting sucrose along pressure gradients generated by osmosis, a process called translocation. Phloem is a complex tissue, consisting of two main cell types, the sieve tubes and the intimately associated companion cells, together with parenchyma cells, phloem fibres and sclereids. Sieve tubes are joined end-to-end with perforated end-plates between known as \"sieve plates\", which allow transport of photosynthate between the sieve elements. The sieve tube elements lack nuclei and ribosomes, and their metabolism and functions are regulated by the adjacent nucleate companion cells. The companion cells, connected to the sieve tubes via plasmodesmata, are responsible for loading the phloem with sugars. The bryophytes lack phloem, but moss sporophytes have a simpler tissue with analogous function known as the leptome.\nEpidermis.\nThe plant epidermis is specialised tissue, composed of parenchyma cells, that covers the external surfaces of leaves, stems and roots. Several cell types may be present in the epidermis. Notable among these are the stomatal guard cells that control the rate of gas exchange between the plant and the atmosphere, glandular and clothing hairs or trichomes, and the root hairs of primary roots. In the shoot epidermis of most plants, only the guard cells have chloroplasts. Chloroplasts contain the green pigment chlorophyll which is needed for photosynthesis. The epidermal cells of aerial organs arise from the superficial layer of cells known as the \"tunica\" (L1 and L2 layers) that covers the plant shoot apex, whereas the cortex and vascular tissues arise from innermost layer of the shoot apex known as the \"corpus\" (L3 layer). The epidermis of roots originates from the layer of cells immediately beneath the root cap. The epidermis of all aerial organs, but not roots, is covered with a cuticle made of polyester cutin or polymer cutan (or both), with a superficial layer of epicuticular waxes. The epidermal cells of the primary shoot are thought to be the only plant cells with the biochemical capacity to synthesize cutin.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23978", "revid": "35474667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23978", "title": "Polysaccharide", "text": "Long carbohydrate polymers such as starch, glycogen, cellulose, and chitin\nPolysaccharides (; from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'many, much' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'sugar') are \"Compounds consisting of a large number of monosaccharides linked glycosidically\". They are the most abundant carbohydrates in food. Their structures range from linear to highly branched polymers. Examples include storage polysaccharides such as starch, glycogen, and galactogen and structural polysaccharides such as hemicellulose and chitin. The term \"glycan\" is synonymous with polysaccharide, but often glycans are discussed in the context of glycoconjugates, i.e. hybrids of polysaccharides and proteins or lipids.\nPolysaccharides are often heterogeneous, containing slight modifications of the repeating unit. They may be amorphous (e.g. starch) or insoluble in water (e.g. cellulose).\nSaccharides are generally composed of simple carbohydrates called monosaccharides with general formula (CH2O)\"n\" where \"n\" is three or more. Examples of monosaccharides are glucose, fructose, and glyceraldehyde. Polysaccharides, meanwhile, have a general formula of C\"x\"(H2O)\"y\" where \"x\" and \"y\" are usually large numbers between 200 and 2500. When the repeating units in the polymer backbone are six-carbon monosaccharides, as is often the case, the general formula simplifies to (C6H10O5)\"n\", where typically 40 \u2264 \"n\" \u2264 3000.\nAs a rule of thumb, polysaccharides contain more than ten monosaccharide units, whereas oligosaccharides contain three to ten monosaccharide units, but the precise cutoff varies according to the convention. Polysaccharides are an important class of biological polymers. Their function in living organisms is usually either structure- or storage-related. Starch (a polymer of glucose) is used as a storage polysaccharide in plants, being found in the form of both amylose and the branched amylopectin. In animals, the structurally similar glucose polymer is the more densely branched glycogen, sometimes called \"animal starch\". Glycogen's properties allow it to be metabolized more quickly, which suits the active lives of moving animals. In bacteria, they play an important role in bacterial multicellularity.\nCellulose and chitin are examples of structural polysaccharides. Cellulose is used in the cell walls of plants and other organisms and is said to be the most abundant organic molecule on Earth. It has many uses such as a significant role in the paper and textile industries and is used as a feedstock for the production of rayon (via the viscose process), cellulose acetate, celluloid, and nitrocellulose. Chitin has a similar structure but has nitrogen-containing side branches, increasing its strength. It is found in arthropod exoskeletons and in the cell walls of some fungi. It also has multiple uses, including surgical threads. Polysaccharides also include callose or laminarin, chrysolaminarin, xylan, arabinoxylan, mannan, fucoidan, and galactomannan.\nCellulose and dietary fiber.\nStructure.\nNutritional polysaccharides are common sources of energy. Many organisms can easily break down starches into glucose. By contrast, few organisms can metabolize cellulose. Some bacteria and protists can metabolize these carbohydrate types. Ruminants and termites, for example, use microorganisms to process cellulose.\nSome polysaccharides are not very digestible, but in the form of dietary fiber, they enhance digestion. Soluble fiber binds to bile acids in the small intestine, making them less likely to enter the body; this, in turn, lowers cholesterol levels in the blood. Soluble fiber also attenuates the absorption of sugar, reduces sugar response after eating, normalizes blood lipid levels and, once fermented in the colon, produces short-chain fatty acids as byproducts with wide-ranging physiological activities (discussion below). Although insoluble fiber is associated with reduced diabetes risk, the mechanism by which this occurs is unknown.\nDietary fiber is nevertheless regarded as important for the diet, with regulatory authorities in many developed countries recommending increases in fiber intake.\nStorage polysaccharides.\nStarch.\nStarch is a glucose polymer in which glucopyranose units are bonded by \"alpha\"-linkages. It is made up of a mixture of amylose (15\u201320%) and amylopectin (80\u201385%). Amylose consists of a linear chain of several hundred glucose molecules, and amylopectin is branched made of several thousand glucose units (every chain of 24\u201330 glucose units is one unit of Amylopectin). Starches are insoluble in water. They can be digested by breaking the \"alpha\"-linkages (glycosidic bonds). Humans and other animals have amylases so that they can digest starches. Potato, rice, wheat, and maize are major sources of starch in the human diet. The formations of starches are the ways that plants store glucose.\nGlycogen.\nGlycogen serves as the secondary long-term energy storage in animal and fungal cells, with the primary energy stores being held in adipose tissue. Glycogen is made primarily by the liver and the muscles, but can also be made by glycogenesis within the brain and stomach.\nGlycogen is analogous to starch and is sometimes referred to as \"animal starch\", having a similar structure to amylopectin but more extensively branched and compact than starch. Glycogen is a polymer of \u03b1(1\u21924) glycosidic bonds linked with \u03b1(1\u21926)-linked branches. Glycogen is found in the form of granules in the cytosol/cytoplasm in many cell types and plays an important role in the glucose cycle. Glycogen forms an energy reserve that can be quickly mobilized to meet a sudden need for glucose, but one that is less compact and more immediately available as an energy reserve than triglycerides (lipids).\nIn the liver hepatocytes, glycogen comprises up to 8 percent (100\u2013120\u00a0grams in an adult) of the fresh weight soon after a meal. Only the glycogen stored in the liver can be made accessible to other organs. In the muscles, glycogen is found in a low concentration of one to two percent of the muscle mass. The amount of glycogen stored in the body\u2014especially within the muscles, liver, and red blood cells\u2014varies with physical activity, basal metabolic rate, and eating habits such as intermittent fasting. Small amounts of glycogen are found in the kidneys and even smaller amounts in certain glial cells in the brain and white blood cells. The uterus also stores glycogen during pregnancy to nourish the embryo.\nGlycogen is composed of a branched chain of glucose residues. It is primarily stored in the liver and muscles.\nGalactogen.\nGalactogen is a polysaccharide of galactose that also functions as energy storage in pulmonate snails and some Caenogastropoda. This polysaccharide is exclusive of the reproduction and is only found in the albumen gland from the female snail reproductive system and in the perivitelline fluid of egogens have applications within hydrogel structures. These hydrogel structures can be designed to release particular nanoparticle pharmaceuticals and/or encapsulated therapeutics over time or in response to environmental stimuli.\nFormed by crosslinking polysaccharide-based nanoparticles and functional polymers, galactogens have applications within hydrogel structures. These hydrogel structures can be designed to release particular nanoparticle pharmaceuticals and/or encapsulated therapeutics over time or in response to environmental stimuli.\nGalactogens are polysaccharides with binding affinity for bioanalytes. With this, by end-point attaching galactogens to other polysaccharides constituting the surface of medical devices, galactogens have use as a method of capturing bioanalytes (e.g., CTC's), a method for releasing the captured bioanalytes and an analysis method.\nInulin.\nInulin is a naturally occurring polysaccharide complex carbohydrate composed of fructose, a plant-derived food that human digestive enzymes cannot completely break down. The inulins belong to a class of dietary fibers known as fructans. Inulin is used by some plants as a means of storing energy and is typically found in roots or rhizomes. Most plants that synthesize and store inulin do not store other forms of carbohydrates such as starch. In the United States in 2018, the Food and Drug Administration approved inulin as a dietary fiber ingredient used to improve the nutritional value of manufactured food products.\nStructural polysaccharides.\nArabinoxylans.\nArabinoxylans are found in both the primary and secondary cell walls of plants and are the copolymers of two sugars: arabinose and xylose. They may also have beneficial effects on human health.\nCellulose.\nThe structural components of plants are formed primarily from cellulose. Wood is largely cellulose and lignin, while paper and cotton are nearly pure cellulose. Cellulose is a polymer made with repeated glucose units bonded together by \"beta\"-linkages. Humans and many animals lack an enzyme to break the \"beta\"-linkages, so they do not digest cellulose. Certain animals, such as termites can digest cellulose, because bacteria possessing the enzyme are present in their gut. Cellulose is insoluble in water. It does not change color when mixed with iodine. On hydrolysis, it yields glucose. It is the most abundant carbohydrate in nature.\nChitin.\nChitin forms a structural component of many animals, such as exoskeletons of insects. It biodegrades in the presence of enzymes called chitinases, secreted by microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi and produced by some plants. Some of these microorganisms have receptors to simple sugars from the decomposition of chitin. If chitin is detected, they then produce enzymes to digest it by cleaving the glycosidic bonds in order to convert it to simple sugars and ammonia.\nChemically, chitin is closely related to chitosan (a more water-soluble derivative of chitin). It is also closely related to cellulose in that it is an unbranched chain of glucose derivatives. Both materials contribute structure and strength, protecting the organism.\nPectins.\nPectins are a family of complex polysaccharides that contain 1,4-linked \u03b1-D-galactosyl uronic acid residues. They are present in most primary cell walls and in the nonwoody parts of terrestrial plants.\nAcidic polysaccharides.\nAcidic polysaccharides are polysaccharides that contain carboxyl groups, phosphate groups and/or sulfuric ester groups.\nPolysaccharides containing sulfate groups can be isolated from algae or obtained by chemical modification.\nPolysaccharides are major classes of biomolecules. They are long chains of carbohydrate molecules, composed of several smaller monosaccharides. These complex bio-macromolecules functions as an important source of energy in animal cell and form a structural component of a plant cell. It can be a homopolysaccharide or a heteropolysaccharide depending upon the type of the monosaccharides.\nPolysaccharides can be a straight chain of monosaccharides known as linear polysaccharides, or it can be branched known as a branched polysaccharide.\nBacterial polysaccharides.\nPathogenic bacteria commonly produce a bacterial capsule, a thick, mucus-like layer of polysaccharide. The capsule cloaks antigenic proteins on the bacterial surface that would otherwise provoke an immune response and thereby lead to the destruction of the bacteria. Capsular polysaccharides are water-soluble, commonly acidic, and have molecular weights on the order of . They are linear and consist of regularly repeating subunits of one to six monosaccharides. There is enormous structural diversity; nearly two hundred different polysaccharides are produced by \"E. coli\" alone. Mixtures of capsular polysaccharides, either conjugated or native, are used as vaccines.\nBacteria and many other microbes, including fungi and algae, often secrete polysaccharides to help them adhere to surfaces and to prevent them from drying out. Humans have developed some of these polysaccharides into useful products, including xanthan gum, dextran, welan gum, gellan gum, diutan gum and pullulan.\nMost of these polysaccharides exhibit useful visco-elastic properties when dissolved in water at very low levels. This makes various liquids used in everyday life, such as some foods, lotions, cleaners, and paints, viscous when stationary, but much more free-flowing when even slight shear is applied by stirring or shaking, pouring, wiping, or brushing. This property is named pseudoplasticity or shear thinning; the study of such matters is called rheology.\nAqueous solutions of the polysaccharide alone have a curious behavior when stirred: after stirring ceases, the solution initially continues to swirl due to momentum, then slows to a standstill due to viscosity and reverses direction briefly before stopping. This recoil is due to the elastic effect of the polysaccharide chains, previously stretched in solution, returning to their relaxed state.\nCell-surface polysaccharides play diverse roles in bacterial ecology and physiology. They serve as a barrier between the cell wall and the environment, mediate host-pathogen interactions. Polysaccharides also play an important role in formation of biofilms and the structuring of complex life forms in bacteria like \"Myxococcus xanthus\"\".\"\nThese polysaccharides are synthesized from nucleotide-activated precursors (called nucleotide sugars) and, in most cases, all the enzymes necessary for biosynthesis, assembly and transport of the completed polymer are encoded by genes organized in dedicated clusters within the genome of the organism. Lipopolysaccharide is one of the most important cell-surface polysaccharides, as it plays a key structural role in outer membrane integrity, as well as being an important mediator of host-pathogen interactions.\nThe enzymes that make the \"A-band\" (homopolymeric) and \"B-band\" (heteropolymeric) O-antigens have been identified and the metabolic pathways defined. The exopolysaccharide alginate is a linear copolymer of \u03b2-1,4-linked D-mannuronic acid and L-guluronic acid residues, and is responsible for the mucoid phenotype of late-stage cystic fibrosis disease. The \"pel\" and \"psl\" loci also encode exopolysaccharides found to be important for biofilm formation. Rhamnolipid is a biosurfactant whose production is tightly regulated at the transcriptional level, but the precise role that it plays in disease is not well understood at present. Protein glycosylation, particularly of pilin and flagellin, became a focus of research by several groups from about 2007, and has been shown to be important for adhesion and invasion during bacterial infection.\nChemical identification tests for polysaccharides.\nPeriodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS).\nPolysaccharides with unprotected vicinal diols or amino sugars (where some hydroxyl groups are replaced with amines) give a positive periodic acid-Schiff stain (PAS). The list of polysaccharides that stain with PAS is long. Although mucins of epithelial origins stain with PAS, mucins of connective tissue origin have so many acidic substitutions that they do not have enough glycol or amino-alcohol groups left to react with PAS.\nDerivatives.\nBy chemical modifications certain properties of polysaccharides can be improved. Various ligands can be covalently attached to their hydroxyl groups. Due to the covalent attachment of methyl-, hydroxyethyl- or carboxymethyl- groups on cellulose, for instance, high swelling properties in aqueous media can be introduced.\nAnother example is thiolated polysaccharides. (See thiomers.) Thiol groups are covalently attached to polysaccharides such as hyaluronic acid or chitosan. As thiolated polysaccharides can crosslink via disulfide bond formation, they form stable three-dimensional networks. Furthermore, they can bind to cysteine subunits of proteins via disulfide bonds. Because of these bonds, polysaccharides can be covalently attached to endogenous proteins such as mucins or keratins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23979", "revid": "47822643", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23979", "title": "Ptolemy", "text": "Greco-Roman astronomer and geographer (c. 100\u2013170)\nClaudius Ptolemy (; , ; ; c.\u2009100 \u2013 160s/170s AD), better known mononymously as Ptolemy, was a Greco-Roman mathematician, astronomer, astrologer, geographer, and music theorist who wrote about a dozen scientific treatises, three of which were important to later Byzantine, Islamic, and Western European science. The first was his astronomical treatise now known as the \"Almagest\", originally entitled ' (, ', lit.\u2009'Mathematical Treatise'). The second is the \"Geography\", which is a thorough discussion on maps and the geographic knowledge of the Greco-Roman world. The third is the astrological treatise in which he attempted to adapt horoscopic astrology to the Aristotelian natural philosophy of his day. This is sometimes known as the ' (, 'On the Effects') but more commonly known as the ' (from the Koine Greek meaning 'four books'; ).\nThe Catholic Church promoted his work, which included the only mathematically sound geocentric model of the Solar System, and unlike most Greek mathematicians, Ptolemy's writings (foremost the \"Almagest\") never ceased to be copied or commented upon, both in late antiquity and in the Middle Ages. However, it is likely that only a few truly mastered the mathematics necessary to understand his works, as evidenced particularly by the many abridged and watered-down introductions to Ptolemy's astronomy that were popular among the Arabs and Byzantines. His work on epicycles is now seen as a very complex theoretical model built in order to explain a false tenet based on faith.\nBiography.\nPtolemy's date of birth and birthplace are both unknown. The 14th-century astronomer Theodore Meliteniotes wrote that Ptolemy's birthplace was Ptolemais Hermiou, a Greek city in the Thebaid region of Egypt (now El Mansha, Sohag Governorate). This attestation is quite late, however, and there is no evidence to support it.\nIt is known that Ptolemy lived in or around the city of Alexandria, in the Roman province of Egypt under Roman rule.\nHe had a Latin name, Claudius, which is generally taken to imply he was a Roman citizen.\nHe was familiar with Greek philosophers and used Babylonian observations and Babylonian lunar theory. In half of his extant works, Ptolemy addresses a certain Syrus, a figure of whom almost nothing is known but who likely shared some of Ptolemy's astronomical interests.\nPtolemy died in Alexandria.(p311) Ptolemy's year of death is not directly recorded by primary sources, and has to be inferred from the scale of his work. Suggested years of death include c.\u2009165, c.\u2009168,(p311) c.\u2009170, and c.\u2009175.\nNaming and nationality.\nPtolemy is often called Ptolemaeus, which is a latinised version of his original ancient Greek personal name (Latin transcript: \"Ptolema\u00eeos\"). It occurs once in Greek mythology and is of Homeric form.\nIt was common among the Macedonian upper class at the time of Alexander the Great and several people of this name were among Alexander's army, one of whom made himself pharaoh in 323 BC: Ptolemy I Soter, the first pharaoh of the Ptolemaic Kingdom. Almost all subsequent pharaohs of Egypt, with a few exceptions, were named Ptolemy until Egypt became a Roman province in 30 BC, ending the Macedonian family's rule.\nThe name \"Claudius\" is a Roman name, belonging to the \"gens\" Claudia; the peculiar multipart form of the whole name \"Claudius Ptolemaeus\" is a Roman custom, characteristic of Roman citizens. This indicates that Ptolemy would have been a Roman citizen. Gerald Toomer, the translator of Ptolemy's \"Almagest\" into English, suggests that citizenship was probably granted to one of Ptolemy's ancestors by either the emperor Claudius or the emperor Nero.\nThe 9th century Persian astronomer Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi mistakenly presents Ptolemy as a member of Ptolemaic Egypt's royal lineage, stating that the descendants of the Alexandrine general and Pharaoh Ptolemy I Soter were wise \"and included Ptolemy the Wise, who composed the book of the \"Almagest\"\". Abu Ma'shar recorded a belief that a different member of this royal line \"composed the book on astrology and attributed it to Ptolemy\". Historical confusion on this point can be inferred from Abu Ma'shar's subsequent remark: \"It is sometimes said that the very learned man who wrote the book of astrology also wrote the book of the \"Almagest\". The correct answer is not known.\"\nNot much positive evidence is known on the subject of Ptolemy's ancestry, apart from what can be drawn from the details of his name, although modern scholars have concluded that Abu Ma'shar's account is erroneous.\nIt is no longer doubted that the astronomer who wrote the \"Almagest\" also wrote the \"Tetrabiblos\" as its astrological counterpart.(px) In later Arabic sources, he was often known as \"the Upper Egyptian\",(p606) suggesting he may have had origins in southern Egypt.\nArabic astronomers, geographers, and physicists referred to his name in Arabic as \"Ba\u1e6dlumyus\" ().\nPtolemy wrote in Koine Greek,\nand can be shown to have used Babylonian astronomical data.(p99)\nHe might have been a Roman citizen, but was ethnically either a Greek\nor at least a Hellenized Egyptian.\nAstronomical writings.\nAstronomy was the subject to which Ptolemy devoted the most time and effort; about half of all the works that survived deal with astronomical matters, and even others such as the \"Geography\" and the \"Tetrabiblos\" have significant references to astronomy.\n\"Math\u0113matik\u0113 Syntaxis\".\nPtolemy's \"Almagest\" (originally , lit.\u2009'Mathematical Systematic Treatise') is the only surviving comprehensive ancient treatise on astronomy. Although Babylonian astronomers had developed arithmetical techniques for calculating and predicting astronomical phenomena, these were not based on any underlying model of the heavens; early Greek astronomers, on the other hand, provided qualitative geometrical models to \"save the appearances\" of celestial phenomena without the ability to make any predictions.\nThe earliest person who attempted to merge these two approaches was Hipparchus, who produced geometric models that not only reflected the arrangement of the planets and stars but could be used to calculate celestial motions.\nPtolemy, following Hipparchus, derived each of his geometrical models for the Sun, Moon, and the planets from selected astronomical observations done in the spanning of more than 800\u00a0years; however, many astronomers have for centuries suspected that some of his models' parameters were adopted independently of observations.\nPtolemy presented his astronomical models alongside convenient tables, which could be used to compute the future or past position of the planets.\nThe \"Almagest\" also contains a star catalogue, which is a version of a catalogue created by Hipparchus. Its list of forty-eight constellations is ancestral to the modern system of constellations but, unlike the modern system, they did not cover the whole sky (only what could be seen with the naked eye in the northern hemisphere).\nFor over a thousand years, the \"Almagest\" was the authoritative text on astronomy across Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa.\nThe \"Almagest\" was preserved, like many extant Greek scientific works, in Arabic manuscripts; the modern title is thought to be an Arabic corruption of the Greek name ('The greatest treatise'), as the work was presumably known during late antiquity.\nBecause of its reputation, it was widely sought and translated twice into Latin in the 12th century, once in Sicily and again in Spain. Ptolemy's planetary models, like those of the majority of his predecessors, were geocentric and almost universally accepted until the reappearance of heliocentric models during the Scientific Revolution.\nModern reassessment.\nUnder the scrutiny of modern scholarship, and the cross-checking of observations contained in the \"Almagest\" against figures produced through backwards extrapolation, various patterns of errors have emerged within the work. A prominent miscalculation is Ptolemy's use of measurements that he claimed were taken at noon, but which systematically produce readings now shown to be off by half an hour, as if the observations were taken at 12:30\u00a0pm.\nThe overall quality of Ptolemy's observations has been challenged by several modern scientists, but prominently by Robert R. Newton in his 1977 book \"The Crime of Claudius Ptolemy\", which asserted that Ptolemy fabricated many of his observations to fit his theories. Newton accused Ptolemy of systematically inventing data or doctoring the data of earlier astronomers, and labelled him \"the most successful fraud in the history of science\". One striking error noted by Newton was an autumn equinox said to have been observed by Ptolemy and \"measured with the greatest care\" at 2pm on 25 September 132, when the equinox should have been observed around 9:55am the day prior. In attempting to disprove Newton, Herbert Lewis also found himself agreeing that \"Ptolemy was an outrageous fraud,\" and that \"all those result capable of statistical analysis point beyond question towards fraud and against accidental error\".\nThe charges laid by Newton and others have been the subject of wide discussions and received significant push back from other scholars against the findings. Owen Gingerich, while agreeing that the \"Almagest\" contains \"some remarkably fishy numbers\", including in the matter of the 30-hour displaced equinox, which he noted aligned perfectly with predictions made by Hipparchus 278 years earlier, rejected the qualification of fraud. Objections were also raised by Bernard Goldstein, who questioned Newton's findings and suggested that he had misunderstood the secondary literature, while noting that issues with the accuracy of Ptolemy's observations had long been known. Other authors have pointed out that instrument warping or atmospheric refraction may also explain some of Ptolemy's observations at a wrong time.\nIn 2022 the first Greek fragments of Hipparchus' lost star catalog were discovered in a palimpsest and they debunked accusations made by the French astronomer Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre in the early 1800s which were repeated by R. R. Newton. Specifically, it proved Hipparchus was not the sole source of Ptolemy's catalog, as they both had claimed, and proved that Ptolemy did not simply copy Hipparchus' measurements and adjust them to account for precession of the equinoxes, as they had claimed. Scientists analyzing the charts concluded:\nIt also confirms that Ptolemy\u2019s Star Catalogue was not based solely on data from Hipparchus\u2019 Catalogue.\n... These observations are consistent with the view that Ptolemy composed his star catalogue by combining various sources, including Hipparchus\u2019 catalogue, his own observations and, possibly, those of other authors.\n\"Handy Tables\".\nThe \"Handy Tables\" () are a set of astronomical tables, together with canons for their use. To facilitate astronomical calculations, Ptolemy tabulated all the data needed to compute the positions of the Sun, Moon and planets, the rising and setting of the stars, and eclipses of the Sun and Moon, making it a useful tool for astronomers and astrologers. The tables themselves are known through Theon of Alexandria's version. Although Ptolemy's \"Handy Tables\" do not survive as such in Arabic or in Latin, they represent the prototype of most Arabic and Latin astronomical tables or \"z\u012bjes\".\nAdditionally, the introduction to the \"Handy Tables\" survived separately from the tables themselves (apparently part of a gathering of some of Ptolemy's shorter writings) under the title \"Arrangement and Calculation of the Handy Tables\".\n\"Planetary Hypotheses\".\nThe \"Planetary Hypotheses\" (, lit.\u2009'Hypotheses of the Planets') is a cosmological work, probably one of the last written by Ptolemy, in two books dealing with the structure of the universe and the laws that govern celestial motion.\nPtolemy goes beyond the mathematical models of the \"Almagest\" to present a physical realization of the universe as a set of nested spheres,\nin which he used the epicycles of his planetary model to compute the dimensions of the universe. He estimated the Sun was at an average distance of Earth radii (now known to actually be radii), while the radius of the sphere of the fixed stars was times the radius of the Earth.\nThe work is also notable for having descriptions on how to build instruments to depict the planets and their movements from a geocentric perspective, much as an orrery would have done for a heliocentric one, presumably for didactic purposes.\nOther astronomical works.\nThe \"Analemma\" is a short treatise where Ptolemy provides a method for specifying the location of the Sun in three pairs of locally oriented coordinate arcs as a function of the declination of the Sun, the terrestrial latitude, and the hour. The key to the approach is to represent the solid configuration in a plane diagram that Ptolemy calls the \"analemma\".\nIn another work, the \"Phaseis\" (\"Risings of the Fixed Stars\"), Ptolemy gave a \"parapegma\", a star calendar or almanac, based on the appearances and disappearances of stars over the course of the solar year.\nThe \"Planisphaerium\" (, lit.\u2009'Flattening of the sphere') contains 16\u00a0propositions dealing with the projection of the celestial circles onto a plane. The text is lost in Greek (except for a fragment) and survives in Arabic and Latin only.\nPtolemy also erected an inscription in a temple at Canopus, around 146\u2013147\u00a0AD, known as the \"Canobic Inscription\". Although the inscription has not survived, someone in the sixth century transcribed it, and manuscript copies preserved it through the Middle Ages. It begins: \"To the saviour god, Claudius Ptolemy (dedicates) the first principles and models of astronomy\", following by a catalogue of numbers that define a system of celestial mechanics governing the motions of the Sun, Moon, planets, and stars.\nIn 2023, archaeologists were able to read a manuscript which gives instructions for the construction of an astronomical tool called a \"meteoroscope\" (\u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03b5\u03c9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03ba\u03cc\u03c0\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd or \u03bc\u03b5\u03c4\u03b5\u03c9\u03c1\u03bf\u03c3\u03ba\u03bf\u03c0\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03bd). The text, which comes from an eighth-century manuscript which also contains Ptolemy's \"Analemma\", was identified on the basis of both its content and linguistic analysis as being by Ptolemy.\nPtolemy is also though to have produced his Table of Noteworthy Cities as an aid to his astronomical tables.\nOther writings.\n\"Geography\".\nPtolemy's second most well-known work is his \"Geographike Hyphegesis\" (; lit.\u2009'Guide to Drawing the Earth'), known as the \"Geography\", a handbook on how to draw maps using geographical coordinates for parts of the Roman world known at the time.\nHe relied on previous work by an earlier geographer, Marinus of Tyre, as well as on gazetteers of the Roman and ancient Persian Empire. He also acknowledged ancient astronomer Hipparchus for having provided the elevation of the north celestial pole for a few cities. Although maps based on scientific principles had been made since the time of Eratosthenes (c.\u2009276\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009195 BC), Ptolemy improved on map projections.\nThe first part of the \"Geography\" is a discussion of the data and of the methods he used. Ptolemy notes the supremacy of astronomical data over land measurements or travelers' reports, though he possessed these data for only a handful of places. Ptolemy's real innovation, however, occurs in the second part of the book, where he provides a catalogue of 8,000 localities he collected from Marinus and others, the biggest such database from antiquity.\nAbout of these places and geographic features have assigned coordinates so that they can be placed in a grid that spanned the globe. Latitude was measured from the equator, as it is today, but Ptolemy preferred to express it as \"climata\", the length of the longest day rather than degrees of arc: The length of the midsummer day increases from 12h to 24h as one goes from the equator to the polar circle.\nOne of the places Ptolemy noted specific coordinates for was the now-lost stone tower which marked the midpoint on the ancient Silk Road, and which scholars have been trying to locate ever since.\nIn the third part of the \"Geography\", Ptolemy gives instructions on how to create maps both of the whole inhabited world (\"oikoumen\u0113\") and of the Roman provinces, including the necessary topographic lists, and captions for the maps. His \"oikoumen\u0113\" spanned 180\u00a0degrees of longitude from the Blessed Islands in the Atlantic Ocean to the middle of China, and about 80 degrees of latitude from Shetland to anti-Meroe (east coast of Africa); Ptolemy was well aware that he knew about only a quarter of the globe, and an erroneous extension of China southward suggests his sources did not reach all the way to the Pacific Ocean.\nIt seems likely that the topographical tables in the second part of the work (Books\u00a02\u20137) are cumulative texts, which were altered as new knowledge became available in the centuries after Ptolemy. This means that information contained in different parts of the \"Geography\" is likely to be of different dates, in addition to containing many scribal errors. However, although the regional and world maps in surviving manuscripts date from c.\u20091300\u00a0AD (after the text was rediscovered by Maximus Planudes), there are some scholars who think that such maps go back to Ptolemy himself.\n\"Tetrabiblos\".\nPtolemy wrote an astrological treatise, in four parts, known by the Greek term \"Tetrabiblos\" (lit.\u2009'Four Books') or by its Latin equivalent \"Quadripartitum\".\nIts original title is unknown, but may have been a term found in some Greek manuscripts, \"Apotelesmatik\u00e1\" (\"bibl\u00eda\"), roughly meaning \"(books) on the Effects\" or \"Outcomes\", or \"Prognostics\".(px)\nAs a source of reference, the \"Tetrabiblos\" is said to have \"enjoyed almost the authority of a Bible among the astrological writers of a thousand years or more\".(pxii)\nIt was first translated from Arabic into Latin by Plato of Tivoli (Tiburtinus) in 1138, while he was in Spain.\nMuch of the content of the \"Tetrabiblos\" was collected from earlier sources; Ptolemy's achievement was to order his material in a systematic way, showing how the subject could, in his view, be rationalized. It is, indeed, presented as the second part of the study of astronomy of which the \"Almagest\" was the first, concerned with the influences of the celestial bodies in the sublunary sphere. Thus explanations of a sort are provided for the astrological effects of the planets, based upon their combined effects of heating, cooling, moistening, and drying. Ptolemy dismisses other astrological practices, such as considering the numerological significance of names, that he believed to be without sound basis, and leaves out popular topics, such as electional astrology (interpreting astrological charts to determine courses of action) and medical astrology, for similar reasons.\nThe great respect in which later astrologers held the \"Tetrabiblos\" derived from its nature as an exposition of theory, rather than as a manual.\nA collection of one hundred aphorisms about astrology called the \"Centiloquium\", ascribed to Ptolemy, was widely reproduced and commented on by Arabic, Latin, and Hebrew scholars, and often bound together in medieval manuscripts after the \"Tetrabiblos\" as a kind of summation. It is now believed to be a much later pseudepigraphical composition. The identity and date of the actual author of the work, referred to now as Pseudo-Ptolemy, remains the subject of conjecture.\n\"Harmonics\".\nPtolemy's \"Harmonics\" () is a work in three books on music theory and the mathematics behind musical scales\n\"Harmonics\" begins with a definition of harmonic theory, with a long exposition on the relationship between reason and sense perception in corroborating theoretical assumptions. After criticizing the approaches of his predecessors, Ptolemy argues for basing musical intervals on mathematical ratios (as opposed to the ideas advocated by followers of Aristoxenus), backed up by empirical observation (in contrast to the excessively theoretical approach of the Pythagoreans).\nPtolemy introduces the \"harmonic canon\" (Greek name) or \"monochord\" (Latin name), which is an experimental musical apparatus that he used to measure relative pitches, and used to describe to his readers how to demonstrate the relations discussed in the following chapters for themselves. After the early exposition on to build and use monochord to test proposed tuning systems, Ptolemy proceeds to discuss Pythagorean tuning (and how to demonstrate that their idealized musical scale fails in practice). The Pythagoreans believed that the mathematics of music should be based on only the one specific ratio of 3:2, the perfect fifth, and believed that tunings mathematically exact to their system would prove to be melodious, if only the extremely large numbers involved could be calculated (by hand). To the contrary, Ptolemy believed that musical scales and tunings should in general involve multiple different ratios arranged to fit together evenly into smaller tetrachords (combinations of four pitch ratios which together make a perfect fourth) and octaves.\nPtolemy reviewed standard (and ancient, disused) musical tuning practice of his day, which he then compared to his own subdivisions of the tetrachord and the octave, which he derived experimentally using a monochord / harmonic canon. The volume ends with a more speculative exposition of the relationships between harmony, the soul (\"psyche\"), and the planets (harmony of the spheres).\nAlthough Ptolemy's \"Harmonics\" never had the influence of his \"Almagest\" or \"Geography\", it is nonetheless a well-structured treatise and contains more methodological reflections than any other of his writings. In particular, it is a nascent form of what in the following millennium developed into the scientific method, with specific descriptions of the experimental apparatus that he built and used to test musical conjectures, and the empirical musical relations he identified by testing pitches against each other: He was able to accurately measure relative pitches based on the ratios of vibrating lengths two separate sides of the same single string, hence which were assured to be under equal tension, eliminating one source of error. He analyzed the empirically determined ratios of \"pleasant\" pairs of pitches, and then synthesised all of them into a coherent mathematical description, which persists to the present as just intonation \u2013 the standard for comparison of consonance in the many other, less-than exact but more facile compromise tuning systems.\nDuring the Renaissance, Ptolemy's ideas inspired Kepler in his own musings on the harmony of the world (\"Harmonice Mundi\", Appendix to Book V).\nOptics.\nThe \"Optica\" (Koine Greek: \u1f48\u03c0\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac), known as the \"Optics\", is a work that survives only in a somewhat poor Latin version, which, in turn, was translated from a lost Arabic version by Eugenius of Palermo (c.\u20091154). In it, Ptolemy writes about properties of sight (not light), including reflection, refraction, and colour. The work is a significant part of the early history of optics and influenced the more famous and superior 11th-century \"Book of Optics\" by Ibn al-Haytham. Ptolemy offered explanations for many phenomena concerning illumination and colour, size, shape, movement, and binocular vision. He also divided illusions into those caused by physical or optical factors and those caused by judgmental factors. He offered an obscure explanation of the Sun or Moon illusion (the enlarged apparent size on the horizon) based on the difficulty of looking upwards.\nThe work is divided into three major sections. The first section (Book II) deals with direct vision from first principles and ends with a discussion of binocular vision. The second section (Books III-IV) treats reflection in plane, convex, concave, and compound mirrors. The last section (Book V) deals with refraction and includes the earliest surviving table of refraction from air to water, for which the values (with the exception of the 60\u00b0 angle of incidence) show signs of being obtained from an arithmetic progression.\nHowever, according to Mark Smith, Ptolemy's table was based in part on real experiments.\nPtolemy's theory of vision consisted of rays (or flux) coming from the eye forming a cone, the vertex being within the eye, and the base defining the visual field. The rays were sensitive, and conveyed information back to the observer's intellect about the distance and orientation of surfaces. Size and shape were determined by the visual angle subtended at the eye combined with perceived distance and orientation.\nThis was one of the early statements of size-distance invariance as a cause of perceptual size and shape constancy, a view supported by the Stoics.\nPhilosophy.\nAlthough mainly known for his contributions to astronomy and other scientific subjects, Ptolemy also engaged in epistemological and psychological discussions across his corpus.\nHe wrote a short essay entitled \"On the Criterion and Hegemonikon\" (), which may have been one of his earliest works. Ptolemy deals specifically with how humans obtain scientific knowledge (i.e., the \"criterion\" of truth), as well as with the nature and structure of the human \"psyche\" or soul, particularly its ruling faculty (i.e., the \"hegemonikon\"). Ptolemy argues that, to arrive at the truth, one should use both reason and sense perception in ways that complement each other. \"On the Criterion\" is also noteworthy for being the only one of Ptolemy's works that is devoid of mathematics.\nElsewhere, Ptolemy affirms the supremacy of mathematical knowledge over other forms of knowledge. Like Aristotle before him, Ptolemy classifies mathematics as a type of theoretical philosophy; however, Ptolemy believes mathematics to be superior to theology or metaphysics because the latter are conjectural while only the former can secure certain knowledge. This view is contrary to the Platonic and Aristotelian traditions, where theology or metaphysics occupied the highest honour. Despite being a minority position among ancient philosophers, Ptolemy's views were shared by other mathematicians such as Hero of Alexandria.\nNamed after Ptolemy.\nThere are several characters and items named after Ptolemy, including:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n \nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23980", "revid": "1283263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23980", "title": "Petabyte", "text": ""}
{"id": "23981", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23981", "title": "Pickups", "text": ""}
{"id": "23982", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23982", "title": "Geologic period", "text": "Geologic time unit shorter than an era, longer than an epoch"}
{"id": "23984", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23984", "title": "Pyxis", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nPyxis is a small and faint constellation in the southern sky. Abbreviated from Pyxis Nautica, its name is Latin for a mariner's compass (contrasting with Circinus, which represents a draftsman's compasses). Pyxis was introduced by Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille in the 18th century, and is counted among the 88 modern constellations.\nThe plane of the Milky Way passes through Pyxis. A faint constellation, its three brightest stars\u2014Alpha, Beta and Gamma Pyxidis\u2014are in a rough line. At magnitude 3.68, Alpha is the constellation's brightest star. It is a blue-white star approximately distant and around 22,000 times as luminous as the Sun.\nPyxis is located close to the stars that formed the old constellation Argo Navis, the ship of Jason and the Argonauts. Parts of Argo Navis were the Carina (the keel or hull), the Puppis (the stern), and the Vela (the sails). These eventually became their own constellations. In the 19th century, John Herschel suggested renaming Pyxis to Malus (meaning the mast) but the suggestion was not followed.\nT Pyxidis, located about 4 degrees northeast of Alpha Pyxidis, is a recurrent nova that has flared up to magnitude 7 every few decades. Also, three star systems in Pyxis have confirmed exoplanets. The Pyxis globular cluster is situated about 130,000 light-years away in the galactic halo. This region was not thought to contain globular clusters. The possibility has been raised that this object might have escaped from the Large Magellanic Cloud.\nHistory.\nIn ancient Chinese astronomy, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Pyxidis formed part of \"Tianmiao\", a celestial temple honouring the ancestors of the emperor, along with stars from neighbouring Antlia.\nThe French astronomer Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille first described the constellation in French as \"la Boussole\" (the Marine Compass) in 1752, after he had observed and catalogued almost 10,000 southern stars during a two-year stay at the Cape of Good Hope. He devised fourteen new constellations in uncharted regions of the Southern Celestial Hemisphere not visible from Europe. All but one honoured instruments that symbolised the Age of Enlightenment. Lacaille Latinised the name to \"Pixis\" [sic] \"Nautica\" on his 1763 chart. The Ancient Greeks identified the four main stars of Pyxis as the mast of the mythological Jason's ship, \"Argo Navis\".\nGerman astronomer Johann Bode defined the constellation Lochium Funis, the Log and Line\u2014a nautical device once used for measuring speed and distance travelled at sea\u2014around Pyxis in his 1801 star atlas, but the depiction did not survive. In 1844 John Herschel attempted to resurrect the classical configuration of Argo Navis by renaming it Malus the Mast, a suggestion followed by Francis Baily, but Benjamin Gould restored Lacaille's nomenclature. For instance, Alpha Pyxidis is referenced as \u03b1 Mali in an old catalog of the United States Naval Observatory (star 3766, page 97). \nCharacteristics.\nCovering 220.8 square degrees and hence 0.535% of the sky, Pyxis ranks 65th of the 88 modern constellations by area. Its position in the Southern Celestial Hemisphere means that the whole constellation is visible to observers south of 52\u00b0N. It is most visible in the evening sky in February and March. A small constellation, it is bordered by Hydra to the north, Puppis to the west, Vela to the south, and Antlia to the east. The three-letter abbreviation for the constellation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"Pyx\". The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of eight sides (\"illustrated in infobox\"). In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 8h 27.7m and 9h 27.6m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221217.41\u00b0 and \u221237.29\u00b0.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nLacaille gave Bayer designations to ten stars now named Alpha to Lambda Pyxidis, skipping the Greek letters iota and kappa. Although a nautical element, the constellation was not an integral part of the old Argo Navis and hence did not share in the original Bayer designations of that constellation, which were split between Carina, Vela and Puppis. Pyxis is a faint constellation, its three brightest stars\u2014Alpha, Beta and Gamma Pyxidis\u2014forming a rough line. Overall, there are 41 stars within the constellation's borders with apparent magnitudes brighter than or equal to 6.5.\nWith an apparent magnitude of 3.68, Alpha Pyxidis is the brightest star in the constellation. Located 880 \u00b1 30 light-years distant from Earth, it is a blue-white giant star of spectral type B1.5III that is around 22,000 times as luminous as the Sun and has 9.4 \u00b1 0.7 times its diameter. It began life with a mass 12.1 \u00b1 0.6 times that of the Sun, almost 15 million years ago. Its light is dimmed by 30% due to interstellar dust, so would have a brighter magnitude of 3.31 if not for this. The second brightest star at magnitude 3.97 is Beta Pyxidis, a yellow bright giant or supergiant of spectral type G7Ib-II that is around 435 times as luminous as the Sun, lying 420 \u00b1 10 light-years distant away from Earth. It has a companion star of magnitude 12.5 separated by 9 arcseconds. Gamma Pyxidis is a star of magnitude 4.02 that lies 207 \u00b1 2 light-years distant. It is an orange giant of spectral type K3III that has cooled and swollen to 3.7 times the diameter of the Sun after exhausting its core hydrogen.\nKappa Pyxidis was catalogued but not given a Bayer designation by Lacaille, but Gould felt the star was bright enough to warrant a letter. Kappa has a magnitude of 4.62 and is 560 \u00b1 50 light-years distant. An orange giant of spectral type K4/K5III, Kappa has a luminosity approximately 965 times that of the Sun. It is separated by 2.1 arcseconds from a magnitude 10 star. Theta Pyxidis is a red giant of spectral type M1III and semi-regular variable with two measured periods of 13 and 98.3 days, and an average magnitude of 4.71, and is 500 \u00b1 30 light-years distant from Earth. It has expanded to approximately 54 times the diameter of the Sun.\nLocated around 4 degrees northeast of Alpha is T Pyxidis, a binary star system composed of a white dwarf with around 0.8 times the Sun's mass and a red dwarf that orbit each other every 1.8 hours. This system is located around 15,500 light-years away from Earth. A recurrent nova, it has brightened to the 7th magnitude in the years 1890, 1902, 1920, 1944, 1966 and 2011 from a baseline of around 14th magnitude. These outbursts are thought to be due to the white dwarf accreting material from its companion and ejecting periodically.\nTY Pyxidis is an eclipsing binary star whose apparent magnitude ranges from 6.85 to 7.5 over 3.2 days. The two components are both of spectral type G5IV with a diameter 2.2 times, and mass 1.2 times that of the Sun, and revolve around each other every 3.2 days. The system is classified as a RS Canum Venaticorum variable, a binary system with prominent starspot activity, and lies 184 \u00b1 5 light-years away. The system emits X-rays, and analysing the emission curve over time led researchers to conclude that there was a loop of material arcing between the two stars. RZ Pyxidis is another eclipsing binary system, made up of two young stars less than 200,000 years old. Both are hot blue-white stars of spectral type B7V and are around 2.5 times the size of the Sun. One is around five times as luminous as the Sun and the other around four times as luminous. The system is classified as a Beta Lyrae variable, the apparent magnitude varying from 8.83 to 9.72 over 0.66 days. XX Pyxidis is one of the more-studied members of a class of stars known as Delta Scuti variables\u2014short period (six hours at most) pulsating stars that have been used as standard candles and as subjects to study astroseismology. Astronomers made more sense of its pulsations when it became clear that it is also a binary star system. The main star is a white main sequence star of spectral type A4V that is around 1.85 \u00b1 0.05 times as massive as the Sun. Its companion is most likely a red dwarf of spectral type M3V, around 0.3 times as massive as the Sun. The two are very close\u2014possibly only 3 times the diameter of the Sun between them\u2014and orbit each other every 1.15 days. The brighter star is deformed into an egg shape.\nAK Pyxidis is a red giant of spectral type M5III and semi-regular variable that varies between magnitudes 6.09 and 6.51. Its pulsations take place over multiple periods simultaneously of 55.5, 57.9, 86.7, 162.9 and 232.6 days. UZ Pyxidis is another semi-regular variable red giant, this time a carbon star, that is around 3560 times as luminous as the Sun with a surface temperature of 3482 K, located 2116 light-years away from Earth. It varies between magnitudes 6.99 and 7.83 over 159 days. VY Pyxidis is a BL Herculis variable (type II Cepheid), ranging between apparent magnitudes 7.13 and 7.40 over a period of 1.24 days. Located around 650 light-years distant, it shines with a luminosity approximately 45 times that of the Sun.\nThe closest star to Earth in the constellation is Gliese 318, a white dwarf of spectral class DA5 and magnitude 11.85. Its distance has been calculated to be 26 light-years, or 28.7 \u00b1 0.5 light-years distant from Earth. It has around 45% of the Sun's mass, yet only 0.15% of its luminosity. WISEPC J083641.12-185947.2 is a brown dwarf of spectral type T8p located around 72 light-years from Earth. Discovered by infrared astronomy in 2011, it has a magnitude of 18.79.\nPlanetary systems.\nPyxis is home to three stars with confirmed planetary systems\u2014all discovered by Doppler spectroscopy. A hot Jupiter, HD 73256 b, that orbits HD 73256 every 2.55 days, was discovered using the CORALIE spectrograph in 2003. The host star is a yellow star of spectral type G9V that has 69% of our Sun's luminosity, 89% of its diameter and 105% of its mass. Around 119 light-years away, it shines with an apparent magnitude of 8.08 and is around a billion years old. HD 73267 b was discovered with the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS) in 2008. It orbits HD 73267 every 1260 days, a 7 billion-year-old star of spectral type G5V that is around 89% as massive as the Sun. A red dwarf of spectral type M2.5V that has around 42% the Sun's mass, Gliese 317 is orbited by two gas giant planets. Around 50 light-years distant from Earth, it is a good candidate for future searches for more terrestrial rocky planets.\nDeep sky objects.\nPyxis lies in the plane of the Milky Way, although part of the eastern edge is dark, with material obscuring our galaxy arm there. NGC 2818 is a planetary nebula that lies within a dim open cluster of magnitude 8.2. NGC 2818A is an open cluster that lies on line of sight with it. K 1-2 is a planetary nebula whose central star is a spectroscopic binary composed of two stars in close orbit with jets emanating from the system. The surface temperature of one component has been estimated at as high as 85,000\u00a0K. NGC 2627 is an open cluster of magnitude 8.4 that is visible in binoculars.\nDiscovered in 1995, the Pyxis globular cluster is a 13.3 \u00b1 1.3 billion year-old globular cluster situated around 130,000 light-years distant from Earth and around 133,000 light-years distant from the centre of the Milky Way\u2014a region not previously thought to contain globular clusters. Located in the galactic halo, it was noted to lie on the same plane as the Large Magellanic Cloud and the possibility has been raised that it might be an escaped object from that galaxy.\nNGC 2613 is a spiral galaxy of magnitude 10.5 which appears spindle-shaped as it is almost edge-on to observers on Earth. Henize 2-10 is a dwarf galaxy which lies 30 million light-years away. It has a black hole of around a million solar masses at its centre. Known as a starburst galaxy due to very high rates of star formation, it has a bluish colour due to the huge numbers of young stars within it.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23985", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23985", "title": "Parasitic computing", "text": "Parasitic computing is a technique where a program in normal authorized interactions with another program manages to get the other program to perform computations of a complex nature without exploiting vulnerabilities to execute attacker-supplied code on the latter. It is, in a sense, a security exploit in that the program implementing the parasitic computing has no authority to consume resources made available to the other program.\nIt was first proposed by Albert-Laszlo Barabasi, Vincent W. Freeh, Hawoong Jeong &amp; Jay B. Brockman from University of Notre Dame, Indiana, USA, in 2001. The example given by the original paper was two computers communicating over the Internet, under disguise of a standard communications session. The first computer is attempting to solve a large and extremely difficult 3-SAT problem; it has decomposed the original 3-SAT problem in a considerable number of smaller problems. Each of these smaller problems is then encoded as a relation between a checksum and a packet such that whether the checksum is accurate or not is also the answer to that smaller problem. The packet/checksum is then sent to another computer. This computer will, as part of receiving the packet and deciding whether it is valid and well-formed, create a checksum of the packet and see whether it is identical to the provided checksum. If the checksum is invalid, it will then request a new packet from the original computer. The original computer now knows the answer to that smaller problem based on the second computer's response, and can transmit a fresh packet embodying a different sub-problem. Eventually, all the sub-problems will be answered and the final answer easily calculated.\nThe example is based on an exploit of the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), used for internet connections, so in the end, the target computer(s) is unaware that it has performed computation for the benefit of the other computer, or even done anything besides have a normal TCP/IP session.\nThe proof-of-concept is obviously extremely inefficient as the amount of computation necessary to merely send the packets in the first place easily exceeds the computations leeched from the other program; the 3-SAT problem would be solved much more quickly if just analyzed locally. In addition, in practice packets would probably have to be retransmitted occasionally when real checksum errors and network problems occur. However, parasitic computing on the level of checksums is a demonstration of the concept. The authors suggest that as one moves up the application stack, there might come a point where there is a net computational gain to the parasite - perhaps one could break down interesting problems into queries of complex cryptographic protocols using public keys. If there was a net gain, one could in theory use a number of control nodes for which many hosts on the Internet form a distributed computing network completely unawares.\nStudents of the University of Applied Sciences, Bern, Switzerland, extended this concept into a programmable virtual machine in 2002.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23986", "revid": "318802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23986", "title": "Pegasus", "text": "Mythological creature in Greek mythology\nPegasus (; ) is a winged horse in Greek mythology, usually depicted as a white stallion. He was sired by Poseidon, in his role as horse-god, and foaled by the Gorgon Medusa. Pegasus was the brother of Chrysaor, both born from Medusa's blood when their mother was decapitated by Perseus. Greco-Roman poets wrote about his ascent to heaven after his birth and his obeisance to Zeus, who instructed him to bring lightning and thunder from Olympus.\nPegasus is the creator of Hippocrene, the fountain on Mount Helicon. He was captured by the Greek hero Bellerophon, near the fountain Peirene, with the help of Athena and Poseidon. Pegasus allowed Bellerophon to ride him in order to defeat the monster Chimera, which led to many more exploits. Bellerophon later fell from Pegasus's back while trying to reach Mount Olympus. Both Pegasus and Bellerophon were said to have died at the hands of Zeus for trying to reach Olympus. Other tales have Zeus bring Pegasus to Olympus to carry his thunderbolts.\nLong honored as a constellation, Pegasus is a subject of very rich iconography, especially through ancient Greek pottery as well as paintings and sculptures of the Renaissance.\nEtymology.\nThe poet Hesiod presents a folk etymology of the name \"Pegasus\" as derived from 'spring, well', referring to \"the \"pegai\" of Okeanos, where he was born\".\nA proposed etymology of the name is Luwian 'lightning', and , a local Luwian-Hittite name in southern Cilicia of a weather deity associated with thunder and lightning. The proponents of this etymology adduce the role of Pegasus, reported as early as Hesiod, as the bringer of thunderbolts to Zeus. That interpretation was first suggested in 1952 and remains widely accepted, but Robin Lane Fox (2009) has criticized it as implausible.\nSprings.\nAccording to early myths, everywhere the winged horse struck his hoof to the earth, an inspiring water spring burst forth. One of these springs was upon the Muses' Mount Helicon, the \"Hippocrene\" (\"horse spring\"). Antoninus Liberalis suggested, that it was opened at the behest of Poseidon to prevent the mountain from swelling with rapture at the song of the Muses. Another spring associated with Pegasus was at Troezen. Hesiod relates how Pegasus was peacefully drinking from a spring when the hero Bellerophon captured him.\nThunderbolts.\nHesiod wrote that Pegasus carried thunderbolts for Zeus.\nRoman iconography.\nMcCartney examines early Roman \"aes signatum\" (cast bronze currency) that pairs Pegasus with an eagle carrying a thunderbolt. He interprets this imagery in light of literary traditions that describe Pegasus as bearing Zeus\u2019s thunder or drawing the god\u2019s storm chariot, suggesting that Roman iconography viewed Pegasus as linked to divine power and storm symbolism.\nBirth.\nThere are several versions of the birth of the winged stallion and his brother Chrysaor in the far distant place at the edge of Earth, Hesiod's \"springs of Oceanus\", which encircles the inhabited earth, where Perseus found Medusa:\nOne is that they sprang from the blood issuing from Medusa's neck as Perseus was beheading her, similar to the manner in which Athena was born from the head of Zeus after he swallowed her pregnant mother.\nIn another version, when Perseus beheaded Medusa, the brothers were born of the Earth, when the Gorgon's blood fell upon her. A variation of this story holds that they were formed from the mingling of Medusa's blood, pain, and sea foam, implying that Poseidon had involvement in their making.\nThe last version bears resemblance to Hesiod's account of the birth of Aphrodite from the foam created when the severed genitals of Uranus were cast into the sea by Cronus.\nBellerophon.\nPegasus aided the hero Bellerophon in his fight against the Chimera. There are varying tales about how Bellerophon found Pegasus; the most common being that the hero was told by Polyeidos to sleep in the temple of Athena, where the goddess visited him in the night and presented him with a golden bridle. The next morning, still clutching the bridle, Bellerophon found Pegasus drinking at the Pierian spring, caught him, and eventually tamed him.\nAncient interpretations.\nHubbard discusses multiple ancient accounts of Pegasus\u2019s capture, including versions in Hesiod, Pindar, and Corinthian cult tradition. He highlights Athena\u2019s role in providing the bridle that allowed Pegasus to be tamed and connects this motif to the Corinthian cult of Athena Hippia/Chalinitis. Hubbard also notes Pegasus\u2019s appearance on early Corinthian coinage, where the winged horse served as a civic symbol.\nPerseus.\nMichaud's \"Biographie universelle\" relates that when Pegasus was born, he flew to where thunder and lightning are released. Then, according to certain versions of the myth, Athena tamed him and gave him to Perseus, who flew to Ethiopia to help Andromeda.\nOlympus.\nAfter Bellerophon fell off Pegasus while trying to reach Olympus, Pegasus and Athena left him and continued to Olympus where he was stabled with other steeds belonging to Zeus, and was given the task of carrying Zeus's thunderbolts, along with other members of his entourage, his attendants/handmaidens/shield bearers/shieldmaidens, Astrape and Bronte.\nBecause of his years of faithful service to Zeus, Pegasus was later honoured with transformation into a constellation. On the day of his \"catasterism\", when Zeus transformed him into a constellation, a single feather fell to Earth near the city of Tarsus.\nIndo-European context.\nLobell and Powell situate Pegasus within the wider Indo-European tradition of divine or supernatural horses. They note that Pegasus\u2019s transformation into a constellation reflects ancient associations between equine imagery and seasonal renewal, with the Pegasus constellation linked to the arrival of spring in several early traditions.\nLegacy.\nIn heraldry.\nThe pegasus became a common element in British heraldry, appearing chiefly as a supporter or a crest. Pegasi may also appear upon escutcheons, although this is rare. A pegasus rampant is featured on the arms of the Inner Temple, while those of the Richardson family contain a rare depiction of a pegasus sejant.\nWorld War II emblem.\nDuring World War II, the silhouetted image of Bellerophon the warrior, mounted on the winged Pegasus, was adopted by the United Kingdom's newly raised parachute troops in 1941 as their upper sleeve insignia. \nThe image clearly symbolized a 67 warrior arriving at a battle by air, the same tactics used by paratroopers. The square upper-sleeve insignia comprised Bellerophon/Pegasus in light blue on a maroon background. One source suggests that the insignia was designed by famous English novelist Daphne du Maurier, who was wife of the commander of the 1st Airborne Division (and later the expanded British Airborne Forces), General Frederick \"Boy\" Browning. According to the British Army Website, the insignia was designed by the celebrated East Anglian painter Major Edward Seago in May 1942. The maroon background on the insignia was later used again by the Airborne Forces when they adopted the famous maroon beret in Summer 1942. The beret was the origin of the German nickname for British airborne troops, the Red Devils. Today's Parachute Regiment carries on the maroon beret tradition. The selection process for the elite Parachute Regiment is called Pegasus Company (often abbreviated to \"P Company\").\nIn 2015 it was announced that the units of 16 Air Assault Brigade would once again use the Pegasus insignia after a 15-year hiatus.\nDuring the airborne phase of the Normandy invasion on the night of 5\u20136 June 1944, British 6th Airborne Division captured all its key objectives in advance of the seaborne assault, including the capture and holding at all costs of a vital bridge over the Caen Canal, near Ouistreham. In memory of their tenacity, the bridge has been known ever since as Pegasus Bridge.\nTuscany.\nThe Pegasus has been a symbol of Tuscany ever since Benvenuto Cellini incorporated it in a coin made in 1537 to honor Cardinal Pietro Bembo.\nThe Tuscan Committee of National Liberation during the German occupation of Italy also had a Pegasus as its emblem. The winged horse is still featured on the Tuscan flag and coat of arms.\nIn popular culture.\nThe winged horse has provided an instantly recognizable corporate logo or emblem of inspiration. Ecuador launched its weather satellite, named \"Pegaso\" (, Pegasus in Spanish), on 26 April 2013 but it was damaged by Russian space debris. Pegasus Airlines (Turkish: Pegasus Hava Ta\u015f\u0131mac\u0131l\u0131\u011f\u0131 A.\u015e.) is a low-cost airline headquartered in the Kurtk\u00f6y area of Pendik, Istanbul, Turkey. Mobil Oil has had a Pegasus as its company logo since its affiliation with Magnolia Petroleum Company in the 1930s. TriStar Pictures famously uses a winged horse in their logo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23987", "revid": "50570322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23987", "title": "Party-list proportional representation", "text": "Family of voting systems\nParty-list proportional representation (list-PR) is a system of proportional representation based on preregistered political parties, with each party being allocated a certain number of seats roughly proportional to their share of the vote.\nIn these systems, parties provide lists of candidates to be elected, or candidates may declare their affiliation with a political party (in some open-list systems). Seats are distributed by election authorities to each party, in proportion to the number of votes the party receives. Voters may cast votes for parties, as in Spain, Turkey, and Israel (closed lists); or for candidates whose vote totals are pooled together to determine the share of representation of their respective parties, as in Finland, Brazil, and the Netherlands (mixed single vote or panachage).\nVoting.\nIn most party list systems, a voter will only support one party (a choose-one ballot). Open list systems may allow voters to support more than one candidate \"within\" a party list. Some open-list systems allow voters to support different candidates across multiple lists, which is called panachage.\nSelection of party candidates.\nThe order in which a party's list candidates get elected may be pre-determined by some method internal to the party or the candidates (a closed list system) or it may be determined by the voters at large (an open list system) or by districts (a local list system).\nClosed list.\nIn a closed list system, each political party has pre-decided who will receive the seats allocated to that party in the elections, so that the candidates positioned highest on this list will always get a seat in the parliament while the candidates positioned very low on the closed list will not. Voters vote only for the party, not for individual candidates.\nOpen list.\nAn open list describes any variant of a party-list where voters have at least some influence on the order in which a party's candidates are elected. Open lists can be anywhere from \"relatively closed\", where a candidate can move up a predetermined list only with a certain number of votes, to \"completely open,\" where the order of the list completely depends on the number of votes each individual candidate gets.\nApportionment of party seats.\nWithin party-list PR systems, there are a variety of different methods that can be used to determine how many seats are allocated to each party for a given vote breakdown. The method used to allocate seats within party-list proportional representation vary. Some apportionment methods may favor small parties; others may favor large parties:\nD'Hondt method.\nThe D'Hondt method is a highest averages method that allocates seats by dividing each party's total votes by a series of divisors (1, 2, 3, ...).\nSainte-Lagu\u00eb method.\nThe Sainte-Lagu\u00eb (Webster) method is a highest averages method using odd-numbered divisors (1, 3, 5, ...) to promote more equal distribution.\nModified Sainte-Lagu\u00eb method.\nSame as Sainte-Lagu\u00eb but first divisor is 1.4 to favour larger parties.\nHare quota (largest remainder).\nThe Hare quota uses a quota to allocate seats, then gives remaining seats to the parties with the largest remainders.\nImperiali quota (largest remainder).\nThe Imperiali quota is rarely used; favors large parties more.\nHuntington\u2013Hill method.\nThe Huntington\u2013Hill method is used for US congressional apportionment, based on geometric mean. Too specialized for vote quotas, usually used with population.\nThe apportionment methods can be classified into two categories:\nWhile the allocation formula is important, equally important is the district magnitude (number of seats in a constituency). The higher the district magnitude, the more proportional an electoral system becomes, with the most proportional results being when there is no division into constituencies at all and the entire country is treated as a single constituency. In some countries the electoral system works on two levels: at-large for parties, and in constituencies for candidates, with local party-lists seen as fractions of general, national lists. In this case, magnitude of local constituencies is irrelevant, seat apportionment being calculated at national level.\nList proportional representation may also be combined with other apportionment methods in various mixed systems, using either additional member systems or parallel voting.\nExample.\nBelow it can be seen how different apportionment methods yield different results when apportioning 100 seats.\nWebster's method yields the same result (though this is not always the case). Otherwise, all other methods give a different number of seats to the parties.\nNotice how the D'Hondt method breaks the quota rule (shown in red text) and favors the largest party by \"rounding\" an ideal apportionment of 35.91 up to 37.\nAdams' method greatly favors smaller parties, giving 2 seats to the smallest party, and would give at least 1 seat to every party receiving at least one vote.\nList of countries using party-list proportional representation.\nThe table below lists countries that use a proportional electoral system to fill a nationally elected legislative body. Detailed information on electoral systems applying to the first chamber of the legislature is maintained by the ACE Electoral Knowledge Network. Countries using PR as part of a parallel voting (mixed-member majoritarian) or other mixed system (e.g. MMP) are not included.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23990", "revid": "34017952", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23990", "title": "Puppis", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nPuppis (\"stern\") is a constellation in the southern sky. It was originally part of the traditional constellation of Argo Navis (\"Argo\" is the ship of Jason and the Argonauts), which was divided into three parts, the other two being Carina (the keel and hull), and Vela (the sails). Puppis is the largest of the three constellations in square degrees. It is one of the 88 modern constellations recognized by the International Astronomical Union.\nHistory.\nThe constellation of Argo Navis is recorded in Greek texts, derived from ancient Egypt around 1000 BC. According to Plutarch, its equivalent in Egyptian astronomy was the \"Boat of Osiris\".\nAs Argo Navis was roughly 28% larger than the next largest constellation, Hydra, it was sub-divided into three sections in 1752 by the French astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille, including Puppis, which he referred to as \"Arg\u00fbs in puppi\". Despite the division, Lacaille kept a single set of Bayer designations for the whole constellation, Argo. Therefore, Carina has the \u03b1, \u03b2, and \u03b5, Vela has \u03b3 and \u03b4, Puppis has \u03b6, and so on. In 1844, John Herschel proposed complete dividing Argo Navis in accordance with Lacaille's divisions. However, the constellation continued to be used into the 20th century, and officially received a three-letter designation alongside its divisions in 1922. Puppis, along with Carina and Vela, was included in the list of modern IAU constellations in 1930.\nFeatures.\nNamed stars.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nPlanetary systems.\nSeveral extrasolar planet systems have been found around stars in the constellation Puppis, including:\nDeep-sky objects.\nAs the Milky Way runs through Puppis, there are many open clusters in the constellation. M46 and M47 are two open clusters in the same binocular field. M47 can be seen with the naked eye under dark skies, and its brightest stars are 6th magnitude. Messier 93 (M93) is another open cluster somewhat to the south. NGC 2451 is a very bright open cluster containing the star c Puppis, and the near NGC 2477 is a good target for small telescopes. The star Pi Puppis is the main component of a bright group of stars known as Collinder 135.\nM46 is a circular open cluster with an overall magnitude of 6.1 at a distance of approximately 5400 light-years from Earth. The planetary nebula NGC 2438 is superimposed; it is approximately 2900 light-years from Earth. M46 is classified as a Shapley class f and a Trumpler class III 2 m cluster. This means that it is a rich cluster that appears distinct from the star field, despite not being at its center. The cluster's stars, numbering between 50 and 100, have a moderate range in brightness.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23992", "revid": "2395584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23992", "title": "Piscis Austrinus", "text": "Constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere\nPiscis Austrinus is a constellation in the southern celestial hemisphere. The name is Latin for \"the southern fish\", in contrast with the larger constellation Pisces, which represents a pair of fish. Before the 20th century, it was also known as Piscis Notius. Piscis Austrinus was one of the 48 constellations listed by the 2nd-century astronomer Ptolemy, and it remains one of the 88 modern constellations. The stars of the modern constellation Grus once formed the \"tail\" of Piscis Austrinus. In 1597 (or 1598), Petrus Plancius carved out a separate constellation and named it after the crane.\nIt is a faint constellation, containing only one star brighter than 4th magnitude: Fomalhaut, which is 1st magnitude and the 18th-brightest star in the night sky. Fomalhaut is surrounded by a circumstellar disk, and possibly hosts a planet. Other objects contained within the boundaries of the constellation include Lacaille 9352, one of the brightest red dwarf stars in the night sky (though still too faint to see with the naked eye); and PKS 2155-304, a BL Lacertae object that is one of the optically brightest blazars in the sky.\nOrigins.\nPisces Austrinus originated with the Babylonian constellation simply known as the Fish (MUL.KU). Professor of astronomy Bradley Schaefer has proposed that ancient observers must have been able to see as far south as Mu Piscis Austrini to define a pattern that looked like a fish. Like many of Schaefer's proposals this is nothing new: mu PsA is explicitly mentioned in the Almagest and the constellation is definitely a takeover from ancient Babylon. Along with the eagle Aquila the crow Corvus and water snake Hydra, Piscis Austrinus was introduced to the Ancient Greeks around 500 BCE; the constellations marked the summer and winter solstices, respectively.\nIn Greek mythology, this constellation is known as the Great Fish and it is portrayed as swallowing the water being poured out by Aquarius, the water-bearer constellation. The two fish of the constellation Pisces are said to be the offspring of the Great Fish. In Egyptian mythology, this fish saved the life of the Egyptian goddess Isis, so she placed this fish and its descendants into the heavens as constellations of stars. In the 5th century BC, Greek historian Ctesias wrote that the fish was said to have lived in a lake near Bambyce in Syria and had saved Derceto, daughter of Aphrodite, and for this deed was placed in the heavens. For this reason, fish were sacred and not eaten by many Syrians.\nCharacteristics.\nPiscis Austrinus is a constellation bordered by Capricornus to the northwest, Microscopium to the southwest, Grus to the south, Sculptor to the east, and Aquarius to the north. Its recommended three-letter abbreviation, as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922, is \"PsA\". Ptolemy called the constellation \"Ichthus Notios\" \"Southern Fish\" in his \"Almagest\"; this was Latinised to Piscis Notius and used by German celestial cartographers Johann Bayer and Johann Elert Bode. Bayer also called it Piscis Meridianus and Piscis Austrinus, while French astronomer Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille called it Piscis Australis. English Astronomer Royal John Flamsteed went with Piscis Austrinus, which was followed by most subsequently. The official constellation boundaries, as set by Belgian astronomer Eug\u00e8ne Delporte in 1930, are defined by a polygon of four segments (\"illustrated in infobox\"). In the equatorial coordinate system, the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between 21h 27.3m and 23h 06.5m, while the declination coordinates are between \u221224.83\u00b0 and \u221236.46\u00b0. The whole constellation is visible to observers south of latitude 53\u00b0N.\nFeatures.\nStars.\nAncient astronomers counted twelve stars as belonging to Piscis Austrinus, though one was later incorporated into nearby Grus as Gamma Gruis. Other stars became part of Microscopium. Bayer used the Greek letters alpha through mu to label the most prominent stars in the constellation. Ptolemy had catalogued Fomalhaut (Alpha Piscis Austrini) as belonging to both this constellation and Aquarius. Lacaille redrew the constellation as it was poorly visible from Europe, adding pi, and relabelling gamma, delta and epsilon as epsilon, eta and gamma, respectively. However, Baily and Gould did not uphold these changes as Bayer's original chart was fairly accurate. Bode added tau and upsilon. Flamsteed gave 24 stars Flamsteed designations, though the first four numbered became part of Microscopium. Within the constellation's borders, there are 47 stars brighter than or equal to apparent magnitude\u00a06.5.\nTraditionally representing the mouth of the fish, Fomalhaut is the brightest star in the constellation and the 18th-brightest star in the night sky, with an apparent magnitude of 1.16. Located 25.13 \u00b1 0.09 light-years away, it is a white main-sequence star that is 1.92 \u00b1 0.02 times as massive and 16.63 \u00b1 0.48 as luminous as the Sun. Its companion Fomalhaut b was thought to be the first extrasolar planet ever detected by a visible light image, thanks to the Hubble Space Telescope, but infrared observations have since retracted this claim: it is instead a spherical cloud of dust. TW Piscis Austrini can be seen close by and is possibly associated with Fomalhaut as it lies within a light-year of it. Of magnitude 6.5, it is a BY Draconis variable.\nThe second-brightest star in the constellation, Epsilon Piscis Austrini is a blue-white star of magnitude +4.17. Located 400 \u00b1 20 light-years distant, it is a blue-white main-sequence star 4.10 \u00b1 0.19 times as massive as the Sun, and around 661 times as luminous.\nBeta, Delta and Zeta constitute the \"Tien Kang\" (\"heavenly rope\") in China. Beta is a white main-sequence star of apparent magnitude 4.29 that is of similar size and luminosity to Fomalhaut but five times as remote, at around 143 \u00b1 1 light-years distant from Earth. Delta Piscis Austrini is a double star with components of magnitude 4.2 and 9.2. The brighter is a yellow giant of spectral type G8 III. It is a red clump star that is burning helium in its core. It is 172 \u00b1 2 light-years distant from Earth. Zeta Piscis Austrini is an orange giant star of spectral type K1III that is located 413 \u00b1 2 light-years distant from Earth. It is a suspected variable star.\nS Piscis Austrini is a long-period Mira-type variable red giant which ranges between magnitude 8.0 and 14.5 over a period of 271.7 days, and V Piscis Austrini is a semi-regular variable ranging between magnitudes 8.0 and 9.0 over 148 days.\nLacaille 9352 is a faint red dwarf star of spectral type M0.5V that is just under half the Sun's diameter and mass. A mere 10.74 light-years away, it is too dim to be seen with the naked eye at magnitude 7.34. In June 2020 two super-Earth planets were discovered via radial velocity method.\nExoplanets have been discovered in five other star systems in the constellation. HD 205739 is a yellow-white main-sequence star of spectral type F7 V that has a planet around 1.37 times as massive as Jupiter orbiting it with a period of 279 days, and a suggestion of a second planet. HD 216770 is an orange dwarf accompanied by a Jupiter-like planet every 118 days. HD 207832 is a star of spectral type G5V with a diameter and mass about 90% of that of the Sun, and around 77% of its luminosity. Two gas giant planets with masses around 56% and 73% that of Jupiter were discovered in 2012 via the radial velocity method. With orbits of 162 and 1156 days, they average around 0.57 and 2.11 astronomical units away from their star.\nWASP-112 and WASP-124 are two sun-like stars that have planets discovered by transit.\nDeep sky objects.\nNGC 7172, NGC 7174 and NGC 7314 are three galaxies of magnitudes 11.9, 12.5 and 10.9, respectively. NGC 7259 is another spiral galaxy, which hosted a supernova\u2014SN 2009ip\u2014in 2009.\nAt redshift z = 0.116, the BL Lacertae object PKS 2155-304 is one of the brightest blazars in the sky.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23993", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23993", "title": "Prelude In G Major", "text": ""}
{"id": "23994", "revid": "48885933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23994", "title": "Ptolemaic dynasty", "text": "Macedonian Greek royal family which ruled Egypt\nThe Ptolemaic dynasty (; , \"Ptolemaioi\"), also known as the Lagid dynasty (, \"Lagidai\"; after Ptolemy I's father, Lagus), was a Macedonian Greek royal house which ruled the Ptolemaic Kingdom in Ancient Egypt during the Hellenistic period. Reigning for 275 years, the Ptolemaic was the longest and last dynasty of ancient Egypt from 305 BC until its incorporation into the Roman Republic in 30 BC.\nPtolemy, a general and one of the \"somatophylakes\" (bodyguard companions) of Alexander the Great, was appointed satrap of Egypt after Alexander's death in 323 BC. In 305\u00a0BC he declared himself Pharaoh Ptolemy I, later known as \"S\u014dter\" \"Saviour\". The Egyptians soon accepted the Ptolemies as the successors to the pharaohs of independent Egypt. The new dynasty showed respect to local traditions and adopted the Egyptian titles and iconography, while also preserving their own Greek language and culture. The Ptolemaic period was marked by the intense interactions and blending of the Greek and Egyptian cultures. Under the Ptolemies, Hellenistic religion was largely shaped by religious syncretism and imperial cult. Elements of Greek education became widespread in urban spaces, culminating in the foundation of the Mouseion (including the Library of Alexandria) and the Serapeum. During the Hellenistic period, the city of Alexandria, founded by Alexander the Great, would gradually surpass Athens as the intellectual centre of the Mediterranean world.\nTo emulate the previous dynasties of Egypt, the Ptolemaic dynasty eventually adopted the practice of inbreeding including sibling marriage; this did not start in earnest until nearly a century into the dynasty's history. All the male rulers of the dynasty took the name Ptolemy, while queens regnant were all called Cleopatra, Arsinoe, or Berenice. The most famous member of the line was the last queen, Cleopatra VII, known for her role in the Roman political battles between Julius Caesar and Pompey, and later between Octavian and Mark Antony. Her apparent suicide after the Roman conquest of Egypt marked the end of Ptolemaic rule in Egypt.\nRulers and consorts.\nDates in brackets represent the regnal dates of the Ptolemaic pharaohs. They frequently ruled jointly with their wives, who were often also their sisters, aunts or cousins. Several queens exercised regal authority. Of these, one of the last and most famous was Cleopatra (\"Cleopatra VII Philopator\", 51\u201330 BC), with her two brothers and her son serving as successive nominal co-rulers. Several systems exist for numbering the later rulers; the one used here is the one most widely employed by modern scholars.\nHealth.\nContinuing the tradition established by previous Egyptian dynasties, the Ptolemies engaged in inbreeding including sibling marriage, with many of the pharaohs being married to their siblings and often co-ruling with them. Ptolemy I and other early rulers of the dynasty were not married to their relatives, the childless marriage of siblings Ptolemy II and Arsinoe II being an exception. The first child-producing incestuous marriage in the Ptolemaic dynasty was that of Ptolemy IV and Arsinoe III, who were succeeded as co-pharaohs by their son Ptolemy V, born 210 BC. The best-known Ptolemaic pharaoh, Cleopatra VII, was at different times married to and ruled with two of her brothers (Ptolemy XIII until 47 BC and then Ptolemy XIV until 44 BC), and their parents were also likely to have been siblings or possibly cousins.\nContemporaries describe a number of the Ptolemaic dynasty members as extremely obese, while sculptures and coins reveal prominent eyes and swollen necks. Familial Graves' disease could explain the swollen necks and eye prominence (exophthalmos), although this is unlikely to occur in the presence of morbid obesity. This is all likely due to inbreeding depression. In view of the familial nature of these findings, members of the Ptolemaic dynasty are likely to have suffered from a multi-organ fibrotic condition such as Erdheim\u2013Chester disease, or a familial multifocal fibrosclerosis where thyroiditis, obesity and ocular proptosis may have all occurred concurrently.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23995", "revid": "107307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23995", "title": "Party", "text": "Gathering of invited guests\nA party is a gathering of people who have been invited by a host for the purposes of socializing, conversation, recreation, or as part of a festival or other commemoration or celebration of a special occasion. A party will often feature food and beverages, and generally conversation, music, dancing, or other forms of entertainment. \nSome parties are held in honor of a specific person, day, or event, such as a birthday party, a Super Bowl party, or a St. Patrick's Day party. Parties of this kind are often called celebrations. A party is not necessarily a private occasion. Public parties are sometimes held in parks, restaurants, pubs, beer gardens, nightclubs, or bars, and people attending such parties may be charged an admission fee by the host. Large parties in public streets may celebrate events such as Mardi Gras or the signing of a peace treaty ending a long war.\nTypes.\nBirthday party.\nA birthday party is a celebration of the anniversary of the birth of the person who is being honored. While there is historical precedent for birthday parties for the rich and powerful throughout history, the tradition extended to middle-class Americans around the nineteenth century and took on more modern norms and traditions in the twentieth century. Birthday parties are now a feature of many cultures.\nIn Western cultures, birthday parties include a number of common rituals. The guests may be asked to bring a gift for the honored person. Party locations are often decorated with colorful decorations, such as balloons and streamers. A birthday cake is usually served with lit candles that are to be blown out after a \"birthday wish\" has been made. The person being honored will be given the first piece of cake. While the birthday cake is being brought to the table, the song \"Happy Birthday to You\" or some other birthday song is sung by the guests.\nAt parties for children, time is often taken for the \"gift opening\" wherein the individual whose birthday is celebrated opens each of the gifts brought. It is also common at children's parties for the host to give parting gifts to the attendees in the form of \"goodie bags\". Children and even adults sometimes wear colorful cone-shaped party hats.\nBirthday parties are often larger and more extravagant if they celebrate someone who has reached what is regarded in the culture as a milestone age, such as the transition from childhood to adulthood. Examples of traditional coming of age celebrations include the North American sweet sixteen party and the Latin American quincea\u00f1era.\nSince medieval times, children have dressed specially for birthday parties; there is evidence to suggest historical birthday parties existed in Germany as \"kinderfeste\".\nA children's party or kids' party is a party for children such as a birthday party or tea party. Since medieval times, children have dressed specially for such occasions.\nSurprise party.\nA surprise party is a party that is not made known beforehand to the person in whose honor it is being held.\nBirthday surprise parties are the most common kind of surprise party. At most such parties, the guests will arrive an hour or so before the honoree arrives. Often, a friend in on the surprise will lead the honoree to the location of the party without letting on anything.\nThe guests might even conceal themselves from view, and then when the honoree enters the room, they leap from hiding and all shout, \"Surprise!\". For some surprise birthday parties, it is considered to be a good tactic to shock the honoree. Streamers, silly string, and balloons may be used for this purpose. Evidence of a party, such as decorations and balloons, are not made visible from the exterior of the home or party venue, so that the honoree will suspect nothing.\nDinner party.\nA dinner party is a social gathering at which people eat dinner together, usually in the host's home. At the most formal dinner parties, the dinner is served on a dining table with place settings. Dinner parties are often preceded by a cocktail hour in a living room or bar, where guests drink cocktails while mingling and conversing. Wine is usually served throughout the meal, often with a different wine accompanying each course.\nAt less formal dinner parties, a buffet is provided. Guests choose food from the buffet and eat while standing up and conversing. Women guests may wear cocktail dresses; men may wear blazers.\nAt some informal dinner parties, the host may ask guests to bring food or beverages (a main dish, a side dish, a dessert, or appetizers). A party of this type is called a potluck or potluck dinner. In the United States, potlucks are very often held in churches and community centers.\nGarden party.\nA garden party is a party in a park or a garden. An event described as a garden party is usually more formal than other outdoor gatherings, which may be called simply parties, picnics, barbecues, etc. A garden party can be a prestigious event. For example, invitations by the British Sovereign to garden parties at Buckingham Palace or at the Palace of Holyroodhouse (in Scotland) are considered an honor. The President of France holds a garden party at the Palais de l'Elys\u00e9e in Paris on Bastille Day.\nCocktail party.\nA cocktail party is a party at which cocktails are served. It is sometimes called a \"cocktail reception\". Women who attend a cocktail party may wear a cocktail dress. A cocktail hat is sometimes worn as a fashion statement.\nTea party.\nIn Anglo-American culture, a tea party is a formal gathering for afternoon tea. These parties were traditionally attended only by women, but men may also be invited. Tea parties are often characterized by the use of prestigious tableware, such as bone china and silver. The table, whatever its size or cost, is made to look its prettiest, with cloth napkins and matching cups and plates.\nIn addition to tea, larger parties may serve punch or, in cold weather, hot chocolate. The tea is accompanied by a variety of easily managed foods. Thin sandwiches such as cucumber or tomato, bananas, cake slices, buns, and cookies are all common choices.\nReception.\nFormal receptions are parties that are designed to receive a large number of guests, often at prestigious venues such as Buckingham Palace, the White House, or Government Houses of the British Empire and Commonwealth. The hosts and any guests of honor form a receiving line in order of precedence near the entrance. Each guest is announced to the host who greets each one in turn as he or she arrives. Each guest properly speaks little more than his name (if necessary) and a conventional greeting or congratulation to each person in the receiving line. In this way, the line of guests progresses steadily without unnecessary delay. After formally receiving each guest in this fashion, the hosts may mingle with the guests.\nSomewhat less formal receptions are common in academic settings, sometimes to honor a guest lecturer, or to celebrate a special occasion such as retirement of a respected member of staff. Receptions are also common in symposium or academic conference settings, as an environment for attendees to mingle and interact informally. These gatherings may be accompanied by a sit-down dinner, or more commonly, a stand-up informal buffet meal.\nReceptions are also held to celebrate exhibition openings at art galleries or museums. The featured artist or artists are often present, as well as the curators who organized the exhibition. In addition or instead, a celebratory reception may be held partway through or at the end of an exhibition run. This alternative scheduling allows guests more time to see the exhibition in depth at their own pace, before meeting the featured guests. Some food is often served, as in academic gatherings.\nRefreshments at a reception may be as minimal, such as coffee or lemonade, or as elaborate as those at a state dinner.\nSoir\u00e9es.\nIn the 18th century, in France and England, it became fashionable for wealthy, well married ladies who had a residence \"in town\" to invite accomplished guests to visit their home in the evening, to partake of refreshments and cultural conversation. Soir\u00e9es often included refined musical entertainment, and the term is still sometimes used to define a certain sophisticated type of evening party.\nSociety hostesses included actresses or other women with an influential reputation. The character of the hostess determined the character of the soir\u00e9e and the choice of guests.\nFamous soir\u00e9e hostesses include Hester Thrale and Madame de Sta\u00ebl.\nDances and balls.\nA dance is a social gathering at which the guests dance. It may be a casual, informal affair, or a structured event, such as a school dance or a charity ball. Dances usually take place during the evening. An afternoon dance is formally known as a tea dance. Some dances feature specific kinds of dancing, such as square dancing.\nA ball is a large formal party that features ballroom dancing. Women guests wear ball gowns; men wear evening dress.\nBlock party.\nA block party is a public party that is attended by the residents of a specific city block or neighborhood. These parties are typically held in a city street that has been closed to traffic to accommodate the party. At some block parties, attendees are free to pass from house to house, socializing, and often drinking alcoholic beverages.\nCostume or fancy dress party.\nAt a masquerade ball, guests wear masks to conceal their identities. Guests at a costume party or a fancy dress party wear costumes. These parties are sometimes associated with holiday events, such as Halloween and Mardi Gras.\nChristmas caroling party.\nIn English and American culture during the Christmas season, it is traditional to have a Christmas caroling party. People go from door to door in a neighborhood and sing Christmas carols. Some popular Christmas carols are \"We Wish You a Merry Christmas\", \"Deck the Halls\", \"The Twelve Days of Christmas\", \"Frosty the Snowman\", \"Jingle Bells\", \"Silver Bells\", \"Santa Claus Is Comin' to Town\", and \"O Holy Night\".\nIn Spain, this type of party is called \"El Aguinaldo\". It is the same as in England and the United States, but the only difference is that the children who sing the carols are given tips. Christmas songs are called \"villancicos\" in Spain; they are mainly sung by children at small parties.\nParties for teenagers and young adults.\nDance parties are gatherings in bars or community centers where the guests dance to house music, techno music, or disco. The music for dance parties is usually selected and played by a disc jockey.\nA spin-off of dance parties, the rave involves dancing to loud house music, techno music, or industrial music. Rave parties may be attended by as few as a score of people in a basement or, more likely, by a few hundred people in a club, to as many as thousands in a large warehouse, field, or even tens of thousands in a sporting arena, amusement park, or other large space. Raves are associated with illegal drugs such as ecstasy and psychedelic drugs.\nA house party is a party where a large group of people get together at a private home to socialize. House parties that involve the drinking of beer pumped from a keg are called keg parties or \"keggers.\" These parties are popular in North America, the United Kingdom, and Australia and are often attended by people under the legal drinking age. Sometimes, even older party-goers run afoul of the law for having provided alcoholic beverages to minors. Arrests may also be made for violating a noise ordinance, for disorderly conduct, and even for operating a \"blind pig\", an establishment that illegally sells alcoholic beverages.\nOn college campuses, parties are often hosted by fraternities.\nOutdoor parties include bush parties and beach parties. Bush parties (also called \"field parties\") are held in a secluded area of a forest (\"bush\"), where friends gather to drink and talk. These parties are often held around a bonfire. Beach parties are held on a sandy shoreline of a lake, river, or sea, and also often feature a bonfire.\nSchool-related parties for teenagers and young adults include proms and graduation parties, which are held in honor of someone who has recently graduated from a school or university.\nPool party.\nA pool party is a party in which the guests swim in a swimming pool.\nSingles dance party and mixer.\nA singles dance party and mixer is a party which is organized for people who are not married and who want to find a partner for friendship, dating, or sex.\nUsually a \"mixer game\" is played, to make it easy for people to meet each other. For example, each guest may be given a card with an inspiring quotation on it. The game is to find a potential partner who has the same quotation. Couples who have matching cards may be given a small prize.\nThese parties are sponsored by various organizations, both non-profit and for-profit.\nFundraising party.\nA fundraising party, or fundraiser, is a party that is held for the purpose of collecting money that will be given to some person or to some institution, such as a school, charity, business, or political campaign. These parties are usually formal and consist of a dinner followed by speeches or by a presentation extolling whatever the money is being raised for.\nIt is very common to charge an admission fee for parties of this kind. This fee may be as high as several thousand dollars, especially if money is being raised for a political campaign.\nGraduation party.\nIn some places, parties to celebrate graduation from school, college, or university are popular. A graduation party may be held on campus or external, and transportation is provided when location is far away.\nShowers.\nA shower is a party whose primary purpose is to give gifts to the guest of honor. Traditionally, a bridal shower is a way for an engaged woman to be \"showered\" with gifts for her upcoming married life (see hope chest). Guests are expected to bring a small gift related to the upcoming life event. Themed games are a frequent sight at this sort of party. A new twist on the baby shower for a pregnant woman is the gender reveal party, made possible by modern ultrasound technology.\nHousewarming party.\nA housewarming party may be held when a family, couple, or person moves into a new house or apartment. It is an occasion for the hosts to show their new home to their friends. Housewarming parties are typically informal and do not include any planned activities other than a tour of the new house or apartment. Invited family members and friends may bring gifts for the new home.\nWelcome party.\nA welcome party is held for the purpose of welcoming a newcomer, such as a new club member, a new employee, or a family's new baby.\nFarewell party.\nIn many cultures, it is customary to throw a farewell party in honor of someone who is moving away or departing on a long trip (often called a \"going away party\" and sometimes called a \"bon voyage\" party). Retirement parties for departing co-workers fall into this category. Several are described in Japan in Shusaku Endo's 1974 novel \"When I Whistle\".\nCast party.\nA cast party is a celebration following the final performance of a theatrical event, such as a play, a musical, or an opera. A party of this kind may also be held following the end of shooting for a motion picture (called a \"wrap party\") or after the season's final episode of a television series. Cast parties are traditionally held for most theater performances, both professional and amateur.\nInvited guests are usually restricted to performers, crew members, and a few others who did not participate in the performance, such as sponsors and donors who have helped fund the production.\nPre-party.\nA pre-party is a party that is held immediately before a school dance, a wedding, a birthday party, and a bar mitzvah. These parties are usually of short duration and sometimes involve getting ready for the event (e.g., the guests may put on makeup or costumes). Guests usually leave at the same time and arrive at the event together. Often people engage in pregaming or drinking before an event or a night out, especially if the event lacks access to alcohol.\nAfter-party.\nAn after-party is a party that is held after a play, wedding, school dance, or other more formal event.\nLegal obstacles to having mixed-sex parties.\nIran.\nIn 2023, the Iranian government arrested 300 people for going to a party that was not sex-segregrated in Semnan. In Yazd a citizen was jailed for five years for hosting a party that was not sex-segregrated. In Karaj, 11 people were arrested for organizing a party that was not sex-segregrated. Authorities also closed down hundreds of cafes. It also changed the name of \"Yalda night\" and Chaharshanbe Suri night to day of respecting host and day of respecting neighbors. In 2021, Iranian ambassador was dismissed for hosting a party. The government detains and whips people that go to birthdays, Yalda night, private parties or closes down businesses. Tirgan is a crime just as well. In December 2023, government arrested several people for sorting parties on the internet. In the entire Mashhad, public partying and celebration of Yalda night was illegalized. In 2024, three Europeans and 250 people were arrested in a rave.\nParties on special days.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInternational\nAustralia\nCanada\nFrance\nGermany\nIndia\nMany other regional festivals, mostly different Hindu festivals in every state.\nIran and other Persified societies\nIreland\nIsrael\nMexico\nNew Zealand\nPakistan\nScotland\nSweden\nUnited Kingdom\nUnited States\nUruguay\nParties associated with religious events.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristian\nIslamic\nJewish\nA social gathering during which the guests play party games or board games.\n A party that involves multi-player computer games and uses a local area network.\nA form of direct selling, in which a party is used to sell products (for example, a Tupperware party).\nA party that is hosted in a private home for the purpose of supporting a particular candidate, political party, or ballot measure, or to share information and opinions about an upcoming election.\nA nightclub event where participants socialize by writing notes to each other instead of speaking. The single rule at these events is \"no talking\".\nA party for which the guests are invited to stay overnight at the home of the host. These parties are usually for teenagers or young children.\nA party in which the guests wear togas.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23996", "revid": "50536615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23996", "title": "Political party", "text": "Organization coordinating policy priorities and candidates for government positions\nA political party is an organization that coordinates candidates to compete in elections and participate in governance. It is common for the members of a party to hold similar ideas about politics, and parties may promote specific ideological or policy goals.\nPolitical parties have become a major part of the politics of almost every country, as modern party organizations developed and spread around the world over the last few centuries. Although some countries have no political parties, this is extremely rare. Most countries have several parties while others only have one. Parties are important in the politics of autocracies as well as democracies, though usually democracies have more political parties than autocracies. Autocracies often have a single party that governs the country, and some political scientists consider competition between two or more parties to be an essential part of democracy.\nParties can develop from existing divisions in society, like the divisions between lower and upper classes, and they streamline the process of making political decisions by encouraging their members to cooperate. Political parties usually include a party leader, who has primary responsibility for the activities of the party; party executives, who may select the leader and who perform administrative and organizational tasks; and party members, who may volunteer to help the party, donate money to it, and vote for its candidates. There are many different ways in which political parties can be structured and interact with the electorate. The contributions that citizens give to political parties are often regulated by law, and parties will sometimes govern in a way that favours the people who donate time and money to them. In some cases, a political party tightly cooperates with affiliated or subordinate organizations of a different type, such as a trade union, a youth organization, or a party militia (armed wing).\nMany political parties are motivated by ideological goals. It is common for democratic elections to feature liberal, conservative, and socialist parties; other common ideologies of very large political parties include communism, populism, nationalism, and Islamism. Political parties in different countries will often adopt similar colours and symbols to identify themselves with a particular ideology. However, many political parties have no ideological affiliation and may instead be primarily engaged in patronage, clientelism, the advancement of a specific political entrepreneur, or be a \"big tent\", in that they wish to attract voters who have a variety of positions on issues.\nDefinition.\nPolitical parties are collective entities and activities that organize competitions for political offices. The members of a political party contest elections under a shared label. In a narrow definition, a political party can be thought of as just the group of candidates who run for office under a party label. In a broader definition, political parties are the entire apparatus that supports the election of a group of candidates, including voters and volunteers who identify with a particular political party, the official party organizations that support the election of that party's candidates, and legislators in the government who are affiliated with the party. In many countries, the notion of a political party is defined in law, and governments may specify requirements for an organization to legally qualify as a political party.\nPolitical parties are distinguished from other political groups or clubs, such as parliamentary groups, because only presidents have control over the political foundations of the party and also they include political factions, or advocacy groups, mostly by the fact that a party is focused on electing candidates, whereas a parliamentary group is a group of political parties, a political faction is a subgroup within a political party, and an advocacy group is focused on advancing a policy agenda. This is related to other features that sometimes distinguish parties from other political organizations, including a larger membership, greater stability over time, and a deeper connection to the electorate.\nIn addition to contesting elections, political parties serve key functions such as articulating a shared set of beliefs and a policy platform (ideology) to address public issues, recruiting and training potential political leaders, and acting as a vital link between the government and the populace.\nHistory.\nThe idea of people forming large groups or factions to advocate for their shared interests is ancient. Plato mentions the political factions of Classical Athens in the \"Republic\", and Aristotle discusses the tendency of different types of government to produce factions in the \"Politics\". Certain ancient disputes were also factional, like the Nika riots between two chariot racing factions at the Hippodrome of Constantinople. A few instances of recorded political groups or factions in history included the late Roman Republic's \"Populares\" and \"Optimates\" factions as well as the Dutch Republic's \"Orangists\" and the \"Staatsgezinde\". However, modern political parties are considered to have emerged around the end of the 18th century; they are usually considered to have first appeared in Europe and the United States of America, with the United Kingdom's Conservative Party and the Democratic Party of the United States both frequently called the world's \"oldest continuous political party\".\nBefore the development of mass political parties, elections typically featured a much lower level of competition, had small enough polities that direct decision-making was feasible, and held elections that were dominated by individual networks or cliques that could independently propel a candidate to victory in an election.\n18th century.\nSome scholars argue that the first modern political parties developed in early modern Britain in the 17th century, after the Exclusion Crisis and the Glorious Revolution. The Whig faction originally organized itself around support for Protestant constitutional monarchy as opposed to absolute rule, whereas the conservative Tory faction (originally the Royalist or Cavalier faction of the English Civil War) supported a strong monarchy, and these two groups structured disputes in the politics of the United Kingdom throughout the 18th century The Rockingham Whigs have been identified as the first modern political party, because they retained a coherent party label and motivating principles even while out of power.\nAt the end of the century, the United States also developed a party system, called the First Party System. Although the framers of the 1787 United States Constitution did not all anticipate that American political disputes would be primarily organized around political parties, political controversies in the early 1790s over the extent of federal government powers saw the emergence of two proto-political parties: the Federalist Party and the Democratic-Republican Party.\n19th century.\nBy the early 19th century, a number of countries had developed stable modern party systems. The party system that developed in Sweden has been called the world's first party system, on the basis that previous party systems were not fully stable or institutionalized. In many European countries, including Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, and France, political parties organized around a liberal-conservative divide, or around religious disputes. The spread of the party model of politics was accelerated by the 1848 Revolutions around Europe.\nThe strength of political parties in the United States waned during the Era of Good Feelings, but shifted and strengthened again by the second half of the 19th century. This was not the only country in which the strength of political parties had substantially increased by the end of the century; for example, around this time the Irish political leader Charles Stewart Parnell implemented several methods and structures like party discipline that would come to be associated with strong grassroots political parties.\n20th century.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century in Europe, the liberal\u2013conservative divide that characterized most party systems was disrupted by the emergence of socialist parties, which attracted the support of organized trade unions.\nDuring the wave of decolonization in the mid-20th century, many newly sovereign countries outside of Europe and North America developed party systems that often emerged from their movements for independence. For example, a system of political parties arose out of factions in the Indian independence movement, and was strengthened and stabilized by the policies of Indira Gandhi in the 1970s. The formation of the Indian National Congress, which developed in the late 19th century as a pro-independence faction in British India and immediately became a major political party after Indian independence, foreshadowed the dynamic in many newly independent countries; for example, the Uganda National Congress was a pro-independence party and the first political party in Uganda, and its name was chosen as an homage to the Indian National Congress.\nAs broader suffrage rights and eventually universal suffrage slowly spread throughout democracies, political parties expanded dramatically, and only then did a vision develop of political parties as intermediaries between the full public and the government.\nCauses of political parties.\nPolitical parties are a nearly ubiquitous feature of modern countries. Nearly all democratic countries have strong political parties, and many political scientists consider countries with fewer than two parties to necessarily be autocratic. However, these sources allow that a country with multiple competitive parties is not necessarily democratic, and the politics of many autocratic countries are organized around one dominant political party. The ubiquity and strength of political parties in nearly every modern country has led researchers to remark that the existence of political parties is almost a law of politics, and to ask why parties appear to be such an essential part of modern states. Political scientists have therefore come up with several explanations for why political parties are a nearly universal political phenomenon.\nSocial cleavages.\nOne of the core explanations for the existence of political parties is that they arise from pre-existing divisions among people: society is divided in a certain way, and a party is formed to organize that division into the electoral competition. By the 1950s, economists and political scientists had shown that party organizations could take advantage of the distribution of voters' preferences over political issues, adjusting themselves in response to what voters believe in order to become more competitive. Beginning in the 1960s, academics began identifying the social cleavages in different countries that might have given rise to specific parties, such as religious cleavages in specific countries that may have produced religious parties there.\nThe theory that parties are produced by social cleavages has drawn several criticisms. Some authors have challenged it on empirical grounds, either finding no evidence for the claim that parties emerge from existing cleavages, or arguing that the claim is not empirically testable. Others note that while social cleavages might cause political parties to exist, this obscures the opposite effect: that political parties also cause changes in the underlying social cleavages. A further objection is that, if the explanation for where parties come from is that they emerge from existing social cleavages, then the theory is an incomplete story of where political parties come from unless it also explains the origins of these social cleavages.\nIndividual and group incentives.\nAn alternative explanation for why parties are ubiquitous across the world is that the formation of parties provides compatible incentives for candidates and legislators. For example, the existence of political parties might coordinate candidates across geographic districts, so that a candidate in one electoral district has an incentive to assist a similar candidate in a different district. Thus, political parties can be mechanisms for preventing candidates with similar goals from acting to each other's detriment when campaigning or governing. This might help explain the ubiquity of parties: if a group of candidates form a party and are harming each other less, they may perform better over the long run than unaffiliated politicians, so politicians with party affiliations will out-compete politicians without parties.\nParties can also align their member's incentives when those members are in a legislature. The existence of a party apparatus can help coalitions of electors to agree on ideal policy choices, whereas a legislature of unaffiliated members might never be able to agree on a single best policy choice without some institution constraining their options.\nParties as heuristics.\nAnother prominent explanation for why political parties exist is psychological: parties may be necessary for many individuals to participate in politics because they provide a massively simplifying heuristic, which allows people to make informed choices with much less mental effort than if voters had to consciously evaluate the merits of every candidate individually. Without political parties, electors would have to individually evaluate every candidate in every election. Parties enable electors to make judgments about just a few groups, and then apply their judgment of the party to its entire slate of candidates. Because it is much easier to become informed about a few parties' platforms than the positions of a multitude of independent candidates, parties reduce the cognitive burden for people to cast informed votes. However, some evidence suggests that over the last several decades, the strength of party identification has been weakening, so this may be a less important function for parties to provide than it was in the past.\nStructure of political parties.\nPolitical parties are often structured in similar ways across countries. They typically feature a single party leader, a group of party executives, and a community of party members. Parties in democracies usually select their party leadership in ways that are more open and competitive than parties in autocracies, where the selection of a new party leader is likely to be tightly controlled. In countries with large sub-national regions, particularly federalist countries, there may be regional party leaders and regional party members in addition to the national membership and leadership.\nParty leaders.\nParties are typically led by a party leader, who serves as the main representative of the party and often has primary responsibility for overseeing the party's policies and strategies. The leader of the party that controls the government usually becomes the head of government, such as the president or prime minister, and the leaders of other parties explicitly compete to become the head of government. In both presidential democracies and parliamentary democracies, the members of a party frequently have substantial input into the selection of party leaders, for example by voting on party leadership at a party conference. Because the leader of a major party is a powerful and visible person, many party leaders are well-known career politicians. Party leaders can be sufficiently prominent that they affect voters' perceptions of the entire party, and some voters decide how to vote in elections partly based on how much they like the leaders of the different parties.\nThe number of people involved in choosing party leaders varies widely across parties and across countries. On one extreme, party leaders might be selected from the entire electorate; on the opposite extreme, they might be selected by just one individual. Selection by a smaller group can be a feature of party leadership transitions in more autocratic countries, where the existence of political parties may be severely constrained to only one legal political party, or only one competitive party. Some of these parties, like the Chinese Communist Party, have rigid methods for selecting the next party leader, which involves selection by other party members. A small number of single-party states have hereditary succession, where party leadership is inherited by the child of an outgoing party leader. Autocratic parties use more restrictive selection methods to avoid having major shifts in the regime as a result of successions.\nParty executives.\nIn both democratic and non-democratic countries, the party leader is often the foremost member of a larger party leadership. A party executive will commonly include administrative positions, like a party secretary and a party chair, who may be different people from the party leader. These executive organizations may serve to constrain the party leader, especially if that leader is an autocrat. It is common for political parties to conduct major leadership decisions, like selecting a party executive and setting their policy goals, during regular party conferences.\nMuch as party leaders who are not in power are usually at least nominally competing to become the head of government, the entire party executive may be competing for various positions in the government. For example, in Westminster systems, the largest party that is out of power will form the Official Opposition in parliament, and select a shadow cabinet which (among other functions) provides a signal about which members of the party would hold which positions in the government if the party were to win an election.\nParty membership.\nCitizens in a democracy will often affiliate with a specific political party. Party membership may include paying dues, an agreement not to affiliate with multiple parties at the same time, and sometimes a statement of agreement with the party's policies and platform. In democratic countries, members of political parties often are allowed to participate in elections to choose the party leadership. Party members may form the base of the volunteer activists and donors who support political parties during campaigns. The extent of participation in party organizations can be affected by a country's political institutions, with certain electoral systems and party systems encouraging higher party membership. Since at least the 1980s, membership in large traditional party organizations has been steadily declining across a number of countries, particularly longstanding European democracies.\nTypes of party organizations.\nPolitical scientists have distinguished between different types of political parties that have evolved throughout history. These include elite parties, mass parties, catch-all parties and cartel parties. Elite parties were political elites that were concerned with contesting elections and restricted the influence of outsiders, who were only required to assist in election campaigns. Mass parties tried to recruit new members who were a source of party income and were often expected to spread party ideology as well as assist in elections. In the United States, where both major parties were elite parties, the introduction of primaries and other reforms has transformed them so that power is held by activists who compete over influence and nomination of candidates.\nScholars distinguish between strong political parties where decision-making is centralized and top-down on one hand and weak political parties where decision-making is decentralized and the grassroots has considerable power on the other hand.\nElite parties.\nAn elite party is a type of political party that was dominant in the nineteenth century before the introduction of universal suffrage. The French political scientist Maurice Duverger first distinguished between elite and \"mass\" parties, founding his distinction on the differences within the organizational structures of these two types. Elite parties are characterized by minimal and loose organization, and are financed by fewer larger monetary contributions typically originating from outside the party. Elite parties give little priority to expanding the party's membership base, and its leaders are its only members. The earliest political parties, such as the Democratic-Republicans and the Federalists, are classified as elite parties.\nMass parties.\nA mass party is a type of political party that developed around cleavages in society and mobilized the ordinary citizens or 'masses' in the political process. In Europe, the introduction of universal suffrage resulted in the creation of worker's parties that later evolved into mass parties; an example is the German Social Democratic Party. These parties represented large groups of citizens who had not previously been represented in political processes, articulating the interests of different groups in society. In contrast to elite parties, mass parties are funded by their members, and rely on and maintain a large membership base. Further, mass parties prioritize the mobilization of voters and are more centralized than elite parties.\nCatch-all parties.\nThe term \"catch-all party\" was developed by German-American political scientist Otto Kirchheimer to describe the parties that developed in the 1950s and 1960s as a result of changes within the mass parties. The term \"big tent party\" may be used interchangeably. Kirchheimer characterized the shift from the traditional mass parties to catch-all parties as a set of developments including the \"drastic reduction of the party's ideological baggage\" and the \"downgrading of the role of the individual party member\". By broadening their central ideologies into more open-ended ones, catch-all parties seek to secure the support of a wider section of the population. Further, the role of members is reduced as catch-all parties are financed in part by the state or by donations. In Europe, the shift of Christian Democratic parties that were organized around religion into broader centre-right parties epitomizes this type.\nCartel parties.\nCartel parties are a type of political party that emerged post-1970s and are characterized by heavy state financing and the diminished role of ideology as an organizing principle. The cartel party thesis was developed by Richard Katz and Peter Mair, who wrote that political parties have turned into \"semi-state agencies\", acting on behalf of the state rather than groups in society. The term 'cartel' refers to the way in which prominent parties in government make it difficult for new parties to enter, as such forming a cartel of established parties. As with catch-all parties, the role of members in cartel parties is largely insignificant as parties use the resources of the state to maintain their position within the political system.\nNiche parties.\nNiche parties are a type of political party that developed on the basis of the emergence of new cleavages and issues in politics, such as immigration and the environment. In contrast to mainstream or catch-all parties, niche parties articulate an often limited set of interests in a way that does not conform to the dominant economic left-right divide in politics, in turn emphasizing issues that do not attain prominence within the other parties. Further, niche parties do not respond to changes in public opinion to the extent that mainstream parties do. Examples of niche parties include Green parties and extreme nationalist parties, such as the National Rally in France. However, over time these parties may grow in size and shed some of their niche qualities as they become larger, a phenomenon observable among European Green parties during their transformation from radical environmentalist movements to mainstream centre-left parties.\nEntrepreneurial parties.\nAn Entrepreneurial party is a political party that is centered on a political entrepreneur, and dedicated to the advancement of that person or their policies. While some definitions of political parties state that a party is an organization that advances a specific set of ideological or policy goals, many political parties are not primarily motivated by ideology or policy, and instead exist to advance the career of a specific political entrepreneur.\nProxy parties.\nA proxy political party is a political organization that is formally founded and legally registered as any other regular political party, but is in fact a proxy political actor, directly or indirectly controled by another political party, group or organization, formal or informal. Proxy political parties are created for various reasons, whether legal or political. Some are openly acknowledging their direct dependency on other political subjects (proxy parties cretaed publicly as such, by wider political movements or communities), while others are trying to act as independent parties, but are in fact covertly controled, whether in order to facilitate an impression of political plurality, or directly distort political and electoral processes. \nParty positions and ideologies.\nPolitical ideologies are one of the major organizing features of political parties, and parties often officially align themselves with specific ideologies. Parties adopt ideologies for a number of reasons. Ideological affiliations for political parties send signals about the types of policies they might pursue if they were in power. Ideologies also differentiate parties from one another, so that voters can select the party that advances the policies that they most prefer. A party may also seek to advance an ideology by convincing voters to adopt its belief system.\nCommon ideologies that can form a central part of the identity of a political party include liberalism, conservatism, socialism, communism, anarchism, fascism, feminism, environmentalism, nationalism, fundamentalism, Islamism, and multiculturalism. Liberalism is the ideology that is most closely connected to the history of democracies and is often considered to be the dominant or default ideology of governing parties in much of the contemporary world. Many of the traditional competitors to liberal parties are conservative parties. Socialist, communist, feminist, anarchist, fascist, and nationalist parties are more recent developments, largely entering political competitions only in the 19th and 20th centuries. Environmentalism, multiculturalism, and certain types of fundamentalism became prominent towards the end of the 20th century.\nParties can sometimes be organized according to their ideology using an economic left\u2013right political spectrum. However, a simple left-right economic axis does not fully capture the variation in party ideologies. Other common axes that are used to compare the ideologies of political parties include ranges from liberal to authoritarian, from pro-establishment to anti-establishment, and from tolerant and pluralistic (in their behavior while participating in the political arena) to anti-system.\nParty positions for individual political parties are assessed by different published indices, such as the V-Party Dataset.\nNon-ideological parties.\nThough ideologies are central to a large number of political parties around the world, not all political parties have an organizing ideology, or exist to promote ideological policies. For example, some political parties may be clientelistic or patronage-based organizations, which are largely concerned with distributing goods. Other political parties may be created as tools for the advancement of an individual politician. It is also common, in countries with important social cleavages along ethnic or racial lines, to represent the interests of one ethnic group or another. This may involve a non-ideological attachment to the interests of that group, or may be a commitment based on an ideology like identity politics. While any of these types of parties may be ideological, there are political parties that do not have any organizing ideology.\nParty systems.\nPolitical parties are ubiquitous across both democratic and autocratic countries, and there is often very little change in which political parties have a chance of holding power in a country from one election to the next. This makes it possible to think about the political parties in a country as collectively forming one of the country's central political institutions, called a party system. Some basic features of a party system are the number of parties and what sorts of parties are the most successful. These properties are closely connected to other major features of the country's politics, such as how democratic it is, what sorts of restrictions its laws impose on political parties, and what type of electoral systems it uses. Even in countries where the number of political parties is not officially constrained by law, political institutions affect how many parties are viable. For example, democracies that use a single-member district electoral system tend to have very few parties, whereas countries that use proportional representation tend to have more. The number of parties in a country can also be accurately estimated based on the magnitude of a country's electoral districts and the number of seats in its legislature.\nAn informative way to classify the party systems of the world is by how many parties they include. Because some party systems include a large number of parties that have a very low probability of winning elections, it is often useful to think about the effective number of parties (the number of parties weighted by the strength of those parties) rather than the literal number of registered parties.\nNon-partisan systems.\nIn a non-partisan system, no political parties exist, or political parties are not a major part of the political system. There are very few countries without political parties.\nIn some non-partisan countries, the formation of parties is explicitly banned by law. The existence of political parties may be banned in autocratic countries in order to prevent a turnover in power. For example, in Saudi Arabia, a ban on political parties has been used as a tool for protecting the monarchy. However, parties are also banned in some polities that have long democratic histories, usually in local or regional elections of countries that have strong national party systems.\nPolitical parties may also temporarily cease to exist in countries that have either only been established recently, or that have experienced a major upheaval in their politics and have not yet returned to a stable system of political parties. For example, the United States began as a non-partisan democracy, and it evolved a stable system of political parties over the course of many decades. A country's party system may also dissolve and take time to re-form, leaving a period of minimal or no party system, such as in Peru following the regime of Alberto Fujimori. However, it is also possible\u00a0\u2013 albeit rare\u00a0\u2013 for countries with no bans on political parties, and which have not experienced a major disruption, to nevertheless have no political parties: there are a small number of pacific island democracies, such as Palau, where political parties are permitted to exist and yet parties are not an important part of national politics.\nOne-party systems.\nIn a one-party system, power is held entirely by one political party. When only one political party exists, it may be the result of a ban on the formation of any competing political parties, which is a common feature in authoritarian states. For example, the Communist Party of Cuba is the only permitted political party in Cuba, and is the only party that can hold seats in the legislature. When only one powerful party is legally permitted to exist, its membership can grow to contain a very large portion of society and it can play substantial roles in civil society that are not necessarily directly related to political governance; one example of this is the Chinese Communist Party. Bans on competing parties can also ensure that only one party can ever realistically hold power, even without completely outlawing all other political parties. For example, in North Korea, more than one party is officially permitted to exist and even to seat members in the legislature, but laws ensure that the Workers' Party of Korea retains control.\nIt is also possible for countries with free elections to have only one party that holds power. These cases are sometimes called dominant-party systems or particracies. Scholars have debated whether or not a country that has never experienced a transfer of power from one party to another can nevertheless be considered a democracy. There have been periods of government exclusively or entirely by one party in some countries that are often considered to have been democratic, and which had no official legal barriers to the inclusion of other parties in the government; this includes recent periods in Botswana, Japan, Mexico, Senegal, and South Africa. It can also occur that one political party dominates a sub-national region of a democratic country that has a competitive national party system; one example is the southern United States during much of the 19th and 20th centuries, where the Democratic Party had almost complete control, with the Southern states being functionally one-party regimes, though opposition parties were never prohibited.\nTwo-party systems.\nIn several countries, there are only two parties that have a realistic chance of competing to form government. One current example of a two-party system is the United States, where the national government has for much of the country's history exclusively been controlled by either the Democratic Party or the Republican Party. Other examples of countries which have had long periods of two-party dominance include Colombia, Uruguay, Malta, and Ghana. Two-party systems are not limited to democracies; they may be present in authoritarian regimes as well. Competition between two parties has occurred in historical autocratic regimes in countries including Brazil and Venezuela.\nA democracy's political institutions can shape the number of parties that it has. In the 1950s Maurice Duverger observed that single-member district single-vote plurality-rule elections tend to produce two-party systems, and this phenomenon came to be known as Duverger's law. Whether or not this pattern is true has been heavily debated over the last several decades. Some political scientists have broadened this idea to argue that more restrictive political institutions (of which first past the post is one example) tend to produce a smaller number of political parties, so that extremely small parties systems \u2013 like those with only two parties \u2013 tend to form in countries with very restrictive rules.\nTwo-party systems have attracted heavy criticism for limiting the choices that electors have, and much of this criticism has centered around their association with restrictive political institutions. For example, some commentators argue that political institutions in prominent two-party systems like the United States have been specifically designed to ensure that no third party can become competitive. Criticisms also center around these systems' tendencies to encourage insincere voting and to facilitate the spoiler effect.\nMulti-party systems.\nMulti-party systems are systems in which more than two parties have a realistic chance of holding power and influencing policy. A very large number of systems around the world have had periods of multi-party competition, and two-party democracies may be considered unusual or uncommon compared to multi-party systems. Many of the largest democracies in the world have had long periods of multi-party competition, including India, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Brazil. Multi-party systems encourage characteristically different types of governance than smaller party systems, for example by often encouraging the formation of coalition governments.\nThe presence of many competing political parties is usually associated with a greater level of democracy, and a country transitioning from having a one-party system to having a many-party system is often considered to be democratizing. Authoritarian countries can include multi-party competition, but typically this occurs when the elections are not fair. For this reason, in two-party democracies like the United States, proponents of forming new competitive political parties often argue that developing a multi-party system would make the country more democratic. However, the question of whether multi-party systems are more democratic than two-party systems, or if they enjoy better policy outcomes, is a subject of substantial disagreement among scholars as well as among the public. In the opposite extreme, a country with a very large number of parties can experience governing coalitions that include highly ideologically diverse parties that are unable to make much policy progress, which may cause the country to be unstable and experience a very large number of elections; examples of systems that have been described as having these problems include periods in the recent history of Israel, Italy, and Finland. Multi-party systems are often viewed as fairer or more representative than one- or two-party systems, but they also have downsides, like the likelihood that in a system with plurality voting the winner of a race with many options will only have minority support.\nSome multi-party systems may have two parties that are noticeably more competitive than the other parties. Such party systems have been called \"two-party-plus\" systems, which refers to the two dominant parties, plus other parties that exist but rarely or never hold power in the government. Such parties may serve a crucial factor in election outcomes. It is also possible for very large multi-party systems, like India's, to nevertheless be characterized largely by a series of regional contests that realistically have only two competitive parties, but in the aggregate can produce many more than two parties that have major roles in the country's national politics.\nFunding.\nMany of the activities of political parties involve the acquisition and allocation of funds in order to achieve political goals. The funding involved can be very substantial, with contemporary elections in the largest democracies typically costing billions or even tens of billions of dollars. Much of this expense is paid by candidates and political parties, which often develop sophisticated fundraising organizations. Because paying for participation in electoral contests is such a central democratic activity, the funding of political parties is an important feature of a country's politics.\nSources of party funds.\nCommon sources of party funding across countries include dues-paying party members, advocacy groups and lobbying organizations, corporations, trade unions, and candidates who may self-fund activities. In most countries, the government also provides some level of funding for political parties. Nearly all of the 180 countries examined by the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance have some form of public funding for political parties, and about a third have regular payments of government funds that goes beyond campaign reimbursements. In some countries, public funding for parties depends on the size of that party: for example, a country may only provide funding to parties which have more than a certain number of candidates or supporters. A common argument for public funding of political parties is that it creates fairer and more democratic elections by enabling more groups to compete, whereas many advocates for private funding of parties argue that donations to parties are a form of political expression that should be protected in a democracy. Public financing of political parties may decrease parties' pursuit of funds through corrupt methods, by decreasing their incentive to find alternate sources of funding.\nOne way of categorizing the sources of party funding is between public funding and private funding. Another dichotomy is between plutocratic and grassroots sources; parties which get much of their funding from large corporations may tend to pursue different policies and use different strategies than parties which are mostly funded through small donations by individual supporters. Private funding for political parties can also be thought of as coming from internal or external sources: this distinguishes between dues from party members or contributions by candidates, and donations from entities outside of the party like non-members, corporations, or trade unions. Internal funding may be preferred because external sources might make the party beholden to an outside entity.\nUses for party funds.\nThere are many ways in which political parties may deploy money in order to secure better electoral outcomes. Parties often spend money to train activists, recruit volunteers, create and deploy advertisements, conduct research and support for their leadership in between elections, and promote their policy agenda. Many political parties and candidates engage in a practice called clientelism, in which they distribute material rewards to people in exchange for political support; in many countries this is illegal, though even where it is illegal it may nevertheless be widespread in practice. Some parties engage directly in vote buying, in which a party gives money to a person in exchange for their vote.\nThough it may be crucial for a party to spend more than some threshold to win a given election, there are typically diminishing returns for expenses during a campaign. Once a party has crossed a particular spending threshold, additional expenditures might not increase their chance of success.\nRestrictions.\nFundraising and expenditures by political parties are typically regulated by governments, with many countries' regulations focusing on who can contribute money to parties, how parties' money can be spent, and how much of it can pass through the hands of a political party. Two main ways in which regulations affect parties are by intervening in their sources of income and by mandating that they maintain some level of transparency about their funding. One common type of restriction on how parties acquire money is to limit who can donate money to political parties; for example, people who are not citizens of a country may not be allowed to make contributions to that country's political parties, in order to prevent foreign interference. It is also common to limit how much money an individual can give to a political party each election. Similarly, many governments cap the total amount of money that can be spent by each party in an election. Transparency regulations may require parties to disclose detailed financial information to the government, and in many countries transparency laws require those disclosures to be available to the public, as a safeguard against potential corruption. Creating, implementing, and amending laws regarding party expenses can be extremely difficult, since governments may be controlled by the very parties that these regulations restrict.\nParty colours and symbols.\nNearly all political parties associate themselves with specific colours and symbols, primarily to aid voters in identifying, recognizing, and remembering the party. This branding is particularly important in polities where much of the population may be illiterate, so that someone who cannot read a party's name on a ballot can instead identify that party by colour or logo. Parties of similar ideologies will often use the same colours across different countries. Colour associations are useful as a short-hand for referring to and representing parties in graphical media. They can also be used to refer to coalitions and alliances between political parties and other organizations; examples include purple alliances, red\u2013green alliances, traffic light coalitions, pan-green coalitions, and pan-blue coalitions.\nHowever, associations between colour and ideology can also be inconsistent: parties of the same ideology in different countries often use different colours, and sometimes competing parties in a country may even adopt the same colours. These associations also have major exceptions. For example, in the United States, red is associated with the more conservative Republican Party while blue is associated with the more left-leaning Democratic Party.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "23997", "revid": "1153284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23997", "title": "Pickup", "text": "Pickup(s), pick-up, or pick up may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "23998", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23998", "title": "Civic Platform", "text": "Political party in Poland (2001\u20132025)\nThe Civic Platform (, PO) was a centre-right liberal conservative political party in Poland. The party's most prominent leader was Donald Tusk, party chairman between 2003\u20132014 and 2021\u20132025.\nIt was formed in 2001 by splinter factions from the Solidarity Electoral Action, the Freedom Union and the Conservative People's Party, and it later placed second in the 2001 Polish parliamentary election. It remained at the opposition until the 2007 Polish parliamentary opposition, when it overtook Law and Justice, won 209 seats, and Tusk was elected as Prime Minister of Poland. Following the Smolensk air disaster in 2010, Bronis\u0142aw Komorowski served as acting president of Poland and later won the 2010 Polish presidential election. Tusk continued to serve as prime minister and leader of Civic Platform until he resigned in 2014 to assume the post of the president of the European Council. The party was defeated in the 2015 Polish parliamentary and presidential elections. It placed second in the 2019 Polish parliamentary election, and its 2020 Polish presidential election candidate, Rafa\u0142 Trzaskowski, won 49% of the popular vote in the second round and lost the election to Andrzej Duda.\nInitially positioned as a Christian democratic party with strong economically liberal tendencies, it soon adopted liberal conservatism throughout the 2000s. During its time in power, it was aligned with more pragmatic and centrist views, and was characterized as a catch-all party. In the 2010s, the Civic Platform adopted more socially liberal policies, aligned itself with conservative liberalism and economic neoliberalism, and it has since been positioned in the centre-right. It has also strongly advocated for Poland's membership in the European Union and NATO. It was a member of the European People's Party.\nThe party headed an electoral alliance Civic Coalition, which was founded in 2018. Since its creation, it had shown strong electoral performances in Warsaw, the west, and the north of Poland. Since the 2000s, the Civic Platform had established itself as one of the dominant political parties in Poland. On 25 October 2025, the party merged into a new party called Civic Coalition, bearing the same name as the PO-led electoral coalition from 2018.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nThe Civic Platform was founded in 2001 as economically liberal, Christian-democratic split from existing parties. Founders Andrzej Olechowski, Maciej P\u0142a\u017cy\u0144ski, and Donald Tusk were sometimes jokingly called \"the Three Tenors\" by Polish media and commentators. Olechowski and P\u0142a\u017cy\u0144ski left the party during the 2001\u20132005 parliamentary term, leaving Tusk as the sole remaining founder, and current party leader.\nFirst elections.\nIn the 2001 general election, the party secured 12.6% of the vote and 65 deputies in the Sejm, making it the largest opposition party to the government led by the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD). In the 2002 local elections, PO stood together with Law and Justice in 15 voivodeships (in 14 as POPiS, in Podkarpacie with another centre-right political parties). They stood separately only in Mazovia.\nThe POPiS coalition won 12% of the popular vote nationally, which was well below the expectations. Ludwik Dorn, the chairman of the PiS parliamentary club at the time, remarked: \"Together, we gained as much as the PO itself collected a year earlier.\" This marked the point at which PO and PiS, until now ideological and political allies, started to grow apart. The leadership of PiS decided that it had to distance itself from PO and change its ideology in order to increase its popular support. \nIn 2005, PO led all opinion polls with 26% to 30% of public support. However, in the 2005 general election, in which it was led by Jan Rokita, PO polled only 24.1% and unexpectedly came second to the 27% garnered by Law and Justice (PiS). A centre-right coalition of PO and PiS (nicknamed POPiS) was deemed most likely to form a government after the election. Yet the putative coalition parties had a falling out in the wake of the fiercely contested Polish presidential election of 2005. \nIn the 2005 elections, PiS attacked PO by campaigning on a difference between \"liberal Poland\" and its \"social Poland\". The former was marked by economic liberalism, austerity, deregulation and \"serving the rich\". In contrast, Law and Justice stressed its \"social\" character, pledging policies that would help the poor. The party attacked Civic Platform's flat tax proposal and advocated a much more active role of the state in the economy. Law and Justice also made \"an offer to the left\", stressing its economically left-wing policies. \nUltimately, Lech Kaczy\u0144ski (PiS) won the second round of the presidential election on 23 October 2005 with 54% of the vote, ahead of Tusk, the PO candidate. Due to the demands of PiS for control of all the armed ministries (the Defence Ministry, the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) and the office of the prime minister, PO and PiS were unable to form a coalition. Instead, PiS formed a coalition government with the support of the League of Polish Families (LPR) and Self-Defense of the Republic of Poland (SRP). PO became the opposition to this PiS-led coalition government.\nRuling government (2007\u20132015).\nThe PiS-led coalition fell apart in 2007 amid a corruption scandal involving Andrzej Lepper and Tomasz Lipiec and internal leadership disputes. These events led to new elections, and in the 21 October 2007 parliamentary election PO won 41.51% of the popular vote and 209 out of 460 seats in the Sejm and 60 out of 100 seats in the Senate of Poland. Civic Platform, now the largest party in both houses of parliament, subsequently formed a coalition with the Polish People's Party (PSL).\nDespite declaring the parliamentary election campaign the will to limit taxation in Poland, the Civic Platform implemented an ideologically diverse set of policies - it increased the excise imposed on diesel oil, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, and oil. It had also eliminated tax exemptions. \nAt the 2010 Polish presidential election, following the Smolensk air disaster which killed the incumbent Polish president Lech Kaczy\u0144ski, Tusk decided not to present his candidature, considered an easy possible victory over PiS leader Jaros\u0142aw Kaczy\u0144ski. During the PO primary elections, Bronis\u0142aw Komorowski defeated Foreign Minister Rados\u0142aw Sikorski. At the polls, Komorowski defeated Jaros\u0142aw Kaczy\u0144ski, ensuring PO dominance over the contemporary Polish political landscape.\nIn November 2010, local elections granted Civic Platform about 30.1 percent of the votes and PiS at 23.2 percent, an increase for the former and a drop for the latter compared to the 2006 elections. PO succeeded in winning four consecutive elections, and Tusk remained as kingmaker. PO's dominance was also a reflection of left-wing weakness and divisions on both sides of the political scene, with PiS suffering a splinter in Autumn 2010. Civic Platform won the plurality of votes in the 9 October 2011 parliamentary election, gaining 39.18% of the popular vote, 207 of 460 seats in the Sejm, and 63 out of 100 seats in the Senate.\nIn the 2014 European elections, Civic Platform came first place nationally, achieving 32.13% of the vote and returning 19 MEPs. In the 2014 local elections, PO achieved 179 seats, the highest single number. In the 2015 presidential election, PO endorsed Bronis\u0142aw Komorowski, a former member of PO from 2001 till 2010. He lost the election receiving 48.5% of the popular vote, while Andrzej Duda won with 51.5%.\nOpposition (2015\u20132023).\nIn the 2015 parliamentary election, PO came in second place, after PiS, achieving 24.09% of the popular vote, 138 out of 460 seats in the Sejm, and 34 out of 100 seats in the Senate. In the 2018 local elections, PO achieved 26.97% of the votes, coming second after PiS. In the 2019 European elections, PO participated in the European Coalition electoral alliance which achieved 38.47%, coming second after PiS. On 1 October 2023, it held The Million Hearts march in Warsaw.\nReturn to power (2023\u20132025) and unification.\nThe Civic Platform returned to power in a coalition with the Polish People's Party, Poland 2050 and New Left in the 2023 parliamentary election.\nIn October 2025, the party announed its plans to merge into a new party with two of its smaller coalition partners, Modern and Polish Initiative. The unification convention was held on 25 October 2025, where the three parties merged into a single party known as the Civic Coalition. Some members of the 2018 electoral alliance Civic Coalition, such as the Greens, opted to remain a separate party. The leader of the new party became Donald Tusk, and the new party is to complete its leadership election on 26 January 2026. The creation of Civic Coalition marked the dissolution of the Civic Platform.\nIdeology.\nThe Civic Platform was mainly described as a centre-right political party. Due to the peculiarity of Polish politics, as a major liberal opponent of the conservative PiS, the party was also classified as centrist or centre-left, although since 2023 the party was considered to have shifted back towards the centre-right. It has also been described as liberal-conservative, Christian democratic, conservative, conservative-liberal, classical-liberal, liberal, and social-liberal. It was also described as pragmatic and big tent. It supported Poland's membership in the European Union.\nSince 2007, when Civic Platform formed the government, the party has gradually moved from its Christian-democratic stances, and many of its politicians hold more liberal positions on social issues. In 2013, the Civic Platform's government introduced public funding of \"in vitro\" fertilization program. Civic Platform also supported civil unions for same-sex couples but was against same-sex marriage and the adoption of children by same-sex couples. The party also supported liberalization of the abortion law, which it had opposed while in government. In response to the climate crisis, the Civic Platform pledged to end the use of coal for energy in Poland by 2040.\nPO was described as neoliberal, economically liberal, right-wing liberal, and fiscally conservative. It represented moderately conservative positions, and pursued deregulatory economic policies. The Third Cabinet of Donald Tusk led by the Civic Platform pursued economic deregulation, lowering healthcare tax for business, restricting immigration and tax cuts. It also pursued laissez-faire economic policies, such as introducing tax exemptions for self-employed and high earners.\nAfter becoming the biggest opposition party, the Civic Platform became more culturally liberal and populist. This tendency became especially popular among the younger generation of the party's politicians, such as mayor of Warsaw and presidential candidate Rafa\u0142 Trzaskowski. The party has also changed its opinion about the social programs of PiS, starting to support them. After returning to the government in 2023, the party adopted an anti-immigration stance to migrants coming from Russia and Belarus.\nOrganization.\nPolitical support.\nAs of 2020, the party enjoyed the greatest support in large cities and among people with higher education and in managerial positions, while in terms of age, the electorate was evenly distributed, and the electoral base of the Civic Platform lay in middle-aged, highly educated gold-collar and white-collar workers of the middle and upper-middle classes. As of 2020, the Civic Platform electorate was made up of more women than men, was disproportionally represented by middle-aged, urban and middle-class voters, and was characterized by higher levels of education, higher position in the socio-professional structure, as well as moderate religiosity and Roman Catholicism. The party consistently enjoyed overwhelming support of workers such as directors, managers and specialists, business owners and co-owners, and administrative workers. At the same time, the party underperformed amongst blue-collar workers, young voters, farmers and students, as well as unemployed voters. In regards to age, Civic Platform performed the best amongst voters aged 40\u201349, while also performing strongly among 30-39 and 50-59 year olds. The party performs the worst amongst the oldest (aged 60 or more) and the youngest (aged 29 or less) voters. The party strongly appealed to urban voters, as almost a half of voters living in big cities (500,000 people or more) vote for Civic Platform; support for the party remains strong in middle-sized cities but strongly declines in small towns and the countryside, as on average only 15% of rural voters support it. \nAs of 2016, an overwhelming majority of party's supporters (83%) were Roman Catholics, and 44% of these voters partook in religious practices at least once a week. As of 2016, the party was supported by the Christian left, as well as liberal and moderate Catholics, while most of conservative Catholics in Poland support Law and Justice instead. Churchgoing Catholics are roughly evenly split between Civic Platform and Law and Justice, with a significant minority of churchgoers supporting Polish People's Party as well. Catholics who support Civic Platform \"oppose, on the one hand, the state's enforcement of religious norms and, on the other, do not condone their violation\". This was largely consistent with the party's attitude towards religion, which combines a moderately conservative and politically Catholic program with left-wing economic slogans, supported by Catholic social teaching and the teaching of John Paul II contained in the encyclical Centesimus annus.\nAs of 2020, most of Civic Platform's electorate identified as liberal conservatives, centrists and moderate conservatives. No tendency dominates, as the party's supporters are roughly evenly split between political tendencies - 35% of party's supporters identify with political center, 28% as left-wing, and 24% as right-wing. Throughout the 2010s, Civic Platform had been losing left-wing supporters due to the re-emergence of Lewica as well as Janusz Palikot's defection from the party. The party also faced a challenge from Nowoczesna, whose vote \"came largely from former Civic Platform supporters, disappointed with its failure to shake off its social conservatism\". According to Janusz Jarty\u015b of the University of Szczecin, the ideological base of Civic Platform are \"national-conservative, liberal and social-democratic voters\", with each faction expecting \"at least partial implementation of their demands, stability in the governance of the country and social peace\". According to , the party was also unpopular amongst the traditionally social-democratic voters, who were opposed to Europeanisation and globalization, and were critical of the Civic Platform's \"almost U.S. type of election campaign.\"\nAs of 2021, according to CBOS, Civic Platform was overwhelmingly popular amongst pro-European voters, with almost 80% of party's supporters wishing to cooperate with the European Union more. The party was generally supported by moderates, as most of the party's voters wish for a \"compromise\" on issues such as abortion. Economically, the party was supported by pro-business and welfare-oriented voters alike; while most of Civic Platform's supporters believe that Poland should become a welfare state, they are evenly split on issues such as progressive taxation and flat tax, and nationalization vs. privatization. The party has also enjoyed the support of regionalists, autonomists and voters supportive of decentralization and localism in general. Over 90% of Civic Platform supporters believe that local governments should have more power and that the national government should devolve its power to the regional governments of gminas and voivodeships. The party was supported by Silesian regionalists, and had organized joint electoral lists with Silesian parties like Silesian Autonomy Movement and Silesian Regional Party. Local politicians of the Civic Platform in Silesia are often associated with Silesian regionalism as well. The party also enjoys support from the Kashubians and their local autonomist movement, with the co-founder of the party, Donald Tusk, having expressed his support for autonomous Kashubia in 1992. \nIn March 2023, Tusk stated that Silesian should be considered a language rather than an ethnolect as it has unique literature and grammar, and promised to recognize Silesian as an official, statutory language of Upper Silesia. Tusk also declared that he was a regionalist.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24001", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24001", "title": "Paris, Texas", "text": "City in the United States\nParis is a city in and the county seat of Lamar County, Texas, United States. Located in Northeast Texas at the western edge of the Piney Woods, the population of the city was 24,171 in 2020.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nPresent-day Lamar County was part of Red River County during the Republic of Texas. By 1840, population growth necessitated the organization of a new county. George Washington Wright, who had served in the Third Congress of the Republic of Texas as a representative from Red River County, was a major proponent of the new county. The Fifth Congress established the new county on December 17, 1840, and named it after Mirabeau B. Lamar, who was the first vice president and the second president of the Republic of Texas.\nLamar County was one of the 18 Texas counties that voted against secession on February 23, 1861.\nIn 1877, 1896, and 1916, major fires in the city forced considerable rebuilding. The 1916 fire destroyed almost half the town and caused an estimated $11\u00a0million in property damage. The fire ruined most of the central business district and swept through a residential area. The burned structures included the Federal Building and Post Office, the Lamar County Courthouse and Jail, City Hall, most commercial buildings, and several churches.\nIn 1893, black teenager Henry Smith was accused of murder, tortured, and then burned to death on a scaffold in front of thousands of spectators in Paris. In 1920, two black brothers from the Arthur family were tied to a flagpole and burned to death at the Paris fairgrounds. The city has prominent memorials to the Confederacy.\nIn 1943, the U.S. Supreme Court in \"Largent v. Texas\" struck down a Paris ordinance that prohibited a person from selling or distributing religious publications without first obtaining a city-issued permit. The court ruled that the ordinance abridged freedom of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of the press in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution.\nParis is a former railroad center. The Texas and Pacific reached town in 1876; the Gulf, Colorado and Santa Fe Railway (later merged into the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway) and the Frisco in 1887; the Texas Midland Railroad (later Southern Pacific) in 1894; and the Paris and Mount Pleasant (Pa-Ma Line) in 1910. Paris Union Station, built 1912, served Frisco, Santa Fe, and Texas Midland passenger trains until 1956. Today, the station is used by the Lamar County Chamber of Commerce and serves as the research library for the Lamar County Genealogical Society.\nFollowing a tradition of American cities named \"Paris\" (named after France's capital), the city commissioned a replica of the Eiffel Tower in 1993 and installed it on site of the Love Civic Center, southeast of the town square. In 1998, presumably as a response to the 1993 construction of a tower in Paris, Tennessee, the city placed a giant red cowboy hat atop its tower. The current Eiffel Tower replica is at least the second one; an earlier replica constructed of wood was destroyed by a tornado.\nRace relations.\nParis has had a white majority with a significant Black minority for most of its history. The city is deeply segregated and race relations in Paris have a bloody history and are deeply polarized, turbulent, and sometimes explosive.\nIn the late-19th and early-20th centuries, several lynchings were staged at the Paris Fairgrounds as public spectacles, with crowds of white spectators cheering as the African-American victims were tortured and murdered. A Black teenager named Henry Smith was lynched in 1893. His murder was the first lynching in US history that was captured in photographs sold as postcards and other trinkets commemorating the killing. Journalist Ida B. Wells said of the incident, \"Never in the history of civilization has any Christian people stooped to such shocking brutality and indescribable barbarism as that which characterized the people of Paris, Texas.\"\nOn July 7, 1920 Irving and Herman Arthur were burned alive at the fairgrounds before a crowd of 3,000, their charred corpses then being dragged by a convoy of shouting white terrorists through Paris's African-American neighborhood as a warning to the Black community.\nIn 2008, an African-American man, Brandon McClelland, was run over and dragged to death under a vehicle. Two white men were arrested, but the prosecutor cited lack of evidence and declined to press charges, and no serious subsequent attempt to find other perpetrators was made. This caused unrest in the Paris African-American community. Following this incident, an attempt by the United States Department of Justice Community Relations Service to initiate a dialogue between the races in the town ended in failure when African-American complaints were mostly met by silent glares from white community members.\nA 2009 protest rally over the case led to Texas State Police intervention to prevent groups shouting \"white power!\" and \"black power!\" from coming to blows. In response to the incident, civil rights activist Brenda Cherry said \"I think we are probably stuck in 1930 right about now\".\nIn 2007, a 14-year-old African-American girl was sentenced by a local judge to up to seven years in a youth prison for shoving a hall monitor at Paris High School. Three months earlier, the same judge had sentenced a 14-year-old white girl to probation for arson. This sentencing disparity occasioned nationwide controversy and the African-American girl was released after serving one year on orders of a special conservator appointed by the State of Texas to investigate problems with the state's juvenile-justice practices.\nIn 2009, some African-American workers at the Turner Industries Group facility in the city claimed that hangman's nooses, Confederate flags, and racist graffiti were common occurrences due to a select group of employees on the site. At the same time, the United States Department of Education was conducting an investigation into allegations that African-American students in Paris's schools are disciplined more harshly than white students for similar offenses.\nIn 2015, the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ruled after an investigation that African-American workers at the Sara Lee Corporation plant in Paris (closed in 2011) were deliberately exposed disproportionately to asbestos, black mold, and other toxins, and also were targets of racial slurs and racist graffiti.\nSome Paris residents downplay the extent to which the town has a race-relations problem. Judge M. C. Superville commented, \"I do not believe there is systematic racial discrimination in Lamar County. I do believe there is a misperception that that is going on\".\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which (3.74%) are covered by water.\nParis is located in \"Tornado Alley\", an area largely centered in the middle of the United States in which tornadoes occur frequently because of weather patterns and geography. Paris is in USDA plant hardiness zone 8a for winter temperatures. This is cooler than its southern neighbor Dallas, and while similar to Atlanta, Georgia, it has warmer summertime temperatures. Summertime average highs reach in July and August, with associated lows of . Winter temperatures drop to an average high of and low of in January. The highest temperature on record was , set in August 1936, and the record low was , set in 1930. Average precipitation is . Snow is not unusual, but is by no means predictable, and years can pass with no snowfall at all.\nOn April 2, 1982, Paris was hit by an F4 tornado that destroyed more than 1,500 homes, and left 10 people dead, 170 injured, and 3,000 homeless. The damage toll from this tornado was estimated at US$50\u00a0million in 1982.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification, Paris has a humid subtropical climate, a\"Cfa\" on climate maps. The hottest temperature recorded in Paris was in August 1936, while the coldest temperature recorded was in January 1930 although unofficially it was in February 1899.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom an 1880 United States census population of 3,980, the population of the city of Paris increased to 25,898 at the 2000 census; in 2020, however, its population declined to 24,171.\nIn 2010, 25,171 people 10,306 households, and 6,426 families resided in the city. The population density was ; the 11,883 housing units averaged . of all households were made up of individuals, and 15.2% had someone living alone who was 65 or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.01. In the city, the population was distributed as 25.0% under 18, 10.6% from 18 to 24, 24.1% from 25 to 44, 23.8% from 45 to 64, and 16.6% who were 65 or older. The median age was 37.1 years. For every 100 females, there were 87.3 males. For every 100 females 18 and over, there were 82.9 males.\nBy 2020, the city had 10,522 households according to the American Community Survey, and 3,549 were married-couple households. The average household size was 2.29, and the average family size was 2.99. Of its 2020 population, 933 were foreign-born nationals, 18.9% of whom were naturalized U.S. citizens. As of the census estimates, 49.6% of housing units were owner-occupied and 50.4% were renter-occupied.\nIn 2010, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, the racial makeup of the city was 70.3% white, 24.8% Black and African American, 3.1% American Indian and Alaska Native, 1.1% Asian, and 4.1% from other races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race were 8.2% of the population. In 2020, its racial and ethnic makeup was 56.6% non-Hispanic White, 23.06% Black and African American, 1.35% Native American, 1.42% Asian, 0.08% Pacific Islander, 0.23% some other race, 5.38% multiracial, and 11.88% Hispanic or Latino of any race, reflecting demographic trends of greater diversification.\nEconomy.\nIn the past, Paris was a major cotton exchange, and the county was developed as cotton plantations. While cotton is still farmed on the lands around Paris, it is no longer a major part of the economy.\nParis's one major hospital had two campuses: Paris Regional Medical Center South (formerly St. Joseph's Hospital) and Paris Regional Medical Center North (formerly McCuistion Regional Medical Center). It serves as the center of healthcare for much of Northeast Texas and Southeast Oklahoma. Both campuses were operated jointly under the name of the Paris Regional Medical Center, a division of Essent Healthcare. Paris Regional Medical Center South Campus has closed and only the North Campus remains open. The health network is one of the largest employers in the Paris area.\nOutside of healthcare, the largest employers are Kimberly-Clark and Campbell Soup.\n\"Note: PRMC is Paris Regional Medical Center.\"\nArts and culture.\nThe city is home to several late-19th to mid-20th century stately homes. Among these is the Rufus Fenner Scott Mansion, designed by German architect J.L. Wees and constructed in 1910. The structure is solid concrete and steel with four floors. Rufus Scott was a prominent businessman known for shipping, imports, and banking. He was well known by local farmers, who bought aging transport mules from him. The Scott Mansion narrowly survived the fire of 1916. After the fire, Scott brought the architect Wees back to Paris to redesign the historic downtown area.\nGovernment.\nParis is governed by a city council as specified in the city's charter adopted in 1948.\nParis is represented in the Texas Senate by Republican Bryan Hughes, District 1, and in the Texas House of Representatives by Republican Gary VanDeaver, District 1.\nThe Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the Paris District Parole Office\nAt the federal level, the two U.S. senators from Texas are Republicans John Cornyn and Ted Cruz. Paris is part of Texas's 4th congressional district, represented by Republican Pat Fallon.\nThe United States Postal Service operates the Paris Post Office.\nEducation.\nElementary and secondary education is split among these school districts:\nIn addition, Paris Junior College provides postsecondary education. The Texas Education Code specifies that all of the Paris city limits is in the community college's service area. The TEC additionally specifies that areas in Paris ISD and all of Lamar County are in the college's service area. It hosts the Texas Institute of Jewelry Technology, a well-respected school of gemology, horology, and jewelry. The Industrial Technology Division offers programs in air conditioning technology, refrigeration technology, agricultural technology, drafting and computer-aided design, electronics, electromechanical technology, and welding technology.\nEast Texas A&amp;M University, a major university of over 12,000 students, is located in the neighboring city of Commerce, southwest of Paris.\nThe Paris Public Library serves Paris, as does the Lamar County Genealogical Society Library.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\nParis is served by four major highways:\nAccording to the Texas Transportation Commission, Paris is the second-largest city in Texas without a four-lane divided highway connecting to an interstate highway within the state. However, those traveling north of the city can go into the Midwest on a four-lane thoroughfare via US 271 across the Red River into Oklahoma, and then the Indian Nation Turnpike from Hugo to Interstate 40 at Henryetta, which in turn continues as a free four-lane highway via US 75 to Tulsa.\nMass transit.\nFor public transit, Paris is served by the Ark-Tex Council of Governments Rural Transit District (TRAX). Local, fixed-route bus service runs hourly on weekdays between 6:30 am and 6:30 pm. Dubbed the \"Paris Metro\", \"Texas Monthly\" has cited the town as a model for rural transport. There is no intercity transit available in Paris. However, intercity bus routes can be accessed in nearby Mount Pleasant and Sulphur Springs. These services are operated by Greyhound and Trailways.\nRail.\nParis is served by a branch line of the Kiamichi Railroad leading to Hugo, Oklahoma, and is the eastern terminus of a Dallas, Garland and Northeastern Railroad line to Sherman, Texas. As of 2024, the rail lines are used for freight haulage only; the city is not served by Amtrak.\nAir.\nCox Field provides general aviation services, and is categorized by the Federal Aviation Administration as a \"Regional\" airport.\nTrails.\nParis is located on the Northeast Texas Trail (NETT), a hike-and-bike trail from Farmersville, Texas, to New Boston, Texas, which follows a disused railroad right-of-way railbanked by the Union Pacific Railroad and Chaparral Railroad in the 1990s.\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24002", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24002", "title": "List of political parties by region", "text": "This page serves as a directory to lists of political parties worldwide, organized by their respective regions. Each linked page contains a table listing sub-pages for countries or jurisdictions within the specified region. The tables provide information on the dominant party system in each country.\nA political party is an organized group that adheres to a specific ideology or revolves around particular issues, aiming to participate in political power, often through elections involvement. Individual parties are appropriately detailed in separate articles dedicated to each nation.\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "24004", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24004", "title": "Private branch exchange", "text": ""}
{"id": "24005", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24005", "title": "Palo Alto Research Center", "text": ""}
{"id": "24006", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24006", "title": "Paraffin wax", "text": "Soft colorless solid derived from petroleum, coal or shale oil\nParaffin wax (or petroleum wax) is a soft colorless solid derived from petroleum, coal, or oil shale that consists of a mixture of hydrocarbon molecules containing between 20 and 40 carbon atoms. It is solid at room temperature and begins to melt above approximately , and its boiling point is above . Common applications for paraffin wax include lubrication, electrical insulation, and candles; dyed paraffin wax can be made into crayons.\nUn-dyed, unscented paraffin candles are odorless and bluish-white. Paraffin wax was first created by Carl Reichenbach in Germany in 1830 and marked a major advancement in candlemaking technology, as it burned more cleanly and reliably than tallow candles and was cheaper to produce.\nIn chemistry, \"paraffin\" is used synonymously with \"alkane\", indicating hydrocarbons with the general formula C\"n\"H2\"n\"+2. The name is derived from Latin \"parum\" (\"very little\") + \"affinis\", meaning \"lacking affinity\" or \"lacking reactivity\", referring to paraffin's unreactive nature.\nProperties.\nParaffin wax is mostly found as a white, odorless, flavourless, waxy solid, with a typical melting point between about , and a density of around 900\u00a0kg/m3. It is insoluble in water, but soluble in ether, benzene, and certain esters. Paraffin is unaffected by most common chemical reagents but burns readily. Its heat of combustion is 42 MJ/kg.\nParaffin wax is an excellent electrical insulator, with a resistivity of between 1013 and 1017 ohm-metre. This is better than nearly all other materials except some plastics (notably PTFE). It is an effective neutron moderator and was used in James Chadwick's 1932 experiments to identify the neutron.\nParaffin wax is an excellent material for storing heat, with a specific heat capacity of 2.14\u20132.9\u00a0J\u22c5g\u22121\u22c5K\u22121 (joules per gram per kelvin) and a heat of fusion of 200\u2013220\u00a0J\u22c5g\u22121. Paraffin wax phase-change cooling coupled with retractable radiators was used to cool the electronics of the Lunar Roving Vehicle during the crewed missions to the Moon in the early 1970s. Wax expands considerably when it melts and so is used in wax element thermostats for industrial, domestic and, particularly, automobile purposes.\nIf pure paraffin wax is heated in a partially open glass vessel until it nears the flash point and then rapidly cooled, its vapors may autoignite as result of reaching boiling liquid pressure.\nHistory.\nParaffin wax was first created in 1830 by German chemist Karl von Reichenbach when he attempted to develop a method to efficiently separate and refine waxy substances naturally occurring in petroleum. Paraffin represented a major advance in the candle-making industry because it burned cleanly and was cheaper to manufacture than other candle fuels such as beeswax and tallow. Paraffin wax initially suffered from a low melting point. This was remedied by adding stearic acid. The production of paraffin wax enjoyed a boom in the early 20th century due to the growth of the oil and meatpacking industries, which created paraffin and stearic acid as byproducts.\nManufacturing.\nThe feedstock for paraffin is slack wax, which is a mixture of oil and wax, a byproduct from the refining of lubricating oil.\nThe first step in making paraffin wax is to remove the oil (de-oiling or de-waxing) from the slack wax. The oil is separated by crystallization. Most commonly, the slack wax is heated, mixed with one or more solvents such as a ketone and then cooled. As it cools, wax crystallizes out of the solution, leaving only oil. This mixture is filtered into two streams: solid (wax plus some solvent) and liquid (oil and solvent). After the solvent is recovered by distillation, the resulting products are called \"product wax\" (or \"press wax\") and \"foots oil\". The lower the percentage of oil in the wax, the more refined it is considered to be (semi-refined versus fully refined). The product wax may be further processed to remove colors and odors. The wax may finally be blended together to give certain desired properties such as melt point and penetration. Paraffin wax is sold in either liquid or solid form.\nApplications.\nIn industrial applications, it is often useful to modify the crystal properties of the paraffin wax, typically by adding branching to the existing carbon backbone chain. The modification is usually done with additives, such as EVA copolymers, microcrystalline wax, or forms of polyethylene. The branched properties result in a modified paraffin with a higher viscosity, smaller crystalline structure, and modified functional properties. Pure paraffin wax is rarely used for carving original models for casting metal and other materials in the lost wax process, as it is relatively brittle at room temperature and presents the risks of chipping and breakage when worked. Soft and pliable waxes, like beeswax, may be preferred for such sculpture, but \"investment casting waxes,\" often paraffin-based, are expressly formulated for the purpose.\nIn a histology or pathology laboratory, paraffin wax is used to impregnate tissue prior to sectioning thin samples. Water is removed from the tissue through ascending strengths of alcohol (75% to absolute), and then the alcohol is cleared in an organic solvent such as xylene. The tissue is then placed in paraffin wax for several hours, then set in a mold with wax to cool and solidify. Sections are then cut on a microtome.\nOccupational safety.\nPeople can be exposed to paraffin in the workplace by breathing it in, skin contact, and eye contact. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) for paraffin wax fume exposure of 2\u00a0mg/m3 over an 8-hour workday.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24007", "revid": "49001800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24007", "title": "Pearl", "text": "Hard object produced within a living shelled mollusc\nA pearl is a hard, glistening object produced within the soft tissue (specifically the mantle) of a living shelled mollusk or another animal, such as fossil conulariids. Just like the shell of a mollusk, a pearl is composed of calcium carbonate (mainly aragonite or a mixture of aragonite and calcite) in minute crystalline form, which has deposited in concentric layers. More commercially valuable pearls are perfectly round and smooth, but many other shapes, known as baroque pearls, can occur. The finest quality of natural pearls have been highly valued as gemstones and objects of beauty for many centuries. Because of this, \"pearl\" has become a metaphor for something rare, fine, admirable, and valuable.\nThe most valuable pearls occur spontaneously in the wild but are extremely rare. These wild pearls are referred to as \"natural\" pearls. \"Cultured\" or \"farmed\" pearls from pearl oysters and freshwater mussels make up the majority of those currently sold. Imitation pearls are also widely sold in inexpensive jewelry. Pearls have been harvested and cultivated primarily for use in jewelry but in the past were also used to adorn clothing. They have also been crushed and used in cosmetics, medicines, and paint formulations.\nWhether wild or cultured, gem-quality pearls are almost always nacreous and iridescent, like the interior of the shell that produces them. However, almost all species of shelled mollusks are capable of producing pearls (technically \"calcareous concretions\") of lesser shine or less spherical shape. Although these may also be legitimately referred to as \"pearls\" by gemological labs and also under U.S. Federal Trade Commission rules, and are formed in the same way, most of them have no value except as curiosities.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"pearl\" comes from the French , originally from the Latin 'leg', after the ham- or mutton leg-shaped bivalve.\nThe scientific name for the family of pearl-bearing oysters, Margaritiferidae comes from the Old Persian word for pearl which is the source of the English name Margaret.\nDefinition.\nAll shelled mollusks can, by natural processes, produce some kind of \"pearl\" when an irritating microscopic object becomes trapped within its mantle folds, but the great majority of these \"pearls\" are not valued as gemstones. Nacreous pearls, the best-known and most commercially significant, are primarily produced by two groups of molluskan bivalves or clams. A nacreous pearl is made from layers of nacre, by the same living process as is used in the secretion of the mother of pearl, which lines the shell.\nNatural (or wild) pearls, formed without human intervention, are very rare. Many hundreds of pearl oysters or mussels must be gathered and opened, and thus killed, to find even one wild pearl; for many centuries, this was the only way pearls were obtained, and why pearls fetched such extraordinary prices in the past. Cultured pearls are formed in pearl farms, using human intervention as well as natural processes.\nOne family of nacreous pearl bivalves\u00a0\u2013 the pearl oyster\u00a0\u2013 lives in the sea, while the other\u00a0\u2013 a very different group of bivalves\u00a0\u2013 lives in freshwater; these are the river mussels such as the freshwater pearl mussel. Saltwater pearls can grow in several species of marine pearl oysters in the family Pteriidae. Freshwater pearls grow within certain (but by no means all) species of freshwater mussels in the order Unionida, the families Unionidae and Margaritiferidae.\nPhysical properties.\nThe unique luster of pearls depends upon the reflection, refraction, and diffraction of light from the translucent layers. The thinner and more numerous the layers in the pearl, the finer the luster. The iridescence that pearls display is caused by the overlapping of successive layers, which breaks up light falling on the surface. In addition, pearls (especially cultured freshwater pearls) can be dyed yellow, green, blue, brown, pink, purple, or black. The most valuable pearls have a metallic, highly reflective luster.\nBecause pearls are made primarily of calcium carbonate, they can be dissolved in vinegar. Calcium carbonate is susceptible to even a weak acid solution because the crystals react with the acetic acid in the vinegar to form calcium acetate and carbon dioxide.\nFreshwater and saltwater pearls.\nFreshwater and saltwater pearls may sometimes look quite similar, but they come from different sources.\nFreshwater pearls form in various species of freshwater mussels, family Unionidae, which live in lakes, rivers, ponds and other bodies of fresh water. These freshwater pearl mussels occur not only in hotter climates but also in colder, more temperate areas such as Scotland (where they are protected under law). Most freshwater cultured pearls sold today come from China.\nSaltwater pearls grow within pearl oysters, family Pteriidae, which live in oceans. Saltwater pearl oysters are usually cultivated in protected lagoons or volcanic atolls.\nFormation.\nThe mollusk's mantle (protective membrane) deposits layers of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) in the form of the mineral aragonite or a mixture of aragonite and calcite (polymorphs with the same chemical formula, but different crystal structures) held together by an organic horn-like compound called conchiolin. The combination of aragonite and conchiolin is called nacre, which makes up mother-of-pearl. The commonly held belief that a grain of sand acts as the irritant is rarely the case. Typical stimuli include organic material, parasites, or even damage that displaces mantle tissue to another part of the mollusk's body. These small particles or organisms gain entry when the shell valves are open for feeding or respiration. In cultured pearls, the irritant is typically an introduced piece of the mantle epithelium, with or without a spherical bead (beaded or beadless cultured pearls).\nNatural pearls.\nNatural pearls are nearly 100% calcium carbonate and conchiolin. It is thought that natural pearls form under a set of accidental conditions when a microscopic intruder or parasite enters a bivalve mollusk and settles inside the shell. The mollusk, irritated by the intruder, forms a pearl sac of external mantle tissue cells and secretes the calcium carbonate and conchiolin to cover the irritant. This secretion process is repeated many times, thus producing a pearl. Natural pearls come in many shapes, with perfectly round ones being comparatively rare.\nTypically, the build-up of a natural pearl consists of a brown central zone formed by columnar calcium carbonate (usually calcite, sometimes columnar aragonite) and a yellowish to white outer zone consisting of nacre (tabular aragonite). In a pearl cross-section such as the diagram, these two different materials can be seen. The presence of columnar calcium carbonate rich in organic material indicates juvenile mantle tissue that formed during the early stage of pearl development. Displaced living cells with a well-defined task may continue to perform their function in their new location, often resulting in a cyst. Such displacement may occur via an injury. The fragile rim of the shell is exposed and is prone to damage and injury. Crabs, other predators and parasites such as worm larvae may produce traumatic attacks and cause injuries in which some external mantle tissue cells are disconnected from their layer. Embedded in the conjunctive tissue of the mantle, these cells may survive and form a small pocket in which they continue to secrete calcium carbonate, their natural product. The pocket is called a pearl sac and grows with time by cell division. The juvenile mantle tissue cells, according to their stage of growth, secrete columnar calcium carbonate from the pearl sac's inner surface. In time, the pearl sac's external mantle cells proceed to the formation of tabular aragonite. When the transition to nacre secretion occurs, the brown pebble becomes covered with a nacreous coating. During this process, the pearl sac seems to travel into the shell; however, the sac actually stays in its original relative position in the mantle tissue while the shell itself grows. After a couple of years, a pearl forms, and the shell may be found by a lucky pearl fisher.\nCultured pearls.\nCultured pearls are the response of the shell to a tissue implant. A tiny piece of mantle tissue (called a \"graft\") from a donor shell is transplanted into a recipient shell, causing a pearl sac to form into which the tissue precipitates calcium carbonate. There are a number of methods for producing cultured pearls: using freshwater or seawater shells, transplanting the graft into the mantle or into the gonad, and adding a spherical bead as a nucleus. Most saltwater cultured pearls are grown with beads. Trade names of cultured pearls are Akoya (), white or golden South Sea, and black Tahitian. Most beadless cultured pearls are mantle-grown in freshwater shells in China and are known as freshwater cultured pearls.\nCultured pearls can be distinguished from natural pearls by X-ray examination. Nucleated cultured pearls are often 'preformed' as they tend to follow the shape of the implanted shell bead nucleus. After a bead is inserted into the oyster, it secretes a few layers of nacre around the bead; the resulting cultured pearl can then be harvested in as few as twelve to eighteen months.\nWhen a cultured pearl with a bead nucleus is X-rayed, it reveals a different structure to that of a natural pearl. A beaded cultured pearl shows a solid center with no concentric growth rings, whereas a natural pearl shows a series of concentric growth rings. A beadless cultured pearl (whether of freshwater or saltwater origin) may show growth rings, but also a complex central cavity, witness of the first precipitation of the young pearl sac.\nImitation pearls.\nSome imitation pearls (also called shell pearls) are simply made of mother-of-pearl, coral, or conch shell, while others are made from glass and are coated with a solution containing fish scales called \"essence d'Orient\".\nGemological identification.\nA well-equipped gem testing laboratory can distinguish natural pearls from cultured pearls by using gemological X-ray equipment to examine the center of a pearl. With X-rays, it is possible to see the growth rings of the pearl, where the layers of calcium carbonate are separated by thin layers of conchiolin. The differentiation of natural pearls from non-beaded cultured pearls can be very difficult without the use of this X-ray technique.\nNatural and cultured pearls can be distinguished from imitation pearls using a microscope. Another method of testing for imitations is to rub two pearls against each other. Imitation pearls are completely smooth, but natural and cultured pearls are composed of nacre platelets, making both feel slightly gritty.\nValue of a natural pearl.\nFine quality natural pearls are very rare jewels. Their values are determined similarly to those of other precious gems, according to size, shape, color, quality of surface, orient, and luster.\nSingle natural pearls are often sold as collector's items or set as centerpieces in unique jewelry. Very few matched strands of natural pearls exist, and those that do often sell for hundreds of thousands of dollars. (In 1917, jeweler Pierre Cartier purchased the Fifth Avenue mansion that is now the New York Cartier store in exchange for a matched double strand of natural pearls Cartier had been collecting for years; at the time, it was valued at US$1\u00a0million.)\nThe introduction and advancement of cultured pearls hit the pearl industry hard. Pearl dealers publicly disputed the authenticity of these new cultured products and left many consumers uneasy and confused about their much lower prices. Essentially, the controversy damaged the images of both natural and cultured pearls. By the 1950s, when a significant number of women in developed countries could afford their own cultured pearl necklace, natural pearls were reduced to a small, exclusive niche in the pearl industry.\nOrigin of a natural pearl.\nPreviously, natural pearls were found in many parts of the world. Present-day natural pearling is confined mostly to the Persian Gulf, in seas off Bahrain. Australia also has one of the world's last remaining fleets of pearl diving ships. Australian pearl divers dive for South Sea pearl oysters to be used in the cultured South Sea pearl industry. The catch of pearl oysters is similar to the numbers of oysters taken during the natural pearl days. Hence, significant numbers of natural pearls from wild oysters are still found in the Australian Indian Ocean waters. X-ray examination is required to positively verify natural pearls found today.\nTypes of cultured pearls.\nA keshi pearl is a pearl composed entirely of nacre and results from mishaps in the culturing process. Most are quite small, typically only a few millimeters in diameter, and are often irregular in shape. In seeding a cultured pearl, a piece of mantle muscle from a sacrificed oyster is placed with a bead of mother of pearl within a host oyster. If the piece of mantle should slip off the bead, a keshi pearl forms of baroque shape about the mantle piece. Therefore, while a keshi pearl could be considered superior to cultured pearls with a mother-of-pearl bead center, in the cultured pearl industry, the oyster's resources used to create a mistaken all-nacre baroque pearl is a drain on the production of the intended round cultured pearl. Therefore, the pearl industry is making ongoing attempts to improve culturing techniques so that keshi pearls do not occur. All-nacre pearls may one day be limited to natural found pearls. Today many \"keshi\" pearls are intentional, with post-harvest shells returned to the water to regenerate a pearl in the existing pearl sac.\nTahitian pearls, frequently referred to as black pearls, are highly valued because of their rarity; the culturing process for them dictates a smaller volume output and they can never be mass-produced because, in common with most sea pearls, the oyster can only be nucleated with one pearl at a time, while freshwater mussels are capable of multiple pearl implants. Before the days of cultured pearls, black pearls were rare and highly valued for the simple reason that white pearl oysters rarely produced naturally black pearls, and black pearl oysters rarely produced any natural pearls at all.\nSince the development of pearl culture technology, the black pearl oysters \"Pinctada margaritifera\" found in Tahiti and many other Pacific islands, including the Cook Islands and Fiji are being extensively used for producing cultured pearls. The rarity of the black cultured pearl is now a \"comparative\" issue. The black cultured pearl is rare when compared to Chinese freshwater cultured pearls and Japanese and Chinese akoya cultured pearls and is more valuable than these pearls. However, it is more abundant than the South Sea pearl, which is more valuable than the black cultured pearl. This is simply because the black pearl oyster \"Pinctada margaritifera\" is far more abundant than the elusive, rare, and larger South Sea pearl oyster \"Pinctada maxima\", which cannot be found in lagoons, but which must be dived for in a rare number of deep ocean habitats or grown in hatcheries. Black cultured pearls from the black pearl oyster \"Pinctada margaritifera\" are not South Sea pearls, although they are often mistakenly described as black South Sea pearls.\nNatural black pearls are rare and have a body color that may be assessed as silver, silver blue, gold, brown-black, green-black, or black.\nThe correct definition of a South Sea pearl\u00a0\u2013 as described by CIBJO and GIA\u00a0\u2013 is a pearl produced by the \"Pinctada maxima\" pearl oyster. South Sea pearls are the color of their host \"Pinctada maxima\" oyster and can be white, silver, pink, gold, cream, and any combination of these basic colors, including overtones of the various colors of the rainbow displayed in the pearl nacre of the oyster shell itself.\nSouth Sea pearls are the largest and rarest of the cultured pearls, making them the most valuable. Prized for their exquisitely beautiful \"orient\" or lustre, South Sea pearls are now farmed in various parts of the world where the \"Pinctada maxima\" oysters can be found, with the finest South Sea pearls being produced by Paspaley along the remote coastline of North-Western Australia. White and silver colored South Sea pearls tend to come from the Broome area of Australia, while golden colored ones are more prevalent in the Philippines and Indonesia.\nA farm in the Gulf of California, Mexico, is culturing pearls from the black lipped \"Pinctada mazatlanica\" oysters and the rainbow-lipped \"Pteria sterna\" oysters. Also called Concha N\u00e1car, the pearls from these rainbow-lipped oysters fluoresce red under ultraviolet light.\nFrom other species.\nBiologically speaking, under the right set of circumstances, almost any shelled mollusk can produce some kind of pearl. However, most of these molluscan pearls have no luster or iridescence. The great majority of mollusk species produce pearls that are not attractive and are sometimes not even very durable. Such pearls usually have no value at all, except perhaps to a scientist or collector or as a curiosity. These objects used to be referred to as \"calcareous concretions\" by some gemologists, even though a malacologist would still consider them to be pearls. Valueless pearls of this type are sometimes found in edible mussels, edible oysters, escargot snails, and so on. The GIA and CIBJO now simply use the term 'pearl' (or, where appropriate, the more descriptive term 'non-nacreous pearl') when referring to such items and, under Federal Trade Commission rules, various mollusk pearls may be referred to as 'pearls', without qualification.\nA few species produce pearls that can be of interest as gemstones. These species include the bailer shell \"Melo\", the giant clam \"Tridacna\", various scallop species, Pen shells \"Pinna\", and the \"Haliotis iris\" species of abalone. Pearls of abalone are cultured pearls, or blister pearls, unique to New Zealand waters, and are commonly referred to as 'blue pearls'. They are admired for their luster and naturally bright vibrant colors that are often compared to opal. Another example is the conch pearl (sometimes referred to simply as the 'pink pearl'), which is found very rarely growing between the mantle and the shell of the queen conch or pink conch, \"Strombus gigas\", a large sea snail or marine gastropod from the Caribbean Sea. These pearls, which are often pink in color, are a by-product of the conch fishing industry, and the best of them display a shimmering optical effect related to chatoyance known as 'flame structure'.\nSomewhat similar gastropod pearls, this time more orange in hue, are (again very rarely) found in the horse conch \"Triplofusus papillosus\".\nThe second largest pearl known was found in the Philippines in 1934 and is known as the \"Pearl of Lao Tzu\". It is a naturally occurring, non-nacreous, calcareous concretion (pearl) from a giant clam. Because it did not grow in a pearl oyster, it is not pearly; instead, the surface is glossy like porcelain. Other pearls from giant clams are known to exist, but this is a particularly large one, weighing 14\u00a0lb (6.4\u00a0kg).\nThe largest known pearl (also from a giant clam) is the Pearl of Puerto, also found in the Philippines by a fisherman from Puerto Princesa, Palawan Island. The enormous pearl is 30\u00a0cm wide (1\u00a0ft), 67\u00a0cm long (2.2\u00a0ft) and weighs 75\u00a0lb (34\u00a0kg).\nThe extinct conulariids, a group of cnidarians closely related to stalked jellyfish, also possessed the ability to produce pearls. However, these pearls are composed of calcium phosphate, and this combined with their age and crystal structure makes them rather unattractive for use in decoration.\nHistory.\nPearl hunting.\nThe ancient chronicle Mahavamsa mentions the thriving pearl industry in the port of Oruwella in the Gulf of Mannar in Sri Lanka. It also records that eight varieties of pearls accompanied Prince Vijaya's embassy to the Pandyan king as well as king Devanampiya Tissa's embassy to Emperor Ashoka. Pliny the Elder (23\u201379 AD) praised the pearl fishery of the Gulf as most productive in the world.\nFor thousands of years, seawater pearls were retrieved by divers in the Indian Ocean in areas such as the Persian Gulf, the Red Sea and the Gulf of Mannar. Evidence also suggest a prehistoric origin to pearl diving in these regions. Starting in the Han dynasty (206 BC\u2013220 AD), the Chinese hunted extensively for seawater pearls in the South China Sea, particularly in what is now Tolo Harbour in Hong Kong. Tanka pearl divers of twelfth century China attached ropes to their waists in order to be safely brought back up to the surface.\nWhen Spanish conquistadors arrived in the Western Hemisphere, they discovered that around the islands of Cubagua and Margarita, some 200\u00a0km north of the Venezuelan coast, was an extensive pearl bed (a bed of pearl oysters). One discovered and named pearl, La Peregrina pearl, was offered to Philip II of Spain who intended to give it as a gift for his daughter on the occasion of her marriage, but the King found it so beautiful that he kept it for himself. Later, he elevated it to be part of the Spanish Crown Jewels. From then on, the pearl was recorded in every royal inventory for more than 200 years. According to Garcilasso de la Vega, who says that he saw La Peregrina at Seville in 1607, this was found at Panama in 1560 by a slave worker who was rewarded with his liberty and his owner with the office of alcalde of Panama.\nMargarita pearls are extremely difficult to find today and are known for their unique yellowish color.\nBefore the beginning of the 20th century, pearl hunting was the most common way of harvesting pearls. Divers manually pulled oysters from ocean floors and river bottoms and checked them individually for pearls. Not all mussels and oysters produce pearls. In a haul of three tons, only three or four oysters will produce perfect pearls.\nBritish Isles.\nPearls were one of the attractions that drew Julius Caesar to Britain. They are, for the most part, freshwater pearls from mussels. Pearling was banned in the U.K. in 1998 due to the endangered status of river mussels. Discovery and publicity about the sale for a substantial sum of the Abernethy pearl in the River Tay had resulted in the heavy exploitation of mussel colonies during the 1970s and 80s by weekend warriors. When it was permitted it was carried on mainly by Scottish Travellers who found pearls varied from river to river with the River Oykel in the Highlands being noted for the finest rose-pink pearls. There are two firms in Scotland that are licensed to sell pre-1998 freshwater pearls.\nPearl farming.\nToday, the cultured pearls on the market can be divided into two categories. The first category covers the beaded cultured pearls, including akoya, South Sea, and Tahiti. These pearls are gonad grown, and usually one pearl is grown at a time. This limits the number of pearls at a harvest period. The pearls are usually harvested after one year for akoya, 2\u20134 years for Tahitian and South Sea, and 2\u20137 years for freshwater. This perliculture process was first developed by the British biologist William Saville-Kent who passed the information along to Tatsuhei Mise and Tokichi Nishikawa from Japan.\nThe second category includes the non-beaded freshwater cultured pearls, like the Biwa or Chinese pearls. As they grow in the mantle, where up to 25 grafts can be implanted on each wing, these pearls are much more frequent and saturate the market completely. An impressive improvement in quality has taken place over ten years when the former rice-grain-shaped pebbles are compared with the near round pearls of today. Later, large, near-perfect round bead nucleated pearls up to 15\u00a0mm in diameter have been produced with metallic luster.\nThe nucleus bead in a beaded cultured pearl is generally a polished sphere made from freshwater mussel shell. Along with a small piece of mantle tissue from another mollusk (donor shell) to catalyze the pearl sac, it is surgically implanted into the gonad (reproductive organ) of a saltwater mollusk. In freshwater perliculture, only the piece of tissue is used in most cases and is inserted into the fleshy mantle of the host mussel. South Sea and Tahitian pearl oysters, also known as \"Pinctada maxima\" and \"Pinctada margaritifera\", which survive the subsequent surgery to remove the finished pearl, are often implanted with a new, larger beads as part of the same procedure and then returned to the water for another 2\u20133 years of growth.\nDespite the common misperception, Mikimoto did not invent pearl culture. The accepted process of pearl culture was developed by the British Biologist William Saville-Kent in Australia and brought to Japan by Tokichi Nishikawa and Tatsuhei Mise. Nishikawa was granted the patent in 1916 and married the daughter of Mikimoto. Mikimoto was able to use Nishikawa's technology. After the patent was granted in 1916, the technology was immediately commercially applied to akoya pearl oysters in Japan in 1916. Mise's brother was the first to produce a commercial crop of pearls in the akoya oyster. Mitsubishi's Baron Iwasaki immediately applied the technology to the South Sea pearl oyster in 1917 in the Philippines and later in Buton and Palau. Mitsubishi was the first to produce a cultured South Sea pearl\u00a0\u2013 although it was not until 1928 that the first small commercial crop of pearls was successfully produced.\nThe original Japanese cultured pearls, known as akoya pearls, are produced by a species of small pearl oyster, \"Pinctada fucata martensii\", which is no bigger than in size, hence akoya pearls larger than 10\u00a0mm in diameter are extremely rare and highly priced. Today, a hybrid mollusk is used in both Japan and China in the production of akoya pearls.\nCultured Pearls were sold in cans for the export market. These were packed in Japan by the I.C.P. Canning Factory (International Pearl Company L.T.D.) in Nagasaki Pref. Japan.\nTimeline of pearl production.\nMitsubishi commenced pearl culture with the South Sea pearl oyster in 1916, as soon as the technology patent was commercialized. By 1931, this project was showing signs of success, but was upset by the death of Tatsuhei Mise. Although the project was recommenced after Tatsuhei's death, it was discontinued at the beginning of WWII before significant productions of pearls were achieved.\nAfter WWII, new South Sea pearl projects were commenced in the early 1950s at Kuri Bay and Port Essington in Australia, and Burma. Japanese companies were involved in all projects using technicians from the original Mitsubishi South Sea pre-war projects. Kuri Bay is now the location of one of the largest and most well-known pearl farms owned by Paspaley, the biggest producer of South Sea pearls in the world.\nIn 2010, China overtook Japan in akoya pearl production. Japan has all but ceased its production of akoya pearls smaller than 8\u00a0mm. Japan maintains its status as a pearl processing center, however, and imports the majority of Chinese akoya pearl production. These pearls are then processed (often simply matched and sorted), relabeled as products of Japan, and exported.\nIn the past two decades, cultured pearls have been produced using larger oysters in the south Pacific and Indian Ocean. The largest pearl oyster is the \"Pinctada maxima\", which is roughly the size of a dinner plate. South Sea pearls are characterized by their large size and warm luster. Sizes up to 14\u00a0mm in diameter are not uncommon. In 2013, Indonesia Pearl supplied 43 percent of South Sea Pearls international market. The other significant producers are Australia, Philippines, Myanmar and Malaysia.\nFreshwater pearl farming.\nIn 1914, pearl farmers began growing cultured freshwater pearls using the pearl mussels native to Lake Biwa. This lake, the largest and most ancient in Japan, lies near the city of Kyoto. The extensive and successful use of the Biwa Pearl Mussel is reflected in the name \"Biwa pearls\", a phrase which was at one time nearly synonymous with freshwater pearls in general. Since the time of peak production in 1971, when Biwa pearl farmers produced six tons of cultured pearls, pollution has caused the virtual extinction of the industry. Japanese pearl farmers recently cultured a hybrid pearl mussel\u00a0\u2013 a cross between Biwa Pearl Mussels and a closely related species from China, \"Hyriopsis cumingi\", in Lake Kasumigaura. This industry has also nearly ceased production due to pollution. Currently, the Belpearl company, based out of Kobe, Japan, continues to purchase the remaining Kasumiga-ura pearls.\nJapanese pearl producers also invested in producing cultured pearls with freshwater mussels in the region of Shanghai, China. China has since become the world's largest producer of freshwater pearls, producing more than 1,500 metric tons per year (in addition to metric measurements, Japanese units of measurement such as the kan and momme are sometimes encountered in the pearl industry).\nLed by pearl pioneer John Latendresse and his wife Chessy, the United States began farming cultured freshwater pearls in the mid-1960s. \"National Geographic\" magazine introduced the American cultured pearl as a commercial product in their August 1985 issue. The Tennessee pearl farm has emerged as a tourist destination in recent years, but commercial production of freshwater pearls has ceased.\nMomme weight.\nFor many cultured pearl dealers and wholesalers, the preferred weight measure used for loose pearls and pearl strands is the momme. Momme is a weight measure used by the Japanese for centuries. Today, momme weight is still the standard unit of measure used by most pearl dealers to communicate with pearl producers and wholesalers. One momme corresponds to 1/1000 kan. Reluctant to give up tradition, the Japanese government formalized the kan measure in 1891 as being exactly 3.75 kilograms or 8.28 pounds. Hence, 1 momme = 3.75 grams or 3750 milligrams.\nIn the United States, during the 19th and 20th centuries, through trade with Japan in silk cloth, the momme became a unit indicating the quality of silk cloth.\nThough the millimeter size range is typically the first factor in determining a cultured pearl necklace's value, the momme weight of the pearl necklace will allow the buyer to quickly determine if the necklace is properly proportioned. This is especially true when comparing the larger South Sea and Tahitian pearl necklaces.\nIn jewelry.\nThe value of the pearls in jewelry is determined by a combination of the luster, color, size, lack of surface flaw, and symmetry that are appropriate for the type of pearl under consideration. Among those attributes, luster is the most important differentiator of pearl quality, according to jewelers.\nAll factors being equal, however, the larger the pearl, the more valuable it is. Large, perfectly round pearls are rare and highly valued. Teardrop-shaped pearls are often used in pendants.\nShapes.\nPearls are generally of spherical shapes. Perfectly round pearls are the rarest and most valuable shape. Semi-rounds are also used in necklaces or in pieces where the shape of the pearl can be disguised to look like it is a perfectly round pearl. Button pearls are like slightly flattened round pearls and can also make a necklace, but are more often used in single pendants or earrings where the back half of the pearl is covered, making it look like a larger, rounder pearl.\nPear-shaped pearls sometimes look like teardrop pearls and are most often seen in earrings, pendants, or as a center pearl in a necklace. Baroque pearls have a different appeal; they are often highly irregular with unique and interesting shapes. They are also commonly seen in necklaces. Circled pearls are characterized by concentric ridges, or rings, around the body of the pearl.\nIn general, cultured pearls are less valuable than natural pearls, whereas imitation pearls have almost no value. One way that jewelers can determine whether a pearl is cultured or natural is to have a gem lab perform an X-ray examination of the pearl. If X-rays reveal a nucleus, the pearl is likely a bead-nucleated saltwater pearl. If no nucleus is present, but irregular and small dark inner spots indicating a cavity are visible, combined with concentric rings of organic substance, the pearl is likely a cultured freshwater. Cultured freshwater pearls can often be confused with natural pearls, which present as homogeneous pictures that continuously darken toward the surface of the pearl. Natural pearls will often show larger cavities where organic matter has dried out and decomposed.\nLengths of pearl necklaces.\nThere is a special vocabulary used to describe the length of pearl necklaces. While most other necklaces are simply referred to by their physical measurement, pearl necklaces are named by how low they hang when worn around the neck. A \"collar\", measuring in length, sits directly against the throat and does not hang down the neck at all; collars are often made up of multiple strands of pearls. \"Pearl chokers\", measuring in length, nestle just at the base of the neck. A strand called a \"princess length\", measuring in length, comes down to or just below the collarbone. A \"matinee length\", measuring in length, falls just above the breasts. An \"opera length\", measuring in length, will be long enough to reach the breastbone or sternum of the wearer; and longer still, a \"pearl rope\", measuring more than in length, is any length that falls down farther than an \"opera\".\nNecklaces can also be classified as uniform or graduated. In a uniform strand of pearls, all pearls are classified as the same size but fall in a range. A uniform strand of akoya pearls, for example, will measure within 0.5\u00a0mm. So a strand will never be 7\u00a0mm, but will be 6.5\u20137\u00a0mm. Freshwater pearls, Tahitian pearls, and South Sea pearls all measure to a full millimeter when considered uniform.\nA graduated strand of pearls most often has at least 3\u00a0mm of differentiation from the ends to the center of the necklace. Popularized in the United States during the 1950s by the GIs bringing strands of cultured akoya pearls home from Japan, a 3.5 momme, 3\u00a0mm to 7\u00a0mm graduated strand was much more affordable than a uniform strand because most of the pearls were small.\nColors.\nEarrings and necklaces can also be classified by the grade of the color of the pearl: saltwater and freshwater pearls come in many different colors. While white, and more recently black, saltwater pearls are by far the most popular, other color tints can be found on pearls from the oceans. Pink, blue, champagne, green, and even purple saltwater pearls can be encountered, but to collect enough of these rare colors to form a complete string of the same size and shade can take years.\nThe vast majority of inexpensive colored pearls have been subjected to some form of dye, often a fabric dye. This dye will only tend to penetrate the first layer or two of nacre, but this is enough to impart vivid and sometimes garish color to otherwise white pearls. Truly valuable pearls are never dyed, and this process is not believed to add to their market value and, in most cases, would only subtract from it.\nReligious references.\nHindu scriptures.\nThe Hindu tradition describes the sacred Nine Pearls, which were first documented in the Garuda Purana, one of the books of the Hindu scriptures. Ayurveda contains references to pearl powder as a stimulant of digestion and a treatment for mental ailments. According to Marco Polo, the kings of Malabar wore a necklace of 108 rubies and pearls, which was given from one generation of kings to the next. The reason was that every king had to say 108 prayers every morning and every evening. At least until the beginning of the 20th century it was a Hindu custom to present a completely new, undrilled pearl and pierce it during the wedding ceremony.\nThe Pearl, which can be transliterated to \"Moti\", a type of \"Mani\" from Sanskrit, is also associated with many Hindu deities, the most famous being the Kaustubha that Lord Vishnu wears on his chest.\nHebrew scriptures.\nThe Hebrew word \u05e4\u05b0\u05bc\u05e0\u05b4\u05d9\u05e0\u05b4\u05d9\u05dd 'pearl(s)' appears in several places in the Hebrew Bible (Job 28:18; Proverbs 3:15; 8:11; 20:15; 31:10; Lamentations 4:7), although its etymology is unclear.\nNew Testament scriptures.\nIn a Christian New Testament parable (Matthew 13:45\u201346), Jesus compared the Kingdom of Heaven to a \"pearl of great price\". \"Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly (fine) pearls: Who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had, and bought it.\"\nThe twelve gates of the New Jerusalem are reportedly each made of a single pearl in Revelation 21:21, that is, the Pearly Gates. \"And the twelve gates were twelve pearls: every several gate was of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.\"\nHoly things are compared to pearls in Matthew 7:6: \"Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.\"\nPearls are also found in numerous references showing the wickedness and pride of a people, as in Revelation 18:16. \"And saying, Alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine linen, in purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and pearls!\"\nIslamic scriptures.\nThe Quran often mentions that dwellers of paradise will be adorned with pearls:\n22:23 \"God will admit those who believe and work righteous deeds, to Gardens beneath which rivers flow: they shall be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls; and their garments there will be of silk.\"\n35:33 \"Gardens of Eternity will they enter: therein will they be adorned with bracelets of gold, silver and pearls; and their garments there will be of silk.\"\n52:24 \"And they will be waited on by their youthful servants like spotless pearls.\"\nAdditional references.\nThe metaphor of a pearl appears in the longer Hymn of the Pearl, a poem respected for its high literary quality and use of layered theological metaphor, found within one of the texts of Gnosticism.\nThe Pearl of Great Price is a book of scripture in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) and some other Latter Day Saint denominations.\n\"Pearl\" is a Middle English religious poem.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24008", "revid": "47897342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24008", "title": "Pope Benedict I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 575 to 579\nPope Benedict I (; died 30 July 579) was the bishop of Rome from 2 June 575 to his death on 30 July 579.\nBenedict was the son of a man named Boniface, and was called Bonosus by the Greeks. The ravages of the Lombards rendered it very difficult to communicate with the emperor at Constantinople, who claimed the privilege of confirming the election of popes. Hence there was a vacancy of nearly eleven months between the death of Pope John III and the arrival of the imperial confirmation of Benedict's election on 2 June 575.\nBenedict granted an estate, the Massa Veneris, in the territory of Minturnae, to Abbot Stephen of St. Mark's \"near the walls of Spoleto\" (St. Gregory I, Ep. ix, 87, I. al. 30). Famine followed the devastating Lombards, and from the few words the \"Liber Pontificalis\" has about Benedict, we gather that he died in the midst of his efforts to cope with these difficulties. He was buried in the vestibule of the sacristy of the old Basilica of St. Peter. In a ceremony held in December, he ordained fifteen priests and three deacons and consecrated twenty-one bishops.\nFew of the records of transactions outside Rome that could help understand Benedict's pontificate survive, and because of the disruptions caused by the Lombards in Italy, perhaps few ever existed.\nHe ruled the church during a period made calamitous by the invasion of the Lombards and by famine, plague, and the flooding of the Tiber River. While working to solve the resulting problems, he died during a siege of Rome by the Lombards.\nPapal life.\nVery little is known about the actions that Pope Benedict I took during his time as pope. He issued the estate called \u201cMassa Veneris\u201d to an Abbot Stephen with St. Mark's. This was a small territory that was in the eastern part of Italy. Benedict I spent most of his time as pope dealing with the Lombards and their threats. This Germanic group continued moving through Italy during his reign and constantly fought the Church for more land. Their battles caused a famine that lasted for years and left Roman Catholics in despair. In December of 578, the pope issued formal orders and held a ceremony to appoint 21 new bishops. The same ceremony saw the appointment of three deacons and 15 priests. That was the only bright spot during his reign. He would spend the rest of his days battling with the Lombards and trying to hold the Church together. When he died on 30 July he had been pope for 1,519 days.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24009", "revid": "29738728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24009", "title": "Pope Benedict II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 684 to 685\nPope Benedict II () was the bishop of Rome from 26 June 684 to his death on 8 May 685. Pope Benedict II's feast day is 7 May.\nEarly life.\nBenedict was born in Rome. It is possible that he was a member of the Savelli family, though this is not certain. Sent when young to the \"schola cantorum\", he distinguished himself by his knowledge of the Scriptures and by his singing.\nPapacy.\nThe bishops of Rome were anciently chosen by the clergy and people of Rome, according to the discipline of those times; the Roman emperor was the head of the people, on which account his consent was required. But whilst the emperors resided in Constantinople, this condition produced often long delays and considerable inconveniences. Although chosen in 683, he was not ordained until 684 awaiting the permission of Emperor Constantine IV. According to the \"Liber Diurnus Romanorum Pontificum\", he obtained from the emperor a decree which either abolished imperial confirmations altogether or made them obtainable from the exarch of Ravenna. Benedict symbolically adopted Constantine's sons, Justinian II and Heraclius.\nTo help to suppress Monothelitism, Benedict endeavoured to secure the subscriptions of the bishops of Hispania to the decrees of the Third Council of Constantinople of 680/1, and to bring about the submission to the decrees of Macarius, the deposed bishop of Antioch. Restorations of numerous churches in Rome are ascribed to the less than a year's pontificate of Benedict II, including Old St. Peter's Basilica and San Lorenzo in Lucina. After a pontificate of about eleven months, Pope Benedict II died on May 8, 685 and was buried in St. Peter's.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24010", "revid": "1293116576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24010", "title": "Pope Benedict III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 855 to 858\nPope Benedict III (; died 17 April 858) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 29 September 855 to his death on 17 April 858.\nEarly career.\nLittle is known of Benedict's life before his papacy. His father was named Peter. Benedict was educated, and lived in Rome and was appointed by Pope Leo IV as cardinal-priest of the church of San Callisto. Benedict had a reputation for learning and piety.\nPontificate.\nBenedict III was elected upon the refusal of Adrian, the initial choice of the clergy and people. Arsenius, bishop of Orte, intercepted the legates sent to advise the emperor of the election and persuaded them to betray Benedict and convince the emperor name the bishop's nephew Anastasius instead. Anastasius had previously been excommunicated by Leo IV. The legates returned with the imperial envoys and had Benedict's election disavowed and Anastasius installed. Anastasius took his place at the Lateran and Benedict was imprisoned. However, local popular opinion was so strong that the Franks recognized Benedict's consecration. Benedict treated Anastasius and his adherents leniently. The schism helped to weaken the hold of the emperors upon the popes, especially upon their elections.\nBenedict intervened in the conflict between Lothair II of Lotharingia, Louis II of Italy, and Charles of Provence on the death of their father, Emperor Lothair I. He wrote to the Frankish bishops, rebuking them for remaining silent in the face of the disorder affecting the Carolingian realms.\n\u00c6thelwulf of Wessex and his son, the future king Alfred the Great, visited Rome in Benedict's reign. The Schola Anglorum, which was destroyed by fire in 847, was restored by Benedict.\nA medieval tradition claimed that Pope Joan, a woman disguised as a man, was Benedict's immediate predecessor. The legendary Joan is generally believed to be fictitious.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24011", "revid": "1319812412", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24011", "title": "Pope Benedict V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 964\nPope Benedict V (; died 4 July 965) was the pope and ruler of the Papal States from 22 May to 23 June 964, in opposition to Leo VIII. He was overthrown by Emperor Otto I. His brief pontificate occurred at the end of a period known as the \"Saeculum obscurum\".\nEarly career.\nBenedict was the son of a Roman called John, and was born and raised in Rome around the vicinity of the Theatre of Marcellus. As cardinal-deacon, Benedict was renowned for his learning, for which his contemporaries gave him the additional name of Grammaticus. He was also a notarius and took part in the deposition of Pope John XII by the Holy Roman emperor, Otto I, and the subsequent election of Otto's candidate, Pope Leo VIII.\nElection.\nThe Roman people, unhappy with the election of Leo VIII as pope, recalled John XII. John convened a synod which condemned Leo, in which Benedict took part. However, with John's death, the Roman people again rejected Leo, who fled from Rome and joined Otto at Rieti in central Italy. After a violent struggle between rival factions, the Romans elected Benedict instead, who was acclaimed by the city militia. Prior to his coronation as pope, envoys were sent to Otto, informing them of their decision. The emperor rejected their decision out of hand and warned them not to proceed. Returning to Rome, they decided to ignore Otto; Benedict was consecrated bishop and crowned pope on 22 May 964. The Romans swore an oath to Benedict that they would not abandon him and would protect him against Otto.\nOtto however, upon hearing the news, resolved to restore his candidate as pope. He marched and proceeded to besiege Rome, blockading it so that no one was able to leave the city. The result was famine, as the land around the city was ravaged, and a single modius of bran cost thirty denarii. Although Benedict tried to bolster morale by encouraging the defenders from the walls of the city, as well as threatening to excommunicate the emperor and his army, the Romans soon decided to capitulate. Opening the gates to Otto, they handed Benedict over to him on 23 June 964.\nOverthrow.\nTogether with his clerical and lay supporters, and clad in his pontifical robes, Benedict was brought before a synod which Leo had convened. Benedict was asked by the archdeacon how he dared to assume the chair of Saint Peter while Leo was still alive. He was also accused of having broken his oath to the emperor, where he promised never to elect a pope without the emperor's consent. Benedict responded: \u201cIf I have sinned, have mercy on me.\u201d Having received a promise from the emperor that his life would be spared if he submitted, Benedict threw himself at Leo's feet and acknowledged his guilt.\nThe synod revoked his episcopal consecration, his pallium was torn from him, and his pastoral staff was broken over him by Leo. However, through the intercession of Otto, he was allowed to retain the rank of deacon. Otto left Rome sometime after 29 June 964, taking Benedict with him. After some delay, he was taken to Germany in early 965. The ex-Pope was moved to Hamburg and placed under the care of Adaldag, Archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen. His period of exile was brief; Adam of Bremen noted:\n\u201dThe archbishop [Adaldag] kept him with great honour till his death; for he is said to have been both holy and learned and worthy of the Apostolic See. . . . And so living a holy life with us, and teaching others how to live well, he at length died a happy death just when the Romans had come to ask the emperor that he might be restored.\u201d\nAlthough he was treated well by Archbishop Adaldag, many others considered him an antipope, and attempted to keep him ostracised. Archbishop Libentius I (the successor of Adaldag) commented:\n\u201dWhen the Lord Pope Benedict was an exile in these parts, I sought him out; and though every effort was made to prevent my going to him, I would never allow myself to be influenced against the Pope. But, as long as he lived, I closely adhered to him.\u201d\nDeath and burial.\nBenedict died on 4 July 965 and was buried in the cathedral in Hamburg. Then sometime before the year 988, his remains were transferred to Rome, but where they were interred is unknown. A legend has it that Benedict prophesied his relocation to Rome, and the devastation of Hamburg by King Mstivoj of the Obodrites in 983:\n\"Here must my frail body return to dust. After my death all this country will be devastated by the sword of the heathen and be abandoned to wild beasts. Nor will the land experience solid peace till my translation. But when I am taken home, I trust that, by the intercession of the apostle, the pagan ravages will cease.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24012", "revid": "1308913610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24012", "title": "Pope Benedict VI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 973 to 974\nPope Benedict VI (; died June 974) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 19 January 973 to his death in 974. His brief pontificate occurred in the political context of the establishment of the Holy Roman Empire, during the transition between the reigns of Otto I and Otto II, incorporating the struggle for power of Roman aristocratic families such as the Crescentii.\nEarly life.\nThe son of a Roman of German ancestry named Hildebrand, Benedict was born in Rome in the region called \"Sub Capitolio\" (in what was the old 8th region of Augustan Rome, the ). Prior to becoming pope, he was the cardinal deacon of the church of Saint Theodore.\nPontificate.\nOn the death of Pope John XIII in September 972, the majority of the electors who adhered to the imperial faction chose Benedict VI to be his successor. He was not consecrated until January 973, due to the need to gain the approval of the Holy Roman emperor, Otto I. Installed as pope under the protection of Otto I, Benedict was seen as a puppet of the emperor by the local Roman aristocracy who resented the emperor's dominance in Roman civil and ecclesiastical affairs.\nRecord of Benedict VI's reign as pope is scant. There is a letter dated to Benedict's reign from Pilgrim of Passau, asking for Benedict to confer on him the pallium, and make him a bishop so that he could continue his mission to convert the Hungarian people to Christianity. However, the response from Benedict is considered to be a forgery. Benedict VI is also known to have confirmed privileges assumed by certain monasteries and churches. At the request of King Lothair and Queen Emma of France, Benedict placed the monastery of Blandin under papal protection. There is also a papal bull from Benedict in which Frederick, archbishop of Salzburg, and his successors are named papal vicars in the former Roman provinces of Upper and Lower Pannonia and Noricum; however, the authenticity of this bull is also disputed.\nOverthrow.\nOtto I died soon after Benedict VI's election in 973, and with the accession of Otto II, troubles with the nobility emerged in Germany. With the new emperor so distracted, a faction of the Roman nobility opposed to the interference of the Ottonian emperors in Roman affairs, took advantage of the opportunity to move against Benedict VI. Led by Crescentius the Elder and Cardinal-Deacon Franco Ferrucci, who had been the preferred candidate of the anti-Ottonian faction, Benedict was taken in June 974, and imprisoned in the Castel Sant'Angelo, at that time a stronghold of the Crescentii. Ferrucci was then proclaimed as the new pope, taking the name Boniface VII.\nHearing of the overthrow of Benedict VI, Otto II sent an imperial representative, Count Sicco, to demand his release. Unwilling to step down, Boniface ordered a priest named Stephen to murder Benedict while he was in prison, strangling him to death. Boniface VII is today considered an antipope, with Benedict VII as the legitimate successor of Benedict VI.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24013", "revid": "1308914765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24013", "title": "Pope Benedict VII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 974 to 983\nPope Benedict VII (; died 10 July 983) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from October 974 to his death on 10 July 983.\nFamily and early career.\nBenedict was born in Rome, the son of David or Deodatus and nephew of Alberic II of Spoleto. He was also connected to the Conti family. Before his accession to the papacy, he served as bishop of Sutri.\nPontificate.\nBenedict VII was elected pope by the Roman clergy and people in October 974 under the influence of Sicco, envoy of Emperor Otto II. He ascended as a compromise candidate to replace Boniface VII, who had caused the death of Pope Benedict VI, usurped the pontificate, and in a month plundered the Vatican of its most valuable contents. He then escaped to Constantinople. The new pope's authority was opposed by Boniface VII and his supporters, and although the antipope himself was forced to flee, his party followed fiercely in his footsteps and compelled Benedict to call upon Otto II for help. Once he was firmly established on his throne by the emperor, he showed himself both desirous of checking the tide of simony which was rising high in the Church, and of advancing the cause of monasticism.\nBenedict VII consecrated the priest James, who had been sent to him by the people of Carthage \"to help the wretched province of Africa,\" which since the Muslim conquest of the Maghreb, had seen a steep decline in the number of bishops. Benedict VII visited the city of Orvieto with his nephew Filippo Alberici, who later settled there and became consul of the city in 1016. In 978, Benedict issued a bull defining the boundaries of the Diocese of Vic for Bishop Froia, thereby rescinding the bulls issued by Pope John XIII that had made Vic an archdiocese. In March 981, Benedict presided over a synod in St Peter's that prohibited simony. In September 981, he convened a Lateran synod.\nBenedict VII died in 983, and was interred at Santa Croce in Gerusalemme.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "24014", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24014", "title": "Pope Benedict VIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1012 to 1024\nPope Benedict VIII (; c.\u2009980 \u2013 9 April 1024) was bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States from 18 May 1012 until his death. He was born Theophylact of Tusculum to the noble family of the counts of Tusculum. Unusually for a medieval pope, he had strong authority both in Rome and abroad.\nTheophylact was born to Count Gregory I of Tusculum. The family had already produced three popes: John XI (r. 931\u2013935), John XII (r. 955\u2013964), and Benedict VII (r. 973\u2013974). Theophylact became pope on 18 May 1012 and took the name Benedict VIII.\nPontificate.\nBenedict VIII was opposed by an antipope, Gregory VI, who compelled him to flee Rome. He was restored by King Henry II of Germany, whom he crowned emperor on 14 February 1014. He remained on good terms with Henry for his entire pontificate. In Benedict VIII's pontificate, the Saracens renewed their attacks on the southern coasts of Italy. They affected a settlement in Sardinia and sacked Pisa. The Normans also then began to settle in Italy. The Pope promoted peace in Italy by allying himself with the Normans, orchestrating the defeat of the Saracens in Sardinia and subjugating the Crescentii. In 1022, he held a synod at Pavia with the Emperor to restrain simony and incontinence of the clergy. The reformation sponsored by Cluny Abbey was supported by him, and he was a friend of its abbot, St. Odilo.\nIn 1020, Benedict VIII travelled to Germany to confer with Henry II about the renewed Byzantine menace in the Mezzogiorno. Arriving at Bamberg at Eastertide, he consecrated the new cathedral there, obtained a charter from Henry II confirming the donations of Charlemagne and Otto the Great, and visited the monastery of Fulda. In 1022, Benedict received Archbishop \u00c6thelnoth of Canterbury, who had traveled to Rome to obtain the pallium.\nTo further the interest of peace, Benedict VIII encouraged the Truce of God. He convinced the Holy Roman emperor to lead an expedition into the south of Italy and subordinate his vassals who had defected to Byzantine authority. Horace Mann considered him \"...one of the few popes of the Middle Ages who was at once powerful at home and great abroad.\" He was succeeded by his brother, John XIX.\nFamily tree.\nBenedict VIII was closely related to five other popes who reigned in the 10th and 11th centuries, as well as some of the most powerful rulers of Italy at the time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24015", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24015", "title": "Pope Benedict IX", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church variously from 1032 to 1048\nPope Benedict IX (; c.\u20091012\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091056), born Theophylact of Tusculum in Rome, was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States for three periods between October 1032 and July 1048 (1032\u20131044; 1045; 1047\u20131048). Aged about 20 when first elected, he may have been the youngest Pope in the history of the Catholic Church. He is the only person to have been Pope more than once and the only person ever accused of selling the papacy.\nBenedict was the nephew of his two immediate predecessors, Benedict VIII and John XIX. In October 1032, Benedict's father obtained his election through bribery. However, his reputedly dissolute activities provoked a revolt on the part of the Romans. Benedict was driven out of Rome and Sylvester III elected to succeed him. Some months later, Benedict and his supporters managed to expel Sylvester. Benedict then decided to resign in favor of his godfather, Gregory VI, provided he was reimbursed for his expenses. \nBenedict subsequently had second thoughts, returned, and attempted to depose Gregory VI. A number of prominent clergymen appealed to Henry III, King of the Romans, to restore order. Henry and his forces crossed the Brenner Pass into Italy, where he summoned the Council of Sutri to decide the matter. Benedict IX, Sylvester III, and Gregory VI were all deposed. Henry then had Clement II elected in December 1046.\nEarly life.\nBenedict was the son of Count Alberic III of Tusculum. He was closely related to several popes, being a nephew of Benedict VIII and John XIX, grandnephew of John XII, great-grandnephew of John XI, first cousin twice removed of Benedict VII, and possibly a distant relative of Sergius III. His father obtained the papal chair for him by bribing the Romans. \nBenedict IX was about twenty when made pontiff in October 1032. Other sources state that he was 11 or 12, based upon the unsubstantiated testimony of Rodulfus Glaber, a monk of St. Germanus at Auxerre. If Glaber was correct, Benedict IX was the youngest Pope in history. If he was incorrect, that honor may belong to Pope John XII, who was between the ages of 17 and 25 when he was elected.\nFirst pontificate (1032\u20131044).\nBenedict IX's reign was allegedly \"scandalous\", and factional strife continued. Ferdinand Gregorovius, wrote that in Benedict, \"It seemed as if a demon from hell, in the disguise of a priest, occupied the chair of Peter and profaned the sacred mysteries of religion by his insolent courses.\" Horace K. Mann called him \"a disgrace to the Chair of Peter\". Pope Victor III, in his third book of \"Dialogues\", referred to \"his rapes, murders and other unspeakable acts of violence and sodomy. His life as a pope was so vile, so foul, so execrable, that I shudder to think of it.\"\nAccording to Reginald Lane Poole, \"In a time of acute political hostility, accusations, as we know too well, are made and are believed, which in a calmer time would never have been suggested.\" He further suggests the credibility of such accusations was determined by probability rather than proof, and a reaction to the Tusculan hegemony. Poole observes that \"we have to wait until he had discredited himself by his sale of the Papacy before we hear anything definite about his misdeeds; and the further we go in time and place, the worse his character becomes\". Poole considers Benedict \"a negligent Pope, very likely a profligate man\", but notes that the picture presented of Benedict is drawn at a time when the party opposed to him was in the ascendant, and he had neither friends nor supporters.\nPope Benedict IX was briefly forced out of Rome in 1036, but returned with the help of Emperor Conrad II, who had expelled the bishops of Piacenza and Cremona from their sees. Bishop Benno of Piacenza accused Benedict of \"many vile adulteries and murders\". He was accused by Peter Damian in his \"Liber Gomorrhianus\" of routine sodomy and bestiality and sponsoring orgies. In September 1044, opposition to Benedict IX's dissolute lifestyle forced him out of the city again and elected Sylvester III to replace him.\nSecond pontificate (1045).\nBenedict IX's forces returned in April 1045 and expelled his rival, allowing Benedict to resume the papacy. Doubting his own ability to maintain his position, and wishing to marry his cousin, Benedict decided to resign in May 1045. He consulted his godfather, the pious priest John Gratian, about the possibility of resigning. He offered to give up the papacy into the hands of his godfather if he would reimburse him for his election expenses. John Gratian paid him the money and was recognized as pope in his stead, as Gregory VI. Peter Damian hailed the change with joy and wrote to the new pope, urging him to deal with the scandals of the church in Italy, singling out the wicked bishops of Pesaro, of Citt\u00e0 di Castello and of Fano.\nThird pontificate (1047\u20131048).\nBenedict IX soon regretted his resignation and returned to Rome, taking the city and remaining on the throne until July 1046, although Gregory VI continued to be recognized as the true pope. At the time, Sylvester III also reasserted his claim. A number of influential clergy and laity besought Emperor Henry III to cross the Alps and restore order. Henry intervened, and at the Council of Sutri in December 1046, Benedict IX and Sylvester III were declared deposed while Gregory VI was encouraged to resign because the arrangement he had entered into with Benedict was considered simoniacal; that is, to have been paid for. A German, Clement II, was chosen to succeed Gregory VI. Benedict IX had not attended the council and did not accept his deposition. \nWhen Clement II died in October 1047, Benedict seized the Lateran Palace in November, again becoming pope, but was driven away by German troops in July 1048. To fill the power vacuum, the German-born Damasus II was elected pope and universally recognized as such. Benedict IX refused to appear on charges of simony in 1049 and was excommunicated.\nBenedict IX's eventual fate is obscure, but he seems to have given up his claims to the papal throne. Leo IX may have lifted the ban on him. Benedict IX was buried in the Abbey of Grottaferrata c. 1056. According to the abbot, Saint Bartholomew of Grottaferrata, he was penitent and turned away from the sins he committed as pontiff.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24017", "revid": "33594889", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24017", "title": "Pope Benedict XI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1303 to 1304\nPope Benedict XI (; 1240 \u2013 7 July 1304), born Nicola Boccasini (Niccol\u00f2 of Treviso), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 22 October 1303 to his death on 7 July 1304.\nBoccasini entered the Order of Preachers in his native Treviso. He studied at Venice and Milan before becoming a teacher in Venice and in other Dominican houses. He served two terms as Provincial Prior of Lombardy, before being elected Master of the Order in 1296. Two years later he was made cardinal. He was appointed Bishop of Ostia, and served as papal legate first to Hungary, and then to France. He was with Pope Boniface VIII when Boniface was attacked by French forces at Anagni.\nHe was beatified with his cultus confirmed by Pope Clement XII in 1736. He is a patron of Treviso.\nEarly life.\nNiccol\u00f2 Boccasini was born in Treviso to Boccasio, a municipal notary (died 1246), whose brother was a priest; and Ber(n)arda, who worked as a laundress for the Dominican friars of Treviso. Boccasini had a sister, Adelette. The family lived outside the walls of Treviso, in a suburb called S. Bartolommeo. \nIn 1246, a Dominican friar left a sum of money in his will to Bernarda and her children, recently orphaned. A condition was that if Boccasini were to enter the Dominican Order he would receive half of the entire legacy. From the age of six, it seems, Boccasini was destined for the monastic life. His first teacher was his uncle, the priest of S. Andrea.\nHe entered the Order of Preachers in 1254, at the age of fourteen, taking the habit of a novice in his native Treviso. He was taken to Venice by his Prior and presented to the Provincial, who assigned him to the convent of SS. Giovanni e Paolo in Venice. For the next seven years or so, Boccasini pursued his basic education in Venice. Toward the end of this period, he served as a tutor to the young sons of Romeo Quirini of Venice, whose brother was a Canon in the Cathedral of Treviso. \nIn 1262, Boccasini was transferred to Milan, to the new \"studium\" of S. Eustorgio. He spent the next six years at S. Eustorgio. By the end of his term at S. Eustorgio he must have become a professed member of the Order of Preachers; the actual date is unknown. As a professed brother he served in the responsible position as a lecturer in the \"studium\" in Venice, that is to say, he was in charge of the elementary education of the brothers in his convent.\nEach convent had its \"lector\". He served as \"lector\" for fourteen years, from 1268 to 1282, according to Bernardus Guidonis. In 1276 he is attested as being \"lector\" at the Dominican convent in his native Treviso, a post he was still holding in 1280. In February 1282 he is found at Genoa, again as \"lector\". He was not a professor, since he had never taken a university degree, being one of the last popes who was not a university graduate.\nOffice and responsibility.\nIn 1286, at the meeting of the Provincial Chapter, which took place that year in Brescia, Boccasini was elected Provincial Prior of Lombardy. As Provincial of Lombardy, Boccasini's lifestyle changed considerably. Instead of being firmly attached to a single convent for years, he instead became peripatetic, moving from one convent to another on visits of inspection, encouragement and correction. In Lombardy at the time there were some fifty-one convents. \nHe had responsibility as an Inquisitor, a task for which popes considered Franciscans and Dominicans especially suited. He had the responsibility of convening the Provincial Chapters. In 1287, the Chapter was at Venice; in 1288, it was at Rimini; in 1289 at the General Chapter, which was held at Trier, Boccasini was released from the office of Provincial of Lombardy, having completed his three-year term. It is probable that, without office, he returned to a convent, possibly that of Treviso\u2014though the evidence is scanty and based on wills and codicils. \nHe was elected Provincial Prior of Lombardy again, however, at the Provincial Chapter held at Brescia in 1293. In 1294 it was held at Faventia, in 1295 at Verona, and in 1296 at Ferrara, where Boccasini's successor was elected, since he had a new assignment.\nMaster General of the Order of Preachers.\nAt the Capitulum Generale of the Order of Preachers, which was held at Strasbourg in 1296, Boccasini was elected Master of the Order of Preachers, and issued ordinances that forbade public questioning of the legitimacy of Pope Boniface VIII's papal election (which had taken place on Christmas Eve, 1295) on the part of any Dominican.\nCardinalate.\nBoccasini was elevated to the cardinalate on 4 December 1298 by Boniface VIII, and assigned the title of Cardinal-Priest of Santa Sabina. He entered the Roman Curia on 25 March 1299 and thus began to receive his share of the profits of the Chamber of the College of Cardinals.\nHe was promoted to the rank of Cardinal-Bishop of the See of Ostia on 2 March 1300 and also received episcopal consecration. On 13 May 1301 he was appointed Apostolic Legate to Hungary. He made his official departure on 22 June 1301 and returned on 10 May 1303. He also served as papal legate to France.\nWhen Pope Boniface VIII was seized at Anagni in September 1303, Boccasini was one of only two cardinals to defend the Pope in the Episcopal Palace itself. The other was Pedro Rodriguez, Bishop of Sabina. They were imprisoned for three days. On Monday 10 September they were liberated by forces led by Cardinal Luca Fieschi, and on 14 September the Pope and his retinue returned to Rome, with an escort organized by Cardinal Matteo Rosso Orsini.\nPapacy.\nPapal election.\nThe conclave to elect the successor of Boniface VIII was held in the Basilica of Saint John Lateran and the College of Cardinals desired an appropriate candidate who would not be hostile towards King Philip IV of France. After one ballot in a conclave that lasted a day, Boccasini was elected as pope.\nActions.\nHe was quick to release King Philip IV from the excommunication that had been put upon him by Boniface VIII. Nevertheless, on 7 June 1304, Benedict XI excommunicated Philip IV's implacable minister Guillaume de Nogaret and all the Italians who had played a part in the seizure of his predecessor at Anagni. Benedict XI also arranged an armistice between Philip IV of France and Edward I of England.\nAfter a brief pontificate that spanned a mere eight months, Benedict XI died suddenly at Perugia. As original reports had it, suspicion fell primarily on Nogaret with the suspicion that his sudden death was caused by poisoning. There is no direct evidence, however, to either support or disprove the contention that Nogaret poisoned the pope. Benedict XI's successor, Clement V was in France when elected and never journeyed to Rome. His successors resided principally in Avignon, inaugurating the period known as the Avignon Papacy. He and the French popes who succeeded him were completely under the influence of the kings of France.\nBenedict XI also celebrated two Consistories for the purpose of creating new cardinals. The first, on 18 December 1303, elevated Nicholas Alberti da Prato, the Bishop of Spoleto; and William Macclesfield (Marlesfeld) of Canterbury, Prior of the English Province of the Dominicans. On 19 February 1304 he elevated Walter Winterburn of Salisbury, the confessor of King Edward I of England, who did not want to part with him, and kept him in England for some time. By the time he arrived in Perugia on 28 November 1304, Pope Benedict was dead. Cardinal Winterburn died at Genoa on 24 September 1305. All three new cardinals were members of the Dominican Order.\nBenedict XI was the author of a volume of sermons and commentaries on the Gospel of Matthew, the Psalms, the Book of Job, and the Book of Revelation.\nStories.\nCardinal Caesar Baronius (1538\u20131607) wrote that, on the Monday of Easter week in 1304, Benedict XI was celebrating Mass, but a pilgrim interrupted it, because he wanted the pope to hear his confession. Rather than telling him to find another time or another priest to have his confession, the Pope left the Mass to hear his confession and then returned to continue the Mass. This appears to be an anecdote, appropriate for a sermon recommending frequent confession, placed in an age when twice annual confession was the norm. It is unlikely that a pilgrim would attempt to interrupt a Mass, that a priest would interrupt a Mass for some other function, or that the protocols of the papal Court would permit such an unfettered close approach to the pontiff during a sacred service.\nThere is also a story that, at the General Chapter of the Dominicans at Lucca in May 1288, the Provincial of the Roman Province, Thomas de Luni predicted to Boccasini that he would someday be pope. On another occasion, when he was in Venice, a friar of Torcello predicted that he would be Provincial, Master General, Cardinal and Pope.\nBeatification.\nBenedict XI earned a reputation for holiness and the faithful came to venerate him. His tomb gained a reputation for the amount of miracles that emerged from the site. Pope Clement XII approved his cultus on 24 April 1736 which acted as his formal beatification. Pope Benedict XIV extended his veneration to the Republic of Venice in 1748 after a request from the Venetians.\nPapal numbering.\nA note on the numbering: Pope Benedict X (1058\u20131059) is now considered an antipope by the Catholic Church. At the time of Benedict XI's election, however, Benedict X was still considered a legitimate pope, and thus the man the Catholic Church officially considers the tenth true Pope Benedict, Niccolo Boccasini, took the official number XI rather than X. This has advanced the numbering of all subsequent Popes Benedict by one digit. Popes Benedict XI-Benedict XVI are, from an official point of view, the 10th through 15th popes by that name.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24018", "revid": "1427850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24018", "title": "Pope Benedict XII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1334 to 1342\nPope Benedict XII (, , ; 1285 \u2013 25 April 1342), born Jacques Fournier, was a cardinal and inquisitor, and later, head of the Catholic Church from 30 December 1334 to his death, in April 1342. He was the third Avignon pope and reformed monastic orders and opposed nepotism. Unable to remove his capital to Rome or Bologna, Benedict started the great palace at Avignon. He settled the beatific vision controversy of Pope John XXII with the bull \"Benedictus Deus\", which stated that souls may attain the \"fullness of the beatific vision\" before the Last Judgment. Despite many diplomatic attempts with Emperor Louis IV to resolve their differences, Benedict failed to bring the Holy Roman Empire back under papal dominance. He died 25 April 1342 and was buried in Avignon.\nEarly life.\nJacques Fournier was born in Saverdun in the County of Foix around 1285. He joined the Cistercian Order and studied at the Coll\u00e8ge des Bernardins at the University of Paris. In 1311 he was made Abbot of Fontfroide Abbey and quickly became known for his intelligence and organisational ability.\nIn 1317, Jacques was made Bishop of Pamiers. It was here he undertook rigorous measures against Cathars, assisting Bernard Gui in some investigations. Fournier's investigation captured Guillaume B\u00e9libaste, who was burned at the stake in 1321. Motivated by Philip V's edict against lepers, Jacques also investigated the supposed leper water-poisoning conspiracy and tortured the director of the Pamiers leprosarium, Guillaume Agasse, into giving a confession to the charges.\nHis efforts against the Cathars of Montaillou in the Ari\u00e8ge were carefully recorded in the Fournier Register, which he took to Rome and deposited in the Vatican Library. His transcription was edited by Jean Duvernoy and has been documented by Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie's pioneering microhistory, \"Montaillou, village occitan.\"\nIn 1326, upon the successful rooting out of the last \u2013 it was believed \u2013 Cathars of the south, Jacques was made Bishop of Mirepoix in the Ari\u00e8ge, and, a year later, in 1327, he was made a cardinal.\nUpon his elevation to cardinal, Jacques continued to wear his Cistercian cowl, which garnered him the nickname the \"white cardinal\". He often advised Pope John XXII on doctrinal matters, which included the heretical nature of magic. Jacques was tasked by the pope with examining the works of Peter John Olivi, Meister Eckhart, William of Ockham and Michael of Cesena.\nElection.\nThe Conclave opened on 13 December 1334, and it appeared that there might be a quick election. A two-thirds majority were prepared to elect Cardinal Jean-Raymond de Comminges, the Bishop of Porto, if he would only swear in advance to agree \"not\" to return the papacy to Rome. Comminges refused to make any promises in order to get elected. The Conclave therefore proposed Jacques Fournier's name, almost as a dare. Owing to his inexperience in politics, it was believed he would not get the votes. Upon Jacques' election the conclave was astonished, while Jacques stated, \"You have elected an ignoramus\". Jacques Fournier took the name of Benedict XII as the pope on 8 January 1335.\nPapacy.\nFrom the beginning of his pontificate, Benedict worked to reform the Curia and secular clergy in an effort to curb clerical avarice and nepotism as well as abuses in the granting of benefices. However, the religious orders were the primary target of his major reform efforts. By 1335\u20131336, Benedict had enacted changes that are viewed as one of the milestones of his pontificate.\nEmperor Louis IV.\nFollowing Benedict's election, ambassadors were received from Emperor Louis IV seeking a pardon and an end to the conflict. Benedict, who was entreated by Louis' ambassadors why the emperor should be pardoned, had declared his intentions in favour of Louis. By the end of 1335, however, political manoeuvring by both Philip VI of France and Louis IV, had pressured Benedict into delaying negotiations.\nThe interdict placed on the Holy Roman Empire had caused havoc; the rebellion of the archbishop of Mainz (1329\u20131332), disagreements between the Hospitallers, the Teutonic knights and the Francicans, while the secular clergy largely defied it. Benedict again received ambassadors from Louis, after German bishops and the Estates of the Empire implored Louis to find a settlement. An agreement was never reached. In response, at Rhens on 16 July 1338, the Estates passed a new declaration giving the Emperor authority over all rights and goods within the Empire without the need of papal approval and that all decrees against Louis by John XXII were \"an offense against God\" and illegal.\nDespite this, Benedict sent his chaplain, Arnaud de Verdale, to entreat with Louis and was assured by the emperor and prince electors of a forthcoming embassy. No ambassadors ever arrived from Louis and Benedict's attempt to restore the Holy Roman Empire to papal supervision came to nothing.\nBologna.\nBenedict planned on moving the papacy to Bologna by 1 October 1335. He even hired, in August 1335, Jean Poisson to supervise repairs to St. Peter, St. Paul basilicas, and the papal palace in Rome. The cost ran into several thousand florins. Valerie Theis, states the construction in Rome may have been a way of Benedict disguising his true intention of settling permanently in Avignon. Consequently, in 1335, he ordered the construction of the Palais des Papes in Avignon, which was finished under Pope Clement VI.\nTheological discourse.\nBenedict spent most of his time working on questions of theology. He rejected many of the ideas developed by John XXII. In this regard, he promulgated an apostolic constitution, \"Benedictus Deus\", in 1336. This dogma defined the Church's belief that the souls of the departed go to their eternal reward immediately after death, as opposed to remaining in a state of unconscious existence until the Last Judgment. Though some claim that he campaigned against the Immaculate Conception, this is far from clear.\nPhilip VI of France.\nOn 15 January 1336 Benedict requested Philip VI's assistance in bringing about peace in the western Mediterranean, where the crusade was being hampered by conflicts between Aragon and Genoa, Naples and Sicily. This was followed by the pope's letter, two months later, canceling the crusade, citing the belief that Christendom was too crippled by domestic quarrels. On 18 December, Benedict cancelled the six-year tenth crusading tithe.\nThough born a Frenchman, Benedict felt no patriotism towards France nor its king, Philip VI. From the start of his papacy, relations between him and Philip were frigid. After being informed of Philip's plan to invade Scotland, Benedict hinted that King Edward III of England would most likely win, regardless. In 1340, Benedict's marshal kidnapped English envoys and handed them over to the French. Using papal sanctions, Benedict secured their release and had the marshal hanged.\nItalian intervention.\nIn 1339, Benedict moved the papal archives from Assisi to Avignon. Unlike his predecessor, he refrained from papal intervention in Italy, issuing a large list of absolutes for Ghibelline cities, including Milan, giving release from interdict and excommunication in exchange for peace. In an effort to secure the acceptance of papal temporal sovereignty in Italy, Benedict negotiated with Azzone Visconti. Azzo was prepared to renounce Louis of Bavaria, but he refused to accept papal rule over Piacenza, Lodi, and Crema, which were Lombard cities. He would never be forgiven for this rejection, and he died while excommunicated. Nevertheless, Luchino Visconti was appointed by Benedict as Azzo's papal vicar for Milan and ruler of Piacenza and Crema after Azzo's death in 1339.\nDeath.\nBenedict died 25 April 1342, and was buried in Notre-Dame-des-Doms cathedral in Avignon.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24019", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24019", "title": "Pope Benedict XIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1724 to 1730\nPope Benedict XIII (; ; 2 February 1649 \u2013 21 February 1730), born Pietro Francesco (or Pierfrancesco) Orsini and later called Vincenzo Maria Orsini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 29 May 1724 to his death in February 1730.\nA Dominican friar, Orsini focused on his religious responsibilities as bishop rather than on papal administration. Orsini's lack of political expertise led him to increasingly rely on an unscrupulous secretary (Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Coscia) whose financial abuses ruined the papal treasury, causing great damage to the Church in Rome.\nIn the process towards sainthood, his cause for canonization opened in 1755, but it was closed shortly afterwards. It was reopened on 21 February 1931, but it was closed once again in 1940. It was opened once more on 17 January 2004, with the official process commencing in 2012 and concluding later in 2017. He now has the posthumous title of Servant of God.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Gravina in Puglia, the eldest of six sons of Ferdinando III Orsini, 8th Duke of Gravina. A member of the Orsini of Rome, he was the third and last member of that family to become Pope after Pope Celestine III and Pope Nicholas III. At the age of eighteen he resigned his inheritance and entered the Dominican Order where he received the name of \"Vincenzo Maria\". He was ordained to the priesthood in February 1671.\nThrough the influence of his family, he was named, by Pope Clement X, Cardinal-Priest of San Sisto on 22 February 1672 (allegedly against his will). He also lectured in philosophy at Brescia. Later he was bishop of Manfredonia, bishop of Cesena and then archbishop of Benevento. After an earthquake in 1688 and another in 1702, he organized relief efforts for the victims. He remained a close friend of a local mystic, Serafina of God.\nRise to the papacy.\nUpon the death of Pope Innocent XIII in 1724, a conclave was convoked to elect a successor. There were four divisions in the College of Cardinals and there were no clear candidates. At the conclave, Orsini was considered one of the papabili. Orsini was then proposed to be elected because he led a modest, austere life, and was considered to be a pastor. His lack of political expertise suggested that he would be neutral and malleable.\nOrsini refused to be elected prior to the final ballot, explaining that he was unworthy of it. Eventually he was persuaded to accept by Agust\u00edn Pipia, Master of the Order of Preachers and on 29 May 1724, Orsini was elected pontiff. He chose the regnal name of \"Benedict XIII\" in honour of Pope Benedict XI because he was also of the Dominican Order.\nOn 4 June 1724, he was crowned by Benedetto Pamphili, the cardinal protodeacon. On the following 24 September, he took possession of the Basilica of St. John Lateran.\nPontificate.\nActions.\nNot a man of worldly matters, Benedict XIII made an effort to maintain his monastic lifestyle. He endeavoured to put a stop to the decadent lifestyles of the Italian priesthood and of the cardinalate. He also abolished the lottery in Rome and the Papal States, which only served to profit the neighboring states that maintained the public lottery. A man fond above all of asceticism and religious celebrations, he built several hospitals, but according to Cardinal Prospero Lambertini (later Pope Benedict XIV), \"did not have any idea about how to rule\".\nIn 1727, he inaugurated the famous Spanish Steps and founded the University of Camerino.\nIn 1728, Benedict's intervention settled a controversy regarding the relics of Augustine of Hippo which erupted in Pavia. He ultimately confirmed the authenticity of Augustine's bones, which had been discovered in 1695 in the Basilica San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro.\nThe government of the Papal States was effectively held in Benedict XIII's stead by Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Coscia, who had been the pope's secretary when he was archbishop of Benevento, and who committed a long series of financial abuses to his own advantage, causing the ruin of the Papal treasury. Coscia and his associates effectively isolated Benedict from other advisors. According to Montesquieu, \"All the money of Rome goes to Benevento... as the Beneventani direct [Benedict's] weakness\".\nIn foreign relations, he struggled with both John V of Portugal and the Jansenists in France.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nUpon election, on 4 June 1724, Benedict XIII published the Bulls of Canonization for Saints previously celebrated:\nBenedict XIII beatified \nThrough the process of equipollent canonization Benedict XIII canonized \nDoctor of the Church.\nThe Pope declared Peter Chrysologus a Doctor of the Church on 19 February 1729.\nOther activities.\nBenedict XIII elevated 29 new cardinals into the cardinalate in a total of 12 consistories; one such new cardinal was Prospero Lambertini, who later became Pope Benedict XIV.\nBenedict XIII, whose orders were descended from Scipione Rebiba, personally consecrated at least 139 bishops for various important European sees, including German, French, English and New World bishops. These bishops in turn consecrated bishops for their respective countries, causing other episcopal lineages to die out. As a result, more than 90% of present-day bishops trace their episcopal lineage through him to Cardinal Rebiba.\nWith the papal bull \"Pretiosus\", dated 26 May 1727, Benedict XIII granted to all Dominicans major houses of study and in particular to the Roman College of St. Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas \"Angelicum\" the right of conferring academic degrees in theology to students outside the Order.\nDeath and burial.\nBenedict XIII was suddenly attacked by a catarrh, contracted while officiating at the funeral service of Cardinal Marco Antonio Ansidei, of which he died on 21 February 1730 at the age of 81. His death was made public to the people the next day.\nThe pope was of middling size; his countenance was mild, his nose aquiline and he had a broad forehead. At the autopsy, it was discovered that his heart was remarkably large. His funeral ceremonies were performed at the Vatican, whence he was removed to the Santa Maria sopra Minerva where he was buried in a tomb completed by Pietro Bracci and others.\nAfter the 1730 papal conclave elevated Pope Clement XII to the pontificate, Clement promptly excommunicated Benedict XIII's corrupt deputy, Cardinal Coscia. Coscia fled Rome and his punishment, but was later restored and took part in the conclaves of 1730 and 1740.\nPope Benedict XIV would later say of Benedict XIII: \"We respectfully love that pontiff who backed his carriage rather than dispute the passage with a cartman.\" On that occasion, Benedict XIII had exclaimed to his coachman: \"Non ci far impicci\"\u00a0\u2013 \"Do not involve us in a quarrel.\" On the other hand, this anonymous satirical comment on Benedict XIII's death was posted at the Pasquino:\n\"This tomb encloses\nthe bones of a little friar:\nmore than a saint's lover\na protector of brigands\"\nCause of beatification.\nThe process for his beatification was opened in Tortona in 1755 under Pope Benedict XIV but it did not at all advance and so was stalled. On 21 February 1931, also in Tortona, the process was revitalized but the presumed doubts about the morality of the late pontiff's Cardinal Secretary of State, Niccol\u00f2 Coscia, caused its closing in 1940.\nThe process was reopened on 17 January 2004. The official diocesan process commenced in Rome in early 2012 and the official opening of that process was held in the Basilica of Saint John Lateran, presided by Agostino Vallini. The diocesan phase for the beatification process concluded on 24 February 2017 at the Basilica of Saint John Lateran with Vallini celebrating the conclusion of the inquest. He now has the posthumous title of Servant of God.\nThe current postulator of the cause is the Dominican priest Francesco Maria Ricci.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24020", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24020", "title": "Pope Benedict XIV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1740 to 1758\nPope Benedict XIV (; ; 31 March 1675\u00a0\u2013 3 May 1758), born Prospero Lorenzo Lambertini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 17 August 1740 to his death in May 1758.\nPerhaps one of the best scholars to sit on the papal throne, yet often overlooked, he promoted scientific learning, the Baroque arts, reinvigoration of Thomism, and the study of the human form. Firmly committed to carrying out the decrees of the Council of Trent and Catholic teaching, Benedict removed changes previously made to the Breviary, sought peacefully to reverse growing secularism in European courts, invigorated ceremonies with great pomp, and throughout his life and his reign published numerous theological and ecclesiastical treatises. In governing the Papal States, he reduced taxation on some products, but also raised taxes on others; he also encouraged agriculture and supported free trade within the Papal States. A scholar, he created the Sacred and Profane Museums, now part of the present Vatican Museums. He can be considered a polymath due to his numerous studies of ancient literature, his publishing of ecclesiastical books and documents, his interest in the study of the human body, and his devotion to art and theology.\nTowards the end of his papacy Benedict XIV was forced to contend with issues surrounding the Society of Jesus. He expelled them from Portugal at the behest of Joseph I in 1758, just before his death. The papacy reluctantly acceded to the anti-Jesuit demands while providing minimal theological justification for the suppressions.\nHorace Walpole described him as \"loved by papists, esteemed by Protestants, a priest without insolence or interest, a prince without favorites, a pope without nepotism, an author without vanity, a man whom neither intellect nor power could corrupt.\"\nEarly life.\nBirth and studies.\nLambertini was born into a noble family of Bologna, the third of five children of Marcello Lambertini and Lucrezia Bulgarini. At the time of his birth, Bologna was the second largest city in the Papal States. His earliest studies were with tutors, and then he was sent to the Convitto del Porto, staffed by the Somaschi Fathers. At the age of thirteen, he began attending the Collegio Clementino in Rome, where he studied rhetoric, Latin, philosophy, and theology (1689\u20131692). During his studies as a young man, he often studied the works of St. Thomas Aquinas, who was his favorite author and saint. While he enjoyed studying at Collegio Clementino, his attention turned toward civil and canon law. Soon after, in 1694 at the age of nineteen, he received the degree of Doctor of Sacred Theology and Doctor Utriusque Juris (both ecclesiastical and civil law).\nEcclesiastical career.\nLambertini became an assistant to Alessandro Caprara, the Auditor of the Rota. After the election of Pope Clement XI in November 1700, he was made a consistorial advocate in 1701. Shortly after, he was created a Consultor of the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition, and then in 1708 Promoter of the Faith. As Promoter of the Faith, he achieved two major successes. The first was the canonization of Pope Pius V. The second was the composition of his treatise on the process of the beatification and canonization of saints.\nIn 1712, Lambertini was named Canon Theologus of the Chapter of the Vatican Basilica and member of the Sacred Congregation of Rites; in 1713 he was named monsignor; and in 1718 secretary of the Sacred Congregation of the Council.\nOn 12 June 1724, only two weeks after his election, Pope Benedict XIII appointed Lambertini titular bishop of Theodosiopolis in Arcadia. Lambertini was consecrated a bishop in Rome, in the Cappella Paolina of the Vatican Palace, on 16 July 1724, by Pope Benedict XIII. The co-consecrators were Giovanni Francesco Nicolai, titular Archbishop of Myra (Vicar of the Vatican Basilica), and Nicola Maria Lercari, titular Archbishop of Nazianzus (Papal Maestro di Camera). In 1725, he served as the Canonist at the Roman Synod of Pope Benedict XIII.\nIn 1718, the \"Istituto delle scienze ed Arti Liberali\" in Bologna had begun construction of a chapel for everyday convenience dedicated to the Annunication of the Virgin Mary. In 1725, Bishop Prospero Lambertini of Theodosia, who was working in the Roman Curia but was mindful of his origins, ordered the chapel to be painted. He handed over the work to Carlo Salarolo, who had the walls of the chapel adorned. Lambertini also ordered and paid for the painting above the main altar, an image of the Virgin being greeted by the angel, the work of Marcantonio Franceschini.\nHe was made Bishop of Ancona on 27 January 1727, and was permitted to retain the title of Archbishop, as well as all the offices which he had already been granted. He was also allowed to continue as Abbot Commendatory of the Camaldolese monastery of S. Stefano di Cintorio (Cemeterio) in the diocese of Pisa. In 1731, the new bishop had the main altar and the choir of the cathedral restored and renovated. Once he became pope, Lambertini remembered his former diocese, sending an annual gift to the Church of Ancona, of sacred vessels of gold or silver, altar appointments, vestments, and other items.\nCardinal.\nBishop Lambertini was created a Cardinal on 9 December 1726, though the public announcement of his promotion was postponed until 30 April 1728. He was assigned the titular church of \"Santa Croce in Gerusalemme\" on 10 May 1728. He participated in the 1730 conclave.\nOn 30 April 1731, Cardinal Lambertini was appointed Archbishop of Bologna by Pope Clement XII. During his time as archbishop, he composed an extensive treatise in three volumes, \"De synodo dioecesana\", on the subject of the diocesan synod, presenting a synthesis of the history, Canon Law, practices, and procedures for the holding of those important meetings of the clergy of each diocese. He was in fact preparing the ground for the holding of a synod of his own for the diocese of Bologna, an expectation he first announced in a \"Notificazione\" of 14 October 1732. When the first edition of the \"De Synodo\" was published in 1748, however, the synod still had not taken place. He continued in the office of Archbishop of Bologna even after he became Pope, not finally resigning until 14 January 1754.\nElection to the papacy.\nAfter the death of Pope Clement XII on 6 February 1740, Cardinal Lambertini attended the papal conclave to choose a successor. The Conclave opened on 18 February, but Lambertini did not arrive until 5 March. He was not one of the 'papabili', not being one of the favorites of any of the factions (Imperialists, Spanish, French, Zelanti). The conclave lasted for six months. At first Cardinal Pietro Ottoboni, the Dean of the College of Cardinals, was favored to be elected, but a number of cardinals were opposed to him because he was the protector of France in the Papal Curia. His death on 29 February 1740 eliminated him from consideration.\nCardinal Domenico Riviera of Urbino received a respectable number of votes for a while, and then, in July, Cardinal Pompeio Aldrovandi of Bologna. He had enemies, however, who assembled enough votes to ensure that he would never get the two-thirds needed to be elected. His greatest enemy, the Camerlengo Cardinal Annibale Albani, chose instead to support Cardinal Giacomo de Lanfredini of Florence, who worked in Rome in the Curia. In mid-August, Albani asked the leader of the Imperialist faction, Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 del Giudice, to give a thought to Lambertini. After long deliberations, Lambertini was put forth to the cardinal electors as a compromise candidate, and it is reported that he said to the members of the College of Cardinals \"If you wish to elect a saint, choose Gotti; a statesman, Aldrovandi; an honest man, me.\" Vincenzo Ludovico Gotti (1664\u20131742) was professor of philosophy at the College of Saint Thomas, and perhaps the leading Thomist of his time. Cardinal Aldrovandi was a canon lawyer.\nThis witticism appears to have assisted his cause, which also benefited from his reputation for deep learning, gentleness, wisdom, and conciliation in policy. On the evening of 17 August 1740 at around 9:00 pm, on the 255th ballot, he was elected pope and took the throne name of Benedict XIV in honour of Pope Benedict XIII to whom he owed his ecclesiastical career. He was solemnly crowned by the protodeacon on 21 August 1740. By 30 August 1740 the famous ephemeral baroque structures of the Festival of the Chinea and the triumphal arch of Benedict XIV were erected by Charles VII of Naples, King of Naples and a papal vassal.\nPontificate.\nBenedict XIV's pontificate began in a time of great difficulties, fueled by anti-clericalism and chiefly caused by the disputes between Catholic rulers and the papacy about governmental demands to nominate bishops rather than leaving the appointment to the church. He managed to overcome most of these problems\u00a0\u2013 the Holy See's disputes with the Kingdom of Naples, Sardinia, Spain, Venice, and Austria were settled.\n\"Pastoralis Romani Pontificis\".\nThe apostolic constitution \"Pastoralis Romani Pontificis\", which was Benedict's revision of the traditional \"In Coena Domini\" anathematization, was promulgated on 30 March 1741. In it Benedict again excommunicated all members of Protestant sects, including Lutherans, Calvinists, Zwinglians, and Huguenots. It ordered that ecumenical councils not be resorted to by opponents of papal decisions. Its most stringent clause was \u00a720:\nWe excommunicate all those who shall by themselves or others, directly or indirectly, under whatever title or pretext, presume to invade, destroy, occupy and detain, wholly or in part, the City of Rome, the Kingdom of Sicily, the islands of Sardinia and Corsica, the territories on this side of Lesina, the patrimony of St. Peter in Tuscany, the Duchy of Spoleto, the Counties of Venaissin, and Sabina, the March of Ancona, Massa Trebaria, Romagna, Campagna, and the maritime provinces and their territories and places, and the territories under special commission of the Arnulfi, and our cities of Bologna, Cesena, Rimini, Benevento, Perugia, Avignon, Citta di Castello, Todi, Ferrara, Comachio, and other cities, territories and places, or rights, belonging to the Roman Church, and mediately or immediately subject to the said Roman Church; and likewise those who presume to usurp de facto, to disturb, to retain, or in various ways to trouble, the supreme jurisdiction, belonging in them to Us and to the said Roman Church; and likewise their adherents, patrons, and protectors, or those who aid, counsel or abet them in any way whatsoever.\nThis clause, if applied, excommunicated the governments of Spain, France, and the Habsburg monarchy, in addition to lesser princes who held, without papal grant or investiture, territory claimed by the Papacy. The papal bull was smiled at even by Benedict himself, who once said, \"I like to leave the Vatican lightning asleep.\" Its application to the Duchy of Parma by Pope Clement XIII in 1768 had major consequences, including the beginning of expulsions of Jesuits from European states.\nFinances.\nAt the beginning of his reign, the papal government was heavily in debt, to the amount of 56,000,000 scudi, and was running an annual deficit of more than 200,000 scudi. Benedict attempted to improve the finances of the Papal States, but even at his death the administration was still running a deficit. His greatest economic action was the reduction in the size of the Papal army, which had become ineffectual in terms of contemporary military practice, even in keeping order inside the Papal States; and he severely reduced the pay of both officers and soldiers. He instituted economies in his own household and in the bureaucracy, but these were insignificant in terms of the debt and deficit. In 1741, on the advice of Cardinal Aldovrandini (who had nearly been elected pope instead of Benedict), he instituted a new tax, a duty on stamped paper on legal documents; it did not produce the revenue expected, and it was abolished in 1743. He reduced taxes on imported cattle, oil, and raw silk, but imposed new taxes on lime, china clay, salt, wine, straw, and hay. In 1744 he raised taxes on land, house rents, feudal grants to barons, and pensions derived from prebends.\nDespite these fiscal problems, the Papacy was able to buy two frigates in Britain, and in April 1745 Benedict personally christened a galley, named the \"Benedetta\", which he had ordered constructed. He also ordered the modernization of the harbor of Anzio, but the work was so expensive that it had to be abandoned in 1752.\nHe encouraged agriculture and free trade and drastically cut the military budget, but was unable to completely reform the administration, still corrupt from previous papacies. At the University of Bologna he revived the practice of anatomical studies and established a chair of surgery. He had a clear view of ecclesiastical problems, had respect for differing opinions and an ability to distinguish between dogma and theory.\nSlavery.\nOn 22 December 1741, Benedict XIV issued the Bull \"Immensa Pastorum Principis\" addressed to the Bishops of Brazil against the enslavement of the indigenous peoples of the Americas and other countries, calling on the support of King John V of Portugal towards this cause. It excommunicated any person who, for whatever motive, enslaved a native Brazilian. It did not address the case of black Africans. The Bull ordered the Jesuits to cease engaging in commerce, which was strictly forbidden by their own statutes, and meddling in politics. The bull went unenforced in Brazil.\nOther activities.\nThe Apostolic constitution \"Sacramentum Poenitentiae\" of 1741 assigned to the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Roman and Universal Inquisition the responsibility of safeguarding the sanctity of the sacrament of penance.\nOn 18 May 1743, Benedict XIV signed a document addressed to the Archbishops and Bishops of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth regarding marriage, communicating his dissatisfaction with the dissolution of Christian marriages, some even long-stable ones, by the Ecclesiastical Courts of Poland without due cause or in violation of canon law. Troubles arose from what are called \"clandestine marriages\", a secret arrangement between partners, usually for the purpose of marrying a person of choice rather than entering into an \"arranged marriage\".\nBenedict XIV was also responsible, along with Cardinal Domenico Silvio Passionei, for beginning the catalogue of the oriental manuscripts in the Vatican Library. The Pope added some 3,300 of his own books to the collection. In 1741 the collection of manuscripts relating to Chinese religion and history were left to the Vatican Library by bequest of Fouchet, a one-time missionary. During his reign the library of Marchese Alessandro Capponi was acquired through bequest. The collection of the antiquarian Filippo Stosch of Florence also came to the Vatican Library after his death, including a large collection of manuscripts that went back as far as the twelfth century.\nIn 1747, Benedict promulgated the bull \"Postremo mense superioris anni\", which summarised and restated certain aspects of Catholic teaching on infant baptism, in particular that 1) it is generally not licit to baptise a child of a Jewish family without parental consent, 2) it is licit to baptise a Jewish child in danger of death without parental consent, 3) once such a baptism had occurred (whether licit or not), the ecclesiastical authorities have a duty to remove the child from its parents' custody in order to provide it with a Christian education.\nOriental rites.\nSince his days as a Consultor at the Holy Office (Inquisition), Benedict had been involved in issues pertaining to the missions, both those seeking to convert non-Christians, and those seeking to reconcile heretics and schismatics to the Roman Church. One concern was the Coptic Christians in upper Egypt, where efforts to seek union with the Coptic Patriarch had not been successful. Numbers of Coptic priests and laity had entered into union with Rome, but had no bishop to serve their needs. In the Bull \"Quemadmodum ingenti\" of 4 August 1741, Benedict entrusted their care to the one Coptic bishop who was in union with Rome, the Patriarch Athanasius of Jerusalem, who was given extensive powers to supervise uniate Copts in Egypt. \nOn 7 August the same year, he supervised a commission of cardinals discussing the acts of the Lebanese Council of 1736 against some of which (such as the prohibition of mixed monasteries) one part of the Maronite clergy had brought forward some complaints. The Lebanese Council was declared legitimate by the commission and on 1 September 1741, Benedict XIV approved the acts of the Lebanese Council.\nIn his encyclical \"Allatae Sunt\", promulgated on 26 July 1755, and sent to missionaries working under the direction of the Congregation \"de propaganda fide\", Pope Benedict addressed the numerous problems arising in dealing with the clergy and laity belonging to various eastern rites, particularly the Armenian and Syriac Rites. He reminded the missionaries that they were converting people from schism and heresy:\nWe also wanted to make clear to all the good will which the Apostolic See feels for Oriental Catholics in commanding them to observe fully their ancient rites which are not at variance with the Catholic religion or with propriety. The Church does not require schismatics to abandon their rites when they return to Catholic unity, but only that they forswear and detest heresy. Its great desire is for the preservation, not the destruction of different peoples\u00a0\u2013 in short, that all may be Catholic rather than all become Latin.\nBenedict XIV, however, echoing the words of Pope Gelasius I, universally banned the practice of females serving the priest at the altar, noting that the practice had spread to certain Oriental Rites.\nChinese rites and Indian rites.\nHe had a very active papacy, reforming the education of priests, the calendar of feasts of the church, and many papal institutions. Perhaps the most important act of Benedict XIV's pontificate was the promulgation of his famous laws about missions in the two bulls, \"Ex quo singulari\" (11 July 1742), and \"Omnium sollicitudinum\" (12 September 1744). In these bulls he ruled on the custom of accommodating non-Christian words and usages to express Christian ideas and practices of the native cultures, which had been extensively done by the Jesuits in their Indian and Chinese missions. An example of this is the statues of ancestors\u00a0\u2013 there had long been uncertainty whether honour paid to one's ancestors was unacceptable 'ancestor worship,' or if it was something more like the Catholic veneration of the saints. This question was especially pressing in the case of an ancestor known not to have been a Christian. The choice of a Chinese translation for the name of God had also been debated since the early 17th century. Benedict XIV denounced these practices in these two bulls. The consequence of this was that many of these converts left the church.\nDuring his papacy, Benedict XIV commissioned a team of architects, led by Nicola Salvi and Luigi Vanvitelli, to design a large palace that was to be 'more complex and with greater baroque style than the box of a palace Vanvitelli designed in Caserta'. The palace was to be built south of St. Peter's Basilica, but was never built, as the plans were quietly ignored by Benedict's successor, Clement XIII. They were brought up once more by Pius VI late in his papacy, but had to stop due to the possibility of invasion. On 15 December 1744, Benedict XIV blessed the baroque chapel (Chapel of St. John the Baptist) in Sant'Antonio dei Portoghesi in Rome, which featured mosaics on the sides, floor, and wall behind the altar made of semi-precious stones. The chapel, which had been commissioned by King John V of Portugal in 1740, was designed by Nicola Salvi and Luigi Vanvitelli. When complete, it was then shipped to Portugal to be placed in the Igreja de S\u00e3o Roque, the Jesuit church in Lisbon.\nThe Capuchins, under the leadership of Italian priest Giuseppe Maria Bernini, grew the community of Bettiah Christians in colonial India. He was invited to spread Catholic Christianity by Maharaja Dhurup Singh of the Bettiah Raj, an appointment that was blessed by Pope Benedict XIV on 1 May 1742 in a personal letter to the king.\nConsistories.\nBenedict XIV created 64 cardinals in seven consistories; among the new cardinals he elevated into the cardinalate was the Henry Benedict Stuart (1747). The pope also reserved one cardinal and revealed that name at a later time, therefore validating the creation.\nCanonizations and beatifications.\nThe pope canonized seven saints during his pontificate including Camillus de Lellis and Fidelis of Sigmaringen. He also beatified several individuals, including Charlemagne and Niccol\u00f2 Albergati.\nJubilee.\nOn 5 May 1749, Pope Benedict XIV declared a Holy Year, to begin on Christmas Eve, 1749 and to extend throughout the next year until Christmas 1750. During the month of April 1750, 43,000 meals were served to the poor at the Trinita Hospital. Later that year, the Pope banned card games.\nWith the papal bull \"Peregrinantes\", Benedict XIV convoked a Jubilee in 1750. Furthermore, the pope called upon Saint Leonard of Port Maurice to preach; both had a close relationship and the year previously saw Benedict XIV ask him to give sermons on penance and conversion in Rome. Among the initiatives that the pope designed for the Jubilee were the call for Christian unity and organizing for proper accommodation for those pilgrims who flocked to Rome.\nUpon the advice of Saint Leonard, the pope was the first to institute the \"Via Crucis\" at the Colosseum, which he consecrated as a site of martyrdom for the early Christians. The pope placed the stations of the Cross in the arena, however, these were removed in 1874 before being restored in 1925.\nPersonality.\nBenedict XIV was considered one of the best scholars to have sat on the papal throne, noted for his keen intellect and his consistent morals. Noted for his modesty, Horace Walpole procured for the pope a statue of him with an accompanying plaque. When the copy of the inscription was forwarded to Rome for approval, Benedict XIV smiled upon reading it and, shaking his head, exclaimed: \"Alas! I am like the statues of the Piazza San Pietro \u2013 admirable at a distance but monstrous when seen at close quarters!\"\nBenedict XIV was an avid gambler. He frequently used profane language, which one of his early biographers called \"unfortunate phraseology.\" He had a crucifix placed in every room, and it is said that seeing it helped restrain his colorful language.\nBenedict XIV was jovial and was lucid until the very end. To those who knew him, his blue eyes seemed to sparkle with humor and cordiality.\nDeath and burial.\nBenedict XIV had suffered from kidney problems for years. His health worsened in 1758 and, after a battle with gout, he died on 3 May 1758 at the age of 83. His final words to those surrounding him on his deathbed were, \"I leave you in the hands of God.\" Despite those words, the pope is alleged to have recited the famous Latin phrase \"Sic transit gloria mundi\" before poignantly adding \"I now fall into silence and forgetfulness, the only place that belongs to me\".\nBenedict XIV originally demonstrated symptoms of illness on 26 April 1758 after having previously rallied from a serious illness that included gout that February. However, a contracted fever aggravated his asthma and he suffered from difficulties in urinating. However, his condition deteriorated rapidly in the following days after his gout and contracted kidney disease increased his sufferings. Despite this, his appetite had not diminished which was interpreted as a sign that he could potentially rally from his malady. However, into May, his condition had worsened considerably, though the pope remained lucid until the end, able to impart one last blessing before he died on 3 May.\nFollowing his funeral, he was interred in Saint Peter's Basilica and a large catafalque was erected in his honour.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24021", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24021", "title": "Place of articulation", "text": "Place in the mouth consonants are articulated\nIn articulatory phonetics, the place of articulation (also point of articulation) of a consonant is an approximate location along the vocal tract where its production occurs. It is a point where a constriction is made between an active and a passive articulator. Active articulators are organs capable of voluntary movement which create the constriction, while passive articulators are so called because they are normally fixed and are the parts with which an active articulator makes contact. Along with the manner of articulation and phonation, the place of articulation gives the consonant its distinctive sound.\nSince vowels are produced with an open vocal tract, the point where their production occurs cannot be easily determined. Therefore, they are not described in terms of a place of articulation but by the relative positions in vowel space. This is mostly dependent on their formant frequencies and less on the specific tongue position and lip rounding.\nThe terminology used in describing places of articulation has been developed to allow specifying of all theoretically possible contrasts. No known language distinguishes all of the places described in the literature so less precision is needed to distinguish the sounds of a particular language.39\nOverview.\nThe human voice produces sounds in the following manner:\nThe larynx.\nThe \"larynx\" or \"voice box\" is a cylindrical framework of cartilage that serves to anchor the vocal folds. When the muscles of the vocal folds contract, the airflow from the lungs is impeded until the vocal folds are forced apart again by the increasing air pressure from the lungs. The process continues in a periodic cycle that is felt as a vibration (buzzing). In singing, the vibration frequency of the vocal folds determines the pitch of the sound produced. Voiced phonemes such as the pure vowels are, by definition, distinguished by the buzzing sound of this periodic oscillation of the vocal cords.\nThe lips of the mouth can be used in a similar way to create a similar sound, as any toddler or trumpeter can demonstrate. A rubber balloon, inflated but not tied off and stretched tightly across the neck produces a squeak or buzz, depending on the tension across the neck and the level of pressure inside the balloon. Similar actions with similar results occur when the vocal cords are contracted or relaxed across the larynx.\nActive articulators.\nThe active articulators are movable parts of the vocal apparatus that impede or direct the airstream, typically some part of the tongue or lips.4 There are five major parts of the vocal tract that move: the lips, the flexible front of the tongue, the body of the tongue, the root of the tongue together with the epiglottis, and the glottis. They are discrete in that they can act independently of each other, and two or more may work together in what is called \"coarticulation\".10-11\nThe five main active parts can be further divided, as many languages contrast sounds produced within the same major part of the vocal apparatus. The following 9 degrees of active articulatory areas are known to be contrastive (sorted such that the top-most is in the front-most area of the mouth and the bottom-most is in the rear-most area of the mouth):10-15\nIn bilabial consonants, both lips move so the articulatory gesture brings the lips together, but by convention, the lower lip is said to be active and the upper lip passive. Similarly, in linguolabial consonants the tongue contacts the upper lip with the upper lip actively moving down to meet the tongue; nonetheless, the tongue is conventionally said to be active and the lip passive if for no other reason than that the parts of the mouth below the vocal tract are typically active, and those above the vocal tract are typically passive.\nIn dorsal gestures, different parts of the body of the tongue contact different parts of the roof of the mouth, but it cannot be independently controlled so they are all subsumed under the term \"dorsal\". That is unlike coronal gestures involving the front of the tongue, which is more flexible.\nThe epiglottis may be active, contacting the pharynx, or passive, being contacted by the aryepiglottal folds. Distinctions made in these laryngeal areas are very difficult to observe and are the subject of ongoing investigation, and several still-unidentified combinations are thought possible.\nThe glottis acts upon itself. There is a sometimes fuzzy line between glottal, aryepiglottal, and epiglottal consonants and phonation, which uses these same areas.\nPassive articulators.\nThe passive are the more stationary parts of the vocal tract that the active articulator touches or gets close to; they can be anywhere from the lips, upper teeth, gums, or roof of the mouth to the back of the throat.4 Although it is a continuum, there are several contrastive areas so languages may distinguish consonants by articulating them in different areas, but few languages contrast two sounds within the same area unless there is some other feature which contrasts as well. The following 9 degrees of passive articulatory areas are known to be contrastive (sorted such that the top-most is in the front-most area of the mouth and the bottom-most is in the rear-most area of the mouth):\nThe regions are not strictly separated. For instance, in some sounds in many languages, the surface of the tongue contacts a relatively large area from the back of the upper teeth to the alveolar ridge, which is common enough to have received its own name, \"denti-alveolar\". Likewise, the alveolar and post-alveolar regions merge into each other, as do the hard and soft palate, the soft palate and the uvula, and all adjacent regions. Terms like \"pre-velar\" (intermediate between palatal and velar), \"post-velar\" (between velar and uvular), and \"upper\" vs. \"lower\" pharyngeal may be used to specify more precisely where an articulation takes place. However, although a language may contrast pre-velar and post-velar sounds, it does not also contrast them with palatal and uvular sounds (of the same type of consonant) so contrasts are limited to the number above, if not always their exact location.\nTable of gestures and passive articulators and resulting places of articulation.\nThe following table shows the possible combinations of active and passive articulators.\nThe possible locations for sibilants as well as non-sibilants to occur are indicated in dashed red. For sibilants, there are additional complications involving tongue shape; see the article on sibilants for a chart of possible articulations.\nA precise vocabulary of compounding the two places of articulation is sometimes seen. However, it is usually reduced to the passive articulation, which is generally sufficient. Thus \"dorsal\u2013palatal\", \"dorsal\u2013velar\", and \"dorsal\u2013uvular\" are usually just called \"palatal\", \"velar\", and \"uvular\". If there is ambiguity, additional terms have been invented, so \"subapical\u2013palatal\" is more commonly called \"retroflex\".\n\"Note:\" Additional shades of passive articulation are sometimes specified using \"pre-\" or \"post-\", for example \"prepalatal\" (near the border between the postalveolar region and the hard palate; \"prevelar\" (at the back of the hard palate, also \"post-palatal\" or even \"medio-palatal\" for the middle of the hard palate); or \"postvelar\" (near the border of the soft palate and the uvula). They can be useful in the precise description of sounds that are articulated somewhat farther forward or back than a prototypical consonant; for this purpose, the \"fronted\" and \"retracted\" IPA diacritics can be used. However, no additional shade is needed to phonemically distinguish two consonants in a single language.\nHomorganic consonants.\nConsonants that have the same place of articulation, such as the alveolar sounds in English, are said to be \"homorganic\". Similarly, labial and velar are homorganic. A homorganic nasal rule, an instance of assimilation, operates in many languages, where a nasal consonant must be homorganic with a following stop. We see this with English \"intolerable\" but \"implausible\"; another example is found in Yoruba, where the present tense of \"ba\" \"hide\" is \"mba\" \"is hiding\", while the present of \"sun\" \"sleep\" is \"nsun\" \"is sleeping\".\nCentral and lateral articulation.\nThe tongue contacts the mouth with a surface that has two dimensions: length and width. So far, only points of articulation along its length have been considered. However, articulation varies along its width as well. When the airstream is directed down the center of the tongue, the consonant is said to be \"central\". If, however, it is deflected off to one side, escaping between the side of the tongue and the side teeth, it is said to be \"lateral\". Nonetheless, for simplicity's sake the place of articulation is assumed to be the point along the length of the tongue, and the consonant may in addition be said to be central or lateral. That is, a consonant may be lateral alveolar, like English (the tongue contacts the alveolar ridge, but allows air to flow off to the side), or lateral palatal, like Castilian Spanish \"ll\" . Some Indigenous Australian languages contrast dental, alveolar, retroflex, and palatal laterals, and many Native American languages have lateral fricatives and affricates as well.\nCoarticulation.\nSome languages have consonants with two simultaneous places of articulation, which is called coarticulation. When these are doubly articulated, the articulators must be independently movable, and therefore there may be only one each from the major categories \"labial, coronal, dorsal\" and \"pharyngeal\".\nThe only common doubly articulated consonants are labial\u2013velar stops like , and less commonly , which are found throughout Western Africa and Central Africa. Other combinations are rare but include labial\u2013(post)alveolar stops , found as distinct consonants only in a single language in New Guinea, and a uvular\u2013epiglottal stop, , found in Somali.\nMore commonly, coarticulation involves secondary articulation of an approximantic nature. Then, both articulations can be similar such as labialized labial or palatalized velar . That is the case of English , which is a velar consonant with secondary labial articulation.\nCommon coarticulations include these:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA common/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA pulmonic consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA co-articulated consonants/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"IPA vowels/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24022", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24022", "title": "Physical therapy", "text": "Profession that helps a disabled person function in everyday life\nPhysical therapy (PT), also known as physiotherapy, is a healthcare profession, as well as the care provided by physical therapists. It focuses on promoting, maintaining, or restoring health through patient education, physical interventions, disease prevention, and health promotion. The term physical therapist or physiotherapist is used to represent the trained person providing physical therapy.\nThe profession has many specialties including musculoskeletal, orthopedics, cardiopulmonary, neurology, endocrinology, sports medicine, geriatrics, pediatrics, women's health, wound care and electromyography. PTs practice in many settings, both public and private.\nIn addition to clinical practice, other aspects of physical therapy include research, education, consultation, and health administration. Physical therapists provide primary care patient management in conjunction with other medical services. In some jurisdictions, such as the United Kingdom, physical therapists may have the authority to prescribe medication.\nOverview.\nPhysical therapy addresses illnesses or injuries that limit a person's ability to move and perform functional activities in their daily lives. PTs use an individual's history and physical examination to arrive at a diagnosis and establish a management plan and, when necessary, incorporate the results of laboratory and imaging studies like X-rays, CT scans, or MRIs. Physical therapists can use sonography to diagnose and manage common musculoskeletal, nerve, and pulmonary conditions. Electrodiagnostic testing (e.g., electromyograms and nerve conduction velocity testing) may also be used.\nPT \"management\" commonly includes the prescription of, or assistance with, specific exercises, manual therapy, and bodily manipulation. Additional treatments include mechanical devices such as traction; education; electrophysical modalities which include heat, cold, electricity, sound waves, and radiation; assistive devices; prostheses; and orthoses. In addition, PTs work with individuals to prevent the loss of mobility before it occurs by developing fitness and wellness-oriented programs for healthier and more active lifestyles, and providing services to individuals and populations to develop, maintain, and restore maximum movement and functional ability throughout life. This includes providing treatment in circumstances where movement and function are threatened by aging, injury, disease, or environmental factors. Functional movement is central to what it means to be healthy.\nPhysical therapy is a profession which has many specialties including musculoskeletal, orthopedics, cardiopulmonary, neurology, endocrinology, sports medicine, geriatrics, pediatrics, women's health, wound care and electromyography. PTs practice in many settings, such as privately owned physical therapy clinics, outpatient clinics or offices, hospitals, health and wellness clinics, rehabilitation hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, extended care facilities, private homes, education and research centers, schools, hospices, industrial workplaces or other occupational environments, fitness centers and sports training facilities.&lt;ref name=\"APTA_1/17/2008\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nPhysical therapists also practice in non-patient care roles such as health policy, health insurance, health care administration, and as health care executives. Physical therapists are involved in the medical-legal field serving as experts, performing peer review and independent medical examinations.\nEducation varies greatly by country. The span of education ranges from some countries having little formal education to others having doctoral degrees and post-doctoral residencies and fellowships.\nRegarding its relationship to other healthcare professions, physiotherapy is typically one of the allied health professions. World Physiotherapy has signed a \"memorandum of understanding\" with the four other members of the World Health Professions Alliance \"to enhance their joint collaboration on protecting and investing in the health workforce to provide safe, quality and equitable care in all settings\".&lt;ref name=\"WHO_11/7/2022\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHistory.\nPhysicians like Hippocrates and later Galen are believed to have been the first practitioners of physical therapy, advocating massage, manual therapy techniques and hydrotherapy to treat people in 460\u00a0BC.\nIn the book \"De Arte Gymnastica\" (The Art of Gymnastics, published in 1569), the Italian physician Hieronymus Mercurialis (1530\u20131606) introduced the term \"medical gymnastics,\" highlighting one of the meanings of \"gymnastics\" as a dedicated rehabilitative tool for disabled subjects of any age.\nThe Italian physiologist and mathematician Alfonso Borelli (1608\u20131679) achieved significant scientific results in the field of animal and human biomechanics. His tractate \"De Motu Animalium\" (On the Movement of Animals), published in 1680, just after his death, provided a practical framework for understanding disordered and pathological movement patterns in ill and disabled people.\nIn the 18th century, the French physician Nicolas Andry de Bois-Regard (1658\u20131742) established a solid link between the health of the musculoskeletal apparatus and physical exercise, and in his book \"Trait\u00e9 d'orthop\u00e9die\" (Treatise on Orthopaedics, 1741), he introduced the new term \"orthopaedics\". After Nicolas Andry de Bois-Regard, this knowledge became fundamental for understanding correct exercises in physical rehabilitation. After the development of orthopedics in the eighteenth century, machines like the Gymnasticon were developed to treat gout and similar diseases by systematic exercise of the joints, similar to later developments in physical therapy.\nThe earliest documented origins of actual physical therapy as a professional group date back to Per Henrik Ling, the \"Father of Swedish Gymnastics,\" who founded the Royal Central Institute of Gymnastics (RCIG) in 1813 for joint manipulation and exercise. Up until 2014, the Swedish word for a physical therapist was \"sjukgymnast\", or someone involved in gymnastics for those who are ill, but the title was then changed to \"fysioterapeut\" (physiotherapist), the word used in the other Scandinavian countries. In 1887, PTs were given official registration by Sweden's National Board of Health and Welfare. Other countries soon followed. In 1894, four nurses in Great Britain formed the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy. Other early associations of physical therapists include the School of Physiotherapy at the University of Otago in New Zealand in 1913, and the United States 1914 Reed College in Portland, Oregon, which graduated \"reconstruction aides.\" Since the profession's inception, spinal manipulative therapy has been a major component of the practice of physical therapy.\nModern physical therapy was established towards the end of the 19th century due to events that affected bodily health on a global scale, which called for rapid advances in physical therapy. Following this, American orthopedic surgeons began treating children with disabilities and employed women trained in physical education, and remedial exercise. These treatments were further applied and promoted during the polio outbreak of 1916.\nDuring the First World War, women were recruited to work with and restore physical function to injured soldiers, and the field of physical therapy was institutionalized. In 1918 the term \"Reconstruction Aide\" was used to refer to individuals practicing physical therapy. The first school of physical therapy was established at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington, D.C., following the outbreak of World War I. Treatment through the 1940s primarily consisted of exercise, massage, and traction. Manipulative procedures to the spine and joints of the extremities began to be practiced, especially in the British Commonwealth countries, in the early 1950s.\nAround the time polio vaccines were developed, the presence of physical therapists became normalized in hospitals throughout North America and Europe. In the late 1950s, physical therapists started to move beyond solely hospital-based practices to outpatient orthopedic clinics, public schools, college/university health centers, geriatric settings (skilled nursing facilities), rehabilitation centers and medical centers. The specialization of physical therapy in the U.S. occurred in 1974, with the Orthopaedic Section of the APTA being formed for those physical therapists specializing in orthopedics. In the same year, the International Federation of Orthopaedic Manipulative Physical Therapists was formed, which has ever since played an important role in advancing manual therapy worldwide.\nAn international organization for the profession is the World Confederation for Physical Therapy (WCPT). It was founded in 1951 and has operated under the brand name World Physiotherapy since 2020.&lt;ref name=\"WP_1/28/2020\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"WP_6/30/2020\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nEducation.\nEducational criteria for physical therapy providers vary from state to state, country to country, and among various levels of professional responsibility. All U.S. states have physical therapy practice acts that recognize both physical therapists (PTs) and physical therapist assistants (PTAs) and some jurisdictions also recognize physical therapy technicians (PT techs) or aides. Most countries have licensing bodies that physical therapists must become members of before they can start practicing as independent professionals.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian Alliance of Physiotherapy Regulators (CAPR) permits eligible program graduates to apply for the national Physiotherapy Competency Examination (PCE). Passing the PCE is one of the requirements in most provinces and territories to work as a licensed physiotherapist in Canada. The members of CAPR are physiotherapy regulatory organizations recognized in their respective provinces and territories:\nPhysiotherapy programs are offered at fifteen universities, often through the university's respective college of medicine. Each of Canada's physical therapy schools has transitioned from three-year Bachelor of Science in Physical Therapy (BScPT) programs that required two years of prerequisite university courses (a five-year bachelor's degree) to two-year Master's of Physical Therapy (MPT) programs that require prerequisite bachelor's degrees. The last Canadian university to follow suit was the University of Manitoba, which transitioned to the MPT program in 2012, making the MPT credential the new standard entry to practice across Canada. Existing practitioners with BScPT credentials are not required to upgrade their qualifications.\nIn the province of Quebec, prospective physiotherapists are required to have completed a college diploma in either health sciences, which lasts on average two years, or physical rehabilitation technology, which lasts at least three years, to apply to a physiotherapy program or program in university. Following admission, physical therapy students work on a bachelor of science with a major in physical therapy and rehabilitation. The B.Sc. usually requires three years to complete. Students must then enter graduate school to complete a master's degree in physical therapy, which normally requires one and a half to two years of study. Graduates who obtain their M.Sc. must successfully pass the membership examination to become members of the \"Ordre Professionnel de la physioth\u00e9rapie du Qu\u00e9bec\" (PPQ). Physiotherapists can pursue their education in such specialized fields as rehabilitation sciences, sports medicine, kinesiology, and physiology.\nQuebec classifies physical rehabilitation therapists as health care professionals who are required to complete a four-year college diploma program in physical rehabilitation therapy and be members of the \"Ordre Professionnel de la physioth\u00e9rapie du Qu\u00e9bec\" (OPPQ) to practice legally in the country according to specialist De Van Gerard.\nMost physical rehabilitation therapists complete their college diploma at Coll\u00e8ge Montmorency, Dawson College, or C\u00e9gep Marie-Victorin, all situated in and around the Montreal area.\nAfter completing their technical college diploma, graduates have the opportunity to pursue their studies at the university level to perhaps obtain a bachelor's degree in physiotherapy, kinesiology, exercise science, or occupational therapy. The Universit\u00e9 de Montr\u00e9al, the Universit\u00e9 Laval and the Universit\u00e9 de Sherbrooke are among the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois universities that admit physical rehabilitation therapists to programs of study related to health sciences and rehabilitation for credit courses that were completed in college.\nTo date, there are no bridging programs available to facilitate upgrading from the BScPT to the MPT credential. However, research Master's of Science (MSc) and Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) programs are available at every university. Aside from academic research, practitioners can upgrade their skills and qualifications through continuing education courses and curriculums. Continuing education is a requirement of the provincial regulatory bodies.\nThe Canadian Physiotherapy Association offers a curriculum of continuing education courses in orthopedics and manual therapy. The program consists of 5 levels (7 courses) of training with ongoing mentorship and evaluation at each level. The orthopedic curriculum and examinations take a minimum of 4 years to complete. However, upon completion of level 2, physiotherapists can apply to a unique 1-year course-based Master's program in advanced orthopedics and manipulation at the University of Western Ontario to complete their training. This program accepts only 16 physiotherapists annually since 2007. Successful completion of either of these education streams and their respective examinations allows physiotherapists the opportunity to apply to the Canadian Academy of Manipulative Physiotherapy (CAMPT) for fellowship. Fellows of the Canadian Academy of Manipulative Physiotherapists (FCAMPT) are considered leaders in the field, having extensive post-graduate education in orthopedics and manual therapy. FCAMPT is an internationally recognized credential, as CAMPT is a member of the International Federation of Manipulative Physiotherapists (IFOMPT), a branch of World Physiotherapy (formerly World Confederation of Physical Therapy (WCPT)) and the World Health Organization (WHO).\nScotland.\nPhysiotherapy degrees are offered at four universities: Edinburgh Napier University in Edinburgh, Robert Gordon University in Aberdeen, Glasgow Caledonian University in Glasgow, and Queen Margaret University in Edinburgh. Students can qualify as physiotherapists by completing a four-year Bachelor of Science degree or a two-year master's degree (if they already have an undergraduate degree in a related field).\nTo use the title 'Physiotherapist', a student must register with the Health and Care Professions Council, a UK-wide regulatory body, on qualifying. Many physiotherapists are also members of the Chartered Society of Physiotherapy (CSP), which provides insurance and professional support.\nUnited States.\nThe primary practitioner of physical therapy practitioner is a physical therapist (PT) who is trained and licensed to examine, evaluate, diagnose and manage injury or disease in patients or clients. When indicated, physical therapists order diagnostic tests/studies, including but not limited to imaging and laboratory tests. Physical therapists may also perform or interpret selected imaging or other tests/studies. Physical therapist education curricula in the United States culminate in a Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) degree, with some practicing PTs holding a Master of Physical Therapy degree, and some with a Bachelor's degree. The Master of Physical Therapy and Master of Science in Physical Therapy degrees are no longer offered, and the entry-level degree is the Doctor of Physical Therapy degree, which typically takes 3 years after completing a bachelor's degree. PTs who hold a Master's or bachelor's in PT are encouraged to get their DPT because APTA's goal is for all PTs to be on a doctoral level. DPT programs in the United States are accredited by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education (CAPTE). According to CAPTE, as of 2025[ [update]] there are 39,448 students currently enrolled in 322 accredited PT programs in the United States while 10,077 PTA students are currently enrolled in 390 PTA programs in the United States.\nThe physical therapist professional curriculum includes content in the clinical sciences (e.g., content about the cardiovascular, pulmonary, endocrine, metabolic, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, integumentary, musculoskeletal, and neuromuscular systems and the medical and surgical conditions frequently seen by physical therapists). Current training is specifically aimed to enable physical therapists to appropriately recognize and refer non-musculoskeletal diagnoses that may present similarly to those caused by systems not appropriate for physical therapy intervention, which has resulted in direct access to physical therapists in many states.\nPost-doctoral residency and fellowship education prevalence is increasing steadily with 219 residency and 42 fellowship programs accredited in 2016. Residencies aim to train physical therapists in a specialty such as acute care, cardiovascular &amp; pulmonary, clinical electrophysiology, faculty, geriatrics, neurology, orthopaedics, pediatrics, sports, women's health, and wound care, whereas fellowships train specialists in a subspecialty (e.g. critical care, hand therapy, and division 1 sports), similar to the medical model. Residency programs offer eligibility to sit for the specialist certification in their respective area of practice. For example, completion of an orthopedic physical therapy residency allows the graduates to apply and sit for the clinical specialist examination in orthopedics, achieving the OCS designation upon passing the examination. Board certification of physical therapy specialists is aimed to recognize individuals with advanced clinical knowledge and skill training in their respective area of practice, and exemplifies the trend toward greater education to optimally treat individuals with movement dysfunction.\nPhysical therapist assistants may deliver treatment and physical interventions for patients and clients under a care plan established by and under the supervision of a physical therapist. Physical therapist assistants in the United States are currently trained under associate of applied sciences curricula specific to the profession, as outlined and accredited by CAPTE. As of December 2022, there were 396 accredited two-year (associate degree) programs for physical therapist assistants in the United States of America.\nEmployment.\nPhysical therapy\u2013related jobs in North America have shown rapid growth in recent years, but employment rates and average wages may vary significantly between different countries, states, provinces, or regions. A study from 2013 states that 56.4% of physical therapists were globally satisfied with their jobs. Salary, interest in work, and fulfillment in a job are important predictors of job satisfaction. In a Polish study, job burnout among physical therapists was manifested by increased emotional exhaustion and a decreased sense of personal achievement. Emotional exhaustion is significantly higher among physical therapists working with adults and employed in hospitals. Other factors that increased burnout include working in a hospital setting and having seniority from 15 to 19 years.\nUnited States.\nAccording to the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics, there were approximately 267,200 physical therapists employed in the United States in 2024, earning an average of $101,020 per year in 2024, or $48.57 per hour, with 11% growth in employment projected by 2034. The Bureau of Labor Statistics also reports that there were approximately 128,700 physical therapist assistants and aides employed in the United States in 2014, earning an average of $42,980 annually, or $20.66 per hour, with 40% growth in employment projected by 2024. To meet their needs, many healthcare and physical therapy facilities hire \"travel physical therapists\", who work temporary assignments between 8 and 26 weeks for much higher wages; about $113,500 a year.\" Bureau of Labor Statistics data on PTAs and techs can be difficult to decipher, due to their tendency to report data on these job fields collectively rather than separately. O-Net reports that in 2015, PTAs in the United States earned a median wage of $55,170 annually or $26.52 hourly and that aides/techs earned a median wage of $25,120 annually or $12.08 hourly in 2015. The American Physical Therapy Association reports vacancy rates for physical therapists as 11.2% in outpatient private practice, 10% in acute care settings, and 12.1% in skilled nursing facilities. The APTA also reports turnover rates for physical therapists as 10.7% in outpatient private practice, 11.9% in acute care settings, 27.6% in skilled nursing facilities.\nDefinitions and licensing requirements in the United States vary among jurisdictions, as each state has enacted its own physical therapy practice act defining the profession within its jurisdiction, but the Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy has also drafted a model definition to limit this variation. The Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education (CAPTE) is responsible for accrediting physical therapy education curricula throughout the United States of America.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe title of Physiotherapist is a protected professional title in the United Kingdom. Anyone using this title must be registered with the Health &amp; Care Professions Council (HCPC). Physiotherapists must complete the necessary qualifications, usually an undergraduate physiotherapy degree (at university or as an intern), a master rehabilitation degree, or a doctoral degree in physiotherapy. This is typically followed by supervised professional experience lasting two to three years. All professionals on the HCPC register must comply with continuing professional development and can be audited for evidence of having done so at intervals.\nSpecialty areas.\nThe body of knowledge of physical therapy is large, and therefore physical therapists may specialize in a specific clinical area. While there are many different types of physical therapy, the American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties lists ten current specialist certifications. Most physical therapists practicing in a particular specialty will have undergone further training, such as an accredited residency program, although individuals are currently able to sit for their specialist examination after 2,000 hours of focused practice in their respective specialty population, in addition to requirements set by each respective specialty board.\nCardiovascular and pulmonary.\nCardiovascular and pulmonary rehabilitation respiratory practitioners and physical therapists offer therapy for a wide variety of cardiopulmonary disorders or pre- and post-cardiac or pulmonary surgery. An example of cardiac surgery is coronary bypass surgery. The primary goals of this specialty include increasing endurance and functional independence. Manual therapy is used in this field to assist in clearing lung secretions experienced with cystic fibrosis. The treatment of pulmonary disorders, heart attacks, post coronary bypass surgery, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and pulmonary fibrosis can benefit from cardiovascular and pulmonary specialized physical therapists.\nClinical electrophysiology.\nThis specialty area includes electrotherapy/physical agents, electrophysiological evaluation (EMG/NCV), physical agents, and wound management.\nGeriatric.\nGeriatric physical therapy covers a wide area of issues concerning people as they go through normal adult aging but is usually focused on the older adult. There are many conditions that affect many people as they grow older and include but are not limited to the following: arthritis, osteoporosis, cancer, Alzheimer's disease, hip and joint replacement, balance disorders, and incontinence. Geriatric physical therapists specialize in providing therapy for such conditions in older adults.\nPhysical rehabilitation can prevent deterioration in the health and activities of daily living among care home residents. The current evidence suggests benefits to physical health from participating in different types of physical rehabilitation to improve daily living, strength, flexibility, balance, mood, memory, exercise tolerance, fear of falling, injuries, and death. It may be both safe and effective in improving physical and possibly mental state, while reducing disability with few adverse events.\nThe current body of evidence suggests that physical rehabilitation may be effective for long-term care residents in reducing disability with few adverse events. However, there is insufficient to conclude whether the beneficial effects are sustainable and cost-effective. The findings are based on moderate quality evidence.\nWound management.\nWound management physical therapy includes the treatment of conditions involving the skin and all its related organs. Common conditions managed include wounds and burns. Physical therapists may utilize surgical instruments, wound irrigations, dressings, and topical agents to remove the damaged or contaminated tissue and promote tissue healing. Other commonly used interventions include exercise, edema control, splinting, and compression garments. The work done by physical therapists in the integumentary specialty is similar to what would be done by medical doctors or nurses in the emergency room or triage.\nNeurology.\nNeurological physical therapy is a field focused on working with individuals who have a neurological disorder or disease. These can include a stroke, chronic back pain, Alzheimer's disease, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), ALS, brain injury, cerebral palsy, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, facial palsy and spinal cord injury. Common impairments associated with neurologic conditions include impairments of vision, balance, ambulation, activities of daily living, movement, muscle strength and loss of functional independence. The techniques involve in neurological physical therapy are wide-ranging and often require specialized training.\nNeurological physiotherapy is also called neurophysiotherapy or neurological rehabilitation. It is recommended for neurophysiotherapists to collaborate with psychologists when providing physical treatment of movement disorders. This is especially important because combining physical therapy and psychotherapy can improve neurological status of the patients.\nOrthopaedics.\nOrthopedic physical therapists diagnose, manage, and treat disorders and injuries of the musculoskeletal system, including rehabilitation after orthopedic surgery, acute trauma such as sprains or strains, and injuries of insidious onset such as tendinopathy, bursitis, and deformities like scoliosis. This specialty of physical therapy is most often found in the outpatient clinical setting. Orthopedic therapists are trained in the treatment of post-operative orthopedic procedures, fractures, acute sports injuries, arthritis, sprains, strains, back and neck pain, spinal conditions, and amputations.\nJoint and spine mobilization/manipulation, dry needling (similar to acupuncture), therapeutic exercise, neuromuscular techniques, muscle reeducation, hot/cold packs, and electrical muscle stimulation (e.g., cryotherapy, iontophoresis, electrotherapy) are modalities employed to expedite recovery in the orthopedic setting. Additionally, an emerging adjunct to diagnosis and treatment is the use of sonography for diagnosis and to guide treatments such as muscle retraining. Those with injury or disease affecting the muscles, bones, ligaments, or tendons will benefit from assessment by a physical therapist specialized in orthopedics.\nPediatrics.\nPediatric physical therapy assists in the early detection of health problems and uses a variety of modalities to provide physical therapy for disorders in the pediatric population. These therapists are specialized in the diagnosis, treatment, and management of infants, children, and adolescents with a variety of congenital, developmental, neuromuscular, skeletal, or acquired disorders/diseases. Treatments focus mainly on improving gross and fine motor skills, balance and coordination, strength and endurance as well as cognitive and sensory processing/integration.\nSports.\nPhysical therapists are closely involved in the care and wellbeing of athletes, including recreational, semi-professional (paid), and professional (full-time employment) participants. This area of practice encompasses athletic injury management under 5 main categories:\nPhysical therapists who work for professional sports teams often have a specialized sports certification issued through their national registering organization. Most physical therapists who practice in a sporting environment are also active in collaborative sports medicine programs (see also athletic trainers).\nWomen's health.\nWomen's health and pelvic floor physical therapy mostly address women's issues related to the female reproductive system, child birth, and post-partum. These conditions include lymphedema, osteoporosis, pelvic pain, prenatal and post-partum periods, and urinary incontinence. It also addresses pelvic pain, pelvic organ prolapse and other disorders associated with pelvic floor dysfunction. Manual physical therapy has been demonstrated in multiple studies to increase rates of conception in women with infertility.\nOncology.\nPhysical therapy in the field of oncology and palliative care is a continuously evolving and developing specialty, both in malignant and non-malignant diseases. Physical therapy for both groups of patients is now recognized as an essential part of the clinical pathway, as early diagnoses and new treatments are enabling patients to live longer. it is generally accepted that patients should have access to an appropriate level of rehabilitation, so that they can function at a minimum level of dependency and optimize their quality of life, regardless of their life expectancy.\nMusculoskeletal and point-of-care sonography.\nPhysical therapists may be credentialed by the APCA in musculoskeletal and point-of-care sonography as sonologists performing and interpreting ultrasound examinations.\nPhysical therapist\u2013patient collaborative relationship.\nPeople with brain injuries, musculoskeletal conditions, cardiac conditions, or multiple pathologies benefit from a positive alliance between patient and therapist. Outcomes include the ability to successfully perform activities of daily living, manage pain, complete specific physical function tasks, depression, global assessment of physical health, treatment adherence, and treatment satisfaction.\nStudies have explored four themes that may influence patient-therapist interactions: interpersonal and communication skills, practical skills, individualized patient-centered care, and organizational and environmental factors. Physical therapists need to be able to effectively communicate with their patients on a variety of levels. Patients have varying levels of health literacy, which must be taken into account when discussing the patient's ailments as well as planned treatments. Research has shown that using communication tools tailored to the patient's health literacy leads to improved engagement with their practitioner and their clinical care. In addition, patients reported that shared decision-making will yield a positive relationship. Practical skills, such as the ability to educate patients about their conditions as well as professional expertise, are perceived as valuable factors in inpatient care. Patients value the ability of a clinician to provide clear and simple explanations about their problems. Furthermore, patients value when physical therapists possess excellent technical skills that improve the patient's condition effectively.\nEnvironmental factors such as the location, equipment used, and parking are less important to the patient than the clinical encounter with the therapist itself.\nBased on the current understanding, the most important factors that contribute to the patient-therapist interactions include that the physical therapist spends an adequate amount of time with the patient, possesses strong listening and communication skills, treats the patient with respect, provides clear explanations of the treatment, and allows the patient to be involved in the treatment decisions.\nEffectiveness.\nPhysical therapy has been found to be effective for improving outcomes, both in terms of pain and function, in multiple musculoskeletal conditions. Spinal manipulation by physical therapists is a safe option to improve outcomes for lower back pain. Several studies have suggested that physical therapy, particularly manual therapy techniques focused on the neck and the median nerve, combined with stretching exercises, may be equivalent or even preferable to surgery for carpal tunnel syndrome. While spine manipulation and therapeutic massage are effective interventions for neck pain, electroacupuncture, strain-counterstrain, relaxation massage, heat therapy, and ultrasound therapy are not as effective, and thus not recommended.\nStudies also show physical therapy is effective for patients with other conditions. Physiotherapy treatment may improve quality of life, promote cardiopulmonary fitness and inspiratory pressure, as well as reduce symptoms and medication use by people with asthma. Physical therapy is provided to patients in the ICU, as early mobilization can help reduce ICU and hospital length of stay and improve long-term functional ability. Early progressive mobilization for adult, intubated ICU patients on mechanical ventilation is safe and effective.\nPsychologically informed physical therapy (PIPT), in which a physical therapist treats patients while other members of a multidisciplinary care team help in preoperative planning for patient management of pain and quality of life, helps improve patient outcomes, especially before and after spine, hip, or knee surgery.\nHowever, in the United States, there are obstacles affecting the effectiveness of physical therapy, such as racial disparities among patients. Studies have shown that non-white and Hispanic patients may receive lower standards of care compared to white patients. Hispanic patients in particular were found to have difficulties receiving a physician referral for an appointment despite sufficient insurance coverage. Raising awareness of these racial disparities in physical therapy is crucial to improving treatment effectiveness across all demographics.\nTelehealth.\nTelehealth (or telerehabilitation) is a developing form of physical therapy in response to the increasing demand for physical therapy treatment. Telehealth is online communication between the clinician and patient, either live or in pre-recorded sessions. It receives mixed reviews when compared to usual, in-person care. The benefits of telehealth include improved accessibility in remote areas, cost efficiency, and improved convenience for people who are bedridden and home-restricted, or physically disabled. Some downsides of telehealth include: limited evidence for greater effectiveness and compliance than in-person therapy, licensing and payment policy issues, and compromised privacy. Studies are controversial as to the effectiveness of telehealth in patients with more serious conditions, such as a stroke, multiple sclerosis, and lower back pain. In the United States, the interstate compact, enacted in March 2018, allows patients to participate in telehealth appointments with medical practices located in different states.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, the need for telehealth came to the fore as patients were less able to safely attend in-person, particularly if they were elderly or had chronic diseases. Telehealth was considered to be a proactive step to prevent physical decline in individuals that could not attend classes. Physical decline in at-risk groups is difficult to address or undo later. The platform licensing or development are found to be the most substantial cost in telehealth. Telehealth does not remove the need for the physical therapist as they still need to oversee the program.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPhysiotherapy is integral to modern rehabilitation strategies for athletes recovering from injuries."}
{"id": "24025", "revid": "3617193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24025", "title": "Polygyny", "text": "Mating system in which the male partner may have multiple partners\nPolygyny () is a form of polygamy entailing the marriage of a man to several women. The term polygyny is from Neoclassical Greek \u03c0\u03bf\u03bb\u03c5\u03b3\u03c5\u03bd\u03af\u03b1 (); from grc \" ' ()\"\u00a0'many' and \" ' ()\"\u00a0'woman, wife'.\nIncidence.\nPolygyny is more widespread in Africa than in any other continent. Some scholars theorize that the slave trade's impact on the male-to-female sex ratio was a key factor in the emergence and fortification of polygynous practices in regions of Africa.\nPolygyny is most common in a region known as the \"polygamy belt\" in West Africa and Central Africa, with the countries estimated to have the highest polygamy prevalence in the world being Burkina Faso, Mali, Gambia, Niger and Nigeria. In the region of sub-Saharan Africa, polygyny is common and deeply rooted in the culture, with 11 percent of the population of sub-Saharan Africa living in such marriages (25 percent of the Muslim population and 3 percent of the Christian population, as of 2019). Polygyny is especially widespread in West Africa, with the countries estimated to have the highest polygyny prevalence in the world as of 2019 being Burkina Faso (36%), Mali (34%) and Gambia (30%). Outside of Africa, the highest prevalence is in Afghanistan, Yemen and Iraq.\nPolygyny was accepted in ancient Hebrew society, in classical China, and in some traditional Native American, African and Polynesian cultures. In the Indian subcontinent, it was known to have been practiced during ancient times. It was accepted in Ancient Greece, until the Roman Empire and the Catholic Church. \nIn North America, polygyny is practiced by some Mormon sects, such as the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS Church).\nPolygyny is more common in societies that have the custom of bride price.\nSome studies of mitochondrial DNA have shown that there have been more mothers than fathers in the genetic record of the human species, meaning that the proportion of females that have reproduced in each generation has generally been greater than the proportion of men that reproduced. The authors of one 2014 study attributed these findings to widespread polygyny.\nCause and explanation.\nAugmenting division of labor.\nEster Boserup was the first to propose that the high incidence of polygyny in sub-Saharan Africa is rooted in the sexual division of labor in hoe-farming and the large economic contribution of women.\nIn some regions of shifting cultivation where polygyny is most frequently recorded, labor is often starkly divided between genders. In many of these cases, the task of felling trees in preparation of new plots, the fencing of fields against wild animals, and sometimes the planting of crops, is usually done by men and older boys (along with hunting, fishing and the raising of livestock). Wives, on the other hand, are responsible for other aspects of cultivating, food processing and providing meals and for performing domestic duties for the family. Boserup argues that though women's work comprises a larger percentage of tasks that form the basis of sub-Saharan life, women often do not receive the majority portion of the benefits that accompany economic and agricultural success.\nAn elderly cultivator, with several wives and likely several young male children, benefits from having a much larger workforce within his household. By the combined efforts of his young sons and young wives, he may gradually expand his cultivation and become more prosperous. A man with a single wife has less help in cultivation and is likely to have little or no help for felling trees. According to Boserup's historical data, women living in such a structure also welcome one or more co-wives to share with them the burden of daily labor. However, the second wife will usually do the most tiresome work, almost as if she were a servant to the first wife, and will be inferior to the first wife in status. A 1930s study of the Mende in the West African state of Sierra Leone concluded that a plurality of wives is an agricultural asset, since a large number of women makes it unnecessary to employ wage laborers. Polygyny is considered an economic advantage in many rural areas. In some cases, the economic role of the additional wife enables the husband to enjoy more leisure.\nAnthropologist Jack Goody's comparative study of marriage around the world, using the Ethnographic Atlas, demonstrated a historical correlation between the practice of extensive shifting cultivation and polygyny in many Sub-Saharan African societies. Drawing on the work of Ester Boserup, Goody notes that in some of the sparsely populated regions where shifting cultivation takes place in Africa, much of the work is done by women. This favored polygynous marriages, in which men sought to monopolize the production of women \"who are valued both as workers and as child bearers.\"\nGoody, however, observes that the correlation is imperfect, and also describes more traditionally male-dominated though relatively extensive farming systems, such as those common in much of West Africa, particularly the savanna region, where more agricultural work is done by men, and polygamy is desired more for the production of male offspring whose labor in farming is valued.\nGoody's observation regarding African male farming systems is discussed and supported by anthropologists Douglas R. White and Michael L. Burton in their article, \"Causes of Polygyny: Ecology, Economy, Kinship, and Warfare\", where the authors note: \"Goody (1973) argues against the female contributions hypothesis. He notes Dorjahn's (1959) comparison of East and\nWest Africa, showing higher female agricultural contributions in East Africa and higher polygyny rates in West Africa, especially in the West African savanna, where one finds especially high male agricultural contributions. Goody says, \"The reasons behind polygyny are sexual and reproductive rather than economic and productive\" (1973:189), arguing that men marry polygynously to maximize their fertility and to obtain large households containing many young dependent males.\"\nAn analysis by James Fenske (2012) found that child mortality and ecologically-related economic shocks had a stronger association with rates of polygamy in Sub-Saharan Africa rather than female agricultural contributions (which are typically relatively small in the West African savanna and Sahel, where polygyny rates are higher), finding that polygyny rates decrease significantly in line with child mortality rates.\nDesire for progeny.\nMost research into the determinants of polygyny has focused on macro-level factors. Widespread polygyny is linked to the kinship groups that share descent from a common ancestor. Polygyny also served as \"a dynamic principle of family survival, growth, security, continuity, and prestige\", especially as a socially approved mechanism that increases the number of adult workers immediately and the eventual workforce of resident children.\nAccording to scientific studies, the human mating system is considered to be moderately polygynandrous (multiple males and multiple females, all mate with each other), based both on surveys of world populations, and on characteristics of human reproductive physiology.\nEconomic burden.\nScholars have argued that in farming systems where men do most of the agriculture work, a second wife can be an economic burden rather than an asset. In order to feed an additional wife, the husband must either work harder himself or he must hire laborers to do part of the work. In such regions, polygyny is either non-existent or is a luxury which only a small minority of rich farmers can indulge.\nA report by the secretariat of the UN Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) quotes: \"one of the strongest appeals of polygyny to men in Africa is precisely its economic aspect, for a man with several wives commands more land, can produce more food for his household and can achieve a high status due to the wealth which he can command\". In Boserup's 1970 discussion of earlier analyses of polygynous systems, for example that of Little's work of the 1930s, that through the hard work, economic, and agricultural assistance of a man's several wives, a husband could afford to pay the bride price of a new wife and further his access to more land, meanwhile increasing his progeny. According to Boserup, writing in 1970, tribal rules of land tenure were still in force over much of the continent of Africa. In this system, members of a tribe which commands a certain territory had a native right to take land under cultivation for food production, and in many cases, also for the cultivation of cash crops. Under this tenure system, an additional wife is an economic asset that helps the family to expand its production.\nThe economist Mich\u00e8le Tertilt concludes that countries that practice polygyny are less economically stable than those that practice monogamy. Polygynous countries usually have a higher fertility rate, fewer savings reserves, and a lower GDP. A 2014 study estimates that fertility would decrease by 40 percent, savings would increase by 70 percent and GDP would increase by 170 percent if polygyny were banned. Monogamous societies present a surge in economic productivity because monogamous men are able to save and invest their resources due to having fewer children. Polygynous societies have a higher concentration of men investing into methods of mating with women, whereas monogamous men invest more into their families and other related institutions.\nDespite the expenses of polygynous marriages, a 1995 study suggests that men benefit from marrying multiple wives through the economic and social insurance that kinship ties produce. With a large network of in-laws, these men have the ties they need to compensate for other economic shortages.\nLibido.\nSome analysts have posited that a high libido may be a factor in polygyny, although others have downplayed its significance. The sex drive as a factor in some Asian cultures was sometimes associated with wealthy men and those that were adjunct to an aristocracy, although such libidinal perceptions were at times discarded in favor of seeing polygyny as a factor of traditional life. For example, many sub-Saharan African societies view polygyny as essential to expand their progeny and kinship, a practice of high cultural importance. In this case, it would be hard to determine whether the origin was that of high libido, as polygyny would be practiced regardless. Other explanations postulate that polygyny is a tool used to ward off inclinations towards infidelity. In a chapter comparing Sub-Saharan African polygyny, Boserup (1970) comments that in regions where polygyny is practiced, but for demographic and economic reasons must to be delayed for males until older ages, higher incidences of adultery and prostitution are expected to be present.\nEnslavement of women.\nResearchers have suggested that Vikings may have originally started sailing and raiding due to a need to seek out women from foreign lands. The concept was expressed in the 11th century by historian Dudo of Saint-Quentin in his semi-imaginary \"History of The Normans\". Rich and powerful Viking men tended to have many wives and concubines, and these polygynous relationships might have led to a shortage of eligible women for the average Viking male. Due to this, the average Viking man could have been forced to perform riskier actions to gain wealth and power to be able to find suitable women. Viking men would often buy or capture women and make them into their wives or concubines. The Annals of Ulster states that in 821 the Vikings plundered an Irish village and \"carried off a great number of women into captivity\".\nPolygyny in West Africa, the region of the world where the practice is most common, exists in a societal context where historical factors, such as the slave trade, and the local religion, Islam, interact creating a culture where polygyny is widespread. The slave trade's impact on the male-to-female sex ratio has been cited as a key factor in the high prevalence of polygynous practices in this region of Africa.\nFindings.\nOf the 1,231 societies listed in the 1980 Ethnographic Atlas, 186 were found to be monogamous; 453 had occasional polygyny; 588 had more frequent polygyny; and 4 had polyandry. Some research has shown that males living in polygynous marriages may live 12 percent longer. Polygyny may be practiced where there is a lower male:female ratio; this may result from male infants having increased mortality from infectious diseases. However, the natural sex ratio at birth is actually slightly biased in favour of males (the natural sex ratio is around 105 boys/100 girls at birth; generally in the range of 103\u2013107); presently in some countries this is even more biased in favor of males due to sex-selective abortion and female infanticide.\nViolence.\nResearch shows that polygyny is widely practiced in countries that are destabilized, more violent, more likely to invade neighbors and more likely to suffer catastrophic political and economic collapse. This has been attributed to the inequality factor of polygyny, where if the richest and most powerful 10 percent of males have four wives each, the bottom thirty percent of males cannot marry. In the top twenty countries in the 2017 Fragile States Index, polygyny is widely practiced. In West Africa, more than one-third of women are married to a man who has more than one wife, and a study of 240,000 children in 29 African countries has also shown that, after controlling for other factors, children in polygynous families were more likely to die young. A 2019 study of 800 rural African ethnic groups published in the \"Journal of Conflict Resolution\" found that \"young men who belong to polygynous groups feel that they are treated more unequally and are readier to use violence in comparison to those belonging to monogamous groups.\"\nIn a 2011 doctoral thesis, anthropologist Kyle R. Gibson reviewed three studies documenting 1,208 suicide attacks from 1981 to 2007 and found that countries with higher polygyny rates correlated with greater production of suicide terrorists. Political scientist Robert Pape has found that among Islamic suicide terrorists, 97 percent were unmarried and 84 percent were male (or if excluding the Kurdistan Workers' Party, 91 percent male), while a study conducted by the U.S. military in Iraq in 2008 found that suicide bombers were almost always single men without children aged 18 to 30 (with a mean age of 22), and were typically students or employed in blue-collar occupations. In addition to noting that countries where polygyny is widely practiced tend to have higher homicide rates and rates of rape, political scientists Valerie M. Hudson and Bradley Thayer have argued that because Islam is the only major religious tradition where polygyny is still largely condoned, the higher degrees of marital inequality in Islamic countries than most of the world causes them to have larger populations susceptible to suicide terrorism, and that promises of harems of virgins for martyrdom serves as a mechanism to mitigate in-group conflict within Islamic countries between alpha and non-alpha males by bringing esteem to the latter's families and redirecting their violence towards out-groups.\nAlong with his research on the Tamil Tigers, anthropologist Scott Atran found that Palestinian terrorist groups (such as Hamas) provide monthly stipends, lump-sum payments, and massive prestige to the families of suicide terrorists. Citing Atran and other anthropological research showing that 99 percent of Palestinian suicide terrorists are male, that 86 percent are unmarried, and that 81 percent have at least six siblings (larger than the average Palestinian family size), cognitive scientist Steven Pinker argues in \"The Better Angels of Our Nature\" (2011) that because the families of men in the West Bank and Gaza often cannot afford bride prices and that many potential brides end up in polygynous marriages, the financial compensation of an act of suicide terrorism can buy enough brides for a man's brothers to have children to make the self-sacrifice pay off in terms of kin selection and biological fitness (with Pinker also citing a famous quotation attributed to evolutionary biologist J. B. S. Haldane when Haldane quipped that he would not sacrifice his life for his brother but would for \"two brothers or eight cousins\").\nEffects on women.\nInequality between husbands and wives is common in countries where polygyny is more frequently practiced because of limited education. In Africa polygyny was believed to be part of the way to build an empire. It was not until the post-colonialism era in Africa that polygyny began to be viewed as unjust or taboo. According to Natali Exposito, \"in a study of the Ngwa Igbo Clan in Nigeria identified five principal reasons for men to maintain more than one wife: because having more than one wife allows the Ngwa husband to (1) have the many children that he desires; (2) heighten his prestige and boost his ego among his peers; (3) enhance his status within the community; (4) ensure a sufficient availability of labor to perform the necessary farm work and the processing of commercial oil-palm produce; and (5) satisfy his sexual urges.\" Out of all of the reasons stated none are beneficial to the wives, but instead only beneficial to the husbands. In Egypt, feminists have fought for polygamy to be abolished, but it is viewed as a core component of Islamic family law, and has thus been largely unsuccessful. In countries where polygyny is practiced less frequently, women have more equality in the marriage and are better able to communicate their opinions about family planning.\nWomen participating in polygynous marriages share common marital problems with women in a monogamous marriage; however, there are issues uniquely related to polygyny which affects their overall life satisfaction and have severe implications for women's health. Women practicing polygyny are susceptible to sexually transmitted infections, infertility, and mental health complications. Among the Logoli of Kenya, the fear of AIDS or becoming infected with the HIV virus has informed women's decisions about entering polygynous marriages. Some view polygyny as a means to prevent men from taking random sexual partners and potentially introducing STIs into relationships. Interviews conducted with some of the Logoli tribe in Kenya suggested they feared polygynous marriages because of what they have witnessed in the lives of other women who are currently in such relationships. The observed experiences of some of the women in polygynous unions tend to be characterized by frequent jealousy, conflicts, competition, tensions, and psychological stresses. Some of the husbands fail to share love and other resources equally; and envy and hatred, and sometimes violent physical confrontations become the order of the day among co-wives and their children. This discourages women from entering a polygynous marriage. Research shows that competition and conflict can intensify to unbearable level for co-wives causing women to commit suicide due to psychological distress. Findings show that the wife order can affect life satisfaction. According to Bove and Valeggia, women who are senior wives often misuse their position to obtain healthcare benefits in countries where only one wife can become a recipient. The conflict between co-wives can attribute to the higher rates of mental health disorders and issues such as anxiety, depression, somatization, psychoticism, and paranoia. As well as this reduced marital/life satisfaction and low self-esteem has been shown to be more prevalent among women in polygynous relationships when compared to women in monogamous relationships.\nVarious methods have been used to reduce the amount of jealousy and conflict among wives. These include sororal polygyny, in which the co-wives are sisters; and hut polygyny, in which each wife has her own residence and the husband visits them in rotation. A clear status hierarchy among wives is also sometimes used to avoid fighting by establishing unequivocally each wife's rights and obligations. Although there are several harmful aspects of this practice related to women, there are some reported personal and economic advantages for women such as sharing household and child rearing responsibilities. Also, wives share companionship and support with co-wives.\nStudies of the Ngwa group in eastern Nigeria shows that on average, women in polygynous unions are 22\u201326 percent less fertile than women in monogamous unions. Data shows that the greater the intensity of polygyny, the lower the fertility of successive wives: 15 percent deficit for first wives; a 37 percent deficit for second wives; and a 46 percent deficit for third or more wives. Studies show that seems to exist because of the widening age gap between the successive order of wives and because of the decreasing exposure to coitus, if all coitus occurs in marriage.\nDisease.\nStudies show there are two mechanisms that could lead to higher prevalence rates of HIV in men and women who are in polygynous unions: partners in polygynous unions have more extra-marital relationships and thus increase each other's exposure to HIV; women who are recruited into a polygynous union are more likely to be HIV positive than those who marry a monogamous husband. In addition to these two mechanisms, variation in HIV prevalence rates by union type is possibly due to individuals in polygynous unions are typically part of a sexual network with concurrent partnerships.\nThe ecological association between polygyny and HIV prevalence is shown to be negative at the sub-national level. HIV prevalence tends to be lower in countries where the practice of polygyny is common, and within countries it is lower in areas with higher levels of polygyny. Proposed explanations for the protective effect of polygyny include the distinctive structure of sexual networks produced by polygyny, the disproportionate recruitment of HIV positive women into marriages with a polygynous husband, and the lower coital frequency in conjugal dyads of polygynous marriages.\nFor example, studies in Malawi have shown that for men and women in polygynous marriages, the rate of HIV is between 10 and 15 percent. About 14 percent of Malawi's population is infected with HIV, which causes AIDS, according to official figures. There are approximately 78,000 AIDS-related deaths and 100,000 new infections every year in the country.\nCriticism.\nCriticism of polygyny focuses on the wellbeing of the wives in such marriages, including coercion, buying and selling of wives (such as through bride price, which is common in societies that practice polygyny), concerns about inequality and the fate of the young men left without wives (such as the lost boys in the FLDS Church), as well as the relation between polygyny practiced on a large scale in a society and war.\nA notable critic of polygyny was Thomas Aquinas nearly eight centuries ago. He contended that polygyny is unjust to wives and children. He also argues that it creates rival stepchildren and forces them to compete for attention, food, and shelter. According to Aquinas, polygyny violates the requirements of fidelity between husband and wife.\nPolygyny has been criticized by feminists such as Professor John O. Ifediora, who believes that women should be equal to men and not subject to them in marriage. Professor Ifediora also believes that polygyny is a \"hindrance to social and economic development\" in the continent of Africa due to women's lack of financial control. Standard polygynist practices often leave women at a disadvantage if they make the decision to remove themselves from the polygynist lifestyle. To leave the marriage, women must repay their bride price. Though this is simple in thought, this is not simple in execution. To prevent their wives from leaving, husbands will often keep the bride price at high levels, which is often at an unpayable level for women. In most cases, women do not have access to their children if they decide to leave polygyny, nor are they allowed to take them, due to cultural ideas of ownership in relation to progeny. Marci Hamilton sees polygyny as a form of oppression of women; she wrote: \"In polygamy, also not a victimless crime, the practice is built on the subjugation of women to the men's needs and demands. Moreover, for many of the religious polygamists, the women are nothing but the means to a particular doctrinal end \u2013 creating more children to increase the man's odds of getting into heaven. Again, the men control the finances and the women are commodities, carrying out the sexual goals of the men. There can be no gender equality in this scenario, which is incapable of being squared with any viable theory of women's rights.\" First wives in polygynous marriages are often in a difficult situation, when the law or religious code does not require their consent or input for new wives to be admitted in the marriage, so the first wife is forced to accept any new women brought into the family by the husband and to get along with them. Polygyny is criticized because of its asymmetrical, unequal marital arrangement, where the husband has sexual/romantic relations with several women, but the wives can only have such a relation with one man, their husband, which often leads to rigid gender roles in the marriage.\nA criticism against polygyny is that in almost all cultures and religious communities that practice it, polygyny is the only form of polygamy that is allowed; and, as such, this violates modern principles of equality between men and women, especially as in many such places females having multiple partners is violently punished through honor killings and stoning, or discouraged through female genital mutilation. In the United States, there has been controversy surrounding the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints that practices polygyny, after the community has been marred by accusations of child sexual abuse, welfare fraud, and child labor trafficking, that culminated in the life imprisonment of polygynous leader Warren Jeffs.\nPremodern era.\nIn Africa, the Americas, and Southeast Asia in the Premodern Era, circa 600\u00a0BCE \u2013 1600\u00a0CE, both monogamy and polygyny occurred. Polygyny occurred even in areas of where monogamy was prevalent. Wealth played a key role in the development of family life during these times. Wealth meant the more powerful men had a principal wife and several secondary wives, known as \"resource polygyny\". Local rulers of villages usually had the most wives as a sign of power and status. Conquerors of villages would often marry the daughters of the former leaders as a symbol of conquest. The practice of resource polygyny continued with the spread and expansion of Islam in Africa and Southeast Asia. Children born into these households were considered free. Children born to free or slave concubines were free, but had lesser status than those born to wives. Living arrangements varied between areas. In Africa, each wife usually had their own house, as well as property and animals. In many other parts of the world, wives lived together in seclusion, under one household. A \"harem\" (also known as a \"forbidden area\") was a special part of the house for the wives.\nBy country.\nAfrica.\nKenya.\nPolygynous marriage was preferred among the Logoli and other Abalulya sub ethnic groups. Taking additional wives was regarded as one of the fundamental indicators of a successfully established man. Large families enhanced the prestige of Logoli men. Logoli men with large families were also capable of obtaining justice, as they would be feared by people, who would not dare to use force to take their livestock or other goods from them. Interviews with some of the contemporary Logoli men and women who recently made polygynous marriages yielded data which suggest that marrying another wife is usually approached with considerable thought and deliberation by the man. It may or may not involve or require the consent of the other wives and prospective wife's parents. A type of \"surrogate pregnancy\" arrangement was reported to have been observed, in which some wives who are unable to bear children, find fulfillment in the children and family provided by a husband taking additional wives. Some of the men indicated that they were pressured by their parents to marry another wife, who could contribute additional income to the family. Some of the young polygynous men indicated that they were trapped in polygyny because of the large number of single women who needed and were willing to take them as husbands although they were already married. Most of those second and third wives were older women who had not yet married.\nNigeria.\nCustomary law, one of the three legal systems in operation in Nigeria (the other two being Nigerian common law and Sharia law) allows for one man to legally marry more than one woman.\nUnlike those marriages recognized by Sharia, there is no limit to the number of legal wives allowed under customary law. Currently polygyny is most common within royal and noble families within the country, and is largely practiced by the tribes native to its north and west. Although far less popular there, it is nonetheless also legal in Nigeria's east and south.\nPolygyny varies according to a woman's age, religion and educational experience. Research conducted in the city of Ibadan, the second largest city in Nigeria, shows that non-educated women are significantly more likely (58%) to be in a polygynous union compared to college educated women (4%). Followers of traditional African religions are expected to have as many wives as they can afford. Muslim men are allowed up to 4 wives and only if they can be provided for and treated equally. Christians are typically (and expected to be) monogamous.\nAmong the Ngwa group in Eastern Nigeria, studies show that 70% of polygynous marriages consist of illiterate men and women, compared to 53% in monogamous marriages.\nMalawi.\nWhile polygynous marriages are not legally recognized under the civil marriage laws of Malawi, customary law affords a generous amount of benefits to polygynous unions, ranging from inheritance rights to child custody. It has been estimated that nearly one in five women in Malawi live in polygynous relationships.\nEfforts to abolish the practice and de facto recognition of polygyny have been widely apparent throughout the recent years in Malawi; led mainly by anti-AIDS organizations and feminist groups. An effort led in 2008 to outlaw polygyny in the country was fiercely opposed by Islamic religious leaders, citing the practice as a cultural, religious and pragmatic reality of the nation.\nSouth Africa.\nPolygynous marriages are legal under certain circumstances in South Africa. All polygynous marriages entered into in accordance with the provisions of the Recognition of Customary Marriages Act are legal. Polygyny in South Africa is practiced among the indigenous Bantu ethnic groups of South Africa, and also within the Muslim community. Although it was widespread in ancient times, it is now only common amongst richer men and men of status, such as chiefs and kings, including the former President of the Republic of South Africa, Jacob Zuma. Polygynous marriages of individuals over the age of 15 accounts for approximately 30,000 (0.1%) people in 2001. Both Islamic law and cultural family laws create a system in which Muslim men are encouraged to take up to four wives. Several factors for this include infertility or long-term illness of the first wife, excessive wealth on the part of the husband enabling him to support widowed or divorced mothers, and the economic benefits of large families.\nDespite the historical and cultural history of polygyny among Muslim South Africans, polygynous unions are officially illegal on the national level in South Africa. After 1994, various laws such as the freedom of religion in the South African Constitution, the ratification of the UN's Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and a proposed Draft Bill on Muslim Marriages have tackled the issue of Islamic polygynous unions in South Africa.\nSomalia.\nPolygyny is legal in Somalia and most commonly seen throughout Muslim communities. According to the Muslim tradition, men can have up to four wives. For a man to gain additional wives in Somalia, it must be granted by the court and it has to be proven that the first wife is either imprisoned or infertile.\nMozambique.\nMozambique prohibits legal recognition of polygamous unions, yet there are no legal restrictions against the practice itself, which has been reported to be quite widespread in the coastal country. As of 2019, it was estimated that about nearly 20% of married women aged 15\u201349 are in polygynous unions.\nAustralia.\nPolygyny is not legal in Australia. The Marriage Act of 1961 under section 94 states that any person who knowingly marries another whose marriage is legally ongoing carries out the act of bigamy. The penalty of bigamy is up to five years of imprisonment. The Full Court of the Family Court of Australia ruled on March 6, 2016, that it is illegal to have polygamous marriages. However, foreign marriages that have potential to be polygamous when it was started will be legally recognized in Australia. The court defined a potentially polygamous marriage as if the marriage is not yet polygamous, but if the country where the marriage marginally taken place permits polygamous marriages of either partner to the original marriage at a later date. Indigenous populations of Australia have been noted to engage in polygamous relationships.\nAsia.\nMany majority-Muslim countries retain the traditional Sharia, which interprets teachings of the Quran to permit polygamy with up to four wives. Exceptions to this include Albania, Tunisia, Turkey, and former Soviet republics. Though about 70% of the population of Albania is historically Muslim, the majority is non-practicing. Turkey and Tunisia are countries with overwhelmingly Muslim populations that enforce secularist practices by law. In the former Soviet republics, a prohibition against polygamy has been inherited from Soviet law. In the 21st century, a revival of the practice of polygamy in the Muslim world has contributed to efforts to re-establish its legality and legitimacy in some countries and communities where it is illegal.\nProposals have been made to re-legalize polygamy in other ex-Soviet Muslim republics, such as Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Uzbekistan.\nThe original wife (or legal wife) was referred to as the (; , ; lit.\u2009'main room') in China, Japan and Korea, with (; 'big woman, big wife') as the slang term. The official wife was called 'big mother' (), mother, or aunt. The child of the concubine addressed the big mother as \"aunt\".\nThe written word for the second woman was (; , ) and literally means '[she who occupies] the side room'. This word was also used in both Korea and Japan. They were also called (; , ) in China and Korea. The common terms referring to the second woman, and the act of having the second woman respectively, are (), literally 'the second wife'.\nIndia.\nPolygamy in India is, in general, prohibited and the vast majority of marriages are legally monogamous. Polygyny among Christians was banned in the late 19th century, while The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 banned polygyny for Hindus. Currently, polygyny is only allowed among Muslims; but it is strongly discouraged by public policy. Muslims are subject to the terms of \"The Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act of 1937\", interpreted by the All India Muslim Personal Law Board. Prevalence of polygyny in India is very low: among married women, only 1.68 percent of Hindus, 2.45 percent of Muslims, 2.16 percent of Christians, and 1.16 percent of other religions live in polygynous marriages.\nChina.\nIn mainland China, polygamy is illegal under the Civil Code passed in 2020. This codified a similar 1950 and 1980 prohibition.\nPolygyny where wives are of equal status had always been illegal in China, and had been considered a crime in some dynasties. In family laws from Tang to Qing Dynasties, the status of a wife, concubines and maid-mistresses could not be altered. However, concubinage was supported by law until the end of the Qing/Ching dynasty of the imperial China (1911). In the past, Emperors could and often did have hundreds to thousands of concubines. Rich officials and merchants of the elite also took concubines in addition to legal wives. The first wife was the head or mother wife; other wives were under her headship if the husband was away. Concubines had a lower status than full wives, generally not being seen in public with their husband and not having rights to decisions in the house. Children from concubines were considered inferior to those of the wife and did not receive equal wealth/legacy from their father. However they were considered legitimate, therefore had many more rights to inheritance of status and wealth than illegitimate children conceived outside a marriage.\nPolygamy was \"de facto\" widely practiced in the Republic of China from 1911 to 1949, before Kuomintang was defeated in the Civil War and retreated to Taiwan. Zhang Zongchang, a well-known warlord, notably declared he had three 'unknowns' \u2013 unknown number of rifles, unknown amount of money, and unknown number of concubines.\nChinese men in Hong Kong could practice concubinage by virtue of the Qing Code. This ended with the passing of the Marriage Reform Ordinance (https://) in 1970. Kevin Murphy of the \"International Herald Tribune\" reported on the cross-border polygamy phenomenon in Hong Kong in 1995. In a research paper of Humboldt University of Berlin on sexology, Doctor Man-Lun Ng estimated about 300,000 men in China have mistresses. In 1995, forty percent of extramarital affairs in Hong Kong involved a stable partner.\nPeriod drama and historical novels frequently refer to the former culture of polygamy (usually polygyny). An example is the \"Wuxia\" novel \"The Deer and the Cauldron\" by Hong Kong writer Louis Cha, in which the protagonist Wei Xiaobao has seven wives (In a later edition of the novel, Princess Jianning was assigned as the wife, while others are concubines).\nKyrgyzstan.\nA proposal to decriminalize polygamy was heard by the Kyrgyz parliament. It was supported by the Justice Minister, the country's ombudsman, and the Muslim Women's organization \"Mutakalim,\" which had gathered 40,000 signatures in favour of polygamy. But, on March 26, 2007, parliament rejected the bill. President Kurmanbek Bakiyev is known to oppose legalizing polygyny.\nTajikistan.\nDue to an increase in the number of polygamous marriages, proposals were made in Tajikistan to re-legalize polygamy. Tajik women who want to be second wives particularly support decriminalizing polygyny. Mukhiddin Kabiri, the Deputy Chairman of the Islamic Renaissance Party of Tajikistan, says that legislation is unlikely to stop the growth in polygyny. He criticizes the ruling \u00e9lite for speaking out against the practice while taking more than one wife themselves.\nYemen.\nPolygyny is legal in Yemen, a majority Muslim nation, which follows Islamic tradition where polygyny is acceptable up to four wives only if the husband treats all wives justly. Seven percent of married women in Yemen are a part of polygamous relationship. Reports conducted in the country have shown that rural regions are more likely to have polygamous relationships than those in cities or coastal areas.\nEurope.\nBosnia and Herzegovina.\nThe Muslim communities of Bosnia and Herzegovina traditionally practiced polygamy but the practice was last observed in Cazinska Krajina in the early 1950s. Although illegal in the country, polygamy is encouraged by certain religious circles, and the number of practitioners has increased. This trend appears linked with the advent of fundamentalist Wahhabism in the Balkans.\nThe Bosniak population in neighbouring Ra\u0161ka, Serbia, has also been influenced by this trend in Bosnia. They have suggested creating an entire Islamic jurisdiction including polygamy, but these proposals have been rejected by Serbia. The top cleric, the Mufti of Novi Pazar, Muamer Zukorli\u0107, has taken a second wife.\nRussia.\nFactual polygamy and sexual relationships with several adult partners are not punishable in accordance with current revisions of Criminal Code of Russia and Code of the Russian Federation on Administrative Offenses. But multiple marriage cannot be registered and officially recognised by Russian authorities because Family Code of Russia (section 14 and others) prohibits registration of marriage if one of person is in another registered marriage in Russia or another country. Polygamy is tolerated in predominantly Muslim republics such as Chechnya, Ingushetia, and Dagestan.\nChechen politician Ramzan Kadyrov actively advocated for polygynous marriage to gain legal recognition. Muslim leaders such as Talgat Tadzhuddin also pushed for the legal recognition of polygynous marriage.\nPolygyny was legalized and documented in unrecognised Chechen Republic of Ichkeria but Russian authorities had annulled these polygynous marriages after they regained control over territory of Ichkeria. Later Ramzan Kadyrov, President of the Chechen Republic, has been quoted on radio as saying that the depopulation of Chechnya by war justifies legalizing polygamy. Kadyrov has been supported by Nafigallah Ashirov, the Chairman of the Council of Grand Muftis of Russia, who has said that polygamy is already widespread among Muslim communities of the country.\nIn Ingushetia in July, 1999 polygyny was officially recognised and allowed by edict of president of Ingushetia Ruslan Aushev and registration of polygyny marriages had been started allowing men to marry up to four wives as it relates to Muslim tradition. But this edict had been formally suspended soon by edict of President of Russia Boris Yeltsin. One year later this edict of Aushev had been cancelled by the Supreme Court of Ingushetia because of contradiction with Family Code of Russia.\nAlthough non-Muslim Russian populations have historically practiced monogamy, Russian politician Vladimir Zhirinovsky offered to legalize polygyny to encourage population growth and correct the demographic crisis of Russians. Zhirinovsky first proposed to legalize polygyny in 1993, after Kadyrov's declaration that he would introduce an amendment to legalize polygyny for all Russian citizens.\nSerbia.\nSerbian Law, which in turn is based on the French Civil Code, permits individuals to only be married monogamously. However, the jurisdiction of the civil law exclusively oversees the marriages conducted in civilian ceremonies, and not those conducted in the religious ones. Given that the law does not require couples to register a religious marriage in the registry of civil marriages (whilst in the neighbouring Bosnia, failing to do so can result in a fine), individuals seeking to practice polygamy are not restricted to do so. One of the best known examples was the chief Mufti of the Islamic Community in Serbia, Dr. Muamer Zukorlic, who was simultaneously married to three women.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, there are believed to be up to 20,000 polygamous marriages in Britain's Muslim community, even though bigamy is an offence. All marriages that happen within the United Kingdom must be monogamous and meet the requirements of the relevant legislation to be perceived as legitimately substantial. For polygamous unions in the UK to be viewed as valid, the people must live in a country where a person is allowed to have more than one spouse and get married in a nation that permits it. There is evidence of unregistered polygamous marriages in the UK, performed through religious ceremonies, that are not recognized under UK law.\nThe Americas.\nChile.\nPolygyny has a long history among the Mapuche people of southern South America. Wives that share the same husband are often relatives, such as sisters, who live in the same community. Having the same husband does not imply women belong to the same household. Mapuche polygamy has no legal recognition in Chile. This puts women who are not legally married to their husband at disadvantage to any legal wife in terms of securing inheritance. It is thought that present-day polygamy is much less common than it once was, in particularly compared with the time before the Occupation of Araucan\u00eda (1861\u20131883) when Araucan\u00eda lost its autonomy. Albeit chiefly rural, Mapuche polygamy has also been reported in the low-income peripheral communes of Santiago.\nNorth America.\nPolygyny is illegal in the United States and Canada.\nMormon fundamentalism believes in the validity of selected fundamental aspects of Mormonism as taught and practiced in the nineteenth century. Fundamentalist Latter-Day Saints' teachings include plural marriage, a form of polygyny first taught by Joseph Smith, the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement.\nIn the 21st century, several sources have claimed as many as 60,000 fundamentalist Latter-day Saints in the United States, with fewer than half of them living in polygamous households. Others have suggested that there may be as few as 20,000 Mormon fundamentalists with only 8,000 to 15,000 practicing polygamy. The largest Mormon fundamentalist groups are the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (FLDS Church) and the Apostolic United Brethren (AUB). The FLDS Church is estimated to have 10,000 members residing in the sister cities of Hildale, Utah and Colorado City, Arizona; Eldorado, Texas; Westcliffe, Colorado; Mancos, Colorado; Creston and Bountiful, British Columbia; Pringle, South Dakota, and Montana.\nIn July 2022, a Mexican judge in the state of Puebla's Eighth District Civil Court authorized the country's first threesome group marriage.\nReligion.\nBuddhism.\nBuddhism does not regard marriage as a sacrament \u2013 it is a secular affair, and normally Buddhist monks do not participate in it (though in some sects priests do marry). Hence marriage receives no religious sanction. Forms of marriage, in consequence, vary from country to country.\nPolygamy in Thailand was legally recognized until 1935. Myanmar outlawed polygyny from 2015. In Sri Lanka, polyandry was legal in the Kingdom of Kandy, but outlawed by British after conquering the kingdom in 1815. When the Buddhist texts were translated into Chinese, the concubines of others were added to the list of inappropriate partners. Polyandry in Tibet was common traditionally, as was polygyny, and having several wives or husbands was never regarded as having sex with inappropriate partners.\nThe Parabhava Sutta states that \"a man who is not satisfied with one woman and seeks out other women is on the path to decline\". Other fragments in the Buddhist scripture seem to treat polygamy unfavorably, leading some authors to conclude that Buddhism generally does not approve of it or alternatively regards it as a tolerated, but subordinate, marital model.\nChristianity.\nPolygamy is not forbidden in the Old Testament. The New Testament is largely silent on polygamy, however, some point to Jesus's repetition of the earlier scriptures, noting that a man and a wife \"shall become one flesh\". However, some look to Paul's writings to the Corinthians: \"Do you not know that he who is joined to a prostitute becomes one body with her? For, as it is written, 'The two will become one flesh.'\" Supporters of polygamy argue this use of the phrase in relation to prostitution in this verse, means \"becoming one flesh\" refers to a merely physical, rather than spiritual, union, even when it is used about marriage in other verses.\nMost Christian theologians argue that in Matthew 19:3\u20139 and referring to Genesis 2:24, Jesus explicitly states a man should have only one wife:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning made them male and female, And said, For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall be one flesh?\u2014\u200a\nIn the New Testament, scriptures state that polygamy should not be practiced by certain church leaders. 1 Timothy says that certain Church leaders should have but one wife: \"A \"bishop\" then must be blameless, the husband of one wife (), vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach\". Verse 12 has similar advice regarding deacons having only one wife. Similar counsel is repeated in the first chapter of the Epistle to Titus.\nPeriodically, Christian reform movements that have aimed at rebuilding Christian doctrine based on the Bible alone (\"sola scriptura\") have at least temporarily accepted polygyny as a Biblical practice. For example, during the Protestant Reformation, in a document referred to simply as (or \"The Confessional Advice\" ), Martin Luther, whose reformation caused a schism in the Western Christian Church leading to the formation of the Lutheran Church, granted the Landgrave Philip of Hesse, who, for many years, had been living \"constantly in a state of adultery and fornication\", a dispensation to take a second wife. The double marriage was to be done in secret, however, to avoid public scandal. Some fifteen years earlier, in a letter to the Saxon Chancellor Gregor Br\u00fcck, Luther stated that he could not \"forbid a person to marry several wives, for it does not contradict Scripture.\" ()\nThe Lutheran World Federation hosted a regional conference in Africa, in which the acceptance of polygynists and their wives into full membership by the Lutheran Church in Liberia was defended as being permissible. The Lutheran Church in Liberia, while permitting men to retain their wives from marriages prior to being received into the Church, does not permit polygynists who have become Christians to marry more wives after they have received the sacrament of Holy Baptism. Evangelical Lutheran missionaries in Maasai also tolerate the practice of polygyny and in Southern Sudan, and some polygynists are becoming Lutheran Christians.\nOn the other hand, the Roman Catholic Church criticizes polygyny in the Catechism of the Catholic Church. Under paragraph 2387 of \"Other offenses against the dignity of marriage\" of the Catechism of the Catholic Church, it states \"is not in accord with the moral law\". Additionally, paragraph 1645 of \"The Goods and Requirements of Conjugal Love\" states \"The unity of marriage, distinctly recognized by our Lord, is made clear in the equal personal dignity which must be accorded to husband and wife in mutual and unreserved affection. Polygamy is contrary to conjugal love which is undivided and exclusive.\" There are small numbers of Roman Catholic theologians that claim polygyny can be an authentic form of marriage in certain regions such as Africa.\nIn Sub-Saharan Africa, there has often been a tension between the Western Christian insistence on monogamy and the traditional practice of polygamy. In some instances in recent times there have been moves for accommodation; in other instances, churches have resisted such moves strongly. African Independent Churches have sometimes referred to those parts of the Old Testament that describe polygamy in defending the practice.\nHinduism.\nThe Hindu scriptures acknowledge numerous occasions of polygyny; it was the norm among kings, the nobility and the extremely wealthy. For instance Pandu, the father of the Pandavas in Mahabharata, had two wives: Kunti and Madri. Similarly, Dashratha had three chief wives: Kausalya, Sumitra, and Kaikeyi. Having more than one wife was a social custom that was believed to increase the prestige of a man. Although many other personalities including Rama had only one wife, as monogamy was regarded as the morally superior type of marriage, polygyny remained customary and widely acceptable among Hindus until it was legally abolished for Hindus in India by the Hindu Marriage Act of 1955.\nIslam.\nUnder Islamic marital jurisprudence, Muslim men can have up to four wives at a time. Polyandry, the practice of a woman having more than one husband, is not permitted.\nBased on verse 30:21 of Quran the ideal relationship is the comfort that a couple find in each other's embrace:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And one of His signs is that He created for you spouses from among yourselves so that you may find comfort in them. And He has placed between you compassion and mercy. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect.\nPolygyny is allowed in the Quran but if a man fears he cannot deal justly with them he should only marry one. This is based on verse 4:3 of Quran which says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you fear you might fail to give orphan women their \u02f9due\u02fa rights \u02f9if you were to marry them\u02fa, then marry other women of your choice\u2014two, three, or four. But if you are afraid you will fail to maintain justice, then \u02f9content yourselves with\u02fa one or those \u02f9bondwomen\u02fa in your possession. This way you are less likely to commit injustice.\nThere are strict requirements to marrying more than one woman, as the man must treat them equally financially and in terms of support given to each wife, according to Islamic law.\nMuslim women are not allowed to marry more than one husband at once. However, in the case of a divorce or their husbands' death they can remarry after the completion of Iddah, as divorce is legal in Islamic law. A non-Muslim woman who flees from her non-Muslim husband and accepts Islam can remarry without divorce from her previous husband, as her marriage with non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved on her fleeing. A non-Muslim woman captured during war by Muslims, can also remarry, as her marriage with her non-Muslim husband is Islamically dissolved at capture by Muslim soldiers. This permission is given to such women in verse 4:24 of Quran. The verse also emphasizes transparency, mutual agreement and financial compensation as prerequisites for matrimonial relationship as opposed to prostitution; it says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Also \u02f9forbidden are\u02fa married women\u2014except \u02f9female\u02fa captives in your possession. This is God's commandment to you. Lawful to you are all beyond these\u2014as long as you seek them with your wealth in a legal marriage, not in fornication. Give those you have consummated marriage with their due dowries. It is permissible to be mutually gracious regarding the set dowry. Surely God is All-Knowing, All-Wise.\nMuhammad was monogamously married to Khadija, his first wife, for 25 years, until she died. After her death, he married multiple women, mostly widows, for social and political reasons. He had a total of nine wives, but not all at the same time, depending on the sources in his lifetime. The Qur'an does not give preference in marrying more than one wife. One reason cited for polygyny is that it allows a man to give financial protection to multiple women, who might otherwise not have any support (e.g. widows). However, the wife can set a condition, in the marriage contract, that the husband cannot marry another woman during their marriage. In such a case, the husband cannot marry another woman as long as he is married to his wife. According to traditional Islamic law, each of those wives keeps their property and assets separate; and are paid mahar and maintenance separately by their husband. Usually the wives have little to no contact with each other and lead separate, individual lives in their own houses, and sometimes in different cities, though they all share the same husband.\nIn most Muslim-majority countries, polygyny is legal with Kuwait being the only one where no restrictions are imposed on it. The practice is illegal in Muslim-majority Turkey, Tunisia, Albania, Kosovo and the Central Asian countries. Kazakhstan is the only country among the Central Asian states [namely Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan] to not criminalize polygyny.\nCountries that allow polygyny typically also require a man to obtain permission from his previous wives before marrying another; they may require the man to prove that he can financially support multiple wives. In Malaysia and Morocco, a man must justify taking an additional wife at a court hearing before he is allowed to do so. In Sudan, the government encouraged polygyny in 2001 to increase the population.\nJudaism.\nPolygyny is permitted by the Bible with certain restrictions (e.g., ), and numerous Biblical figures are recorded as having multiple wives. In practice, though, the incidence of polygyny among ancient Jews was limited, and likely was largely restricted to the wealthy.\nSince the 11th century, Ashkenazi Jews have followed Gershom ben Judah's ban on polygyny (except in rare circumstances). Some Mizrahi (Middle Eastern) Jewish communities (particularly Yemenite Jews and Persian Jews) discontinued polygyny more recently, after they immigrated to countries where it was forbidden or illegal. Israel prohibits polygamy by law, and Mizrahi Jews are not permitted to enter into new polygamous marriages in Israel, though existing polygamous marriages may be maintained. Polygamy may still occur in non-European Jewish communities that exist in countries where it is not forbidden, such as Jewish communities in Iran or Morocco.\nIn nature.\nIn zoology the term \"polygyny\" is used for a pattern of mating in which a male animal has more than one female mate in a breeding season. Males get their mates by defending the females directly or holding resources that the females want and need. This is known as resource defense polygyny and males of the bee species \"Anthidium manicatum\" (also known as the European wool carder bee) exhibit this behavior. Males claim patches of floral plants, ward off conspecific males and other resource competitors, and mate with the multiple females who forage in their territories. Males of many species attract females to their territory by either gathering in a lek or going out in search of dispersed females. In polygyny relationships in animals, the female is the one who provides most of the parental care for the offspring.\nPolygyny in eusocial insects means that some insects living in colonies have not only one queen, but several queens. Solitary species of insects take part in this practice in order to maximize their reproductive success of the widely dispersed females, such as the bee species \"Anthidium maculosum\". Insects such as red flour beetles use polygyny to reduce inbreeding depression and thus maximize reproductive success.\nThere is primary polygyny (several queens join to found a new colony, but after the hatching of the first workers the queens fight each other until only one queen survives and the colony becomes monogynous) and secondary polygyny (a well-established colony continues to have several queens).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiblical verses.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24026", "revid": "25488818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24026", "title": "Proteome", "text": "Set of proteins that can be expressed by a genome, cell, tissue, or organism\nA proteome is the entire set of proteins that is, or can be, expressed by a genome, cell, tissue, or organism at a certain time. It is the set of expressed proteins in a given type of cell or organism, at a given time, under defined conditions. Proteomics is the study of the proteome.\nTypes of proteomes.\nWhile proteome generally refers to the proteome of an organism, multicellular organisms may have very different proteomes in different cells, hence it is important to distinguish proteomes in cells and organisms.\nA cellular proteome is the collection of proteins found in a particular cell type under a particular set of environmental conditions such as exposure to hormone stimulation.\nIt can also be useful to consider an organism's complete proteome, which can be conceptualized as the complete set of proteins from all of the various cellular proteomes. This is very roughly the protein equivalent of the genome.\nThe term \"proteome\" has also been used to refer to the collection of proteins in certain sub-cellular systems, such as organelles. For instance, the mitochondrial proteome may consist of more than 3000 distinct proteins.\nThe proteins in a virus can be called a \"viral proteome\". Usually viral proteomes are predicted from the viral genome but some attempts have been made to determine all the proteins expressed from a virus genome, i.e. the viral proteome. More often, however, virus proteomics analyzes the changes of host proteins upon virus infection, so that in effect \"two\" proteomes (of virus and its host) are studied.\nImportance in cancer.\nThe proteome can be used in order to comparatively analyze different cancer cell lines. Proteomic studies have been used in order to identify the likelihood of metastasis in bladder cancer cell lines KK47 and YTS1 and were found to have 36 unregulated and 74 down regulated proteins. The differences in protein expression can help identify novel cancer signaling mechanisms.\nBiomarkers of cancer have been found by mass spectrometry based proteomic analyses. The use of proteomics or the study of the proteome is a step forward in personalized medicine to tailor drug cocktails to the patient's specific proteomic and genomic profile. The analysis of ovarian cancer cell lines showed that putative biomarkers for ovarian cancer include \"\u03b1-enolase (ENOA), elongation factor Tu, mitochondrial (EFTU), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (G3P), stress-70 protein, mitochondrial (GRP75), apolipoprotein A-1 (APOA1), peroxiredoxin (PRDX2) and annexin A (ANXA)\".\nComparative proteomic analyses of 11 cell lines demonstrated the similarity between the metabolic processes of each cell line; 11,731 proteins were completely identified from this study. Housekeeping proteins tend to show greater variability between cell lines.\nResistance to certain cancer drugs is still not well understood. Proteomic analysis has been used in order to identify proteins that may have anti-cancer drug properties, specifically for the colon cancer drug irinotecan. Studies of adenocarcinoma cell line LoVo demonstrated that 8 proteins were unregulated and 7 proteins were down-regulated. Proteins that showed a differential expression were involved in processes such as transcription, apoptosis and cell proliferation/differentiation among others.\nThe proteome in bacterial systems.\nProteomic analyses have been performed in different kinds of bacteria to assess their metabolic reactions to different conditions. For example, in bacteria such as \"Clostridium\" and \"Bacillus\", proteomic analyses were used in order to investigate how different proteins help each of these bacteria spores germinate after a prolonged period of dormancy. In order to better understand how to properly eliminate spores, proteomic analysis must be performed.\nHistory.\nMarc Wilkins coined the term \"proteome\" in 1994 in a symposium on \"2D Electrophoresis: from protein maps to genomes\" held in Siena in Italy. It appeared in print in 1995, with the publication of part of his PhD thesis. Wilkins used the term to describe the entire complement of proteins expressed by a genome, cell, tissue or organism.\nSize and contents.\nThe genomes of viruses and prokaryotes encode a relatively well-defined proteome as each protein can be predicted with high confidence, based on its open reading frame (in viruses ranging from ~3 to ~1000, in bacteria ranging from about 500 proteins to about 10,000). However, most protein prediction algorithms use certain cut-offs, such as 50 or 100 amino acids, so small proteins are often missed by such predictions. In eukaryotes this becomes much more complicated as more than one protein can be produced from most genes due to alternative splicing (e.g. human genome encodes about 20,000 proteins, but some estimates predicted 92,179 proteins out of which 71,173 are splicing variants).\nAssociation of proteome size with DNA repair capability\nThe concept of \"proteomic constraint\" is that DNA repair capacity is positively correlated with the information content of a genome, which, in turn, is approximately related to the size of the proteome. In bacteria, archaea and DNA viruses, DNA repair capability is positively related to genome information content and to genome size. \"Proteomic constraint\" proposes that modulators of mutation rates such as DNA repair genes are subject to selection pressure proportional to the amount of information in a genome.\nProteoforms. There are different factors that can add variability to proteins. SAPs (single amino acid polymorphisms) and non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) can lead to different \"proteoforms\" or \"proteomorphs\". Recent estimates have found ~135,000 validated nonsynonymous cSNPs currently housed within SwissProt. In dbSNP, there are 4.7 million candidate cSNPs, yet only ~670,000 cSNPs have been validated in the 1,000-genomes set as nonsynonymous cSNPs that change the identity of an amino acid in a protein.\nDark proteome. The term dark proteome coined by Perdig\u00e3o and colleagues, defines regions of proteins that have no detectable sequence homology to other proteins of known three-dimensional structure and therefore cannot be modeled by homology. For 546,000 Swiss-Prot proteins, 44\u201354% of the proteome in eukaryotes and viruses was found to be \"dark\", compared with only ~14% in archaea and bacteria.\nHuman proteome. Currently, several projects aim to map the human proteome, including the http:// , https://, https://, and https://. Much like the Human Genome Project, these projects seek to find and collect evidence for all predicted protein coding genes in the human genome. The Human Proteome Map currently (October 2020) claims 17,294 proteins and ProteomicsDB 15,479, using different criteria. On October 16, 2020, the HPP published a high-stringency blueprint covering more than 90% of the predicted protein coding genes. Proteins are identified from a wide range of fetal and adult tissues and cell types, including hematopoietic cells.\nMethods to study the proteome.\nAnalyzing proteins proves to be more difficult than analyzing nucleic acid sequences. While there are only 4 nucleotides that make up DNA, there are at least 20 different amino acids that can make up a protein. Additionally, there is currently no known high throughput technology to make copies of a single protein. Numerous methods are available to study proteins, sets of proteins, or the whole proteome. In fact, proteins are often studied indirectly, e.g. using computational methods and analyses of genomes. Only a few examples are given below.\nSeparation techniques and electrophoresis.\nProteomics, the study of the proteome, has largely been practiced through the separation of proteins by two dimensional gel electrophoresis. In the first dimension, the proteins are separated by isoelectric focusing, which resolves proteins on the basis of charge. In the second dimension, proteins are separated by molecular weight using SDS-PAGE. The gel is stained with Coomassie brilliant blue or silver to visualize the proteins. Spots on the gel are proteins that have migrated to specific locations.\nMass spectrometry.\nMass spectrometry is one of the key methods to study the proteome. Some important mass spectrometry methods include Orbitrap Mass Spectrometry, MALDI (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization), and ESI (Electrospray Ionization). Peptide mass fingerprinting identifies a protein by cleaving it into short peptides and then deduces the protein's identity by matching the observed peptide masses against a sequence database. Tandem mass spectrometry, on the other hand, can get sequence information from individual peptides by isolating them, colliding them with a non-reactive gas, and then cataloguing the fragment ions produced.\nIn May 2014, a draft map of the human proteome was published in \"Nature\". This map was generated using high-resolution Fourier-transform mass spectrometry. This study profiled 30 histologically normal human samples resulting in the identification of proteins coded by 17,294 genes. This accounts for around 84% of the total annotated protein-coding genes.\nChromatography.\nLiquid chromatography is an important tool in the study of the proteome. It allows for very sensitive separation of different kinds of proteins based on their affinity for a matrix. Some newer methods for the separation and identification of proteins include the use of monolithic capillary columns, high temperature chromatography and capillary electrochromatography.\nBlotting.\nWestern blotting can be used in order to quantify the abundance of certain proteins. By using antibodies specific to the protein of interest, it is possible to probe for the presence of specific proteins from a mixture of proteins.\nProtein complementation assays and interaction screens.\nProtein-fragment complementation assays are often used to detect protein\u2013protein interactions. The yeast two-hybrid assay is the most popular of them but there are numerous variations, both used \"in vitro\" and \"in vivo\". Pull-down assays are a method to determine the protein binding partners of a given protein.\nProtein structure prediction.\nProtein structure prediction can be used to provide three-dimensional protein structure predictions of whole proteomes. In 2022, a large-scale collaboration between EMBL-EBI and DeepMind provided predicted structures for over 200 million proteins from across the tree of life. Smaller projects have also used protein structure prediction to help map the proteome of individual organisms, for example https:// provides coverage of multiple protein isoforms for over 20,000 genes in the human genome.\nProtein databases.\nThe https:// contains information about the human proteins in cells, tissues, and organs. All the data in the knowledge resource is open access to allow scientists both in academia and industry to freely access the data for exploration of the human proteome. The organization https:// has selected the protein atlas as a core resource due to its fundamental importance for a wider life science community.\nThe http:// contains information on 10,500 blood plasma proteins. Because the range in protein contents in plasma is very large, it is difficult to detect proteins that tend to be scarce when compared to abundant proteins. This is an analytical limit that may possibly be a barrier for the detections of proteins with ultra low concentrations.\nDatabases such as https:// and https:// are central resources for human proteomic data.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24027", "revid": "39088972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24027", "title": "Pope John Paul I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 1978\nPope John Paul I (born Albino Luciani; 17 October 1912 \u2013 28 September 1978) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City from 26 August 1978 until his death 33 days later. His reign is among the shortest in papal history, giving rise to the most recent year of three popes\u2014the first since 1605. John Paul I remains the most recent Italian-born pope, the last in a succession of such popes that started with Clement VII in 1523. He was also the first pope to have been born in the 20th century.\nBefore the August 1978 papal conclave that elected him, he expressed his desire not to be elected, telling those close to him that he would decline the papacy if elected, but despite this, upon the cardinals' electing him, he felt an obligation to accept. He was the first pontiff to have a double name, choosing \"John Paul\" in honour of his two immediate predecessors, John XXIII and Paul VI. He explained that he was indebted to John XXIII and to Paul VI for naming him a bishop and a cardinal, respectively. Furthermore, he was the only pope to add the ordinal number \"I\" to his papal name when choosing it. It was reported by Catholic media that John Paul was not aware at the time that this was unusual.\nHis two immediate successors, John Paul II and Benedict XVI, later recalled the warm qualities of the late pontiff in several addresses. In Italy, he is remembered with the appellatives of (transl.\u2009The Pope of the Smile) and (transl.\u2009The Smile of God). \"Time\" magazine and other publications referred to him as \"The September Pope\". He is also referred to in Italy as \"Papa Luciani\" to distinguish him from his successor of the same papal name. In his hometown of Canale d'Agordo a museum built and named in his honour is dedicated to his life and brief papacy.\nJohn Paul I was declared a Servant of God by his successor, John Paul II, on 23 November 2003. Pope Francis confirmed John Paul's heroic virtue on 8 November 2017 and titled him as venerable. Francis presided over John Paul's beatification on 4 September 2022.\nEarly life and education.\nAlbino Luciani was born on 17 October 1912 in Forno di Canale (now Canale d'Agordo) in Belluno, a province of the Veneto region in Northern Italy. He was the son of Giovanni Luciani (c. 1872\u20131952), a bricklayer, and Bortola Tancon (c. 1879\u20131947). Albino was followed by two brothers, Federico (1915\u20131916) and Edoardo (1917\u20132008), and a sister, Antonia (1920\u20132010). He was baptised on the day he was born by the midwife because he was considered to be in danger of death. The solemn rites of baptism were formalised in the parish church two days later.\nLuciani was a restless child. In 1922, aged 10, he was awestruck when a Capuchin friar came to his village to preach the Lenten sermons. From that moment, he decided that he wanted to become a priest and went to his father to ask for his permission. His father agreed and said to him: \"I hope that when you become a priest you will be on the side of the workers, for Christ Himself would have been on their side\".\nLuciani entered the minor seminary of Feltre in 1923, where his teachers found him \"too lively\", and later went on to the major seminary of Belluno. During his stay at Belluno, he attempted to join the Jesuits. However, he was denied by the seminary's rector, Bishop Giosu\u00e8 Cattarossi.\nOrdination and teaching career.\nOrdained a priest on 7 July 1935, Luciani then served as a curate in his native Forno de Canale before becoming a professor and the vice-rector of the Belluno seminary in 1937. Among the different subjects, he taught dogmatic and moral theology, canon law and sacred art.\nIn 1941, Luciani started to work on a Doctorate of Sacred Theology from the Pontifical Gregorian University. This required at least one year's attendance in Rome. However, the Belluno seminary's superiors wanted him to continue teaching during his doctoral studies. The situation was resolved by a special dispensation by Pope Pius XII on 27 March 1941. His thesis (\"The origin of the human soul according to Antonio Rosmini\") largely attacked Rosmini's theology and earned him his doctorate \"magna cum laude\" in 1947.\nIn 1947, he was named chancellor to Bishop Girolamo Bortignon of Belluno, and was appointed a Supernumerary Privy Chamberlain of His Holiness, the most junior class of papal prelate, on 15 December. In 1954, he was named the vicar general for the Belluno diocese. Luciani was nominated for the position of bishop several times, but he was passed over each time due to his poor health, stature, and resigned appearance. In 1949, he published a book titled \"Catechesis in crumbs\". This book, his first, was about teaching the truths of the faith in a simple way, directly and comprehensible to all people.\nEpiscopate.\nOn 15 December 1958, Luciani was appointed Bishop of Vittorio Veneto by Pope John XXIII. He received his episcopal consecration later that month from Pope John XXIII himself, with Bishops Bortignon and Gioacchino Muccin serving as the co-consecrators. Luciani took possession of the diocese on 11 January 1959, with \"Humilitas\" (\"Humility\") as his episcopal motto. In his first address to his new diocese, he told the people that he sought to be \"a bishop who is a teacher and a servant\".\nAs a bishop, he participated in all the sessions of the Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965). On 18 April 1962, Luciani issued a pastoral letter, entitled \"Notes on the Council\", to alert the faithful to the structure of the proceedings and the overall purpose of the council, chiefly, the doctrinal and practical issues.\nBetween 1965 and 1969, he faced the schism of Montaner: almost all the residents of Montaner, a frazione of Sarmede, decided to renounce Catholicism and embrace the Orthodox religion, because they had a great disagreement with their bishop, Luciani. The people disagreed with Luciani's decision to appoint John Gava as a new priest in 1966 since the people wanted their own choice, rather than the one Luciani had settled on. The people then wanted a compromise: make their choice the parish's vice-rector if not parish priest. However, Monsignor Luciani said the small village needed only one priest, and he was the sole authority on priestly selection. Continually, he recommended new priests, but each was denied by the people. Finally, he was escorted by the police and took the Eucharist from the Montaner church, leaving the church unblessed and waiting for their next move.\nIn 1966, Luciani visited Burundi in East Africa.\nOn 15 December 1969, Luciani was appointed the new patriarch of Venice by Pope Paul VI, taking possession of his new archdiocese the following February. That same month he received honorary citizenship of the town of Vittorio Veneto, where he had previously served as bishop.\n1971 Synod of Bishops.\nAt the Synod of Bishops held in Rome in 1971, to which he was personally invited by Pope Paul VI, Luciani suggested to the bishops assembled that dioceses in countries that were heavily industrialised should relinquish around 1% of all their income to Third World nations to be given \"not as alms, but something that is owed. Owed to compensate for the injustices that our consumer-oriented world is committing towards the 'world on the way to development' and to in some way make reparation for social sin, of which we must become aware\".\nCardinalate.\nPope Paul VI created Luciani the Cardinal-Priest of San Marco in the consistory on 5 March 1973.\nDuring his time as Patriarch of Venice, Luciani clashed with priests who supported the liberalisation of divorce in Italy, eventually suspending some of them. At the same time, he was opposed to the 1974 referendum restricting divorce after it had been liberalised, feeling that such a move would fail and simply point out a divided Church with declining influence.\nIn 1975, Luciani travelled to Germany in May. Later that year (6\u201321 November), he visited Brazil, where he met with members of the clergy, including Alo\u00edsio Lorscheider. Upon returning to Italy, he suffered an embolus in his right eye. Luciani also visited Fatima a few months later. While there, he met with Sister Lucia dos Santos, the surviving visionary of three children who in 1917 claimed to see apparitions of the Blessed Virgin Mary (revered in this form under the title Our Lady of Fatima). When Luciani met Sister Lucia, she referred to him as \"Holy Father\". This greeting shocked the humble cardinal. In January 1976, he published \"Illustrissimi\" (\"To the Illustrious Ones\"), a collection of letters penned by him in previous years, whimsically addressed to historical and literary figures such as Dickens, G. K. Chesterton, Maria Theresa of Austria, Teresa of Avila, Goethe, Figaro, Pinocchio, the Pickwick Club, King David, and Jesus.\nIn 1975, he suggested disciplinary punishment for priests who spoke out in favour of the Communist Party or other leftist groups.\nIn 1976, Luciani sold a gold cross and pectoral gold chain that Pope John XXIII had given to him (which once belonged to Pope Pius XII before him) to raise money for disabled children. He also urged fellow priests in Venice to sell their valuables to contribute to this cause and as a way for them to live simply and humbly. As Patriarch of Venice, Luciani established family counselling clinics to assist the poor in coping with marital, financial and sexual problems.\nIn 1978 he forbade the Tridentine Mass in the Archdiocese of Venice.\nPapacy.\nElection.\nPope Paul VI died on 6 August 1978, ending a papacy of fifteen years. Luciani was summoned to Rome for the conclave to elect the new pope. \"Time\" reported that the Dean of the college, Carlo Confalonieri, who was excluded from participating because of age, had been the first to suggest Luciani.\nLuciani was elected on the fourth ballot of the August 1978 papal conclave. Luciani had previously said to his secretary, Father Diego Lorenzi, and Father Prospero Grech (later a cardinal himself), that he would decline the papacy if elected, and that he intended to vote for Alo\u00edsio Lorscheider, whom he met in Brazil. Cardinal Sin of the Philippines told him: \"You will be the new pope.\"\nHowever, when he was asked by Jean-Marie Villot if he accepted his election, Luciani replied, \"May God forgive you for what you have done\", but accepted the election. After his election, when Sin paid him homage, the new pope said: \"You were a prophet, but my reign will be a short one\". On the balcony of St Peter's Basilica, Pericle Felici announced that the cardinals had elected Albino Luciani, Patriarch of Venice, who had chosen the name Pope John Paul I. It was the first time that a pope had chosen a double name. He later explained that the double name was taken to gratefully honour his two immediate predecessors: John XXIII, who had named him a bishop, and Paul VI, who had named him Patriarch of Venice and Cardinal.\nIn the aftermath of the election, the pope confided to his brother Edoardo that his first thought was to call himself \"Pius XIII\" in honour of Pope Pius XI, but he gave up on the idea, worried that the traditionalist members of the Church might exploit this choice of regnal name.\nObservers have suggested that his selection was a compromise to satisfy rumoured divisions among seemingly rival camps within the College of Cardinals:\nDuring the days following the conclave, the cardinals were generally elated at the reaction to Pope John Paul I, some of them happily saying that they had elected \"God's candidate\". Argentine Eduardo Francisco Pironio stated, \"We were witnesses of a moral miracle.\" Mother Teresa, commenting about the new pope, \"He has been the greatest gift of God, a sun beam of God's love shining in the darkness of the world.\" British primate Cardinal Basil Hume declared: \"Once it had happened, it seemed totally and entirely right ... We felt as if our hands were being guided as we wrote his name on the paper\".\nA dramatic event, soon after the election, occurred when the leader of the delegation from the Russian Orthodox Church, Metropolitan Nikodim (Rotov) of Leningrad, collapsed and died during an audience with the Pope on 5 September 1978. The new pope immediately came over and prayed for him.\nChurch policies.\nSix-point plan.\nAfter he became pope, he had set six plans down which would dictate his pontificate:\nHumanising the papacy.\nAfter his election, John Paul I quickly made several decisions that would \"humanise\" the office of the pope. He was the first modern pope to speak in the singular form, using 'I' instead of the royal \"we\". However, the official records of his speeches were often rewritten in a more formal style by aides, who reinstated the royal \"we\" in press releases and \"L'Osservatore Romano\". He initially refused to use the \"sedia gestatoria\" until others convinced him of its need to allow himself to be seen by crowds. He was the last pope to use it. He was the first pope to refuse to be crowned. Instead of a coronation, he inaugurated his papacy with a \"papal inauguration\" where he received the papal pallium as the symbol of his position as Bishop of Rome.\nMoral theology.\nBritish researcher Paul Spackman described Luciani as a man of \"doctrinal rigour leavened by pastoral and social open-mindedness,\" who left behind a \"legacy of gentle and compassionate bridge-building.\"\nContraception.\nLuciani had mixed feelings regarding the traditional stance on contraception. In 1968, as Bishop of Vittorio Veneto, he submitted a report to his predecessor as the Patriarch of Venice, Giovanni Urbani, that argued that the contraceptive pill should be permitted. It was agreed on by fellow Veneto bishops and was later submitted to Pope Paul VI. When \"Humanae vitae\" was released, re-affirming the teaching of the Church against artificial contraception, Luciani defended that document. Nevertheless, he seemed to contradict that defence in a letter he wrote to his diocese four days after the encyclical's release. In May 1978, Luciani was invited to speak at a Milanese conference to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the encyclical. He refused to speak at the event or even attend it.\nRaymond and Lauretta take a different view, saying that while serving as Patriarch of Venice, \"Luciani was intransigent with his upholding of the teaching of the Church and severe with those, who through intellectual pride and disobedience paid no attention to the Church's prohibition of contraception, though while not condoning the sin, he was patient with those who sincerely tried and failed to live up to the Church's teaching.\"\nAbortion.\nIn his letter to Carlo Goldoni from the book \"Illustrissimi\", Luciani took a critical perspective of abortion and argued that it violated God's law and that it went against the deepest aspirations of women, profoundly disturbing them.\nArtificial insemination.\nIn an interview before the death of Pope Paul VI in 1978, when asked for his reaction to the birth of the first test-tube baby Louise Brown, Luciani expressed concerns about the possibility that artificial insemination could lead to women being used as \"baby factories\", but he refused to condemn the parents, noting that they simply wanted to have a baby.\nHis view was that \"from every side the press is sending its congratulations to the English couple and best wishes to their baby girl. In imitation of God, who desires and loves human life, I too offer my best wishes to the baby girl. As for her parents, I do not have any right to condemn them; subjectively, if they have acted with the right intention and in good faith, they may even obtain great merit before God for what they have decided on and asked the doctors to carry out.\" Luciani added, \"Getting down, however, to the act in itself, and good faith aside, the moral problem which is posed is: is extrauterine fertilization in vitro or in a test tube, licit?... I do not find any valid reasons to deviate from this norm, by declaring licit the separation of the transmission of life from the marriage act.\"\nDivorce.\nIn 1969, Luciani was cautious of de facto relationships as a lesser evil to divorce. He said that unions like those should not be the same as marriage. However, he added that \"there are, in undeniably pathological family situations, painful cases. To remedy that, some propose a divorce, which, conversely, would aggravate this. But some remedy outside of divorce, you can't really find? Once the legitimate family is protected and made a place of honour, you will not be able to recognise with all appropriate precautions some civil effect to de facto unions.\"\nHomosexuality.\nIn a 1974 interview, while he was the Patriarch of Venice, Luciani upheld the traditional line: \"A sexuality that is worthy of man must be a part of love for a person of a different sex with the added commitments of fidelity and indissolubility.\"\nOrdination of women.\nIn a 1975 talk Luciani gave to a group of sisters, he expressed his views on the ordination of women into the priesthood:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCommunism.\nJohn Paul I reiterated the official views of the church regarding Marxism and Catholicism being incompatible and believed it to be a \"weapon to disobey\" the Christian faith. As Patriarch of Venice, he struggled at times with Marxist students who were demanding changes in Venetian policies. He also forbade those factions that were Marxist from threatening the faith.\nInterfaith dialogue.\nIslam.\nJohn Paul I was a friend to the Muslim people and, as Patriarch of Venice, said to Catholics that faithful Muslims had the \"right to build a mosque\" to practise their faith in the archdiocese.\nUniversal call to holiness.\nLuciani stressed the need throughout his time as Bishop of Vittorio Veneto to answer the universal call to holiness as was an invitation in the Second Vatican Council. He believed that sainthood was something that all Catholics could achieve if they led a life of service to God. Luciani said there were no barriers to sainthood and discussed this theme of the council in a homily on 6 January 1962: \"We are called by God to be true saints\". Luciani stressed the importance of this and said God invites Catholics and obligates them to sainthood. He also said that by professing love for God, Catholics say: \"my God I want to be holy, I will strive to be holy\".\nMercy.\nDuring his brief pontificate, John Paul I spoke three times on the concept of God's mercy. In his General Audience address on 13 September 1978, the pope said that the entire point of mercy is \"to surrender to God\" through faith in him, which goes about \"transforming one's life\" in the fight against sin, and the pursuit of holiness. The pope continued that \"God has so much tenderness for us\" in which \"He begs me to repent\" from sin to return to God's embrace. The pope concluded that \"the Church too must be good; good to everyone\" in its outreach to the faithful.\nJohn Paul I, in his Angelus address on 24 September 1978, spoke about the importance of doing good deeds through charitable and merciful acts in society, to make the world more just, and to improve the overall conditions of society. The pope elaborated that it was important to \"try to be good and to infect others with a goodness imbued with the meekness and love taught by Christ\" while seeking to give one's all in service to others. The pope further pointed out Christ's example on the Cross, in which he forgave and excused those who persecuted, referring to it as a sentiment which \"would help society so much\" if put into constant practice.\nThe pope also spoke about mercy in his address at the General Audience on 27 September 1978. He referred to God as \"infinite good\" capable of providing for mankind's \"eternal happiness\" in his love for humanity. He continued that it may be \"difficult to love others; we do not find them likeable, they have offended us and hurt us\", though said that forgiveness between brothers and sisters was very important for unity and peace among people. Additionally, the pope referred to the seven corporal and spiritual acts of mercy, which he said acted as a guide for Christians, though highlighting the fact that \"the list is not complete and it would be necessary to update it\" as times change since global situations change. The pope concluded that justice adds to charity, which is linked to the theme of mercy.\nInterpretation of Vatican II.\nLuciani had attended all sessions of the Second Vatican Council (1962\u201365) while he was the Bishop of Vittorio Veneto. He had hoped that the council would highlight \"Christian optimism\" in terms of Christ's teachings against the culture of relativism. He denounced a fundamental ignorance of the \"basic elements of the faith\" \u2014 it was this point that he wished to focus on as opposed to secularism throughout the world.\nLuciani told his niece that his diocese actually contained people \"of three councils\":\nShortly after becoming Pope, he laid out the priorities for his papacy. First and foremost would be the continued implementation of Vatican II.\nIn regard to religious freedom, Luciani wrote about the council's declaration, . In his writings, he said that there is only one true religion that must be followed and no other, affirming that Jesus Christ is the truth, and that the truth will set one truly free. However, he stated that those that who would not accept the one true Catholic faith, for whatever reason, were indeed free to profess their own religion for various reasons. He continued to state that religious freedom must be freely exercised by the individual: \"The choice of religious belief must be free. The freer and more earnest the choice, the more those that embrace the Faith will feel honoured. These are rights, natural rights. Rights always come hand in hand with duties. The non Catholics have the right to profess their religion and I have the duty to respect their right as a private citizen, as a priest, as a bishop and as a State\".\nInternational travels.\nOn 12 September 1978, Mario Casariego y Acevedo of Guatemala invited the pope to visit Guatemala in 1979. The pope was said to have thanked him for the invitation but did not provide a response. The week before this, the pope said he was unable to accept an invitation to the Latin American Episcopal Conference in Puebla, Mexico for October due to his schedule.\nBeatification processes.\nNo candidate was beatified or canonised in John Paul's brief pontificate, but Jos\u00e9 Gras y Granollers, Juan Vicente Zengotita-Bengoa Lasuen and Giuseppe Beschin were titled Servant of God on 22 September 1978.\nPersonality.\nJohn Paul I was regarded as a skilled communicator and writer. His book \"Illustrissimi\", written while he was a cardinal, is a series of letters to a wide collection of historical and fictional persons. Among those still available are his letters to Jesus, King David, Figaro the Barber, Empress Maria Theresa and Pinocchio. Others \"written to\" included Mark Twain, Charles Dickens and Christopher Marlowe. He was also well-read, and was known for reading several newspapers each morning, including one from the Veneto region, before beginning his day.\nJohn Paul I impressed people with his personal warmth. He was seen by some as an intellectual lightweight not up to the responsibilities of the papacy, although David Yallop (\"In God's Name\") says that this is the result of a whispering campaign by people in the Vatican who were opposed to Luciani's policies. In the words of John Cornwell, \"they treated him with condescension\"; one senior cleric discussing Luciani said \"they have elected Peter Sellers.\" Critics contrasted his sermons mentioning Pinocchio to the learned intellectual discourses of Pius XII or Paul VI. Visitors spoke of his isolation and loneliness and the fact that he was the first pope in decades not to have previously held either a diplomatic role (like Pius XI and John XXIII) or Curial role (like Pius XII and Paul VI) in the Church.\nHis personal impact, however, was twofold: his image as a warm, gentle and kind man captivated the whole world. This image was immediately formed when he was presented to the crowd in St. Peter's Square following his election. The warmth of his presence made him a much-loved figure before he even spoke a word. The media in particular fell under his spell. He was a very skilled orator.\nAccording to his aides, he was not the naive idealist his critics made him out to be. Giuseppe Caprio, the substitute Papal Secretary of State, said that John Paul I quickly accepted his new role and performed it with confidence.\nJohn Paul I had admitted that the prospect of the papacy had daunted him to the point that other cardinals had to encourage him to accept it. He refused to have the millennium-old traditional papal coronation or wear the papal tiara. He instead chose to have a simplified inauguration mass. John Paul I adopted as his motto the Latin word ('Humility'). In his notable Angelus of 27 August 1978 (delivered on the first full day of his papacy), he impressed the world with his natural friendliness.\nSister Margherita Marin, who worked in the Vatican during Luciani's papacy, said in comments made in late 2017 that the pope had admitted the sisters into his apartment chapel for morning Mass, unlike his predecessor Paul VI who had only admitted his secretaries. Marin also said that Luciani would speak the Venetian dialect with those Venetian sisters to make them more comfortable, and to better interact with them. The religious also noted that the pope's humour was evident to all those who spoke with him, and he would often joke with the sisters when seeing his picture in the papers: \"But you see how they got me\", in reference to the quality of his picture.\nDeath.\nAround 10 p.m. on the day of his death, the pope learned that several young neo-fascists had fired upon a group of young people reading \"L'Unit\u00e0\", the communist newspaper, outside one of the party's offices in Rome. One boy was killed while another was seriously wounded. The pope lamented to Bishop John Magee, \"Even the young are killing each other.\" He later retired to his room to read Thomas \u00e0 Kempis's \"The Imitation of Christ\" in bed.\nOn 29 September 1978, on what would have been the 35th day of his pontificate, John Paul I was found dead in his bed with reading material and a bedside lamp still lit. He had probably suffered a heart attack the night before. Upon the global announcement of the news, Bolivia declared six days of mourning, while Spain, Zaire and Lebanon all declared three days of mourning and the Dominican Republic declared two days of mourning.\nJohn Paul I's funeral was held in Saint Peter's Square on 4 October 1978, celebrated by Carlo Confalonieri. In his eulogy of the late pope, he described him as a flashing comet who briefly lit up the church. He then was laid to rest in the Vatican Grottoes.\nThere are several conspiracy theories related to his death.\n2018 revelations.\nThe journalist and vice-postulator for John Paul I's cause of beatification, Stefania Falasca, published a new book in 2017 titled \"Pope Luciani, Chronicle of a Death\", in which she revealed that John Paul I had complained of chest pains hours before his death and the evening before, but paid no attention to them and ordered that his doctor not be called. Falasca confirmed, after interviewing the sisters who found him and documents from the Vatican Apostolic Archive, that John Paul I died of a heart attack in the late evening hours of 28\u00a0September 1978.\nThe Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin, in his preface for the book, describes the various conspiracies regarding John Paul I's death as little more than \"noir reconstructions\". Parolin further says that the sudden death of the pope inspired \"myriad theories, suspicions, [and] suppositions\" based on opinion rather than fact.\nFalasca noted the 2009 testimony of Sister Margherita Marin, one of the two sisters who found the pope dead in his bedroom on the morning of 29 September 1978. John Paul I had made it a practice to have a morning coffee in the sacristy and then go into the chapel to pray before tending to the day's matters. Sister Vincenza Taffarel had noted the pope had not touched the coffee she had left for him in the sacristy at 5:15 am (after about 10 minutes) and went looking for him but found him dead, and hastily summoned Marin, who also went into the room.\nSister Vincenza said: \"He hasn't come out yet? Why not?\" and knocked a few more times but heard silence, then opened the door and walked in. Marin remained in the hallway but heard the elder sister say: \"Your Holiness, you shouldn't pull these jokes on me\" because Sister Vincenza also had heart problems. Marin testified that John Paul I's hands were cold and she was struck by the darkness of his nails. Marin further testified that original information provided by the Vatican regarding who discovered the pope was wrong, since it had originally been claimed the discovery was by the pope's secretaries Lorenzi and Magee. Marin testified that \"he was in bed with a slight smile\" on his face. The reading light over the headboard was still on, with his two pillows under his back propping him up, with his legs outstretched and his arms on top of the bedsheets. John Paul I was still in his pyjamas with a few typewritten sheets in his hands. His head was slightly turned to the right and his eyes were partially closed; his glasses rested on his nose.\nJohn Paul I had suffered a severe pain in his chest for about five minutes around 7:30 pm while reciting the vespers in the chapel with Magee before dinner, but insisted against calling for Doctor Renato Buzzonetti. The latter, the book claimed, was informed of that episode after the pope's death. The book also revealed that, before the conclave that elected John Paul II, the cardinals had sent a series of written questions to the doctors who had embalmed John Paul I either on 10 or 11 October to check if there had been any signs of traumatic injuries, so as to ascertain if he died naturally rather than suspiciously. Doctor Buzzonetti sent a detailed report to the Cardinal Secretary of State Agostino Casaroli on 9 October 1979 detailing that the episode of pain John Paul I suffered was in the upper part of the sternal region.\nSister Margherita noted in late 2017 in comments made in Belluno that the pope had made a half-hour phone call on the evening of his death to Giovanni Colombo and said he wanted the Rector Major of the Salesians Egidio Vigan\u00f2 to agree to serve as John Paul I's successor as Patriarch of Venice.\nCanonisation process.\nDiocesan process.\nThe process for the canonisation for John Paul I formally began in 1990 with the petition by 226 Brazilian bishops, including four cardinals. The petition was addressed directly to Pope John Paul II.\nOn 26 August 2002, Bishop Vincenzo Savio announced the start of the preliminary phase to collect documents and testimonies necessary to start the process of canonisation. On 8 June 2003 the Congregation for the Causes of Saints gave its assent to the work and on 17 June transferred the forum for the beatification process from Rome to Belluno-Feltre while also declaring the late pope as a Servant of God after declaring \"nihil obstat\" (no objections to the cause). On 23 November, on the Feast of Christ the King, the diocesan process formally opened in Belluno Cathedral with Jos\u00e9 Saraiva Martins in charge and presiding over the inauguration. The diocesan inquiry for the cause subsequently concluded on 11 November 2006 in Belluno with all the evidence collected being sent to the C.C.S. which received their validation on 13 June 2008. On 13 June 2008, the Vatican began the \"Roman\" phase of the beatification process for John Paul I, in which they would assess the documents and witness testimonies collected during the diocesan inquiry.\nRoman phase.\nThe documents in regard to the cause were supposed to be delivered to the prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, Angelo Amato on 17 October 2012 (the one-hundredth anniversary of the late pope's birth), in a large Positio dossier (consisting of a biography and investigation into his virtues) to examine the pros and cons of the cause. This was delayed when the cause's supporters wanted another check over all the documents. In a mass at Belluno on 20 July 2014, Tarcisio Bertone announced that the cause of beatification was set to advance. The cardinal highlighted that the Positio would be delivered in September 2014. But the dossier was not submitted to the C.C.S. until 17 October 2016; there were five volumes with around 3600 pages in total.\nOn 27 August 2015, Bishop Giuseppe Andrich announced that John Paul I would be beatified \"soon\". In a homily delivered during Mass in Canale d'Agordo, Luciani's home town, on the 37th anniversary of his election as Pope, Andrich said Church authorities had concluded the investigation into Luciani's heroic virtues. Following the conclusion of the writing of the \"Positio\" dossier (3652 pages in total), they received several messages affirming personal experience of Luciani's holiness, including a handwritten card from Pope Emeritus Benedict XVI. The testimony of a Pope or former Pope in considering a candidate for beatification is extremely unusual. Benedict XVI apparently recommended waiving the requirement for miracles in Luciani's case.\nTo determine whether or not the late pontiff should be declared Venerable, theologians and the members of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints must determine if the late pope lived a life of heroic virtue. This meeting took place on 1 June 2017 in which theologians unanimously approved the fact that the late pope exercised virtues to a heroic degree. The cardinal and bishop members discussed the cause on 7 November 2017 and issued their unanimous approval. Pope Francis named John Paul I as Venerable on 8 November 2017 after confirming his heroic virtue per the cardinal and theological virtues.\nBeatification.\nFor Luciani to be beatified, the investigators had to certify at least one miracle attributed to his intercession. For canonisation there must be a second miracle, though the reigning pope may waive these requirements altogether, as is often done in the case of beatified popes.\nIt was reported in 2016 that a potential miracle attributed to the late pontiff's intercession happened to a nun in Buenos Aires in Argentina. The vice-postulator for the cause, Stefania Falasca, reported in a piece for \"Avvenire\" that medical consultants in Rome deemed the healing of the Argentine nun as a miracle on 31 October 2019 as there was no possible scientific or medical explanation. Theologians likewise provided their approval on 6 May 2021 after determining that the healing came as a direct result of the late pope's intercession. Falasca reported that the cardinal and bishop members of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints were scheduled to meet to discuss the cause in October, thereby implying that a 2022 beatification was likely.\nPope Francis authorized a decree that recognized the miracle on 13 October 2021; it enabled John Paul I to be beatified at Saint Peter's Square on 4 September 2022.\nMiracle.\nFollowing the announcement that John Paul I would be beatified, details were released that the miracle in question was the recovery of an 11-year-old in Buenos Aires from inflammatory encephalopathy.\nFailed miracle.\nThe postulation also drew upon the testimony of Giuseppe Denora di Altamura who claimed to have been cured of cancer by the intercession of the late pontiff. An official investigation into the alleged miracle commenced on 14 May 2007 and concluded on 30 May 2009 with the C.C.S. validating the process on 25 March 2010.\nThe supposed miracle attributed to his intercession was taken to a medical board in Rome on 24 April 2015 and the commission came to the conclusion that it was not a miracle that could be attributed to Luciani. This means that another miracle will need to be found before the cause can continue.\nPostulation.\nThe postulator for the cause was Bishop Enrico dal Covolo from 2003 until 2016 when Beniamino Stella was appointed to that position. Stefania Falasca is the current vice-postulator.\nLegacy.\nPope John Paul I was the first pope to abandon the coronation, and he was also the first pope to choose a double name (John Paul) for his papal name. His successor, Karol J\u00f3zef Wojty\u0142a, chose the same name. He was the first pope to have a Papal inauguration and the last pope to use the \"sedia gestatoria\".\nViews of successors.\nJohn Paul II.\nKarol Wojty\u0142a was elected John Paul I's successor as Pope on Monday, 16 October 1978. The next day he celebrated Mass together with the College of Cardinals in the Sistine Chapel. After the Mass, he delivered his first \"Urbi et Orbi\" (a traditional blessing) message, broadcast worldwide via radio. In it he pledged fidelity to the Second Vatican Council and paid tribute to his predecessor:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What can we say of John Paul I? It seems to us that only yesterday he emerged from this assembly of ours to put on the papal robes \u2014 not a light weight. But what warmth of charity, nay, what \"an abundant outpouring of love\" \u2014 which came forth from him in the few days of his ministry and which in his last Sunday address before the Angelus he desired should come upon the world. This is also confirmed by his wise instructions to the faithful who were present at his public audiences on faith, hope and love.\nBenedict XVI.\nBenedict XVI spoke of the late pontiff on 28 September 2008 (the 30th anniversary of John Paul I's death) during his weekly Angelus address. Of the late pope, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because of this virtue of his, it only took 33 days for Pope Luciani to win people's hearts. In his addresses he always referred to events in practical life, from his family memories and from popular wisdom. His simplicity was a vehicle for a solid, rich teaching which, thanks to the gift of an exceptional memory and a vast knowledge, he embellished with numerous citations from ecclesiastical and secular writers. Thus, he was an incomparable catechist, following in the footsteps of St Pius X, who came from the same region and was his predecessor first on the throne of St Mark and then on that of St Peter. 'We must feel small before God,' he said during the same Audience. And he added, 'I am not ashamed to feel like a child before his mother; one believes in one's mother; I believe in the Lord, in what he has revealed to me.' These words reveal the full depth of his faith. As we thank God for having given him to the church and to the world, let us treasure his example, striving to cultivate his same humility which enabled him to talk to everyone, especially the small and the 'distant.' For this, let us invoke Mary Most Holy, the humble handmaid of the Lord.\nFrancis.\nPope Francis spoke of his predecessor in his 2016 book \"The Name of God Is Mercy\" in which Francis recalls how touched he was by his predecessor's writings. More than any of his predecessors mentioned in his book, Francis refers to Luciani the most. The pope referred to Luciani's remarks at the latter's general audience of 6 September 1978 and mentioned how profound that his words were upon him; of the remarks Luciani made, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is the homily when Albino Luciani said he had been chosen because the Lord preferred that certain things not be engraved in bronze or marble but in the dust, so that if the writing had remained, it would have been clear that the merit was only God's.\nLeo XIV.\nSpeaking to seminarians from the Dioceses of Triveneto, Pope Leo XIV referred to Blessed John Paul I, who hailed from that region, as a \"shepherd\" and as a \"true model for priestly life,\" highlighting how the \"finest virtues of your people shone\" in him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24028", "revid": "4770293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24028", "title": "Pope Paul VI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1963 to 1978\nPope Paul VI (born Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini; 26 September 1897\u00a0\u2013 6 August 1978) was head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City State from 21 June 1963 until his death on 6 August 1978. Succeeding John XXIII, he continued the Second Vatican Council, which he closed in 1965, implementing its numerous reforms. He fostered improved ecumenical relations with Eastern Orthodox and Protestant churches, which resulted in many historic meetings and agreements. In January 1964, he flew to Jordan, the first time a reigning pontiff had left Italy in more than a century.\nMontini served in the Holy See's Secretariat of State from 1922 to 1954, and along with Domenico Tardini was considered the closest and most influential advisor of Pope Pius XII. In 1954, Pius named Montini Archbishop of Milan, the largest Italian diocese. Montini later became the Secretary of the Italian Bishops' Conference. John XXIII elevated Montini to the College of Cardinals in 1958, and after his death, Montini was, with little to no opposition, elected his successor, taking the name Paul VI.\nHe reconvened the Second Vatican Council, which had been suspended during the interregnum. After its conclusion, Paul VI took charge of the interpretation and implementation of its mandates, finely balancing the conflicting expectations of various Catholic groups. The resulting reforms were among the widest and deepest in the Church's history.\nPaul VI spoke repeatedly to Marian conventions and Mariological meetings, visited Marian shrines and issued three Marian encyclicals. Following Ambrose of Milan, he named Mary as the Mother of the Church during the Second Vatican Council. He described himself as a humble servant of a suffering humanity and demanded significant changes from the rich in North America and Europe in favour of the poor in the Third World. His opposition to birth control was published in the 1968 encyclical .\nPope Benedict XVI, citing his heroic virtue, proclaimed him venerable on 20 December 2012. Pope Francis beatified Paul VI on 19 October 2014, after the recognition of a miracle attributed to his intercession. His liturgical feast was celebrated on the date of his birth, 26 September, until 2019 when it was changed to the date of his priestly ordination, 29 May. Pope Francis canonised him on 14 October 2018. Paul VI is the most recent pope to take the pontifical name \"Paul\".\nEarly life.\nGiovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini was born in the village of Concesio, in the Province of Brescia, Lombardy, Italy, in 1897. His father, (1860\u20131943), was a lawyer, journalist, director of the Catholic Action, and member of the Italian Parliament. His mother, Giudetta Alghisi (1874\u20131943), was from a family of rural nobility. He had two brothers, Francesco Montini (1900\u20131971), who became a physician, and (1896\u20131990), who became a lawyer and politician. On 30 September 1897, he was baptised with the name Giovanni Battista Enrico Antonio Maria Montini. He attended the Cesare Arici school, run by the Jesuits, and in 1916 received a diploma from the Arnaldo da Brescia public school in Brescia. His education was often interrupted by bouts of illness.\nIn 1916, he entered the seminary to become a Catholic priest. He was ordained on 29 May 1920 in Brescia and celebrated his first Mass at the Santa Maria delle Grazie, Brescia. Montini concluded his studies in Milan with a laurea, the equivalent of a bachelor's degree, in canon law in 1922. He later studied at the Gregorian University, the University of Rome La Sapienza and, at the request of Giuseppe Pizzardo, the Pontifical Academy of Ecclesiastical Nobles. In 1922, at the age of twenty-five, again at the request of Giuseppe Pizzardo, Montini entered the Secretariat of State, where he worked under Pizzardo together with Francesco Borgongini-Duca, Alfredo Ottaviani, Carlo Grano, Domenico Tardini and Francis Spellman. Consequently, he never had an appointment as a parish priest. In 1925 he helped found the publishing house Morcelliana in Brescia, focused on promoting a 'Christian-inspired culture'.\nVatican career.\nDiplomatic service.\nMontini had just one foreign posting in the diplomatic service of the Holy See as Secretary in the office of the papal nuncio to Poland in 1923. Of the nationalism he experienced there he wrote: \"This form of nationalism treats foreigners as enemies, especially foreigners with whom one has common frontiers. Then one seeks the expansion of one's own country at the expense of the immediate neighbours. People grow up with a feeling of being hemmed in. Peace becomes a transient compromise between wars.\" He described his experience in Warsaw as \"useful, though not always joyful\". When he became pope, the Communist government of Poland refused him permission to visit Poland on a Marian pilgrimage.\nRoman Curia.\nHis organisational skills led him to a career in the Roman Curia, the papal civil service. On 19 October 1925, he was appointed a papal chamberlain in the rank of Supernumerary Privy Chamberlain of His Holiness. In 1931, Cardinal Eugenio Pacelli appointed him to teach history at the Pontifical Academy for Diplomats; he was promoted to Domestic Prelate of His Holiness on 8 July of the same year. On 24 September 1936, he was appointed a Referendary Prelate of the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura.\nOn 16 December 1937, after his mentor Giuseppe Pizzardo was named a cardinal and was succeeded by Domenico Tardini, Montini was named Substitute for Ordinary Affairs under Cardinal Pacelli, the Secretary of State. His immediate supervisor was Domenico Tardini, with whom he got along well. He was further appointed Consultor of the Supreme Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office and of the Sacred Consistorial Congregation on 24 December, and was promoted to Protonotary apostolic (\"ad instar participantium\"), the most senior class of papal prelate, on 10 May 1938.\nPacelli became Pope Pius XII in 1939 and confirmed Montini's appointment as Substitute under the new Cardinal Secretary of State Luigi Maglione. In that role, roughly that of a chief of staff, he met the Pope every morning until 1954 and developed a rather close relationship with him. Of his service to two popes he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is true, my service to the Pope was not limited to the political or extraordinary affairs according to Vatican language. The goodness of Pope Pius XII opened to me the opportunity to look into the thoughts, even into the soul of this great pontiff. I could quote many details how Pius XII, always using measured and moderate speech, was hiding, nay revealing a noble position of great strength and fearless courage.\nWhen war broke out, Maglione, Tardini, and Montini were the principal figures in the Secretariat of State of the Holy See. Montini dispatched \"ordinary affairs\" in the morning, while in the afternoon he moved informally to the third floor Office of the Private Secretary of the Pontiff, serving in place of a personal secretary. During the war years, he replied to thousands of letters from all parts of the world with understanding and prayer, and arranging for help when possible.\nAt the request of the Pope, Montini created an information office regarding prisoners of war and refugees, which from 1939 to 1947 received almost ten million requests for information about missing persons and produced over eleven million replies. Montini was several times attacked by Benito Mussolini's government for meddling in politics, but the Holy See consistently defended him. When Maglione died in 1944, Pius XII appointed Tardini and Montini as joint heads of the Secretariat, each a Pro-Secretary of State. Montini described Pius XII with a filial admiration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His richly cultivated mind, his unusual capacity for thought and study led him to avoid all distractions and every unnecessary relaxation. He wished to enter fully into the history of his own afflicted time: with a deep understanding, that he was himself a part of that history. He wished to participate fully in it, to share his sufferings in his own heart and soul.\nAs Pro-Secretary of State, Montini coordinated the activities of assistance to persecuted fugitives hidden in Catholic convents, parishes, seminaries, and schools.\nAt the Pope's instruction, Montini, Ferdinando Baldelli, and Otto Faller established the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza (\"Pontifical Commission for Assistance\"), which supplied a large number of Romans and refugees from everywhere with shelter, food and other necessities. In Rome alone it distributed almost two million portions of free food in 1944. The Papal Residence of Castel Gandolfo was opened to refugees, as was Vatican City in so far as space allowed. Some 15,000 lived in Castel Gandolfo, supported by the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza. Montini was also involved in the re-establishment of Church Asylum, extending protection to hundreds of Allied soldiers escaped from prison camps, to Jews, anti-Fascists, Socialists, Communists, and after the liberation of Rome, to German soldiers, partisans, displaced persons and others. As pope in 1971, Montini turned the Pontificia Commissione di Assistenza into \"Caritas Italiana\".\nArchbishop of Milan.\nAfter the death of Cardinal Alfredo Ildefonso Schuster in 1954, Montini was appointed to succeed him as Archbishop of Milan, which made him the secretary of the Italian Bishops Conference. Pius XII presented the new archbishop \"as his personal gift to Milan\". He was consecrated bishop in Saint Peter's Basilica by Cardinal Eug\u00e8ne Tisserant, the Dean of the College of Cardinals, since Pius XII was severely ill.\nOn 12 December 1954, Pius XII delivered a radio address from his sick bed about Montini's appointment to the crowd in St. Peter's Basilica. Both Montini and the Pope had tears in their eyes when Montini departed for his diocese with its 1,000 churches, 2,500 priests and 3,500,000 souls. On 5 January 1955, Montini formally took possession of his Cathedral of Milan. Montini settled well into his new tasks among all groups of the faithful in the city, meeting cordially with intellectuals, artists, and writers.\nMontini's philosophy.\nIn his first months, Montini showed his interest in working conditions and labour issues by speaking to many unions and associations. He initiated the building of over 100 new churches, believing them the only non-utilitarian buildings in modern society, places for spiritual rest.\nHis public speeches were noticed in Milan, Rome, and elsewhere. Some considered him a liberal when he asked lay people to love not only Catholics but also schismatics, Protestants, Anglicans, the indifferent, Muslims, pagans, and atheists. He gave a friendly welcome to a group of Anglican clergy visiting Milan in 1957 and subsequently exchanged letters with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher.\nPope Pius XII revealed at the 1952 secret consistory that both Montini and Tardini had declined appointments to the cardinalate,\nand, in fact, Montini was never to be made a cardinal by Pius XII, who held no consistory and created no cardinals between the time he appointed Montini to Milan and his own death four years later. After Montini's friend Angelo Roncalli became Pope John XXIII, he made Montini a cardinal in December 1958.\nWhen the new pope announced an ecumenical council, Cardinal Montini reacted with disbelief and said to Giulio Bevilacqua: \"This old boy does not know what a hornets nest he is stirring up.\" Montini was appointed to the Central Preparatory Commission in 1961. During the council, Pope John XXIII asked him to live in the Vatican, where he was a Commission for Extraordinary Affairs member, though he did not engage much in the floor debates. His main advisor was Giovanni Colombo, whom he later appointed as his successor in Milan The commission was significantly overshadowed by the insistence of John XXIII that the Council complete all its work before Christmas 1962, to coincide with the 400th anniversary of the Council of Trent, an insistence which may have also been influenced by the Pope's having recently been told that he had cancer.\nJohn had a vision but \"did not have a clear agenda. His rhetoric seems to have had a note of over-optimism, a confidence in progress, which was characteristic of the 1960s.\"\nPastoral progressivism.\nDuring his period in Milan, Montini was widely seen as a progressive member of the Catholic hierarchy. He adopted new approaches to reach the faithful with pastoral care and carried through the liturgical reforms of Pius XII at the local level. For example, huge posters announced throughout the city that 1,000 voices would speak to them from 10 to 24 November 1957: more than 500 priests and many bishops, cardinals, and lay people delivered 7,000 sermons, not only in churches but in factories, meeting halls, houses, courtyards, schools, offices, military barracks, hospitals, hotels and wherever people congregated. His goal was re-introducing faith to a city without much religion. \"If only we can say Our Father and know what this means, then we would understand the Christian faith.\"\nPius XII asked Archbishop Montini to Rome in October 1957, where he gave the main presentation to the Second World Congress of Lay Apostolate. As Pro-Secretary of State, he had worked hard to form this worldwide organisation of lay people in 58 nations, representing 42 national organisations. He presented them to Pius XII in Rome in 1951. The second meeting in 1957 gave Montini an opportunity to express the lay apostolate in modern terms: \"Apostolate means love. We will love all, but especially those, who need help... We will love our time, our technology, our art, our sports, our world.\"\nCardinal.\nOn 20 June 1958, Saul Alinsky recalled meeting with Montini: \"I had three wonderful meetings with Montini and I am sure that you have heard from him since.\" Alinsky also wrote to George Nauman Shuster, two days before the papal conclave that elected John XXIII: \"No, I don't know who the next Pope will be, but if it's to be Montini, the drinks will be on me for years to come.\"\nAlthough some cardinals seem to have viewed Montini as a likely papabile candidate, possibly receiving some votes in the 1958 conclave, he had the handicap of not yet being a cardinal. Angelo Roncalli was elected pope on 28 October 1958 and took the name John XXIII. On 17 November 1958, \"L'Osservatore Romano\" announced a consistory for the creation of new cardinals, with Montini at the top of the list. When the Pope raised Montini to the cardinalate on 15 December 1958, he became Cardinal-Priest of Ss. Silvestro e Martino ai Monti. The Pope appointed him simultaneously to several Vatican congregations, drawing him frequently to Rome in the coming years.\nCardinal Montini journeyed to Africa in 1962, visiting Ghana, Sudan, Kenya, Congo, Rhodesia, South Africa, and Nigeria. After this journey, John XXIII called Montini to a private audience to report on his trip, speaking for several hours. In fifteen other trips, he visited Brazil (1960) and the USA (1960), including New York City, Washington DC, Chicago, the University of Notre Dame in Indiana, Boston, Philadelphia, and Baltimore. He usually vacationed in Engelberg Abbey, a secluded Benedictine monastery in Switzerland.\nPapacy.\nPapal conclave.\nMontini was generally seen as the most likely papal successor, being close to both Popes Pius XII and John XXIII, as well as his pastoral and administrative background, his insight, and his determination. John XXIII had previously known the Vatican as an official until his appointment to Venice as a papal diplomat, but returning to Rome at age 66, he may at times have felt uncertain in dealing with the professional Roman Curia. Montini, on the other hand, had learned its innermost workings while working in it for a generation.\nUnlike the papabile cardinals Giacomo Lercaro of Bologna and Giuseppe Siri of Genoa, Montini was identified neither left nor right nor as a radical reformer. He was viewed as most likely to continue the Second Vatican Council, which had adjourned without tangible results.\nIn the conclave after John XXIII's death, Montini was elected pope on the sixth ballot on 21 June. When the Dean of the College of Cardinals Eug\u00e8ne Tisserant asked if he accepted the election, Montini said \"Accepto, in nomine Domini\" (\"I accept, in the name of the Lord\"). He took the name \"Paul VI\" in honor of Paul the Apostle.\nAt one point during the conclave on 20 June, it was said that Cardinal Gustavo Testa lost his temper and demanded that opponents of Montini halt their efforts to thwart his election. Montini, fearful of causing strife, started to rise to dissuade the cardinals from voting for him, but Cardinal Giovanni Urbani dragged him back, muttering, \"Eminence, shut up!\"\nThe white smoke first rose from the chimney of the Sistine Chapel at 11:22 am, when Protodeacon Cardinal Alfredo Ottaviani announced to the public the successful election of Montini. When the new pope appeared on the central loggia, he gave the shorter episcopal blessing as his first apostolic blessing rather than the longer, traditional \"Urbi et Orbi\".\nOf the papacy, Paul VI wrote in his journal: \"The position is unique. It brings great solitude. 'I was solitary before, but now my solitude becomes complete and awesome.'\"\nLess than two years later, on 2 May 1965, Paul informed the dean of the College of Cardinals that his health might make it impossible to function as pope. He wrote, \"In case of infirmity, which is believed to be incurable or is of long duration and which impedes us from sufficiently exercising the functions of our apostolic ministry; or in the case of another serious and prolonged impediment\", he would renounce his office \"both as bishop of Rome as well as head of the same holy Catholic Church\".\nReforms of papal ceremony.\nPaul VI did away with much of the papacy's regal splendor. His coronation on 30 June 1963 was the last such ceremony; his successor Pope John Paul I substituted an inauguration (which Paul had substantially modified, but which he left mandatory in his 1975 apostolic constitution \"Romano Pontifici Eligendo\"). At his coronation, Paul wore a tiara presented by the Archdiocese of Milan. Near the end of the third session of the Second Vatican Council in 1964, Paul VI descended the steps of the papal throne in St. Peter's Basilica and ascended the altar, on which he laid the tiara as a sign of the renunciation of human glory and power in keeping with the innovative spirit of the council. It was announced that the tiara would be sold for charity. The purchasers arranged for it to be displayed as a gift to American Catholics in the crypt of the Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C.\nIn 1968, with the motu proprio \"Pontificalis Domus\", he discontinued most of the ceremonial functions of the old Papal nobility at the court (reorganized as the household), save for the Prince Assistants to the Papal Throne. He also abolished the Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard, leaving the Pontifical Swiss Guard as the sole military order of the Vatican.\nCompletion of the Vatican Council.\nPaul VI decided to reconvene Vatican II and completed it in 1965. Faced with conflicting interpretations and controversies, he directed the implementation of its reform goals.\nEcumenical orientation.\nDuring Vatican II, the council fathers avoided statements that might anger non-Catholic Christians. Cardinal Augustin Bea, the President of the Christian Unity Secretariat, always had the full support of Paul VI in his attempts to ensure that the Council language was friendly and open to the sensitivities of Protestant and Orthodox churches, whom he had invited to all sessions at the request of Pope John XXIII. Bea also was strongly involved in the passage of \"Nostra aetate\", which regulates the Church's relations with Judaism and members of other religions.\nDialogue with the world.\nAfter being elected Bishop of Rome, Paul VI first met with the priests in his new diocese. He told them that he started a dialogue with the modern world in Milan and asked them to seek contact with people from all walks of life. Six days after his election, he announced that he would continue Vatican II and convened the opening on 29 September 1963. In a radio address to the world, Paul VI praised his predecessors, the strength of Pius XI, the wisdom and intelligence of Pius XII, and the love of John XXIII. As his pontifical goals, he mentioned the continuation and completion of Vatican II, the Canon Law reform, and improved social peace and justice worldwide. The unity of Christianity would be central to his activities.\nCouncil priorities.\nThe Pope re-opened the Ecumenical Council on 29 September 1963, giving it four key priorities:\nHe reminded the Council Fathers that only a few years earlier, Pope Pius XII had issued the encyclical \"Mystici corporis\" about the mystical body of Christ. He asked them not to repeat or create new dogmatic definitions but to simply explain how the Church sees itself. He thanked the representatives of other Christian communities for their attendance and asked for their forgiveness if the Catholic Church was at fault for their separation. He also reminded the Council Fathers that many bishops from the East had been forbidden to attend by their national governments.\nThird and fourth sessions.\nPaul VI opened the third period on 14 September 1964, telling the Council Fathers that he viewed the text about the Church as the most important document to come out from the council. As the Council discussed the role of bishops in the papacy, Paul VI issued an explanatory note confirming the primacy of the papacy, a step that was viewed by some as meddling in the council's affairs. American bishops pushed for a speedy resolution on religious freedom, but Paul VI insisted this be approved together with related texts on topics such as ecumenism. The Pope concluded the session on 21 November 1964 with the formal pronouncement of Mary as Mother of the Church.\nBetween the third and fourth sessions, the Pope announced reforms in the areas of Roman Curia, revision of Canon law, regulations for interfaith marriages, and birth control issues. He opened the council's final session, concelebrating with bishops from countries where the Church was persecuted. Several texts proposed for his approval had to be changed, but all were finally agreed upon. The council was concluded on 8 December 1965: the Feast of the Immaculate Conception.\nIn the council's final session, Paul VI announced that he would open the canonisation processes of his immediate predecessors: Pope Pius XII and Pope John XXIII.\nUniversal call to holiness.\nAccording to Paul VI, \"the most characteristic and ultimate purpose of the teachings of the Council\" is the universal call to holiness: \"all the faithful of Christ of whatever rank or status, are called to the fullness of the Christian life and to the perfection of charity; by this holiness as such a more human manner of living is promoted in this earthly society.\" This teaching is found in \"Lumen Gentium\", the Dogmatic Constitution on the Church, promulgated by Paul VI on 21 November 1964.\nChurch reforms.\nSynod of Bishops.\nOn 14 September 1965, he established the Synod of Bishops as a permanent institution of the Catholic Church and an advisory body to the papacy. Several meetings were held on specific issues during his pontificate, such as the Synod of Bishops on evangelization in the modern world, which started on 9 September 1974.\nCuria reform.\nPope Paul VI knew the Roman Curia well, having worked there for a generation from 1922 to 1954. He implemented his reforms in stages. On 1 March 1968, he issued a regulation, a process initiated by Pius XII and continued by John XXIII. On 28 March, with \"Pontificalis Domus\", and in several additional Apostolic Constitutions in the following years, he revamped the entire Curia, which included reduction of bureaucracy, streamlining of existing congregations, and a broader representation of non-Italians in the Curial positions.\nAge limits and restrictions.\nOn 6 August 1966, Paul VI asked all bishops to submit their resignations to the pontiff by their 75th birthday. They were not required to do so but \"earnestly requested of their own free will to tender their resignation from office\". He extended this request to all cardinals in \"Ingravescentem aetatem\" on 21 November 1970, with the further provision that cardinals would relinquish their offices in the Roman Curia upon reaching their 80th birthday. These retirement rules enabled the Pope to fill several positions with younger prelates and reduce the Italian domination of the Roman Curia. His 1970 measures also revolutionised papal elections by restricting the right to vote in papal conclaves to cardinals who had not yet reached their 80th birthday, a class known since then as \"cardinal electors\". This reduced the power of the Italians and the Curia in the next conclave. Some senior cardinals objected to losing their voting privilege without effect.\nPaul VI's measures also limited the number of cardinal electors to a maximum of 120, a rule disregarded on several occasions by each of his successors. Previously, Paul VI himself had been the first pope to increase the number above 120 (from 82 in 1963 to 134 in April 1969; but he reduced the number of cardinal electors below 120 in 1971 by simultaneously introducing the voting age limit).\nSome prelates questioned whether he should not apply these retirement rules to himself. When Pope Paul was asked towards the end of his papacy whether he would retire at age 80, he replied \"Kings can abdicate, Popes cannot.\"\nLiturgy.\nReform of the liturgy, an aim of the 20th-century liturgical movement, mainly in France and Germany, was officially recognised as legitimate by Pius XII in his encyclical \"Mediator Dei\". During his pontificate, he eased regulations on the obligatory use of Latin in Catholic liturgies, permitting some use of vernacular languages during baptisms, funerals, and other events. In 1951 and 1955, he revised the Easter liturgies, most notably that of the Easter Triduum. The Second Vatican Council (1962\u20131965) gave some directives in its document \"Sacrosanctum Concilium\" for a general revision of the Roman Missal. Within four years of the close of the council, Paul VI promulgated in 1969 the first postconciliar edition, which included three new Eucharistic Prayers in addition to the Roman Canon, until then the only anaphora in the Roman Rite. Use of vernacular languages was expanded by decision of episcopal conferences, not by papal command. In addition to his revision of the Roman Missal, Pope Paul VI issued instructions in 1964, 1967, 1968, 1969, and 1970, reforming other elements of the liturgy of the Roman Church.\nThese reforms were not universally welcomed. Questions were raised about the need to replace the 1962 Roman Missal, which, though decreed on 23 June 1962, became available only in 1963, a few months before the Second Vatican Council's \"Sacrosanctum Concilium\" decree ordered that it be altered. Attachment to it led to open ruptures, of which the most widely known is that of Marcel Lefebvre. Pope John Paul II granted bishops the right to authorise the use of the 1962 Missal (\"Quattuor abhinc annos\" and \"Ecclesia Dei\") and in 2007 Pope Benedict XVI, while stating that the Mass of Paul VI and John Paul II \"obviously is and continues to be the normal Form \u2013 the \"Forma ordinaria\" \u2013 of the Eucharistic Liturgy\", gave general permission to priests of the Latin Church to use either the 1962 Missal or the post-Vatican II Missal both privately and, under certain conditions, publicly. In 2021, Pope Francis removed many of faculties granted by Pope Benedict XVI with the publishing of his \"motu proprio\", \"Traditionis Custodes\", thus limiting the use of 1962 Roman Missal.\nRelations and dialogues.\nTo Paul VI, a dialogue with all of humanity was essential not as an aim but as a means to find the truth. According to Paul, dialogue is based on the full equality of all participants. This equality is rooted in the common search for the truth. He said: \"Those who have the truth, are in a position as not having it, because they are forced to search for it every day in a deeper and more perfect way. Those who do not have it, but search for it with their whole heart, have already found it.\"\nDialogues.\nIn 1964, Paul VI created a Secretariat for non-Christians, later renamed the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, and a year later, a new Secretariat (later Pontifical Council) for Dialogue with Non-Believers. This latter one was in 1993 incorporated by Pope John Paul II in the Pontifical Council for Culture, which he had established in 1982. In 1971, Paul VI created a papal office for economic development and catastrophic assistance. To foster common bonds with all persons of goodwill, he decreed an annual peace day to be celebrated on 1 January every year. Trying to improve the condition of Christians behind the Iron Curtain, Paul VI engaged in dialogue with Communist authorities at several levels, receiving Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet Nikolai Podgorny in 1966 and 1967 in the Vatican. The situation of the Church in Hungary, Poland, and Romania improved during his pontificate.\nForeign travels.\nPope Paul VI became the first pope to visit six continents. He was also the first pontiff to travel on an airplane, visit the Holy Land on pilgrimage, and travel outside Italy in a century. He travelled more widely than any of his predecessors, earning the nickname \"the Pilgrim Pope\". He visited the Holy Land in 1964 and participated in Eucharistic congresses in Bombay, India, and Bogot\u00e1, Colombia. In 1966, he was twice denied permission to visit Poland for the thousandth anniversary of the introduction of Christianity in Poland. In 1967, he visited the shrine of Our Lady of F\u00e1tima in Portugal on the fiftieth anniversary of the apparitions there. He undertook a pastoral visit to Uganda in 1969, the first by a reigning pope to Africa. Pope Paul VI became the first reigning pontiff to visit the Western hemisphere when he addressed the United Nations in New York City in October 1965. As the U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War was escalating, Paul VI pleaded for peace before the U.N.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Our very brief visit has given us a great honour; that of proclaiming to the whole world, from the Headquarters of the United Nations, Peace! We shall never forget this extraordinary hour. Nor can We bring it to a more fitting conclusion than by expressing the wish that this central seat of human relationships for the civil peace of the world may ever be conscious and worthy of this high privilege.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No more war, never again war. Peace, it is peace that must guide the destinies of people and of all mankind.\"\nAttempted assassination.\nShortly after arriving at Manila International Airport, the Philippines on 27 November 1970, the Pope, closely followed by President Ferdinand Marcos and personal aide Pasquale Macchi, who was private secretary to Pope Paul VI, were encountered suddenly by a crew-cut, cassock-clad man who tried to attack the Pope with a knife. Macchi pushed the man away; police identified the would-be assassin as Benjam\u00edn Mendoza y Amor Flores of La Paz, Bolivia. Mendoza was an artist living in the Philippines. The Pope continued his trip and thanked Marcos and Macchi, who had moved to protect him during the attack.\nNew diplomacy.\nLike his predecessor Pius XII, Paul VI put much emphasis on the dialogue with all nations of the world through establishing diplomatic relations. The number of foreign embassies accredited to the Vatican doubled during his pontificate. This was a reflection of a new understanding between church and state, which had been formulated first by Pius XI and Pius XII but decreed by Vatican II. The pastoral constitution \"Gaudium et spes\" stated that the Catholic Church is not bound to any form of government and is willing to cooperate with all forms. The Church maintained its right to select bishops on its own without any interference by the State.\nPope Paul VI sent one of 73 Apollo 11 Goodwill Messages to NASA for the historic first lunar landing. The message still rests on the lunar surface. It has the words of the 8th Psalm, and the Pope wrote, \"To the Glory of the name of God who gives such power to men, we ardently pray for this wonderful beginning.\"\nTheology.\nMariology.\nPope Paul VI made extensive contributions to Mariology (theological teaching and devotions) during his pontificate. Given its new ecumenical orientation, he attempted to present the Marian teachings of the church. In his inaugural encyclical \"Ecclesiam suam\" (section below), the Pope called Mary the ideal of Christian perfection. He regards \"devotion to the Mother of God as of paramount importance in living the life of the Gospel.\"\nEncyclicals.\nPaul VI authored seven encyclicals.\n\"Ecclesiam suam\".\n\"Ecclesiam suam\" was given at St. Peter's Basilica, Rome, on the Feast of the Transfiguration, 6 August 1964, the second year of his pontificate. Paul VI appealed to \"all people of good will\" and discussed necessary dialogues within the Church, between the churches, and with atheism.\n\"Mense maio\".\nThe encyclical \"Mense maio\" (from 29 April 1965) focused on the Virgin Mary, to whom traditionally the month of May is dedicated as the Mother of God. Paul VI writes that Mary is rightly regarded as how people are led to Christ. Therefore, the person who encounters Mary cannot help but encounter Christ.\n\"Mysterium fidei\".\nOn 3 September 1965, Paul VI issued \"Mysterium fidei\", on the Eucharist. The encyclical critiques certain contemporary Eucharistic theologies and liturgical practices perceived to undermine traditional Catholic doctrine. The Church, according to Paul VI, has no reason to give up the deposit of faith in such a vital matter.\n\"Christi Matri\".\nOn 15 September 1966, Paul VI issued \"Christi Matri\", a request for the faithful to pray for peace during October 1966. As reasons for this call to prayer, Paul VI alludes to the Vietnam War and lists concern about \"the growing nuclear armaments race, the senseless nationalism, the racism, the obsession for revolution, the separations imposed upon citizens, the nefarious plots, the slaughter of innocent people.\"\n\"Populorum progressio\".\n\"Populorum progressio\", released on 26 March 1967, dealt with \"the development of peoples\" and that the world's economy should serve humanity and not just a few. It develops traditional principles of Catholic social teaching, including the right to a just wage, the right to security of employment, the right to fair and reasonable working conditions, the right to join a union, and the universal destination of goods.\nIn addition, \"Populorum progressio\" opines that real peace in the world is conditional on justice. He repeated his demands expressed in Bombay in 1964 for a large-scale World Development Organization as a matter of international justice and peace. He rejected notions of instigating revolution and force in changing economic conditions.\n\"Sacerdotalis caelibatus\".\n\"Sacerdotalis caelibatus\" (Latin for \"Of the celibate priesthood\"), promulgated on 24 June 1967, defends the Catholic Church's tradition of priestly celibacy in the West. Written in response to postconciliar questioning of the discipline of clerical celibacy, the encyclical reaffirms the historical ecclesiastical discipline that because celibacy is an ideal state, it continues to be mandatory for priests. To Catholic conceptions of the priesthood, celibacy symbolizes the reality of the kingdom of God amid modern society. The priestly celibacy is closely linked to the sacramental priesthood. However, during his pontificate, Paul VI was permissive in allowing bishops to grant laicisation of priests who wanted to leave the sacerdotal state. John Paul II changed this policy in 1980, and the 1983 Code of Canon Law made it explicit that only the Pope can, in exceptional circumstances, grant laicization.\n\"Humanae vitae\".\nOf his seven encyclicals, Pope Paul VI is best known for his encyclical \"Humanae vitae\" (\"Of Human Life\", subtitled \"On the Regulation of Birth\"), published on 25 July 1968, responding to the findings of the Pontifical Commission on Birth Control, affirming the minority report. The encyclical reaffirmed the Catholic Church's prior condemnation of artificial birth control. The expressed views of Paul VI reflected the teachings of his predecessors, especially Pius XI, Pius XII and John XXIII.\nThe encyclical teaches that marriage constitutes a union of the loving couple with a loving God, in which the two persons cooperate with God in the creation of a new person. For this reason, the encyclicals that the transmission of human life is a most serious role in which married people collaborate freely and responsibly with God. This divine partnership, according to Paul VI, does not allow for arbitrary human decisions, which may limit divine providence. The Pope does not paint an overly romantic picture of marriage: marital relations are a source of great joy, but also of difficulties and hardships. The question of human procreation exceeds in the view of Paul VI specific disciplines such as biology, psychology, demography or sociology. The reason for this, according to Paul VI, is that married love takes its origin from God, who \"is love\". From this basic dignity, he defines his position:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Love is total\u2014that very special form of personal friendship in which husband and wife generously share everything, allowing no unreasonable exceptions and not thinking solely of their own convenience. Whoever really loves his partner loves not only for what he receives, but loves that partner for the partner's own sake, content to be able to enrich the other with the gift of himself.\nThe reaction to the continued prohibitions of artificial birth control was mixed. The encyclical was welcomed in Italy, Spain, Portugal, and Poland. In Latin America, much support developed for the Pope and his encyclical. As World Bank president Robert McNamara declared at the 1968 Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group that countries permitting birth control practices would get preferential access to resources, doctors in La Paz, Bolivia, called it insulting that money should be exchanged for the conscience of a Catholic nation. In Colombia, Cardinal Archbishop An\u00edbal Mu\u00f1oz Duque declared, \"If American conditionality undermines Papal teachings, we prefer not to receive one cent.\" The Senate of Bolivia passed a resolution stating that \"Humanae vitae\" could be discussed in its implications for individual consciences but was of greatest significance because the papal document defended the rights of developing nations to determine their own population policies. The Jesuit journal \"Sic\" dedicated one edition to the encyclical with supportive contributions.\nPaul VI was concerned but not surprised by the adverse reaction in Western Europe and the United States. He fully anticipated this reaction to be a temporary one: \"Don't be afraid,\" he reportedly told Edouard Gagnon on the eve of the encyclical, \"in twenty years' time, they'll call me a prophet.\" His biography on the Vatican's website notes his reaffirmations of priestly celibacy and the traditional teaching on contraception that \"[t]he controversies over these two pronouncements tended to overshadow the last years of his pontificate\". Pope John Paul II later reaffirmed and expanded upon \"Humanae vitae\" with the encyclical \"Evangelium vitae\".\nEvangelism.\nBy taking the name of Paul, the newly elected pope showed his intention to take Paul the Apostle as a model for his papal ministry. In 1967, when he reorganised the Roman Curia, Pope Paul renamed the Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith as the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples. Pope Paul was the first pope in history to make apostolic journeys to other continents. The Pope chose the theme of evangelism for the synod of bishops in 1974. From materials generated by that synod, he composed the 1975 apostolic exhortation on evangelisation, \"Evangelii nuntiandi\".\nEcumenism and ecumenical relations.\nAfter the council, Paul VI contributed in two ways to the continued growth of ecumenical dialogue: The separated brothers and sisters, as he called them, could not contribute to the council as invited observers. After the council, many took the initiative to seek out their Catholic counterparts and the Pope in Rome, who welcomed such visits. However, the Catholic Church recognized from the many previous ecumenical encounters that much needed to be done within to be an open partner for ecumenism. To those entrusted with the highest and deepest truth, therefore, Paul VI believed that he had the most challenging part to communicate. Ecumenical dialogue, in the view of Paul VI, requires from a Catholic the whole person: one's entire reason, will, and heart. Paul VI, like Pius XII before him, was reluctant to give in on a lowest possible point. And yet, Paul felt compelled to admit his ardent Gospel-based desire to be everything to everybody and to help all people Being the successor of Peter, he felt the words of Christ, \"Do you love me more\" like a sharp knife penetrating to the marrow of his soul. These words meant to Paul VI love without limits, and they underscore the church's fundamental approach to ecumenism.\nOriental Orthodox and Eastern Orthodox Apostolic.\nPaul VI visited the Eastern Orthodox Apostolic Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantinople in 1964 and 1967. He was the first pope since the ninth century to visit the East, labelling the Eastern Churches as sister churches. He was also the first pope in centuries to meet the heads of various Eastern Orthodox communities. Notably, his meeting with Ecumenical Patriarch Athenagoras I in 1964 in Jerusalem led to rescinding the excommunications of the Great Schism, which took place in 1054.\nThis was a significant step towards restoring communion between Rome and Constantinople. It produced the Catholic-Eastern Orthodox Apostolic Joint Declaration of 1965, read on 7 December 1965, simultaneously at a public meeting of the Second Vatican Council in Rome and at a special ceremony in Istanbul. The declaration did not end the schism but showed a desire for greater reconciliation between the two churches. In May 1973, the Coptic Patriarch Shenouda III of Alexandria from the Coptic Orthodox Church visited the Vatican, where he met three times with Pope Paul VI. A common declaration and a joint creed issued after the visit proclaimed unity in a number of theological issues, but also that other theological differences \"since the year 451\" \"cannot be ignored\" while both traditions work to a greater unity.\nAnglicans.\nPaul VI was the first pope to receive an Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury, Michael Ramsey, in official audience as Head of Church, after the private audience visit of Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher to Pope John XXIII on 2 December 1960. Ramsey met Paul three times during his visit and opened the Anglican Centre in Rome to increase their mutual knowledge. He praised Paul VI and his contributions in the service of unity. Paul replied, \"By entering into our house, you are entering your own house; we are happy to open our door and heart to you.\" The two church leaders signed a joint declaration, ending past disputes and outlining a common future agenda.\nCardinal Augustin Bea, the head of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity, added at the end of the visit, \"Let us move forward in Christ. God wants it. Humanity is waiting for it.\" Unmoved by a harsh condemnation by the Congregation of Faith on mixed marriages precisely at this time of the visit, Paul VI and Ramsey appointed a preparatory commission which was to put the common agenda into practice on such issues as mixed marriages. This resulted in a joint Malta declaration, the first joint agreement on the Creed since the Reformation. Paul VI was a good friend of the Anglican Church, which he described as \"our beloved sister Church.\" This description was unique to Paul and not used by later popes.\nProtestants.\nIn 1965, Paul VI decided to create a joint working group with the World Council of Churches to map all possible avenues of dialogue and cooperation. Eight sessions were held in the following three years, resulting in many joint proposals. It was proposed to work closely together in social justice and development and \"Third World\" issues such as hunger and poverty. On the religious side, it was agreed to be shared in the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, which would be held annually. The joint working group was to prepare texts which were to be used by all Christians. On 19 July 1968, the meeting of the World Council of Churches took place in Uppsala, Sweden, which Pope Paul called a sign of the times. He sent his blessing ecumenically: \"May the Lord bless everything you do for the case of Christian Unity.\" The World Council of Churches decided on including Catholic theologians in its committees, provided they have the backing of the Vatican.\nThe Lutherans were the first Protestant church offering a dialogue to the Catholic Church in September 1964 in Reykjav\u00edk, Iceland. It resulted in joint study groups of several issues. The dialogue with the Methodist Church began in October 1965, after its representatives officially applauded the past five years' remarkable changes, friendship, and cooperation. The Reformed Churches entered four years later into a dialogue with the Catholic Church. The President of the Lutheran World Federation and member of the central committee of the World Council of Churches Fredrik A. Schiotz stated during the 450th anniversary of the Reformation, that earlier commemorations were viewed almost as a triumph. He welcomed the announcement of Pope Paul VI to celebrate the 1900th anniversary of the death of the Apostle Peter and Apostle Paul, and promised participation and co-operation in the festivities.\nPaul VI supported the new-found harmony and cooperation with Protestants on many levels. When Cardinal Augustin Bea went to see him for permission for a joint Catholic-Protestant translation of the Bible with Protestant Bible societies, the Pope walked towards him and exclaimed, \"As far as the cooperation with Bible societies is concerned, I am totally in favour.\" He issued a formal approval on Pentecost 1967, the feast on which the Holy Spirit descended on the Christians, overcoming all linguistic difficulties, according to Christian tradition.\nBeatifications and canonisations.\nPaul VI beatified 38 individuals in his pontificate and canonized 84 saints in 21 causes. Among the beatifications were Maximilian Kolbe (1971) and the Korean Martyrs (1968), Nikola Taveli\u0107 (1970) and the Ugandan Martyrs (1964).\nIn 1970, Paul VI also named the first female Doctors of the Church, Teresa of \u00c1vila, which he called \"Doctor orationis\" (\"Doctor of Prayer\"), and Catherine of Siena.\nConsistories.\nPope Paul VI held six consistories between 1965 and 1977 that raised 143 men to the cardinalate in his fifteen years as pope:\nThe successive three popes were created cardinals by him. His immediate successor, Albino Luciani, who took the name Pope John Paul I, was created a cardinal in the consistory of 5 March 1973. Karol J\u00f3zef Wojty\u0142a (later Pope John Paul II) was created a cardinal in the consistory of 26 June 1967. Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI) was made a cardinal in the small four-appointment consistory of 27 June 1977 that was the Pope's last. Paul VI named \u0160t\u011bp\u00e1n Trochta and Iuliu Hossu as cardinals \" in 1969 and only revealed Hossu's name in 1973 after Hossu died while formally naming Trochta. Similarly, Paul VI named both Franti\u0161ek Tom\u00e1\u0161ek and Joseph-Marie Tr\u1ecbnh Nh\u01b0 Khu\u00ea \"in pectore\"\" in 1976, only announcing the former in 1977 and the latter at the 1976 consistory itself, a month after having announced it and his hidden selection.\nWith the six consistories, Paul VI continued the internationalisation policies started by Pius XII in 1946 and continued by John XXIII. In his 1976 consistory, five of twenty cardinals originated from Africa, one of them a son of a tribal chief with fifty wives. Several prominent Latin Americans like Eduardo Francisco Pironio of Argentina; Luis Aponte Martinez of Puerto Rico, Eug\u00eanio de Ara\u00fajo Sales and Aloisio Lorscheider from Brazil were also elevated by him. There were voices within the church at the time saying that the European period of the church was coming to a close, a view shared by Britain's Cardinal Basil Hume. At the same time, the members of the College of Cardinals lost some of their previous influences, after Paul VI decreed, that membership by bishops in committees and other bodies of the Roman Curia would not be limited to cardinals. The age limit of eighty years imposed by the Pope, a numerical increase of Cardinals by almost 100%, and a reform of the formal dress of the \"Princes of the Church\" further contributed to a service-oriented perception of Cardinals under his pontificate. The increased number of Cardinals from the Third World and the papal emphasis on related issues were nevertheless welcomed by many in Western Europe. The consistory of 1969 was the largest consistory since 1946 and would be surpassed later in 2001.\nIn 1965, the theologian Romano Guardini declined an invitation by Paul VI to be inducted into the College of Cardinals. In 1967, he also intended to nominate Pietro Sigismondi, but he died a month before the consistory was held. Also in 1967, according to the memoirs of Louis Bouyer, Paul VI intended to name Bouyer to the cardinalate after the Second Vatican Council; however, Paul VI was forced to abandon the idea after realizing that the French episcopacy would not warmly receive the appointment since Bouyer had been very critical of many of the positions taken by the French bishops. Other sources indicate that the Pope intended to name his friend Jacques Maritain to the cardinalate in 1969. Not only did Maritain decline, but if he had been elevated, it would have made him the first lay cardinal since 1858. On 22 February 1969, Paul VI and Monsignor Hieronymus Menges discussed nominating Iuliu Hossu and \u00c1ron M\u00e1rton to the cardinalate (Pius XII dropped an idea to name M\u00e1rton to the cardinalate in 1946), however, M\u00e1rton's potential elevation was not considered acceptable, hence, Hossu was named \"in pectore\" since the Romanians would not have accepted Hossu either.\nFinal years and death.\nAllegations of homosexuality.\nIn 1976, Paul VI became the first pontiff in the modern era to deny the accusation of homosexuality. On 29 December 1975, the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document entitled \"Persona Humana: Declaration on Certain Questions concerning Sexual Ethics\", that reaffirmed church teaching that premarital or extramarital sex, homosexual activity, and masturbation are sinful acts. In response, Roger Peyrefitte, who had already written in two of his books that Paul VI had a longtime homosexual relationship, repeated his charges in a magazine interview with a French gay magazine that, when reprinted in Italian, brought the rumours to a wider public and caused an uproar. He said that the Pope was a hypocrite who had a long-term sexual relationship with an actor. Widespread rumours identified the actor as Paolo Carlini, who had a small part in the Audrey Hepburn film \"Roman Holiday\" (1953). In a brief address to a crowd of approximately 20,000 in St Peter's Square on 18 April 1976, Paul VI called the charges \"horrible and slanderous insinuations\" and appealed for prayers on his behalf. Special prayers for the Pope were said in all Italian Catholic churches in \"a day of consolation\". The charges have resurfaced periodically. In 1994, Franco Bellegrandi, a former Vatican honour chamberlain and correspondent for the Vatican newspaper \"L'Osservatore Romano\", alleged that Paul VI had been blackmailed and had promoted other gay men to positions of power within the Vatican. In 2006, the newspaper \"L'Espresso\" reported that the private papers of police commander General Giorgio Manes confirmed the blackmail story as true, and that Italian Prime Minister Aldo Moro had been asked to help.\nHealth.\nPaul VI had been in good health prior to his pontifical election. His health following his papal election took a turn when he needed to undergo a serious operation to treat an enlarged prostate. The Pope procrastinated in this but relented in November 1967; the operation took place on a simple table in an improvised operating theatre in the papal apartments by a team led by Professor Pietro Valdoni. The Vatican was delicate in their description of what the Pope underwent and referred to it as \"the malaise from which the Holy Father had been suffering for weeks\". As a result of the delay in having the operation, the Pope had to wear a catheter for a period following the operation and still was by December.\nThe Pope discussed business from his bed about 48 hours after the operation with Cardinal Amleto Giovanni Cicognani and at that point was off intravenous feeding in favour of orange juice and hot broth. Cardinal Cicognani said the Pope was \"in good general condition\" and that he spoke in a \"clear and firm voice\". The Pope's two brothers also visited him at his bedside following a \"tranquil night\" for the Pope. The doctors also reported the Pope's condition to have been \"excellent\".\nKidnapping and killing of Aldo Moro.\nOn 16 March 1978, former Italian prime minister Aldo Moro\u2014a friend of Paul VI's from his FUCI student days\u2014was kidnapped by a far-left Italian terrorist group known as the Red Brigades. The kidnapping kept the country and the Pope in suspense for 55 days. On 20 April, Moro directly appealed to the Pope to intervene as Pope Pius XII had intervened in the case of Professor Giuliano Vassalli in the same situation. The eighty-year-old Paul VI wrote a letter to the Red Brigades:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSome in the Italian government accused the Pope of treating the Red Brigades too kindly. Paul VI continued looking for ways to pay ransom for Moro, but his efforts were fruitless. On 9 May, the bullet-riddled body of Aldo Moro was found in a car in Rome. Pope Paul VI later celebrated his State Funeral Mass.\nFinal days.\nPope Paul VI left the Vatican to go to the papal summer residence, the Palace of Castel Gandolfo, on 14 July 1978, visiting on the way the tomb of Cardinal Giuseppe Pizzardo, who had introduced him to the Vatican half a century earlier. Although he was sick, he agreed to see the new Italian President Sandro Pertini for over two hours. In the evening he watched a Western on television, happy only when he saw \"horses, the most beautiful animals that God had created.\" He had breathing problems and needed oxygen. On Sunday, at the Feast of the Transfiguration, he was tired, but wanted to say the Angelus. He was neither able nor permitted to do so and instead stayed in bed, his temperature rising.\nDeath.\nFrom his bed he participated in Sunday Mass at 18:00. After receiving communion, the Pope suffered a massive heart attack, after which he lived on for three more hours. On 6 August 1978 at 21:41, Paul VI died in Castel Gandolfo. Before he died, the pontiff had been lucid after the first heart attack. An hour before his death, he said he felt dizzy and asked those present to continue the prayers in his stead. Present at his bedside at the time of his death were Cardinal Jean-Marie Villot, Bishop Giuseppe Caprio, and his personal secretary Pasquale Macchi, as well as two nuns and his personal physician. By the time the Pope died, he was already confined to bed due to a flare up in his chronic joint arthritis and could not get up to personally celebrate the Mass. Upon the initial heart attack, the Pope was immediately given oxygen; however, the Holy See indicated that his heart condition was aggravated by a pulmonary edema, or the seeping of fluid into the lungs.\nSyria declared nine days of mourning; Egypt declared seven days of mourning; Bolivia declared five days of mourning; Spain declared four days of mourning; Brazil, Italy Lebanon Portugal, Guatemala and Zaire declared three days of mourning; The Philippines declared one day of mourning.\nPaul VI left a will and a spiritual testament. Those were released by the Vatican shortly after his death. In it, he asked for his burial to be simple, and that his correspondence, personal memos and other writings be destroyed. He also legated all his belongings to the Vatican.\nPaul VI does not have an ornate sarcophagus, but is buried in a grave beneath the floor of Saint Peter's Basilica, in the Vatican Grottoes near the tombs of other popes.\nHis position mirrors the statements attributed to Pius XI: \"a Pope may suffer but he must be able to function\" and by Pius XII. Pope Paul, reflecting on \"Hamlet\", wrote the following in a private note in 1978:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What is my state of mind? Am I Hamlet? Or Don Quixote? On the left? On the right? I do not think I have been properly understood. I am filled with 'great joy (Superabundo gaudio)' With all our affliction, I am overjoyed (2 Cor 2:4).\nHis confessor, the Jesuit Paolo Dezza, said that \"this pope is a man of great joy\", and that:\nIf Paul VI was not a saint, when he was elected Pope, he became one during his pontificate. I was able to witness not only with what energy and dedication he toiled for Christ and the Church but also and above all, how much he suffered for Christ and the Church. I always admired not only his deep inner resignation but also his constant abandonment to divine providence. \nCanonisation.\nThe diocesan process for beatification for Paul VI\u2014titled then as a Servant of God\u2014opened in Rome on 11 May 1993 under Pope John Paul II after the \"nihil obstat\" (\"nothing against\") was declared the previous 18 March. Cardinal Camillo Ruini opened the diocesan process in Rome. The title of Servant of God is the first of four steps toward possible canonisation. The diocesan process concluded its business on 18 March 1998.\nOn 20 December 2012, Pope Benedict XVI, in an audience with the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints Angelo Amato, declared that the late pontiff had lived a life of heroic virtue, which means that he could be called \"Venerable\".\nOn 12 December 2013, Vatican officials comprising a medical panel approved a supposed miracle that was attributed to the intercession of the late pontiff, which was the curing of an unborn child in California, U.S.A in the 1990s. This miracle was investigated in California from 7 July 2003 until 12 July 2004. It was expected that Pope Francis would approve the miracle in the near future, thus, warranting the beatification of the late pontiff. In February 2014, it was reported that the consulting Vatican theologians to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints recognised the miracle attributed to the late pontiff on 18 February.\nOn 24 April 2014, it was reported in the Italian magazine \"Credere\" that the late pope could possibly be beatified on 19 October 2014. This report from the magazine further stated that several cardinals and bishops would meet on 5 May to confirm the miracle that had previously been approved, and then present it to Pope Francis who may sign the decree for beatification shortly after that. The Congregation for the Causes of Saints' cardinal and bishop members held that meeting and positively concluded that the healing was indeed a miracle that could be attributed to the late pope. The matter would then be presented by the Cardinal Prefect to the Pope for approval.\nThe second miracle required for his canonisation was reported to have occurred in 2014 not long after his beatification. The vice-postulator, Antonio Lanzoni, suggested that the canonisation could be approved in the near future which would allow for the canonisation sometime in spring 2016; this did not materialise because the investigations were still ongoing at that stage. It was further reported in January 2017 that Pope Francis was considering canonising Paul VI either in that year, or in 2018 (marking 40 years since the late pope's death), without the second miracle required for sainthood. This too was proven false since the miracle from 2014 was being presented to the competent Vatican officials for assessment.\nThe late pope's liturgical feast day was then established to be celebrated on the date of his birth, 26 September, rather than the day of his death, as is usual since the latter falls on the Feast of the Transfiguration, a major feast in the liturgical year.\nThe final miracle needed for the late pope's canonisation was investigated in Verona, the investigation being closed on 11 March 2017. The miracle in question involves the healing of an unborn girl, Amanda Maria Paola (born 25 December 2014), after her parents (Vanna and Alberto) went to the Church of Santa Maria delle Grazie, Brescia, to pray for the late pope's intercession the previous 29 October, just ten days after Paul VI was beatified. The miracle regarding Amanda was the fact that she had survived for months despite the fact that the placenta was broken. On 23 September, a month before the beatification, Amanda's mother Vanna Pironato (aged 35) was hospitalised due to the premature rupture of the placenta, with doctors declaring her pregnancy to be at great risk. The documents regarding the alleged miracle were by then in Rome awaiting approval, with his canonisation depending on the miracle's confirmation. Theologians advising the Congregation for the Causes of Saints voiced their approval to this miracle on 13 December 2017 (following the confirmation of doctors on 26 October) and had this sent to the cardinal and bishop members of the C.C.S. who had to vote on the cause also before taking it to Pope Francis for his approval. Brescian media reported the canonisation could take place in October 2018 to coincide with the synod on the youth. The cardinal and bishop members of the C.C.S. issued their unanimous approval to this miracle in their meeting held on 6 February 2018. Pope Francis confirmed that the canonisation would be approved and celebrated in 2018 in remarks made during a meeting with Roman priests on 14 February 2018. On 6 March 2018, the Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin, speaking at a plenary meeting of the International Catholic Migration Commission in Rome, confirmed that Paul VI would be canonised in at the close of the synod on 28 October 2018. On 6 March, the Pope confirmed the healing as a miracle, thereby approving Paul VI's canonisation; a consistory of cardinals on 19 May 2018 determined that the official date for Paul VI's canonisation, along with that of the assassinated Archbishop of San Salvador, Oscar Romero, would be 14 October 2018.\nPaul VI's liturgical feast day, which had previously been celebrated on 26 September, the date of his birth, was moved to 29 May, the day of his priestly ordination, in 2019.\nLegacy and controversies.\nIn 2011, newly uncovered documents went up for auction and contained, among other items, proof that beginning in September 1950, while then serving as deputy of foreign affairs for the Vatican, Montini worked with former Nazis and members of the Spanish military in planning for a mercenary style army to operate within the African continent. Another revelation was a letter from the priest of former Nazi Lieutenant Colonel Otto Skorzeny to Montini in which the priest praised Montini's efforts to fund, harbour, and give safe passage to former Nazis evading Allied capture and punishment.\nPope Paul VI continued the opening and internationalisation of the church that began under Pius XII and implemented the reforms of John XXIII and the Second Vatican Council. Yet, unlike these popes, Paul VI faced criticism throughout his papacy from both traditionalists and liberals for steering a middle course during Vatican II and during the implementation of its reforms thereafter. He expressed a desire for peace during the Vietnam War.\nOn basic Church teachings, the Pope was unwavering. On the tenth anniversary of \"Humanae vitae\", he reconfirmed this teaching. In his style and methodology, he was a disciple of Pius XII, whom he deeply revered. He suffered for the attacks on Pius XII for his alleged silences during the Holocaust. Pope Paul VI was said to have been less intellectually gifted than his predecessors: he was not credited with an encyclopaedic memory, nor a gift for languages, nor the brilliant writing style of Pius XII, nor did he have the charisma and outpouring love, sense of humor and human warmth of John XXIII. He took on himself the unfinished reform work of these two popes, bringing them diligently with great humility and common sense and without much fanfare to conclusion. In doing so, Paul VI saw himself following in the footsteps of the Apostle Paul, who, being torn to several directions, said, \"I am attracted to two sides at once, because the Cross always divides.\"\nPaul VI refused to excommunicate opponents. He admonished but did not punish those with other views. The new theological freedoms which he fostered\u00a0resulted in a pluralism of opinions and uncertainties among the faithful. New demands were voiced, which were taboo at the council: the reintegration of divorced Catholics, the sacramental character of the confession, and the role of women in the church and its ministries. Conservatives complained \"women wanted to be priests, priests wanted to get married, bishops became regional popes and theologians claimed absolute teaching authority. Protestants claimed equality, homosexuals and the divorced called for full acceptance.\" Changes such as the reorientation of the liturgy, alterations to the ordinary of the Mass, alterations to the liturgical calendar in the motu proprio \"Mysterii Paschalis\", and the relocation of the tabernacle were controversial among some Catholics.\nWhile the total number of Catholics increased during the pontificate of Paul VI, the number of priests did not keep up. In the United States, at beginning of Paul's reign there were almost 1,600 priestly ordinations a year, while the number dropped to nearly 900 a year at his death. The number of seminarians at the same time dropped by three quarters. More pronounced declines were evident in religious life where the number of sisters and brothers declined sharply. Infant baptisms began to decline almost at once after Paul's election and did not begin to recover until 1980. In the same period adult conversions to the church declined by a third. While marriages increased annulments also increased but at a much greater rate. There was a 1,322% increase in declarations of nullity between 1968 and 1970 alone. While 65% of US Catholics went to Sunday Mass in 1965, that percentage had slipped to 40% by the time of Paul's death. Similar collapses occurred in other developed countries.\nPaul VI renounced many traditional symbols of the papacy and the Catholic Church; some of his changes to the papal dress were temporarily reversed by Pope Benedict XVI in the early 21st century. Refusing a Vatican army of colourful military uniforms from past centuries, he got rid of them, leaving only the Swiss Guard in function. He became the first pope to visit five continents. Paul VI systematically continued and completed the efforts of his predecessors, to turn the Euro-centric church into a church of the world, by integrating the bishops from all continents in its government and in the Synods which he convened. His 6 August 1967 motu proprio \"Pro Comperto Sane\" opened the Roman Curia to the bishops of the world. Until then, only Cardinals could be leading members of the Curia.\nSome critiqued Paul VI's decision; the newly created Synod of Bishops had an advisory role only and could not make decisions on their own, although the Council decided exactly that. During the pontificate of Paul VI, five such synods took place, and he is on record of implementing all their decisions. Related questions were raised about the new National Bishop Conferences, which became mandatory after Vatican II. Others questioned his Ostpolitik and contacts with Communism and the deals he engaged in for the faithful.\nPaul VI suffered from the responses within the church to \"Humanae vitae\". Most regions and bishops supported the pontiff, including notable support from Patrick O'Boyle. However, a small part of the church, especially in the Netherlands, Canada, and Germany openly disagreed with the Pope, which deeply wounded him for the rest of his life.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24029", "revid": "698909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24029", "title": "Peptide", "text": "Short chains of 2\u201350 amino acids\nPeptides are short chains of amino acids linked by peptide bonds. A polypeptide is a longer, continuous, unbranched peptide chain. Polypeptides that have a molecular mass of 10,000 Da or more are called proteins. Chains of fewer than twenty amino acids are called oligopeptides, and include dipeptides, tripeptides, and tetrapeptides. Proteins are polypeptides, i.e. large peptides.\nAmino acids comprise peptides as residues. Peptides are usually \"linear\" with an N-terminal (amine group) and C-terminal (carboxyl group) residue at the ends. Cyclic peptides are a distinct class. \nClassification.\nPeptides have been classified according to their sources and functions. Some groups of peptides include plant peptides, bacterial/antibiotic peptides, fungal peptides, invertebrate peptides, amphibian/skin peptides, venom peptides, cancer/anticancer peptides, vaccine peptides, immune/inflammatory peptides, brain peptides, endocrine peptides, ingestive peptides, gastrointestinal peptides, cardiovascular peptides, renal peptides, respiratory peptides, opioid peptides, neurotrophic peptides, and blood\u2013brain peptides.\nSome ribosomal peptides are subject to proteolysis. These function, typically in higher organisms, as hormones and signaling molecules. Some microbes produce peptides as antibiotics, such as microcins and bacteriocins.\nPeptides frequently have post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation, hydroxylation, sulfonation, palmitoylation, glycosylation, and disulfide formation. In general, peptides are linear, although lariat structures have been observed. More exotic manipulations do occur, such as racemization of L-amino acids to D-amino acids in platypus venom.\n\"Nonribosomal peptides\" are assembled by enzymes, not the ribosome. A common non-ribosomal peptide is glutathione, a component of the antioxidant defenses of most aerobic organisms. Other nonribosomal peptides are most common in unicellular organisms, plants, and fungi and are synthesized by modular enzyme complexes called \"nonribosomal peptide synthetases\".\nThese complexes are often laid out in a similar fashion, and they can contain many different modules to perform a diverse set of chemical manipulations on the developing product. These peptides are often cyclic and can have highly complex cyclic structures, although linear nonribosomal peptides are also common. Since the system is closely related to the machinery for building fatty acids and polyketides, hybrid compounds are often found. The presence of oxazoles or thiazoles often indicates that the compound was synthesized in this fashion.\nPeptones are derived from animal milk or meat digested by proteolysis. In addition to containing small peptides, the resulting material includes fats, metals, salts, vitamins, and many other biological compounds. Peptones are used in nutrient media for growing bacteria and fungi.\n\"Peptide fragments\" refer to fragments of proteins that are used to identify or quantify the source protein. Often these are the products of enzymatic degradation performed in the laboratory on a controlled sample, but can also be forensic or paleontological samples that have been degraded by natural effects.\nProtein-peptide interactions.\nPeptides can perform interactions with proteins and other macromolecules. They are responsible for numerous important functions in human cells, such as cell signaling, and act as immune modulators. Indeed, studies have reported that 15-40% of all protein-protein interactions in human cells are mediated by peptides. Additionally, it is estimated that at least 10% of the pharmaceutical market is based on peptide products.\nExample families.\nThe peptide families in this section are ribosomal peptides, usually with hormonal activity. All of these peptides are synthesized by cells as longer \"propeptides\" or \"proproteins\" and truncated prior to exiting the cell. They are released into the bloodstream where they perform their signaling functions.\nTerminology.\nLength.\nSeveral terms related to peptides have no strict length definitions, and there is often overlap in their usage:\nNumber of amino acids.\nPeptides and proteins are often described by the number of amino acids in their chain, e.g. a protein with 158 amino acids may be described as a \"158 amino-acid-long protein\".\nPeptides of specific shorter lengths are named using IUPAC numerical multiplier prefixes:\nThe same words are also used to describe a group of residues in a larger polypeptide (\"e.g.\", RGD motif).\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24030", "revid": "1318567733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24030", "title": "Pet (disambiguation)", "text": "A pet is an animal kept primarily for company, protection or entertainment.\nPet or PET may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "24031", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24031", "title": "Positron emmision tomography", "text": ""}
{"id": "24032", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24032", "title": "Positron emission tomography", "text": "Medical imaging technique\nPositron emission tomography (PET) is a functional imaging technique that uses radioactive substances known as radiotracers to visualize and measure changes in metabolic processes, and in other physiological activities including blood flow, regional chemical composition, and absorption.\nDifferent tracers are used for various imaging purposes, depending on the target process within the body, such as:\nPET is a common imaging technique, a medical scintillography technique used in nuclear medicine. A radiopharmaceutical\u2014a radioisotope attached to a drug\u2014is injected into the body as a tracer. When the radiopharmaceutical undergoes beta plus decay, a positron is emitted, and when the positron interacts with an ordinary electron, the two particles annihilate and two gamma rays are emitted in opposite directions. These gamma rays are detected by two gamma cameras to form a three-dimensional image.\nPET scanners can incorporate a computed tomography scanner (CT) and are known as PET\u2013CT scanners. PET scan images can be reconstructed using a CT scan performed using one scanner during the same session.\nOne of the disadvantages of a PET scanner is its high initial cost and ongoing operating costs.\nUses.\nPET is both a medical and research tool used in pre-clinical and clinical settings. It is used heavily in the imaging of tumors and the search for metastases within the field of clinical oncology, and for the clinical diagnosis of certain diffuse brain diseases such as those causing various types of dementias. PET is valued as a research tool to learn and enhance knowledge of the normal human brain, heart function, and support drug development. PET is also used in pre-clinical studies using animals. It allows repeated investigations into the same subjects over time, where subjects can act as their own control and substantially reduces the numbers of animals required for a given study. This approach allows research studies to reduce the sample size needed while increasing the statistical quality of its results.\nPhysiological processes result in anatomical changes within the body. Because PET can detect biochemical activity and the expression of certain proteins, it can provide molecular-level information long before any anatomical alterations become visible. PET achieves this by using radiolabelled molecular probes, which are taken up at varying rates depending on the tissue. Regional tracer uptake in different anatomical structures can then be visualized and approximately quantified based on the amount of injected positron-emitting tracer detected in the scan, via metrics like the standardized uptake value.\nIt is possible to acquire PET images using a conventional dual-head gamma camera fitted with a coincidence detector. The quality of gamma-camera PET imaging is lower, and the scans take longer to acquire.\nAlternative methods of medical imaging include single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and ultrasound. SPECT is an imaging technique similar to PET that uses radioligands to detect molecules in the body.\nOncology.\nPET scanning with the radiotracer [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) is widely used in clinical oncology. FDG is a glucose analog that is taken up by glucose-using cells and phosphorylated by hexokinase (whose mitochondrial form is significantly elevated in rapidly growing malignant tumors). Metabolic trapping of the radioactive glucose molecule allows the PET scan to be utilized. The concentrations of imaged FDG tracer indicate tissue metabolic activity as it corresponds to the regional glucose uptake. FDG is used to explore the possibility of cancer spreading to other body sites (cancer metastasis). These FDG PET scans for detecting cancer metastasis are the most common in standard medical care (representing 90% of current scans). The same tracer may also be used for the diagnosis of types of dementia. Less often, other radioactive tracers, usually but not always labelled with fluorine-18 (18F), are used to image the tissue concentration of different kinds of molecules of interest inside the body.\nBecause the hydroxy group that is replaced by fluorine-18 to generate FDG is required for the next step in glucose metabolism in all cells, no further reactions occur in FDG. Furthermore, most tissues (with the notable exception of liver and kidneys) cannot remove the phosphate added by hexokinase. This means that FDG will remain trapped in any cell that takes it up until it decays, since phosphorylated sugars, due to their ionic charge, cannot exit from the cell. This results in intense radiolabeling of tissues with high glucose uptake, such as the normal brain, liver, kidneys, and most cancers, which have a higher glucose uptake than most normal tissue due to the Warburg effect. As a result, FDG-PET can be used for diagnosis, staging, and monitoring treatment of cancers, particularly in Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, and lung cancer.\nA 2020 review of research on the use of PET for Hodgkin lymphoma found evidence that negative findings in interim PET scans are linked to higher overall survival and progression-free survival; however, the certainty of the available evidence was moderate for survival, and very low for progression-free survival.\nA few other isotopes and radiotracers are slowly being introduced into oncology for specific purposes. For example, 11C-labelled metomidate (11C-metomidate) has been used to detect tumors of adrenocortical origin. Also, fluorodopa (FDOPA) PET/CT (also called F-18-DOPA PET/CT) has proven to be a more sensitive alternative to finding and also localizing pheochromocytoma than the iobenguane (MIBG) scan. For prostate cancer, there is growing interest in using a PET scan with radionuclides delivered via prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) targeting ligand, a strategy which allows imaging the primary tumor and surrounding metastases in one scan. The combination is referred to as a PSMA scan.\nNeuroimaging.\nNeurology.\nPET imaging with oxygen-15 indirectly measures blood flow to the brain. In this method, increased radioactivity signal indicates increased blood flow which is assumed to correlate with increased brain activity. Because of its two-minute half-life, oxygen-15 must be piped directly from a medical cyclotron for such uses, which is difficult.\nPET imaging with FDG takes advantage of the fact that the brain is normally a rapid user of glucose. Standard FDG PET of the brain measures regional glucose use and can be used in neuropathological diagnosis.\nBrain pathologies such as Alzheimer's disease greatly decrease brain metabolism of both glucose and oxygen in tandem. Therefore FDG PET of the brain may also be used to successfully differentiate Alzheimer's disease from other dementing processes, and also to make early diagnoses of Alzheimer's disease. The advantage of FDG PET for these uses is its much wider availability. In addition, some other fluorine-18 based radioactive tracers can be used to detect amyloid-beta plaques, a potential biomarker for Alzheimer's in the brain. These include florbetapir, flutemetamol, Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) and florbetaben.\nPET imaging with FDG can also be used for localization of \"seizure focus\". A seizure focus will appear as hypometabolic during an interictal scan. Several radiotracers (i.e. radioligands) have been developed for PET that are ligands for specific neuroreceptor subtypes such as [11C]raclopride, [18F]fallypride and [18F]desmethoxyfallypride for dopamine D2/D3 receptors; [11C]McN5652 and [11C]DASB for serotonin transporters; [18F]mefway for serotonin 5HT1A receptors; and [18F]nifene for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors or enzyme substrates (e.g. 6-FDOPA for the AADC enzyme). These agents permit the visualization of neuroreceptor pools in the context of a plurality of neuropsychiatric and neurologic illnesses.\nPET may also be used for the diagnosis of hippocampal sclerosis, which causes epilepsy. FDG, and the less common tracers flumazenil and MPPF have been explored for this purpose. If the sclerosis is unilateral (right hippocampus or left hippocampus), FDG uptake can be compared with the healthy side. Even if the diagnosis is difficult with MRI, it may be diagnosed with PET.\nThe development of a number of novel probes for non-invasive, \"in-vivo\" PET imaging of neuroaggregate in human brain has brought amyloid imaging close to clinical use. The earliest amyloid imaging probes included [18F]FDDNP, developed at the University of California, Los Angeles, and Pittsburgh compound B (PiB), developed at the University of Pittsburgh. These probes permit the visualization of amyloid plaques in the brains of Alzheimer's patients and could assist clinicians in making a positive clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease pre-mortem and aid in the development of novel anti-amyloid therapies. \n[11C]polymethylpentene (PMP) is a novel radiopharmaceutical used in PET imaging to determine the activity of the acetylcholinergic neurotransmitter system by acting as a substrate for acetylcholinesterase. Post-mortem examination of Alzheimer's patients has shown decreased levels of acetylcholinesterase. [11C]PMP is used to map the acetylcholinesterase activity in the brain, which could allow for premortem diagnoses of Alzheimer's disease and assistance in monitoring treatments. Avid Radiopharmaceuticals has developed and commercialized a compound called florbetapir that uses the longer-lasting radionuclide fluorine-18 to detect amyloid plaques using PET scans.\nPsychiatry and neuropsychopharmacology.\nNumerous compounds that bind selectively to neuroreceptors of interest in biological psychiatry have been radiolabeled with C-11 or F-18. Radioligands that bind to dopamine receptors (D1, D2, reuptake transporter), serotonin receptors (5HT1A, 5HT2A, reuptake transporter), opioid receptors (mu and kappa), cholinergic receptors (nicotinic and muscarinic) and other sites have been used successfully in studies with human subjects. Studies have been performed examining the state of these receptors in patients compared to healthy controls in schizophrenia, substance abuse, mood disorders and other psychiatric conditions.\nStereotactic surgery and radiosurgery.\nPET can also be used in image guided surgery for the treatment of intracranial tumors, arteriovenous malformations and other surgically treatable conditions.\nCardiology.\nCaridac PET can be used to assess myocardial blood flow, and can also be used to diagnose heart conditions such as coronary artery disease, cardiac amyloidosis, and cardiac sarcoidosis. It has also been used to test the efficacy of novel anti-atherosclerosis therapies. Commonly used radiotracers in cardiac PET are Rubidium-82, Nitrogen-13 ammonia and Oxygen-15 water.\nCompared to cardiac SPECT, another commonly used nuclear medicine imaging modality in cardiology, PET offers superior image quality and improved diagnostic accuracy for coronary artery disease. Despite the technical advantages of PET over SPECT, there is some debate over which modality is more cost effective: SPECT scanners are generally cheaper, and have a wider install base, though some studies have found that using PET results in less downstream healthcare utilisation.\nInfectious diseases.\nImaging infections with molecular imaging technologies can improve diagnosis and treatment follow-up. Clinically, PET has been widely used to image bacterial infections using FDG to identify the infection-associated inflammatory response. Three different PET contrast agents have been developed to image bacterial infections in vivo are [18F]maltose, [18F]maltohexaose, and [18F]2-fluorodeoxysorbitol (FDS). FDS has the added benefit of being able to target only Enterobacteriaceae.\nBio-distribution studies.\nIn pre-clinical trials, a new drug can be radiolabeled and injected into animals. Such scans are referred to as biodistribution studies. The information regarding drug uptake, retention and elimination over time can be obtained quickly and cost-effectively compare to the older technique of killing and dissecting the animals. Commonly, drug occupancy at a purported site of action can be inferred indirectly by competition studies between unlabeled drug and radiolabeled compounds to bind with specificity to the site. A single radioligand can be used this way to test many potential drug candidates for the same target. A related technique involves scanning with radioligands that compete with an endogenous (naturally occurring) substance at a given receptor to demonstrate that a drug causes the release of the natural substance.\nSmall animal imaging.\nA miniature animal PET has been constructed that is small enough for a fully conscious rat to be scanned. This RatCAP (rat conscious animal PET) allows animals to be scanned without the confounding effects of anesthesia. PET scanners designed specifically for imaging rodents, often referred to as microPET, as well as scanners for small primates, are marketed for academic and pharmaceutical research. The scanners are based on microminiature scintillators and amplified avalanche photodiodes (APDs) through a system that uses single-chip silicon photomultipliers.\nIn 2018 the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine became the first veterinary center to employ a small clinical PET scanner as a scanner for clinical (rather than research) animal diagnosis. Because of cost as well as the marginal utility of detecting cancer metastases in companion animals (the primary use of this modality), veterinary PET scanning is expected to be rarely available in the immediate future.\nMusculo-skeletal imaging.\nPET imaging has been used for imaging muscles and bones. FDG is the most commonly used tracer for imaging muscles, and NaF-F18 is the most widely used tracer for imaging bones.\nMuscles.\nPET is a feasible technique for studying skeletal muscles during exercise. Also, PET can provide muscle activation data about deep-lying muscles (such as the vastus intermedialis and the gluteus minimus) compared to techniques like electromyography, which can be used only on superficial muscles directly under the skin. However, a disadvantage is that PET provides no timing information about muscle activation because it has to be measured after the exercise is completed. This is due to the time it takes for FDG to accumulate in the activated muscles.\nBones.\nTogether with [18F]sodium floride, PET for bone imaging has been in use for 60 years for measuring regional bone metabolism and blood flow using static and dynamic scans. Researchers have recently started using [18F]sodium fluoride to study bone metastasis as well.\nSafety.\nPET scanning is non-invasive, but it does involve exposure to ionizing radiation. For a typical dose (245 MBq) of FDG, one of the most common radiotracers used for PET neuroimaging and cancer patient management, the effective radiation dose is 4.7\u00a0mSv.\nFor combined PET\u2013CT scanning, the radiation exposure contributed by the CT scan may be substantial - ranging from around 3\u201326\u00a0mSv (for a 70\u00a0kg person, and depending on the coverage and intended use of the scan).\nThe amount of radiation in a typical FDG PET-CT scan is similar to the effective dose of spending one year in the American city of Denver, Colorado (12.4\u00a0mSv/year). For comparison, radiation dosage for other medical procedures range from 0.02\u00a0mSv for a chest X-ray and 6.5\u20138\u00a0mSv for a CT scan of the chest. Average civil aircrews are exposed to 3\u00a0mSv/year, and the whole body occupational dose limit for nuclear energy workers in the US is 50\u00a0mSv/year.\nOperation.\nRadionuclides and radiotracers.\nRadionuclides are incorporated either into compounds normally used by the body such as glucose (or glucose analogues), water, or ammonia, or into molecules that bind to receptors or other sites of drug action. Such labelled compounds are known as radiotracers. PET technology can be used to trace the biologic pathway of any compound in living humans (and many other species as well), provided it can be radiolabeled with a PET isotope. Radiotracers for new target molecules and processes are continuing to be synthesized. As of this writing there are already dozens in clinical use and hundreds applied in research. In 2020 by far the most commonly used radiotracer in clinical PET scanning is the carbohydrate derivative FDG. This radiotracer is used in essentially all scans for oncology and most scans in neurology, thus makes up the large majority of radiotracer (&gt;95%) used in PET and PET\u2013CT scanning.\nDue to the short half-lives of most positron-emitting radioisotopes, the radiotracers have traditionally been produced using a cyclotron in close proximity to the PET imaging facility. The half-life of fluorine-18 is long enough that radiotracers labeled with fluorine-18 can be manufactured commercially at offsite locations and shipped to imaging centers. Recently rubidium-82 generators have become commercially available. These contain strontium-82, which decays by electron capture to produce positron-emitting rubidium-82.\nThe use of positron-emitting isotopes of metals in PET scans has been reviewed, including elements not listed above, such as lanthanides.\nImmuno-PET.\nThe isotope 89Zr has been applied to the tracking and quantification of molecular antibodies with PET cameras (a method called \"immuno-PET\").\nThe biological half-life of antibodies is typically on the order of days, see daclizumab and erenumab by way of example. To visualize and quantify the distribution of such antibodies in the body, the PET isotope 89Zr is well suited because its physical half-life matches the typical biological half-life of antibodies, see table above.\nEmission.\nTo conduct the scan, a short-lived radioactive tracer isotope is injected into the living subject (usually into blood circulation). Each tracer atom has been chemically incorporated into a biologically active molecule. There is a waiting period while the active molecule becomes concentrated in tissues of interest. Then the subject is placed in the imaging scanner. The molecule most commonly used for this purpose is FDG, a sugar, for which the waiting period is typically an hour. During the scan, a record of tissue concentration is made as the tracer decays.\nAs the radioisotope undergoes positron emission decay (also known as positive beta decay), it emits a positron, an antiparticle of the electron with opposite charge. The emitted positron travels in tissue for a short distance (typically less than 1\u00a0mm, but dependent on the isotope), during which time it loses kinetic energy, until it decelerates to a point where it can interact with an electron. The encounter annihilates both electron and positron, producing a pair of annihilation (gamma) photons moving in approximately opposite directions. These are detected when they reach a scintillator in the scanning device, creating a burst of light which is detected by photomultiplier tubes or silicon avalanche photodiodes (Si APD). The technique depends on simultaneous or coincident detection of the pair of photons moving in approximately opposite directions (they would be exactly opposite in their center of mass frame, but the scanner has no way to know this, and so has a built-in slight direction-error tolerance). Photons that do not arrive in temporal \"pairs\" (i.e. within a timing-window of a few nanoseconds) are ignored.\nLocalization of the positron annihilation event.\nThe most significant fraction of electron\u2013positron annihilations results in two 511\u00a0keV gamma photons being emitted at almost 180 degrees to each other. Hence, it is possible to localize their source along a straight line of coincidence (also called the line of response, or LOR). In practice, the LOR has a non-zero width as the emitted photons are not exactly 180 degrees apart. If the resolving time of the detectors is less than 500 picoseconds rather than about 10 nanoseconds, it is possible to localize the event to a segment of a chord, whose length is determined by the detector timing resolution. As the timing resolution improves, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the image will improve, requiring fewer events to achieve the same image quality. This technology is not yet common, but it is available on some new systems.\nImage reconstruction.\nThe raw data collected by a PET scanner are a list of 'coincidence events' representing near-simultaneous detection (typically, within a window of 6 to 12 nanoseconds of each other) of annihilation photons by a pair of detectors. Each coincidence event represents a line in space connecting the two detectors along which the positron emission occurred (i.e., the line of response (LOR)).\nAnalytical techniques, much like the reconstruction of computed tomography (CT) and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) data, are commonly used, although the data set collected in PET is much poorer than CT, so reconstruction techniques are more difficult. Coincidence events can be grouped into projection images, called sinograms. The sinograms are sorted by the angle of each view and tilt (for 3D images). The sinogram images are analogous to the projections captured by CT scanners, and can be reconstructed in a similar way. The statistics of data thereby obtained are much worse than those obtained through transmission tomography. A normal PET data set has millions of counts for the whole acquisition, while the CT can reach a few billion counts. This contributes to PET images appearing \"noisier\" than CT. Two major sources of noise in PET are scatter (a detected pair of photons, at least one of which was deflected from its original path by interaction with matter in the field of view, leading to the pair being assigned to an incorrect LOR) and random events (photons originating from two different annihilation events but incorrectly recorded as a coincidence pair because their arrival at their respective detectors occurred within a coincidence timing window).\nIn practice, considerable pre-processing of the data is required \u2013 correction for random coincidences, estimation and subtraction of scattered photons, detector dead-time correction (after the detection of a photon, the detector must \"cool down\" again) and detector-sensitivity correction (for both inherent detector sensitivity and changes in sensitivity due to angle of incidence).\nFiltered back projection (FBP) has been frequently used to reconstruct images from the projections. This algorithm has the advantage of being simple while having a low requirement for computing resources. Disadvantages are that shot noise in the raw data is prominent in the reconstructed images, and areas of high tracer uptake tend to form streaks across the image. Also, FBP treats the data deterministically \u2013 it does not account for the inherent randomness associated with PET data, thus requiring all the pre-reconstruction corrections described above.\nStatistical, likelihood-based approaches: Statistical, likelihood-based iterative expectation-maximization algorithms such as the Shepp\u2013Vardi algorithm are now the preferred method of reconstruction. These algorithms compute an estimate of the likely distribution of annihilation events that led to the measured data, based on statistical principles. The advantage is a better noise profile and resistance to the streak artifacts common with FBP, but the disadvantage is greater computer resource requirements. A further advantage of statistical image reconstruction techniques is that the physical effects that would need to be pre-corrected for when using an analytical reconstruction algorithm, such as scattered photons, random coincidences, attenuation and detector dead-time, can be incorporated into the likelihood model being used in the reconstruction, allowing for additional noise reduction. Iterative reconstruction has also been shown to result in improvements in the resolution of the reconstructed images, since more sophisticated models of the scanner physics can be incorporated into the likelihood model than those used by analytical reconstruction methods, allowing for improved quantification of the radioactivity distribution.\nResearch has shown that Bayesian methods that involve a Poisson likelihood function and an appropriate prior probability (e.g., a smoothing prior leading to total variation regularization or a Laplacian distribution leading to formula_1-based regularization in a wavelet or other domain), such as via Ulf Grenander's Sieve estimator or via Bayes penalty methods or via I.J. Good's roughness method may yield superior performance to expectation-maximization-based methods which involve a Poisson likelihood function but do not involve such a prior.\nAttenuation correction: Attenuation occurs when photons emitted by the radiotracer inside the body are absorbed by intervening tissue between the detector and the emission of the photon. As different LORs must traverse different thicknesses of tissue, the photons are attenuated differentially. The result is that structures deep in the body are reconstructed as having falsely low tracer uptake. This must be correcter for when using quantitative PET imaging.\nOne option for estimating attenuation coefficients is via a transmission scan, using a 68Ge rod source that is rotated around the patient Transmission scans directly measure attenuation values at 511\u00a0keV. With PET-CT scanners the 511 keV photon attenuation coefficients can be estimated using the Hounsfield units from the CT scan. Attenuation correction in PET-MRI scanners is more challenging, as the MRI images do not directly contain information on about the tissue attenuation coefficients, and the scanner bores are too narrow for a transmission scan. Several methods have been proposed for PET-MRI attenuation coefficient, including machine learning, algorithms to direclty estimate attenuation coefficients from the MRI or emission data, and atlas-based approaches (where the MRI scan is co-registered with a database of CT images).\nWhile attenuation-corrected images are generally more faithful representations, the correction process is itself susceptible to significant artifacts. As a result, both corrected and uncorrected images are often reconstructed and read together.\n2D/3D reconstruction: Early PET scanners had only a single ring of detectors, hence the acquisition of data and subsequent reconstruction was restricted to a single transverse plane. More modern scanners now include multiple rings, essentially forming a cylinder of detectors.\nThere are two approaches to reconstructing data from such a scanner:\n3D techniques have better sensitivity (because more coincidences are detected and used) hence less noise, but are more sensitive to the effects of scatter and random coincidences, as well as requiring greater computer resources. The advent of sub-nanosecond timing resolution detectors affords better random coincidence rejection, thus favoring 3D image reconstruction.\nTime-of-flight (TOF) PET: For modern systems with a higher time resolution (roughly 3 nanoseconds) a technique called \"time-of-flight\" is used to improve the overall performance. Time-of-flight PET makes use of very fast gamma-ray detectors and data processing system which can more precisely decide the difference in time between the detection of the two photons. It is impossible to localize the point of origin of the annihilation event exactly (currently within 10\u00a0cm). Therefore, image reconstruction is still needed. TOF technique gives a remarkable improvement in image quality, especially signal-to-noise ratio.\nCombination of PET with CT or MRI.\nPET scans are increasingly read alongside CT or MRI scans, with the combination (co-registration) giving both anatomic and metabolic information (i.e., what the structure is, and what it is doing biochemically). Because PET imaging is most useful in combination with anatomical imaging, such as CT, modern PET scanners are now available with integrated high-end multi-detector-row CT scanners (PET\u2013CT). Because the two scans can be performed in immediate sequence during the same session, with the patient not changing position between the two types of scans, the two sets of images are more precisely registered, so that areas of abnormality on the PET imaging can be more perfectly correlated with anatomy on the CT images. This is very useful in showing detailed views of moving organs or structures with higher anatomical variation, which is more common outside the brain.\nAt the J\u00fclich Institute of Neurosciences and Biophysics, the world's largest PET\u2013MRI device began operation in April 2009. A\u00a09.4-tesla magnetic resonance tomograph (MRT) combined with a PET. Presently, only the head and brain can be imaged at these high magnetic field strengths.\nFor brain imaging, registration of CT, MRI and PET scans may be accomplished without the need for an integrated PET\u2013CT or PET\u2013MRI scanner by using a device known as the N-localizer.\nLimitations.\nThe minimization of radiation dose to the subject is an attractive feature of the use of short-lived radionuclides. Besides its established role as a diagnostic technique, PET has an expanding role as a method to assess the response to therapy, in particular, cancer therapy, where the risk to the patient from lack of knowledge about disease progress is much greater than the risk from the test radiation. Since the tracers are radioactive they are generally not used with those who are pregnant.\nLimitations to the widespread use of PET arise from the high costs of cyclotrons needed to produce the short-lived radionuclides for PET scanning and the need for specially adapted on-site chemical synthesis apparatus to produce the radiopharmaceuticals after radioisotope preparation. Organic radiotracer molecules that will contain a positron-emitting radioisotope cannot be synthesized first and then the radioisotope prepared within them, because bombardment with a cyclotron to prepare the radioisotope destroys any organic carrier for it. Instead, the isotope must be prepared first, then the chemistry to prepare any organic radiotracer (such as FDG) accomplished very quickly, in the short time before the isotope decays. Few hospitals and universities are capable of maintaining such systems, and most clinical PET is supported by third-party suppliers of radiotracers that can supply many sites simultaneously. This limitation restricts clinical PET primarily to the use of tracers labelled with fluorine-18, which has a half-life of 110 minutes and can be transported a reasonable distance before use, or to rubidium-82 (used as rubidium-82 chloride) with a half-life of 1.27 minutes, which is created in a portable generator and is used for myocardial perfusion studies. In recent years a few on-site cyclotrons with integrated shielding and \"hot labs\" (automated chemistry labs that are able to work with radioisotopes) have begun to accompany PET units to remote hospitals. The presence of the small on-site cyclotron promises to expand in the future as the cyclotrons shrink in response to the high cost of isotope transportation to remote PET machines. In recent years the shortage of PET scans has been alleviated in the US, as rollout of radiopharmacies to supply radioisotopes has grown 30 percent per year.\nBecause the half-life of fluorine-18 is about two hours, the prepared dose of a radiopharmaceutical bearing this radionuclide will undergo multiple half-lives of decay during the working day. This necessitates frequent recalibration of the remaining dose (determination of activity per unit volume) and careful planning with respect to patient scheduling.\nHistory.\nThe concept of emission and transmission tomography was introduced by David E. Kuhl, Luke Chapman and Roy Edwards in the late 1950s. Their work would lead to the design and construction of several tomographic instruments at Washington University School of Medicine and later at the University of Pennsylvania. In the 1960s and 70s tomographic imaging instruments and techniques were further developed by Michel Ter-Pogossian, Michael E. Phelps, Edward J. Hoffman and others at Washington University School of Medicine.\nWork by Gordon Brownell, Charles Burnham and their associates at the Massachusetts General Hospital beginning in the 1950s contributed significantly to the development of PET technology and included the first demonstration of annihilation radiation for medical imaging. Their innovations, including the use of light pipes and volumetric analysis, have been important in the deployment of PET imaging. In 1961, James Robertson and his associates at Brookhaven National Laboratory built the first single-plane PET scan, nicknamed the \"head-shrinker\".\nOne of the factors most responsible for the acceptance of positron imaging was the development of radiopharmaceuticals. In particular, the development of labeled 2-fluorodeoxy-D-glucose (FDG\u2014firstly synthethized and described by two Czech scientists from Charles University in Prague in 1968) by the Brookhaven group under the direction of Al Wolf and Joanna Fowler was a major factor in expanding the scope of PET imaging. The compound was first administered to two normal human volunteers by Abass Alavi in August 1976 at the University of Pennsylvania. Brain images obtained with an ordinary (non-PET) nuclear scanner demonstrated the concentration of FDG in that organ. Later, the substance was used in dedicated positron tomographic scanners, to yield the modern procedure.\nThe logical extension of positron instrumentation was a design using two two-dimensional arrays. PC-I was the first instrument using this concept and was designed in 1968, completed in 1969 and reported in 1972. The first applications of PC-I in tomographic mode as distinguished from the computed tomographic mode were reported in 1970. It soon became clear to many of those involved in PET development that a circular or cylindrical array of detectors was the logical next step in PET instrumentation. Although many investigators took this approach, James Robertson and Zang-Hee Cho were the first to propose a ring system that has become the prototype of the current shape of PET. The first multislice cylindrical array PET scanner was completed in 1974 at the Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology by the group led by Ter-Pogossian.\nThe PET\u2013CT scanner, attributed to David Townsend and Ronald Nutt, was named by \"Time\" as the medical invention of the year in 2000.\nCost.\nAs of August 2008, Cancer Care Ontario reports that the current average incremental cost to perform a PET scan in the province is CA$1,000\u20131,200 per scan. This includes the cost of the radiopharmaceutical and a stipend for the physician reading the scan.\nIn the United States, the cost of a PET scan can vary by the type of scan performed, the geographic location, and whether it is done in inpatient or outpatient setting. 2025 market research from CareCredit gives a national average ranging from US$1,711 to $12,848.\nIn England, the National Health Service reference cost (2015\u20132016) for an adult outpatient PET scan is \u00a3798.\nIn Australia, as of July 2018, the Medicare Benefits Schedule Fee for whole body FDG PET ranges from A$953 to A$999, depending on the indication for the scan.\nQuality control.\nThe overall performance of PET systems can be evaluated by quality control tools such as the Jaszczak phantom.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24033", "revid": "5706971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24033", "title": "Percival Lowell", "text": "American businessman, author, mathematician, and astronomer (1855\u20131916)\nPercival Lowell (; March 13, 1855 \u2013 November 12, 1916) was an American businessman, author, mathematician, and astronomer who fueled speculation that there were canals on Mars, and furthered theories of a ninth planet within the Solar System. He founded the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, and formed the beginning of the effort that led to the discovery of Pluto 14 years after his death.\nLife and career.\nEarly life and work.\nPercival Lowell was born on March 13, 1855, in Boston, Massachusetts, the first son of Augustus Lowell and Katherine Bigelow Lowell. A member of the Brahmin Lowell family, his siblings included the poet Amy Lowell, the educator and legal scholar Abbott Lawrence Lowell, and Elizabeth Lowell Putnam, an early activist for prenatal care. They were the great-grandchildren of John Lowell and, on their mother's side, the grandchildren of Abbott Lawrence.\nPercival graduated from the Noble and Greenough School in 1872 and Harvard College in 1876 with distinction in mathematics. While at Harvard he joined Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity. At his college graduation, he gave a speech, considered very advanced for its time, on the nebular hypothesis. He was later awarded honorary degrees from Amherst College and Clark University. After graduation he ran a cotton mill for six years.\nIn the 1880s, Lowell traveled extensively in the Far East. In August 1883, he served as a foreign secretary and counselor for a special Korean diplomatic mission to the United States. He then went to Korea and lived there from December 1883 to March 1884. In 1884, he took the earliest surviving photograph of a Korean monarch: King Gojong. He also spent significant periods of time in Japan, writing books on Japanese religion, psychology, and behavior. His texts are filled with observations and academic discussions of various aspects of Japanese life, including language, religious practices, economics, travel in Japan, and the development of personality.\nBooks by Lowell on the Orient include \"Noto: An Unexplored Corner of Japan\" (1891) and \"Occult Japan, or the Way of the Gods\" (1894), the latter from his third and final trip to the region. His time in Korea inspired \"Chos\u00f6n: The Land of the Morning Calm\" (1886, Boston). The most popular of Lowell's books on the Orient, \"The Soul of the Far East\" (1888), contains an early synthesis of some of his ideas that, in essence, postulated that human progress is a function of the qualities of individuality and imagination. The writer Lafcadio Hearn called it a \"colossal, splendid, godlike book.\" At his death he left with his assistant Wrexie Leonard an unpublished manuscript of a book entitled \"Peaks and Plateaux in the Effect on Tree Life\".\nAfter his death, Lowell's wife, Constance, contested his will granting most of his estate to the observatory, halting its work for ten years.\nFounding of the Lowell Observatory.\nLowell was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1892. He moved back to the United States in 1893. He became determined to study Mars and astronomy as a full-time career after reading Camille Flammarion's \"La plan\u00e8te Mars\". He was particularly interested in the canals of Mars, as drawn by Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli, who was director of the Milan Observatory. The Boston geologist George Russel Agassiz noted that Lowell made the decision to begin his observations after hearing that Schiaparelli began to experience failing eyesight. Beginning in the winter of 1893\u201394, using his wealth and influence, Lowell dedicated himself to the study of astronomy, founding the observatory which bears his name. He chose Flagstaff, Arizona Territory, as the home of his new observatory. At an altitude of over , with few cloudy nights, and far from city lights, Flagstaff was an excellent site for astronomical observations. This marked the first time an observatory had been deliberately located in a remote, elevated place for optimal seeing which included enhanced image quality, sharpness and steadiness. At his Flagstaff observatory Lowell favored the use of smaller telescopes rather than larger ones, believing that they were usually better for viewing fine planetary details. He was assisted in setting up his observatory by William Pickering, another observer of Mars who had noted the lines seen by Schiaparelli as well.\nLowell was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1897.\nIn 1904, Lowell received the Prix Jules Janssen, the highest award of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 astronomique de France, the French astronomical society. For the last 23 years of his life, astronomy, Lowell Observatory, and his and others' work at his observatory were the focal points of his life.\nWorld War I very much saddened Lowell, who was a dedicated pacifist. This, along with some setbacks in his astronomical work (described below), undermined his health and contributed to his death from a stroke on November 12, 1916, aged 61. Lowell is buried on Mars Hill near his observatory. Lowell claimed to \"stick to the church\" though at least one current author describes him as an agnostic.\nCanals of Mars.\nFor some fifteen years (1893 to about 1908) Lowell studied Mars extensively, making intricate drawings of the surface markings as he perceived them. Lowell published his views in three books: \"Mars\" (1895), \"Mars and Its Canals\" (1906), and \"Mars As the Abode of Life\" (1908). With these writings, Lowell more than anyone else popularized the long-held belief that these markings showed that Mars sustained intelligent life forms.\nHis works include a detailed description of what he termed the \"non-natural features\" of the planet's surface, including especially a full account of the \"canals\", single and double; the \"oases\", as he termed the dark spots at their intersections; and the varying visibility of both, depending partly on the Martian seasons. He theorized that an advanced but desperate culture had built the canals to tap Mars's polar ice caps, the last source of water on an inexorably drying planet.\nWhile this idea excited the public, the astronomical community was skeptical. Many astronomers could not see these markings, and few believed that they were as extensive as Lowell claimed. As a result, Lowell and his observatory were largely ostracized. The consensus was that some actual features did exist that would account for the markings. In 1909, the sixty-inch Mount Wilson Observatory telescope in Southern California allowed closer observation of the structures Lowell had interpreted as canals, and revealed irregular geological features, probably the result of natural erosion.\nThe existence of canal-like features was definitively disproved in the 1960s by NASA's Mariner missions. Mariner 4, 6 and 7, and the Mariner 9 orbiter (1972), did not capture images of canals but instead showed a cratered Martian surface. Today, the surface markings taken to be canals are regarded as an optical illusion. Psychologist Matthew J. Sharps has argued that perception of the canals by Lowell and others could have been the result of a combination of psychological factors, including individual differences, Gestalt reconfiguration, and sociocognitive factors.\nVenus spokes.\nAlthough Lowell was better known for his observations of Mars, he also drew maps of the planet Venus. He began observing Venus in detail in mid-1896 soon after the Alvan Clark &amp; Sons refracting telescope was installed at his new Flagstaff, Arizona observatory. Lowell observed the planet high in the daytime sky with the telescope's lens stopped down to 3 inches in diameter to reduce the effect of the turbulent daytime atmosphere. Lowell observed spoke-like surface features including a central dark spot, contrary to what was suspected then (and known now): that Venus has no surface features visible from Earth, being covered in an atmosphere that is opaque. It has been noted in a 2003 \"Journal for the History of Astronomy\" paper and in an article published in \"Sky and Telescope\" in July 2003 that Lowell's stopping down of the telescope created such a small exit pupil at the eyepiece, it may have become a giant ophthalmoscope giving Lowell an image of the shadows of blood vessels cast on the retina of his own eye.\nPluto.\nLowell's greatest contribution to planetary studies came during the last decade of his life, which he devoted to the search for Planet X, a hypothetical planet beyond Neptune. Lowell believed that the planets Uranus and Neptune were displaced from their predicted positions by the gravity of the unseen Planet X. Lowell started a search program in 1906. A team of human computers, led by Elizabeth Williams were employed to calculate predicted regions for the proposed planet. The program initially used a camera in aperture. The small field of view of the reflecting telescope rendered the instrument impractical for searching. From 1914 to 1916, a telescope on loan from Sproul Observatory was used to search for Planet X. Lowell did not discover Pluto but later Lowell Observatory (observatory code 690) would photograph Pluto in March and April 1915, without realizing at the time that it was not a star.\nIn 1930, Clyde Tombaugh, working at the Lowell Observatory, discovered Pluto near the location expected for Planet X. Partly in recognition of Lowell's efforts, a stylized P-L monogram (\u2647) \u2013 the first two letters of the new planet's name and also Lowell's initials \u2013 was chosen as Pluto's astronomical symbol. However, it would subsequently emerge that the Planet X theory was mistaken.\nPluto's mass could not be determined until 1978, when its satellite Charon was discovered. This confirmed what had been increasingly suspected: Pluto's gravitational influence on Uranus and Neptune is negligible, not nearly enough to account for the discrepancies in their orbits. In 2006, Pluto was reclassified as a dwarf planet by the International Astronomical Union.\nIn addition, the discrepancies between the predicted and observed positions of Uranus and Neptune were found \"not\" to be caused by the gravity of an unknown planet. Rather, they were due to an erroneous value for the mass of Neptune. \"Voyager 2\"'s 1989 encounter with Neptune yielded a more accurate value of its mass, and the discrepancies disappeared when using this value.\nLegacy.\nAlthough Lowell's theories of the Martian canals, of surface features on Venus, and of Planet X are now discredited, his practice of building observatories at the position where they would best function has been adopted as a principle. He also established the program and setting which made the discovery of Pluto by Clyde Tombaugh possible. Lowell has been described by other planetary scientists as \"the most influential popularizer of planetary science in America before Carl Sagan\".\nWhile eventually disproved, Lowell's vision of the Martian canals as an artifact of an ancient civilization making a desperate last effort to survive, significantly influenced the development of science fiction \u2013 starting with H. G. Wells's influential 1898 novel \"The War of the Worlds\", which made the further logical inference that creatures from a dying planet might seek to invade Earth.\nThe image of the dying Mars and its ancient culture was retained, in numerous versions and variations, in most science fiction works depicting Mars in the first half of the twentieth century (see Mars in fiction). Even when proven to be factually mistaken, the vision of Mars derived from his theories remains enshrined in works that remain in print and widely read as classics of science fiction.\nLowell's influence on science fiction remains strong. The canals figure prominently in \"Red Planet\" by Robert A. Heinlein (1949) and \"The Martian Chronicles\" by Ray Bradbury (1950). The canals, and even Lowell's mausoleum, heavily influence \"The Gods of Mars\" (1918) by Edgar Rice Burroughs as well as all other books in the Barsoom series.\nAsteroid 1886 Lowell, discovered by Henry Giclas and Robert Schaldach in 1949, as well as the crater Lowell on the Moon and the crater Lowell on Mars, were named after him. The Lowell Regio on Pluto was also named in his honor after its discovery by the \"New Horizons\" spacecraft in 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24034", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24034", "title": "PC motherboard", "text": ""}
{"id": "24035", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24035", "title": "PCI (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "24036", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24036", "title": "PCI bus", "text": ""}
{"id": "24040", "revid": "461300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24040", "title": "Prostitute", "text": ""}
{"id": "24041", "revid": "578012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24041", "title": "Pavane", "text": "Dance common in 16th century Europe\n \nThe pavane ( ; , \"padovana\"; ) is a slow processional dance common in Europe during the 16th century (Renaissance).\nThe pavane, the earliest-known music for which was published in Venice by Ottaviano Petrucci, in Joan Ambrosio Dalza's \"Intabolatura de lauto libro quarto\" in 1508, is a sedate and dignified couple dance, similar to the 15th-century basse danse. The music which accompanied it appears originally to have been fast or moderately fast but, like many other dances, became slower over time.\nOrigin of term.\nThe word \"pavane\" is most probably derived from Italian [\"danza\"] \"padovana\", meaning \"[dance] typical of Padua\" (similar to Bergamask, \"dance from Bergamo\"); \"pavan\" is an old Northern Italian form for the modern Italian adjective \"padovano\" (= from Padua). This origin is consistent with the equivalent form, \"Paduana\".\nAn alternative explanation is that it derives from the Spanish \"pav\u00f3n\" meaning \"peacock\".\nAlthough the dance is often associated with Spain, it was \"almost certainly of Italian origin\".\nHistory.\nThe decorous sweep of the pavane suited the new more sober Spanish-influenced courtly manners of 16th-century Italy. It appears in dance manuals in England, France, and Italy.\nThe pavane's popularity was from roughly 1530 to 1676, though, as a dance, it was already dying out by the late 16th century. As a musical form, the pavane survived long after the dance itself was abandoned, and well into the Baroque period, when it finally gave way to the allemande/courante sequence..\nDance.\nIn Thoinot Arbeau's French dance manual, it is generally a dance for many couples in procession, with the dancers sometimes throwing in ornamentation (divisions) of the steps.\nThe \"Dictionnaire de Trevoux\" describes the dance as being a \"grave kind of dance, borrowed from the Spaniards, wherein the performers make a kind of wheel or tail before each other, like that of a peacock, whence the name.\" It was usually used by regents to open grand ceremonies and to display their royal attire. Before dancing, the performers saluted the King and Queen whilst circling the room. The steps were called \"advancing\" and \"retreating\". Retreating gentlemen would lead their ladies by the hand and, after curtsies and steps, the gentlemen would regain their places. Next, a lone gentleman advanced and went \"en se pavanant\" (strutting like a peacock) to salute the lady opposite him. After taking backward steps, he would return to his place, bowing to his lady.\nModern use.\nThe step used in the pavane survives to the modern day in the \"hesitation step\" sometimes used at weddings.\nMore recent works titled \"pavane\" often have a deliberately archaic mood. Examples include:\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24042", "revid": "7770027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24042", "title": "Project management", "text": "Practice of leading the work of a team to achieve goals and criteria at a specified time\nProject management is the process of supervising the work of a team to achieve all project goals within the given constraints. This information is usually described in project documentation, created at the beginning of the development process. The primary constraints are scope, time and budget. The secondary challenge is to optimize the allocation of necessary inputs and apply them to meet predefined objectives.\nThe objective of project management is to produce a complete project which complies with the client's objectives. In many cases, the objective of project management is also to shape or reform the client's brief to feasibly address the client's objectives. Once the client's objectives are established, they should influence all decisions made by other people involved in the project\u2013 for example, project managers, designers, contractors and subcontractors. Ill-defined or too tightly prescribed project management objectives are detrimental to the decisionmaking process.\nA project is a temporary and unique endeavor designed to produce a product, service or result with a defined beginning and end (usually time-constrained, often constrained by funding or staffing) undertaken to meet unique goals and objectives, typically to bring about beneficial change or added value. The temporary nature of projects stands in contrast with business as usual (or operations), which are repetitive, permanent or semi-permanent functional activities to produce products or services. In practice, the management of such distinct production approaches requires the development of distinct technical skills and management strategies.\nHistory.\nPrior to the year 1900, civil engineering projects were generally managed by creative architects, engineers, and master builders themselves, for example, Vitruvius (first century BC), Christopher Wren (1632\u20131723), Thomas Telford (1757\u20131834), and Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1806\u20131859). In the 1950s, organizations started to apply project-management tools and techniques more systematically to complex engineering projects.\nAs a discipline, project management developed from several fields of application including civil construction, engineering, and heavy defense activity. Two forefathers of project management are Henry Gantt, called the father of planning and control techniques, who is famous for his use of the Gantt chart as a project management tool (alternatively \"Harmonogram\" first proposed by Karol Adamiecki); and Henri Fayol for his creation of the five management functions that form the foundation of the body of knowledge associated with project and program management. Both Gantt and Fayol were students of Frederick Winslow Taylor's theories of scientific management. His work is the forerunner to modern project management tools including work breakdown structure (WBS) and resource allocation.\nThe 1950s marked the beginning of the modern project management era, where core engineering fields came together to work as one. Project management became recognized as a distinct discipline arising from the management discipline with the engineering model. In the United States, prior to the 1950s, projects were managed on an ad-hoc basis, using mostly Gantt charts and informal techniques and tools. At that time, two mathematical project-scheduling models were developed. The critical path method (CPM) was developed as a joint venture between DuPont Corporation and Remington Rand Corporation for managing plant maintenance projects. The program evaluation and review technique (PERT), was developed by the U.S. Navy Special Projects Office in conjunction with the Lockheed Corporation and Booz Allen Hamilton as part of the Polaris missile submarine program.\nPERT and CPM are very similar in their approach but still present some differences. CPM is used for projects that assume deterministic activity times; the times at which each activity will be carried out are known. PERT, on the other hand, allows for stochastic activity times; the times at which each activity will be carried out are uncertain or varied. Because of this core difference, CPM and PERT are used in different contexts. These mathematical techniques quickly spread into many private enterprises.\nAt the same time, as project-scheduling models were being developed, technology for project cost estimating, cost management and engineering economics was evolving, with pioneering work by Hans Lang and others. In 1956, the American Association of Cost Engineers (now AACE International; the Association for the Advancement of Cost Engineering) was formed by early practitioners of project management and the associated specialties of planning and scheduling, cost estimating, and project control. AACE continued its pioneering work and in 2006, released the first integrated process for portfolio, program, and project management (total cost management framework).\nIn 1969, the Project Management Institute (PMI) was formed in the USA. PMI publishes the original version of \"A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge\" (PMBOK Guide) in 1996 with William Duncan as its primary author, which describes project management practices that are common to \"most projects, most of the time.\"\nTypes.\nProject management methods can be applied to any project. It is often tailored to a specific type of project based on project size, nature, industry or sector. For example, the construction industry, which focuses on the delivery of things like buildings, roads, and bridges, has developed its own specialized form of project management that it refers to as \"construction project management\" and in which project managers can become trained and certified. The information technology industry has also evolved to develop its own form of project management that is referred to as \"IT project management\" and which specializes in the delivery of technical assets and services that are required to pass through various lifecycle phases such as planning, design, development, testing, and deployment. \"Biotechnology project management\" focuses on the intricacies of biotechnology research and development. \"Localization project management\" includes application of many standard project management practices to translation works even though many consider this type of management to be a very different discipline. For example, project managers have a key role in improving the translation even when they do not speak the language of the translation, because they know the study objectives well to make informed decisions. Similarly, \"research study management\" can also apply a project manage approach. There is public project management that covers all public works by the government, which can be carried out by the government agencies or contracted out to contractors. Another classification of project management is based on the hard (physical) or soft (non-physical) type.\nCommon among all the project management types is that they focus on three important goals: time, quality, and cost. Successful projects are completed on schedule, within budget, and according to previously agreed quality standards i.e. meeting the Iron Triangle or Triple Constraint in order for projects to be considered a success or failure.\nFor each type of project management, project managers develop and utilize repeatable templates that are specific to the industry they're dealing with. This allows project plans to become very thorough and highly repeatable, with the specific intent to increase quality, lower delivery costs, and lower time to deliver project results.\nApproaches.\nA 2017 study suggested that the success of any project depends on how well four key aspects are aligned with the contextual dynamics affecting the project, these are referred to as the \"four P's\":\nThere are a number of approaches to organizing and completing project activities, including phased, lean, iterative, and incremental. There are also several extensions to project planning, for example, based on outcomes (product-based) or activities (process-based).\nRegardless of the methodology employed, careful consideration must be given to the overall project objectives, timeline, and cost, as well as the roles and responsibilities of all participants and stakeholders.\nBenefits realization management.\nBenefits realization management (BRM) enhances normal project management techniques through a focus on outcomes (benefits) of a project rather than products or outputs and then measuring the degree to which that is happening to keep a project on track. This can help to reduce the risk of a completed project being a failure by delivering agreed upon requirements (outputs) i.e. project success but failing to deliver the benefits (outcomes) of those requirements i.e. product success. Note that good requirements management will ensure these benefits are captured as requirements of the project and their achievement monitored throughout the project.\nIn addition, BRM practices aim to ensure the strategic alignment between project outcomes and business strategies. The effectiveness of these practices is supported by recent research evidencing BRM practices influencing project success from a strategic perspective across different countries and industries. These wider effects are called the strategic impact.\nAn example of delivering a project to requirements might be agreeing to deliver a computer system that will process staff data and manage payroll, holiday, and staff personnel records in shorter times with reduced errors. Under BRM, the agreement might be to achieve a specified reduction in staff hours and errors required to process and maintain staff data after the system installation when compared without the system.\nCritical path method.\nCritical path method (CPM) is an algorithm for determining the schedule for project activities. It is the traditional process used for predictive-based project planning. The CPM method evaluates the sequence of activities, the work effort required, the inter-dependencies, and the resulting float time per line sequence to determine the required project duration. Thus, by definition, the critical path is the pathway of tasks on the network diagram that has no extra time available (or very little extra time).\"\nCritical chain project management.\nCritical chain project management (CCPM) is an application of the theory of constraints (TOC) to planning and managing projects and is designed to deal with the uncertainties inherent in managing projects, while taking into consideration the limited availability of resources (physical, human skills, as well as management &amp; support capacity) needed to execute projects.\nThe goal is to increase the flow of projects in an organization (throughput). Applying the first three of the five focusing steps of TOC, the system constraint for all projects, as well as the resources, are identified. To exploit the constraint, tasks on the critical chain are given priority over all other activities.\nEarned value management.\nEarned value management (EVM) extends project management with techniques to improve project monitoring. It illustrates project progress towards completion in terms of work and value (cost). Earned Schedule is an extension to the theory and practice of EVM.\nIterative and incremental project management.\nIn critical studies of project management, it has been noted that phased approaches are not well suited for projects which are large-scale and multi-company, with undefined, ambiguous, or fast-changing requirements, or those with high degrees of risk, dependency, and fast-changing technologies. The cone of uncertainty explains some of this as the planning made on the initial phase of the project suffers from a high degree of uncertainty. This becomes especially true as software development is often the realization of a new or novel product.\nThese complexities are better handled with a more exploratory or iterative and incremental approach. Several models of iterative and incremental project management have evolved, including agile project management, dynamic systems development method, and extreme project management. The Scrum approach is a commonly used framework that splits work goals into iterations known as 'sprints'.\nLean project management.\nLean project management uses the principles from lean manufacturing to focus on delivering value with less waste and reduced time.\nProject lifecycle.\nThere are five phases to a project lifecycle; known as process groups. Each process group represents a series of inter-related processes to manage the work through a series of distinct steps to be completed. This type of project approach is often referred to as \"traditional\" or \"waterfall\". The five process groups are:\nSome industries may use variations of these project stages and rename them to better suit the organization. For example, when working on a brick-and-mortar design and construction, projects will typically progress through stages like pre-planning, conceptual design, schematic design, design development, construction drawings (or contract documents), and construction administration.\nWhile the phased approach works well for small, well-defined projects, it often results in challenge or failure on larger projects, or those that are more complex or have more ambiguities, issues, and risks \u2013 see the parodying 'six phases of a big project'.\nProcess-based management.\nThe incorporation of process-based management has been driven by the use of maturity models such as the OPM3 and the CMMI (capability maturity model integration; see \nProject production management.\nProject production management is the application of operations management to the delivery of capital projects. The Project production management framework is based on a project as a production system view, in which a project transforms inputs (raw materials, information, labor, plant &amp; machinery) into outputs (goods and services).\nProduct-based planning.\nProduct-based planning is a structured approach to project management, based on identifying all of the products (project deliverables) that contribute to achieving the project objectives. As such, it defines a successful project as output-oriented rather than activity- or task-oriented. The most common implementation of this approach is PRINCE2.\nProcess groups.\nTraditionally (depending on what project management methodology is being used), project management includes a number of elements: four to five project management process groups, and a control system. Regardless of the methodology or terminology used, the same basic project management processes or stages of development will be used. Major process groups generally include:\nIn project environments with a significant exploratory element (e.g., research and development), these stages may be supplemented with decision points (go/no go decisions) at which the project's continuation is debated and decided. An example is the Phase\u2013gate model.\nProject management relies on a wide variety of meetings to coordinate actions. For instance, there is the kick-off meeting, which broadly involves stakeholders at the project's initiation. Project meetings or project committees enable the project team to define and monitor action plans. Steering committees are used to transition between phases and resolve issues. Project portfolio and program reviews are conducted in organizations running parallel projects. Lessons learned meetings are held to consolidate learnings. All these meetings employ techniques found in meeting science, particularly to define the objective, participant list, and facilitation methods.\nInitiating.\nThe initiating processes determine the nature and scope of the project. If this stage is not performed well, it is unlikely that the project will be successful in meeting the business' needs. The key project controls needed here are an understanding of the business environment and making sure that all necessary controls are incorporated into the project. Any deficiencies should be reported and a recommendation should be made to fix them.\nThe initiating stage should include a plan that encompasses the following areas. These areas can be recorded in a series of documents called Project Initiation documents.\nProject Initiation documents are a series of planned documents used to create an order for the duration of the project. \nThese tend to include: \nPlanning.\nAfter the initiation stage, the project is planned to an appropriate level of detail (see an ). The main purpose is to plan time, cost, and resources adequately to estimate the work needed and to effectively manage risk during project execution. As with the Initiation process group, a failure to adequately plan greatly reduces the project's chances of successfully accomplishing its goals.\nProject planning generally consists of\nAdditional processes, such as planning for communications and for scope management, identifying roles and responsibilities, determining what to purchase for the project, and holding a kick-off meeting are also generally advisable.\nFor new product development projects, conceptual design of the operation of the final product may be performed concurrent with the project planning activities and may help to inform the planning team when identifying deliverables and planning activities.\nExecuting.\nWhile executing, one must know what the planned terms are that need to be executed.\nThe execution/implementation phase ensures that the project management plan's deliverables are executed accordingly. This phase involves proper allocation, coordination, and management of human resources and any other resources such as materials and budgets. The output of this phase is the project deliverables.\nProject documentation.\nDocumenting everything within a project is key to being successful. To maintain budget, scope, effectiveness and pace, a project must have physical documents pertaining to each specific task. With correct documentation, it is easy to see whether or not a project's requirement has been met. In conjunction, documentation provides information regarding what has already been completed for that project. Documentation throughout a project provides a paper trail for anyone who needs to go back and reference the work in the past. \nIn most cases, documentation is the most successful way to monitor and control the specific phases of a project. With the correct documentation, a project's success can be tracked and observed as the project goes on. If performed correctly, documentation can be the backbone of a project's success\nMonitoring and controlling.\nMonitoring and controlling consist of those processes performed to observe project execution so that potential problems can be identified in a timely manner and corrective action can be taken, when necessary, to control the execution of the project. The key benefit is that project performance is observed and measured regularly to identify variances from the project management plan.\nMonitoring and controlling include:\nTwo main mechanisms support monitoring and controlling in projects. On the one hand, contracts offer a set of rules and incentives often supported by potential penalties and sanctions. On the other hand, scholars in business and management have paid attention to the role of integrators (also called project barons) to achieve a project's objectives. In turn, recent research in project management has questioned the type of interplay between contracts and integrators. Some have argued that these two monitoring mechanisms operate as substitutes as one type of organization would decrease the advantages of using the other one.\nIn multi-phase projects, the monitoring and control process also provides feedback between project phases, to implement corrective or preventive actions to bring the project into compliance with the project management plan.\nProject maintenance is an ongoing process, and it includes:\nIn this stage, auditors should pay attention to how effectively and quickly user problems are resolved.\nOver the course of any construction project, the work scope may change. Change is a normal and expected part of the construction process. Changes can be the result of necessary design modifications, differing site conditions, material availability, contractor-requested changes, value engineering, and impacts from third parties, to name a few. Beyond executing the change in the field, the change normally needs to be documented to show what was actually constructed. This is referred to as change management. Hence, the owner usually requires a final record to show all changes or, more specifically, any change that modifies the tangible portions of the finished work. The record is made on the contract documents \u2013 usually, but not necessarily limited to, the design drawings. The end product of this effort is what the industry terms as-built drawings, or more simply, \"as built.\" The requirement for providing them is a norm in construction contracts. Construction document management is a highly important task undertaken with the aid of an online or desktop software system or maintained through physical documentation. The increasing legality pertaining to the construction industry's maintenance of correct documentation has caused an increase in the need for document management systems.\nWhen changes are introduced to the project, the viability of the project has to be re-assessed. It is important not to lose sight of the initial goals and targets of the projects. When the changes accumulate, the forecasted result may not justify the original proposed investment in the project. Successful project management identifies these components, and tracks and monitors progress, so as to stay within time and budget frames already outlined at the commencement of the project. Exact methods were suggested to identify the most informative monitoring points along the project life-cycle regarding its progress and expected duration.\nClosing.\nClosing includes the formal acceptance of the project and the ending thereof. Administrative activities include the archiving of the files and documenting lessons learned.\nThis phase consists of:\nAlso included in this phase is the post-implementation review. This is a vital phase of the project for the project team to learn from experiences and apply to future projects. Normally a post-implementation review consists of looking at things that went well and analyzing things that went badly on the project to come up with lessons learned.\nProject control and project control systems.\nProject control implements verification and controlling functions during the processing of a project to reinforce the defined performance and formal goals. It should be established as an independent function in project management.\nThe related task of cost engineering focusses on the management of project cost. Other tasks involved in project control include: \nFulfillment and implementation of these tasks can be achieved by applying specific methods and instruments of project control. The following methods of project control can be applied:\nProject control is that element of a project that keeps it on track, on time, and within budget. Project control begins early in the project with planning and ends late in the project with post-implementation review, having a thorough involvement of each step in the process. Projects may be audited or reviewed while the project is in progress. Formal audits are generally risk or compliance-based and management will direct the objectives of the audit. An examination may include a comparison of approved project management processes with how the project is actually being managed. Each project should be assessed for the appropriate level of control needed: too much control is too time-consuming, too little control is very risky. If project control is not implemented correctly, the cost to the business should be clarified in terms of errors and fixes.\nControl systems are needed for cost, risk, quality, communication, time, change, procurement, and human resources. In addition, auditors should consider how important the projects are to the financial statements, how reliant the stakeholders are on controls, and how many controls exist. Auditors should review the development process and procedures for how they are implemented. The process of development and the quality of the final product may also be assessed if needed or requested. A business may want the auditing firm to be involved throughout the process to catch problems earlier on so that they can be fixed more easily. An auditor can serve as a controls consultant as part of the development team or as an independent auditor as part of an audit. In the UK, the National Audit Office developed a \"gold standard\" for major defence project control in 2005, which it has used as an audit tool. The key elements of this standard are:\nBusinesses sometimes use formal systems development processes. This help assure systems are developed successfully. A formal process is more effective in creating strong controls, and auditors should review this process to confirm that it is well designed and is followed in practice. A good formal systems development plan includes:\nCharacteristics of projects.\nThere are five important characteristics of a project:\n(i) It should always have specific start and end dates.\n(ii) They are performed and completed by a group of people.\n(iii) The output is the delivery of a unique product or service.\n(iv) They are temporary in nature.\n(v) It is progressively elaborated.\nExamples are: designing a new car or writing a book.\nProject complexity.\nComplexity and its nature play an important role in the area of project management. Despite having a number of debates on this subject matter, studies suggest a lack of definition and reasonable understanding of complexity in relation to the management of complex projects.\nProject complexity is the property of a project which makes it difficult to understand, foresee, and keep under control its overall behavior, even when given reasonably complete information about the project system.\nThe identification of complex projects is specifically important to multi-project engineering environments.\nAs it is considered that project complexity and project performance are closely related, it is important to define and measure the complexity of the project for project management to be effective.\nComplexity can be:\nBased on the Cynefin framework, complex projects can be classified as:\nBy applying the discovery in measuring work complexity described in requisite organization and stratified systems theory, Elliott Jaques classifies projects and project work (stages, tasks) into seven basic levels of project complexity based on such criteria as time-span of discretion and complexity of a project's output:\nBenefits from measuring Project Complexity are to improve project people feasibility by matching the level of a project's complexity with an effective targeted completion time, with the respective capability level of the project manager and of the project members.\nPositive, appropriate (requisite), and negative complexity.\nSimilarly with the Law of requisite variety and The law of requisite complexity, project complexity is sometimes required in order for the project to reach its objectives, and sometimes it has beneficial outcomes. Based on the effects of complexity, Stefan Morcov proposed its classification as Positive, Appropriate, or Negative.\nProject managers.\nA project manager is a professional in the field of project management. Project managers are in charge of the people in a project. People are the key to any successful project. Without the correct people in the right place and at the right time, a project cannot be successful. Project managers can have responsibility for the planning, execution, controlling, and closing of any project typically relating to the construction industry, engineering, architecture, computing, and telecommunications. Many other fields of production engineering, design engineering, and heavy industrial have project managers.\nA project manager needs to understand the order of execution of a project to schedule the project correctly as well as the time necessary to accomplish each individual task within the project. A project manager is the person accountable for accomplishing the stated project objectives on behalf of the client. Project managers tend to have multiple years' experience in their field. A project manager is required to know the project in and out while supervising the workers along with the project. Typically in most construction, engineering, architecture, and industrial projects, a project manager has another manager working alongside of them who is typically responsible for the execution of task on a daily basis. This position in some cases is known as a superintendent. A superintendent and project manager work hand in hand in completing daily project tasks. Key project management responsibilities include creating clear and attainable project objectives, building the project requirements, and managing the triple constraint (which may also include more, competing constraints) for projects, which is cost, time, quality and scope for the first three but about three additional ones in current project management. A typical project is composed of a team of workers who work under the project manager to complete the assignment within the time and budget targets. A project manager normally reports directly to someone of higher stature on the completion and success of the project.\nA project manager is often a client representative and has to determine and implement the exact needs of the client, based on knowledge of the firm they are representing. The ability to adapt to the various internal procedures of the contracting party, and to form close links with the nominated representatives, is essential in ensuring that the key issues of cost, time, quality and above all, client satisfaction, can be realized.\nA complete project manager, a term first coined by Robert J. Graham in his simulation, has been expanded upon by Randall L. Englund and Alfonso Bucero. They describe a complete project manager as a person who embraces multiple disciplines, such as leadership, influence, negotiations, politics, change and conflict management, and humor. These are all \"soft\" people skills that enable project leaders to be more effective and achieve optimized, consistent results.\nProject success vs. project performance.\nThere is a tendency to confuse the project success with project management success. Project success has two perspectives: \nProject management success criteria are different from project success criteria. The project management is said to be successful if the given project is completed within the agreed upon time, met the agreed-upon scope and within the agreed-upon budget. Subsequent to the triple constraints, multiple constraints have been considered to ensure project success. However, the triple or multiple constraints indicate only the efficiency measures of the project, which are indeed the project management success criteria during the project lifecycle.\nThe priori criteria leave out the more important after-completion results of the project which comprise four levels i.e. the output (product) success, outcome (benefits) success and impact (strategic) success during the product lifecycle. These posterior success criteria indicate the effectiveness measures of the project product, service or result, after the project completion and handover. This overarching multilevel success framework of projects, programs and portfolios has been developed by Paul Bannerman in 2008. In other words, a project is said to be successful, when it succeeds in achieving the expected business case which needs to be clearly identified and defined during the project inception and selection before starting the development phase. This multilevel success framework conforms to the theory of project as a transformation depicted as the input-process / activity-output-outcome-impact in order to generate whatever value intended. Emanuel Camilleri in 2011 classifies all the critical success and failure factors into groups and matches each of them with the multilevel success criteria in order to deliver business value.\nAn example of a performance indicator used in relation to project management is the \"backlog of commissioned projects\" or \"project backlog\".\nRisk management.\nThe United States Department of Defense states that \"Cost, Schedule, Performance, and Risk\" are the four elements through which Department of Defense acquisition professionals make trade-offs and track program status. There are also international standards. Risk management applies proactive identification (see tools) of future problems and understanding of their consequences allowing predictive decisions about projects. ERM system plays a role in overall risk management.\nWork breakdown structure and other breakdown structures.\nThe work breakdown structure (WBS) is a tree structure that shows a subdivision of the activities required to achieve an objective\u00a0\u2013 for example a portfolio, program, project, and contract. The WBS may be hardware-, product-, service-, or process-oriented (see an example in a ). Beside WBS for project scope management, there are organizational breakdown structure (chart), cost breakdown structure and risk breakdown structure.\nA WBS can be developed by starting with the end objective and successively subdividing it into manageable components in terms of size, duration, and responsibility (e.g., systems, subsystems, components, tasks, sub-tasks, and work packages), which include all steps necessary to achieve the objective.\nThe work breakdown structure provides a common framework for the natural development of the overall planning and control of a contract and is the basis for dividing work into definable increments from which the statement of work can be developed and technical, schedule, cost, and labor hour reporting can be established.\nThe work breakdown structure can be displayed in two forms, as a table with subdivision of tasks or as an organizational chart whose lowest nodes are referred to as \"work packages\".\nIt is an essential element in assessing the quality of a plan, and an initial element used during the planning of the project. For example, a WBS is used when the project is scheduled, so that the use of work packages can be recorded and tracked.\nSimilarly to work breakdown structure (WBS), other decomposition techniques and tools are: organization breakdown structure (OBS), product breakdown structure (PBS), cost breakdown structure (CBS), risk breakdown structure (RBS), and resource breakdown structure (ResBS).\nInternational standards.\nThere are several project management standards, including:\nProgram management and project networks.\nSome projects, either identical or different, can be managed as program management. \nPrograms are collections of projects that support a common objective and set of goals. While individual projects have clearly defined and specific scope and timeline, a program's objectives and duration are defined with a lower level of granularity.\nBesides programs and portfolios, additional structures that combine their different characteristics are: project networks, mega-projects, or mega-programs.\nA project network is a temporary project formed of several different distinct evolving phases, crossing organizational lines. \nMega-projects and mega-programs are defined as exceptional in terms of size, cost, public and political attention, and competencies required.\nProject portfolio management.\nAn increasing number of organizations are using what is referred to as project portfolio management (PPM) as a means of selecting the right projects and then using project management techniques as the means for delivering the outcomes in the form of benefits to the performing public, private or not-for-profit organization.\nPortfolios are collections of similar projects. Portfolio management supports efficiencies of scale, increasing success rates, and reducing project risks, by applying similar standardized techniques to all projects in the portfolio, by a group of project management professionals sharing common tools and knowledge. \nOrganizations often create project management offices as an organizational structure to support project portfolio management in a structured way. \nThus, PPM is usually performed by a dedicated team of managers organized within an enterprise project management office (PMO), usually based within the organization, and headed by a PMO director or chief project officer. In cases where strategic initiatives of an organization form the bulk of the PPM, the head of the PPM is sometimes titled as the chief initiative officer.\nProject management software.\nProject management software is software used to help plan, organize, and manage resource pools, develop resource estimates and implement plans. Depending on the sophistication of the software, functionality may include estimation and planning, scheduling, cost control and budget management, resource allocation, collaboration software, communication, decision-making, workflow, risk, quality, documentation, and/or administration systems. A comparison of project management software shows different features included in different software.\nVirtual project management.\nVirtual program management (VPM) is management of a project done by a virtual team, though it rarely may refer to a project implementing a virtual environment It is noted that managing a virtual project is fundamentally different from managing traditional projects, combining concerns of remote work and global collaboration (culture, time zones, language).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24047", "revid": "13006032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24047", "title": "Phase (waves)", "text": "Elapsed fraction of a cycle of a periodic function\nIn physics and mathematics, the phase (symbol \u03c6 or \u03d5) of a wave or other periodic function formula_1 of some real variable formula_2 (such as time) is an angle-like quantity representing the fraction of the cycle covered up to formula_2. It is expressed in such a scale that it varies by one full turn as the variable formula_2 goes through each period (and formula_5 goes through each complete cycle). It may be measured in any angular unit such as degrees or radians, thus increasing by 360\u00b0 or formula_6 as the variable formula_2 completes a full period.\nThis convention is especially appropriate for a sinusoidal function, since its value at any argument formula_2 then can be expressed as formula_9, the sine of the phase, multiplied by some factor (the amplitude of the sinusoid). (The cosine may be used instead of sine, depending on where one considers each period to start.)\nUsually, whole turns are ignored when expressing the phase; so that formula_9 is also a periodic function, with the same period as formula_1, that repeatedly scans the same range of angles as formula_2 goes through each period. Then, formula_1 is said to be \"at the same phase\" at two argument values formula_14 and formula_15 (that is, formula_16) if the difference between them is a whole number of periods.\nThe numeric value of the phase formula_9 depends on the arbitrary choice of the start of each period, and on the interval of angles that each period is to be mapped to.\nThe term \"phase\" is also used when comparing a periodic function formula_1 with a shifted version formula_19 of it. If the shift in formula_2 is expressed as a fraction of the period, and then scaled to an angle formula_21 spanning a whole turn, one gets the \"phase shift\", \"phase offset\", or \"phase difference\" of formula_19 relative to formula_1. If formula_1 is a \"canonical\" function for a class of signals, like formula_25 is for all sinusoidal signals, then formula_21 is called the \"initial phase\" of formula_19.\nMathematical definition.\nLet the signal formula_1 be a periodic function of one real variable, and formula_29 be its period (that is, the smallest positive real number such that formula_30 for all formula_2). Then the \"phase of formula_1 at\" any argument formula_2 is \nformula_34\nHere formula_35 denotes the fractional part of a real number, discarding its integer part; that is, formula_36; and formula_37 is an arbitrary \"origin\" value of the argument, that one considers to be the beginning of a cycle.\nThis concept can be visualized by imagining a clock with a hand that turns at constant speed, making a full turn every formula_29 seconds, and is pointing straight up at time formula_37. The phase formula_9 is then the angle from the 12:00 position to the current position of the hand, at time formula_2, measured clockwise.\nThe phase concept is most useful when the origin formula_37 is chosen based on features of formula_1. For example, for a sinusoid, a convenient choice is any formula_2 where the function's value changes from zero to positive.\nThe formula above gives the phase as an angle in radians between 0 and formula_6. To get the phase as an angle between formula_46 and formula_47, one uses instead\nformula_48\nThe phase expressed in degrees (from 0\u00b0 to 360\u00b0, or from \u2212180\u00b0 to +180\u00b0) is defined the same way, except with \"360\u00b0\" in place of \"2\u03c0\".\nConsequences.\nWith any of the above definitions, the phase formula_9 of a periodic signal is periodic too, with the same period formula_29:\nformula_51\nThe phase is zero at the start of each period; that is\nformula_52\nMoreover, for any given choice of the origin formula_37, the value of the signal formula_1 for any argument formula_2 depends only on its phase at formula_2. Namely, one can write formula_57, where formula_58 is a function of an angle, defined only for a single full turn, that describes the variation of formula_1 as formula_2 ranges over a single period.\nIn fact, every periodic signal formula_1 with a specific waveform can be expressed as \nformula_62\nwhere formula_63 is a \"canonical\" function of a phase angle in 0 to 2\u03c0, that describes just one cycle of that waveform; and formula_64 is a scaling factor for the amplitude. (This claim assumes that the starting time formula_37 chosen to compute the phase of formula_1 corresponds to argument 0 of formula_63.)\nAdding and comparing phases.\nSince phases are angles, any whole full turns should usually be ignored when performing arithmetic operations on them. That is, the sum and difference of two phases (in degrees) should be computed by the formulas\nformula_68\nrespectively. Thus, for example, the sum of phase angles 190\u00b0 + 200\u00b0 is 30\u00b0 (190 + 200 = 390, minus one full turn), and subtracting 50\u00b0 from 30\u00b0 gives a phase of 340\u00b0 (30 \u2212 50 = \u221220, plus one full turn).\nSimilar formulas hold for radians, with formula_6 instead of 360.\nPhase shift.\nThe difference formula_70 between the phases of two periodic signals formula_1 and formula_19 is called the \"phase difference\" or \"phase shift\" of formula_19 relative to formula_1. At values of formula_2 when the difference is zero, the two signals are said to be \"in phase;\" otherwise, they are \"out of phase\" with each other.\nIn the clock analogy, each signal is represented by a hand (or pointer) of the same clock, both turning at constant but possibly different speeds. The phase difference is then the angle between the two hands, measured clockwise.\nThe phase difference is particularly important when two signals are added together by a physical process, such as two periodic sound waves emitted by two sources and recorded together by a microphone. This is usually the case in linear systems, when the superposition principle holds.\nFor arguments formula_2 when the phase difference is zero, the two signals will have the same sign and will be reinforcing each other. One says that constructive interference is occurring. At arguments formula_2 when the phases are different, the value of the sum depends on the waveform.\nFor sinusoids.\nFor sinusoidal signals, when the phase difference formula_9 is 180\u00b0 (formula_79 radians), one says that the phases are \"opposite\", and that the signals are \"in antiphase\". Then the signals have opposite signs, and destructive interference occurs. \nConversely, a \"phase reversal\" or \"phase inversion\" implies a 180-degree phase shift.\nWhen the phase difference formula_9 is a quarter of turn (a right angle, +90\u00b0 = \u03c0/2 or \u221290\u00b0 = 270\u00b0 = \u2212\u03c0/2 = 3\u03c0/2), sinusoidal signals are sometimes said to be in \"quadrature\", e.g., in-phase and quadrature components of a composite signal or even different signals (e.g., voltage and current).\nIf the frequencies are different, the phase difference formula_9 increases linearly with the argument formula_2. The periodic changes from reinforcement and opposition cause a phenomenon called beating.\nFor shifted signals.\nThe phase difference is especially important when comparing a periodic signal formula_1 with a shifted and possibly scaled version formula_19 of it. That is, suppose that formula_85 for some constants formula_86 and all formula_2. Suppose also that the origin for computing the phase of formula_19 has been shifted too. In that case, the phase difference formula_21 is a constant (independent of formula_2), called the 'phase shift' or 'phase offset' of formula_19 relative to formula_1. In the clock analogy, this situation corresponds to the two hands turning at the same speed, so that the angle between them is constant.\nIn this case, the phase shift is simply the argument shift formula_93, expressed as a fraction of the common period formula_29 (in terms of the modulo operation) of the two signals and then scaled to a full turn:\nformula_95\nIf formula_1 is a \"canonical\" representative for a class of signals, like formula_25 is for all sinusoidal signals, then the phase shift formula_21 called simply the \"initial phase\" of formula_19.\nTherefore, when two periodic signals have the same frequency, they are always in phase, or always out of phase. Physically, this situation commonly occurs, for many reasons. For example, the two signals may be a periodic soundwave recorded by two microphones at separate locations. Or, conversely, they may be periodic soundwaves created by two separate speakers from the same electrical signal, and recorded by a single microphone. They may be a radio signal that reaches the receiving antenna in a straight line, and a copy of it that was reflected off a large building nearby.\nA well-known example of phase difference is the length of shadows seen at different points of Earth. To a first approximation, if formula_5 is the length seen at time formula_2 at one spot, and formula_19 is the length seen at the same time at a longitude 30\u00b0 west of that point, then the phase difference between the two signals will be 30\u00b0 (assuming that, in each signal, each period starts when the shadow is shortest).\nFor sinusoids with same frequency.\nFor sinusoidal signals (and a few other waveforms, like square or symmetric triangular), a phase shift of 180\u00b0 is equivalent to a phase shift of 0\u00b0 with negation of the amplitude. When two signals with these waveforms, same period, and opposite phases are added together, the sum formula_103 is either identically zero, or is a sinusoidal signal with the same period and phase, whose amplitude is the difference of the original amplitudes.\nThe phase shift of the co-sine function relative to the sine function is +90\u00b0. It follows that, for two sinusoidal signals formula_1 and formula_19 with same frequency and amplitudes formula_64 and formula_107, and formula_19 has phase shift +90\u00b0 relative to formula_1, the sum formula_103 is a sinusoidal signal with the same frequency, with amplitude formula_111 and phase shift formula_112 from formula_1, such that\nformula_114\nA real-world example of a sonic phase difference occurs in the warble of a Native American flute. The amplitude of different harmonic components of same long-held note on the flute come into dominance at different points in the phase cycle. The phase difference between the different harmonics can be observed on a spectrogram of the sound of a warbling flute.\nPhase comparison.\n\"Phase comparison\" is a comparison of the phase of two waveforms, usually of the same nominal frequency. In time and frequency, the purpose of a phase comparison is generally to determine the frequency offset (difference between signal cycles) with respect to a reference.\nA phase comparison can be made by connecting two signals to a two-channel oscilloscope. The oscilloscope will display two sine signals, as shown in the graphic to the right. In the adjacent image, the top sine signal is the test frequency, and the bottom sine signal represents a signal from the reference.\nIf the two frequencies were exactly the same, their phase relationship would not change and both would appear to be stationary on the oscilloscope display. Since the two frequencies are not exactly the same, the reference appears to be stationary and the test signal moves. By measuring the rate of motion of the test signal, the offset between frequencies can be determined.\nVertical lines have been drawn through the points where each sine signal passes through zero. The bottom of the figure shows bars whose width represents the phase difference between the signals. In this case the phase difference is increasing, indicating that the test signal is lower in frequency than the reference.\nFormula for phase of an oscillation or a periodic signal.\nThe phase of a simple harmonic oscillation or sinusoidal signal is the value of formula_115 in the following functions:\nformula_116\nwhere formula_117, formula_118, and formula_119 are constant parameters called the \"amplitude\", \"frequency\", and \"phase\" of the sinusoid. These signals are periodic with period formula_120, and they are identical except for a displacement of formula_121 along the formula_122 axis. The term \"phase\" can refer to several different things:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24048", "revid": "50803212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24048", "title": "Particle in a box", "text": "Mathematical model in quantum mechanics\nIn quantum mechanics, the particle in a box model (also known as the infinite potential well or the infinite square well) describes the movement of a free particle in a small space surrounded by impenetrable barriers. The model is mainly used as a hypothetical example to illustrate the differences between classical and quantum systems. In classical systems, for example, a particle trapped inside a large box can move at any speed within the box and it is no more likely to be found at one position than another. However, when the well becomes very narrow (on the scale of a few nanometers), quantum effects become important. The particle may only occupy certain positive energy levels. Likewise, it can never have zero energy, meaning that the particle can never \"sit still\". Additionally, it is more likely to be found at certain positions than at others, depending on its energy level. The particle may never be detected at certain positions, known as spatial nodes.\nThe particle in a box model is one of the very few problems in quantum mechanics that can be solved analytically, without approximations. Due to its simplicity, the model allows insight into quantum effects without the need for complicated mathematics. It serves as a simple illustration of how energy quantizations (energy levels), which are found in more complicated quantum systems such as atoms and molecules, come about. It is one of the first quantum mechanics problems taught in undergraduate physics courses, and it is commonly used as an approximation for more complicated quantum systems.\nOne-dimensional solution.\nThe simplest form of the particle in a box model considers a one-dimensional system. Here, the particle may only move backwards and forwards along a straight line with impenetrable barriers at either end.\nThe walls of a one-dimensional box may be seen as regions of space with an infinitely large potential energy. Conversely, the interior of the box has a constant, zero potential energy. This means that no forces act upon the particle inside the box and it can move freely in that region. However, infinitely large forces repel the particle if it touches the walls of the box, preventing it from escaping. The potential energy in this model is given as\nformula_1\nwhere \"L\" is the length of the box, \"xc\" is the location of the center of the box and \"x\" is the position of the particle within the box. Simple cases include the centered box (\"xc\" = 0) and the shifted box (\"xc\" = \"L\"/2) (pictured).\nPosition wave function.\nIn quantum mechanics, the wave function gives the most fundamental description of the behavior of a particle; the measurable properties of the particle (such as its position, momentum and energy) may all be derived from the wave function.\nThe wave function formula_2 can be found by solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation for the system\nformula_3\nwhere formula_4 is the reduced Planck constant, formula_5 is the mass of the particle, formula_6 is the imaginary unit and formula_7 is time.\nInside the box, no forces act upon the particle, which means that the part of the wave function inside the box oscillates through space and time with the same form as a free particle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt; where formula_8 and formula_9 are arbitrary complex numbers. The frequency of the oscillations through space and time is given by the wave number formula_10 and the angular frequency formula_11 respectively. These are both related to the total energy of the particle by the expression\nformula_12\nwhich is known as the dispersion relation for a free particle. However, since the particle is not entirely free but under the influence of a potential, the energy of the particle is \nformula_13 \nwhere \"T\" is the kinetic and \"V\" the potential energy. Therefore, the energy of the particle given above is \"not\" the same thing as formula_14 (i.e. the momentum of the particle is not given by formula_15). Thus the wave number \"k\" above actually describes the energy states of the particle and is not related to momentum like the \"wave number\" usually is. The rationale for calling \"k\" the wave number is that it enumerates the number of crests that the wave function has inside the box, and in this sense it is a wave number. This discrepancy can be seen more clearly below, when we find out that the energy spectrum of the particle is discrete (only discrete values of energy are allowed) but the momentum spectrum is continuous (momentum can vary continuously), i.e., formula_16. \nThe amplitude of the wave function at a given position is related to the probability of finding a particle there by formula_17. The wave function must therefore vanish everywhere beyond the edges of the box. Also, the amplitude of the wave function may not \"jump\" abruptly from one point to the next. These two conditions are only satisfied by wave functions with the form\nformula_18\nwhere\nformula_19\nand\nformula_20\nfor positive integers formula_21. The simplest solutions, formula_22 or formula_23 both yield the trivial wave function formula_24, which describes a particle that does not exist anywhere in the system. Here one sees that only a discrete set of energy values and wave numbers \"k\" are allowed for the particle. Usually in quantum mechanics it is also demanded that the derivative of the wave function in addition to the wave function itself be continuous; here this demand would lead to the only solution being the constant zero function, which is not what we desire, so we give up this demand (as this system with infinite potential can be regarded as a nonphysical abstract limiting case, we can treat it as such and \"bend the rules\"). Note that giving up this demand means that the wave function is not a differentiable function at the boundary of the box, and thus it can be said that the wave function does not solve the Schr\u00f6dinger equation at the boundary points formula_25 and formula_26 (but does solve it everywhere else).\nFinally, the unknown constant formula_8 may be found by normalizing the wave function. That is, it follows from\nformula_28\nthat any complex number formula_8 whose absolute value is\nformula_30\nyields the same normalized state.\nIt is expected that the \"eigenvalues\", i.e., the energy formula_31 of the box should be the same regardless of its position in space, but formula_32 changes. Notice that formula_33 represents a phase shift in the wave function. This phase shift has no effect when solving the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and therefore does not affect the \"eigenvalue\".\nIf we set the origin of coordinates to the center of the box, we can rewrite the spatial part of the wave function succinctly as:\nformula_34\nMomentum wave function.\nThe momentum wave function is proportional to the Fourier transform of the position wave function. With formula_35 (note that the parameter k describing the momentum wave function below is not exactly the special \"kn\" above, linked to the energy eigenvalues), the momentum wave function is given by\nformula_36\nwhere sinc is the cardinal sine sinc function, sinc(\"x\") = sin(\"x\")/\"x\". For the centered box (\"xc\" = 0), the solution is real and particularly simple, since the phase factor on the right reduces to unity. (With care, it can be written as an even function of p.)\nIt can be seen that the momentum spectrum in this wave packet is continuous, and one may conclude that for the energy state described by the wave number \"kn\", the momentum can, when measured, also attain \"other values\" beyond formula_37.\nHence, it also appears that, since the energy is formula_38 for the \"n\"th eigenstate, the relation formula_39 does not strictly hold for the measured momentum p; the energy eigenstate formula_40 is not a momentum eigenstate, and, in fact, not even a superposition of two momentum eigenstates, as one might be tempted to imagine from equation (1) above: peculiarly, it has no well-defined momentum before measurement!\nPosition and momentum probability distributions.\nIn classic physics, the particle can be detected anywhere in the box with equal probability. In quantum mechanics, however, the probability density for finding a particle at a given position is derived from the wave function as formula_41 For the particle in a box, the probability density for finding the particle at a given position depends upon its state, and is given by\nformula_42\nThus, for any value of \"n\" greater than one, there are regions within the box for which formula_43, indicating that \"spatial nodes\" exist at which the particle cannot be found. If relativistic wave equations are considered, however, the probability density does not go to zero at the nodes (apart from the trivial case formula_44).\nIn quantum mechanics, the average, or expectation value of the position of a particle is given by\nformula_45\nFor the steady state particle in a box, it can be shown that the average position is always formula_46, regardless of the state of the particle. For a superposition of states, the expectation value of the position will change based on the cross term, which is proportional to formula_47.\nThe variance in the position is a measure of the uncertainty in position of the particle:\nformula_48\nThe probability density for finding a particle with a given momentum is derived from the wave function as formula_49. As with position, the probability density for finding the particle at a given momentum depends upon its state, and is given by\nformula_50\nwhere, again, formula_35. The expectation value for the momentum is then calculated to be zero, and the variance in the momentum is calculated to be:\nformula_52\nThe uncertainties in position and momentum (formula_53 and formula_54) are defined as being equal to the square root of their respective variances, so that:\nformula_55\nThis product increases with increasing \"n\", having a minimum for \"n\" = 1. The value of this product for \"n\" = 1 is about equal to 0.568 formula_4, which obeys the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which states that the product will be greater than or equal to formula_57.\nAnother measure of uncertainty in position is the information entropy of the probability distribution \"H\"x:\nformula_58\nwhere \"x\"0 is an arbitrary reference length.\nAnother measure of uncertainty in momentum is the information entropy of the probability distribution \"Hp\":\nformula_59\nformula_60\nwhere \"\u03b3\" is Euler's constant. The quantum mechanical entropic uncertainty principle states that for formula_61\nformula_62 (nats)\nFor formula_63, the sum of the position and momentum entropies yields:\nformula_64\nwhere the unit is nat, and which satisfies the quantum entropic uncertainty principle.\nEnergy levels.\nThe energies that correspond with each of the permitted wave numbers may be written as\nformula_65\nThe energy levels increase with formula_66, meaning that high energy levels are separated from each other by a greater amount than low energy levels are. The lowest possible energy for the particle (its \"zero-point energy\") is found in state 1, which is given by\nformula_67\nThe particle, therefore, always has a positive energy. This contrasts with classical systems, where the particle can have zero energy by resting motionlessly. This can be explained in terms of the uncertainty principle, which states that the product of the uncertainties in the position and momentum of a particle is limited by\nformula_68\nIt can be shown that the uncertainty in the position of the particle is proportional to the width of the box. Thus, the uncertainty in momentum is roughly inversely proportional to the width of the box. The kinetic energy of a particle is given by formula_69, and hence the minimum kinetic energy of the particle in a box is inversely proportional to the mass and the square of the well width, in qualitative agreement with the calculation above.\nHigher-dimensional boxes.\n(Hyper-)rectangular walls.\nIf a particle is trapped in a two-dimensional box, it may freely move in the formula_70 and formula_71-directions, between barriers separated by lengths formula_72 and formula_73 respectively. For a centered box, the position wave function may be written including the length of the box as formula_74. Using a similar approach to that of the one-dimensional box, it can be shown that the wave functions and energies for a centered box are given respectively by\nformula_75\nformula_76\nwhere the two-dimensional wavevector is given by\nformula_77\nFor a three dimensional box, the solutions are\nformula_78\nformula_79\nwhere the three-dimensional wavevector is given by:\nformula_80\nIn general for an \"n\"-dimensional box, the solutions are\nformula_81\nThe \"n\"-dimensional momentum wave functions may likewise be represented by formula_82 and the momentum wave function for an \"n\"-dimensional centered box is then:\nformula_83\nAn interesting feature of the above solutions is that when two or more of the lengths are the same (e.g. formula_84), there are multiple wave functions corresponding to the same total energy. For example, the wave function with formula_85 has the same energy as the wave function with formula_86. This situation is called \"degeneracy\" and for the case where exactly two degenerate wave functions have the same energy that energy level is said to be \"doubly degenerate\". Degeneracy results from symmetry in the system. For the above case two of the lengths are equal so the system is symmetric with respect to a 90\u00b0 rotation.\nMore complicated wall shapes.\nThe wave function for a quantum-mechanical particle in a box whose walls have arbitrary shape is given by the Helmholtz equation subject to the boundary condition that the wave function vanishes at the walls. These systems are studied in the field of quantum chaos for wall shapes whose corresponding dynamical billiard tables are non-integrable.\nApplications.\nBecause of its mathematical simplicity, the particle in a box model is used to find approximate solutions for more complex physical systems in which a particle is trapped in a narrow region of low electric potential between two high potential barriers. These quantum well systems are particularly important in optoelectronics, and are used in devices such as the quantum well laser, the quantum well infrared photodetector and the quantum-confined Stark effect modulator. It is also used to model a lattice in the Kronig\u2013Penney model and for a finite metal with the free electron approximation.\nConjugated polyenes.\nConjugated polyene systems can be modeled using particle in a box. The conjugated system of electrons can be modeled as a one dimensional box with length equal to the total bond distance from one terminus of the polyene to the other. In this case each pair of electrons in each \u03c0 bond corresponds to their energy level. The energy difference between two energy levels, \"nf\" and \"ni\" is:\nformula_87\nThe difference between the ground state energy, n, and the first excited state, n+1, corresponds to the energy required to excite the system. This energy has a specific wavelength, and therefore color of light, related by:\nformula_88\nA common example of this phenomenon is in \u03b2-carotene. \u03b2-carotene (C40H56) is a conjugated polyene with an orange color and a molecular length of approximately 3.8\u00a0nm (though its chain length is only approximately 2.4\u00a0nm). Due to \u03b2-carotene's high level of conjugation, electrons are dispersed throughout the length of the molecule, allowing one to model it as a one-dimensional particle in a box. \u03b2-carotene has 11 carbon-carbon double bonds in conjugation; each of those double bonds contains two \u03c0-electrons, therefore \u03b2-carotene has 22 \u03c0-electrons. With two electrons per energy level, \u03b2-carotene can be treated as a particle in a box at energy level \"n\"=11. Therefore, the minimum energy needed to excite an electron to the next energy level can be calculated, \"n\"=12, as follows (recalling that the mass of an electron is 9.109 \u00d7 10\u221231 kg):\nformula_89\nUsing the previous relation of wavelength to energy, recalling both the Planck constant \"h\" and the speed of light \"c\":\nformula_90\nThis indicates that \u03b2-carotene primarily absorbs light in the infrared spectrum, therefore it would appear white to a human eye. However the observed wavelength is 450\u00a0nm, indicating that the particle in a box is not a perfect model for this system.\nQuantum well laser.\nThe particle in a box model can be applied to quantum well lasers, which are laser diodes consisting of one semiconductor \u201cwell\u201d material sandwiched between two other semiconductor layers of different material . Because the layers of this sandwich are very thin (the middle layer is typically about 100\u00a0\u00c5 thick), quantum confinement effects can be observed. The idea that quantum effects could be harnessed to create better laser diodes originated in the 1970s. The quantum well laser was patented in 1976 by R. Dingle and C. H. Henry.\nSpecifically, the quantum wells behavior can be represented by the particle in a finite well model. Two boundary conditions must be selected. The first is that the wave function must be continuous. Often, the second boundary condition is chosen to be the derivative of the wave function must be continuous across the boundary, but in the case of the quantum well the masses are different on either side of the boundary. Instead, the second boundary condition is chosen to conserve particle flux as formula_91, which is consistent with experiment. The solution to the finite well particle in a box must be solved numerically, resulting in wave functions that are sine functions inside the quantum well and exponentially decaying functions in the barriers. This quantization of the energy levels of the electrons allows a quantum well laser to emit light more efficiently than conventional semiconductor lasers.\nDue to their small size, quantum dots do not showcase the bulk properties of the specified semi-conductor but rather show quantised energy states. This effect is known as the quantum confinement and has led to numerous applications of quantum dots such as the quantum well laser.\nResearchers at Princeton University have recently built a quantum well laser that is no bigger than a grain of rice. The laser is powered by a single electron that passes through two quantum dots; a double quantum dot. The electron moves from a state of higher energy, to a state of lower energy whilst emitting photons in the microwave region. These photons bounce off mirrors to create a beam of light; the laser.\nThe quantum well laser is heavily based on the interaction between light and electrons. This relationship is a key component in quantum mechanical theories that include the De Broglie Wavelength and Particle in a box. The double quantum dot allows scientists to gain full control over the movement of an electron, which consequently results in the production of a laser beam.\nQuantum dots.\nQuantum dots are extremely small semiconductors (on the scale of nanometers). They display quantum confinement in that the electrons cannot escape the \u201cdot\u201d, thus allowing particle-in-a-box approximations to be used. Their behavior can be described by three-dimensional particle-in-a-box energy quantization equations.\nThe energy gap of a quantum dot is the energy gap between its valence and conduction bands. This energy gap formula_92 is equal to the gap of the bulk material formula_93 plus the energy equation derived particle-in-a-box, which gives the energy for electrons and holes. This can be seen in the following equation, where formula_94 and formula_95 are the effective masses of the electron and hole, formula_96 is radius of the dot, and formula_97 is the Planck constant:\nformula_98\nHence, the energy gap of the quantum dot is inversely proportional to the square of the \"length of the box\", i.e. the radius of the quantum dot.\nManipulation of the band gap allows for the absorption and emission of specific wavelengths of light, as energy is inversely proportional to wavelength. The smaller the quantum dot, the larger the band gap and thus the shorter the wavelength absorbed.\nDifferent semiconducting materials are used to synthesize quantum dots of different sizes and therefore emit different wavelengths of light. Materials that normally emit light in the visible region are often used and their sizes are fine-tuned so that certain colors are emitted. Typical substances used to synthesize quantum dots are cadmium (Cd) and selenium (Se). For example, when the electrons of two nanometer CdSe quantum dots relax after excitation, blue light is emitted. Similarly, red light is emitted in four nanometer CdSe quantum dots.\nQuantum dots have a variety of functions including but not limited to fluorescent dyes, transistors, LEDs, solar cells, and medical imaging via optical probes.\nOne function of quantum dots is their use in lymph node mapping, which is feasible due to their unique ability to emit light in the near infrared (NIR) region. Lymph node mapping allows surgeons to track if and where cancerous cells exist.\nQuantum dots are useful for these functions due to their emission of brighter light, excitation by a wide variety of wavelengths, and higher resistance to light than other substances.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24050", "revid": "49464769", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24050", "title": "Peter F. Hamilton", "text": "British author (born 1960)\nPeter F. Hamilton (born 1960) is a British author. He is known for writing science fiction space opera.\nBiography.\nPeter F. Hamilton was born in Rutland, England in 1960. He did not attend university. He said in an interview, \"I did science at school up to age eighteen, I stopped doing English, English literature, writing at sixteen, I just wasn't interested in those days\".\nAfter he started writing in 1987, he sold his first short story to \"Fear Magazine\" in 1988. His first novel, \"Mindstar Rising\", was published during 1993, followed by \"A Quantum Murder\" (1994) and \"The Nano Flower\" (1995), which together comprise the Greg Mandel trilogy.\nHe then wrote a space opera novel, named \"The Night's Dawn Trilogy\". He has also published the \"Commonwealth Saga\" with the \"Void Trilogy\" and \"The Chronicle of the Fallers\" in the same universe.\nSince 2018, he has written the unrelated space opera \"Salvation Sequence\", and young adult sci-fi \"Arkship Trilogy\", set in original universes. \nAwards.\nIn 2000, Hamilton was awarded BSFA Award for \"The Suspect Genome.\"\nHamilton received the Inkpot Award in 2012.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24052", "revid": "609725", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24052", "title": "The Night's Dawn Trilogy", "text": "SF novel series by Peter F. Hamilton\nBritish author Peter F. Hamilton's The Night's Dawn Trilogy consists of three science fiction novels: \"The Reality Dysfunction\" (1996), \"The Neutronium Alchemist\" (1997), and \"The Naked God\" (1999). A collection of short stories, \"A Second Chance at Eden\", shares the same universe, and \"The Confederation Handbook\" documents that universe in non-fiction style.\nOverview.\nThe story of \"The Night's Dawn Trilogy\" is separated over three books: \"The Reality Dysfunction\" (1996), \"The Neutronium Alchemist\" (1997), and \"The Naked God\" (1999); but is also supported by \"A Second Chance at Eden\", a collection of short stories which provide insight into the history of Hamilton's universe.\nThe story is divided in many threads, based on primary, secondary and tertiary characters. These delve deeply into the rich and complex texture of the Universe providing a sense of verisimilitude, also exploring some of Hamilton's darker themes. These story lines include Dariat's struggles inside Valisk, and the Deadnights' voyage to their 'Saviour'.\nIn the 27th century humans have colonised nearly 900 worlds, have living, sentient starships as well as the conventional kind, and are also living in asteroid communities and in large, living space stations. Due to policies of 'ethnic streaming' by the colonisation authorities, worlds are generally united under a single government, with these governments collectively forming a Confederation. The Confederation includes both Adamists and Edenists, two alien races (the Tyrathca and the Kiint), and has an armed Navy (which acts primarily against smugglers, pirates and anti-matter production facilities, which are highly illegal) and a central 'house' based on the world of Avon. Earth is still an important world, with a massive population, exporting a massive number of colonists (both voluntarily and involuntarily), but virtually environmentally destroyed after years of technological abuse.\nHumanity in the 27th century.\nIn the \"Night's Dawn\" trilogy, humankind, although now united under an organization known as the Confederation, has been broken up into two major divisions, \"Adamists\" and \"Edenists\". The economy is dominated by the Edenists, who maintain a powerful monopoly across the Confederation by harvesting 3He (\"helium 3\") from suitable gas giants. This resource is used by all Adamist starships as a primary fuel source. The use of the only other major energy source, antimatter, is illegal due to its devastating military potential, and its possession or production is a capital crime.\nAdamist culture.\nAdamists are the larger of the two groups, and consider themselves to be \"normal\" humans. They allow themselves to use some genetic-engineering improvements (referred to as \"geneering\"), but do not generally condone the use of \"bitek\" (organic/bio technology) in their culture. They are a vast group of people of various cultures and backgrounds, and realistically, the Adamist group encompasses any non-Edenist humans. The majority of Adamists, who are at least nominally religious, do not utilise bitek because it was banned by the Pope during the 21st century. Instead, they use nanotechnology, which they refer to as \"nanonics\". Nanonics perform many of the same physiological feats as bitek, and the two technologies are relatively compatible. Adamist starships use fusion drives, and much of the human economy therefore depends on 3He. The ZTT (Zero Tau Transit, i.e. faster than light) drive allows Adamists to colonize star-systems, usually settling both planets and asteroid belts.\nEdenist culture.\nEdenists are, for the most part, a single culture. They are an idealized, egalitarian, utopian society which, while not believing or practicing religion, does not prohibit it. The majority of Edenists live in huge, multi-kilometre space habitats orbiting gas giants. Each individual habitat is a living organism, fully sentient, and is the perfect arbitrator of its community. Habitats cannot be bribed, are perfect impartial judges, and are aware of almost everything that occurs within them and immediately around them. The most important aspect of any Edenist is his/her use of \"affinity\". Affinity is an advanced form of mental communication similar to the present-day concepts of telepathy or entanglement. Edenist affinity allows them to transfer their memories into the habitat at the time of death. This is regarded as a form of immortality. However, no habitat has yet died of old age (nor will for millennia) and could in turn pass their memories and personality on to another habitat were they ever to die. Adamist religions reject this as an attempt to avoid God's judgment on the soul after death, and it is this which is the root cause of the schism between the Adamist and Edenist cultures.\nEdenists have access to faster-than-light travel through large, fully sentient bitek creatures called \"Voidhawks\". They, along with their crews, make up a vast armada of Edenist merchant vessels operating throughout the Confederation as well as a large fraction of the Confederation Navy. Voidhawks are born and live in the vacuum of space. They are naturally attuned to the magnetic fields and energy fluctuations of surrounding space, and can generate and precisely control a distortion field to manipulate space around them. By manipulating space in this way, Voidhawks can open wormholes and jump long distances (many light years) instantaneously. Such jumps are known as \"swallows\". Another product of the distortion field is the ability to affect gravity in and near the Voidhawk. This is used to reduce the effect of high-g manoeuvering on Voidhawk crews. By using the full power of their distortion fields, Voidhawks can attain a speed and manoeuvrability unmatched by Adamist vessels (except those powered by illegal and highly dangerous antimatter).\nEdenists heavily genetically modify their children, including the gene which allows affinity to develop from conception. They also use modified \"servitors\" which are often chimpanzees with affinity which carry out small tasks and leave Edenists to concentrate on more important matters. Edenists operate cloud scoops in gas giants in order to extract the rare isotope helium 3 which can be used for fusion energy."}
{"id": "24053", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24053", "title": "Pope Boniface I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 418 to 422\nPope Boniface I () was the bishop of Rome from 28 December 418 to his death on 4 September 422. His election was disputed by the supporters of Eulalius until the dispute was settled by Emperor Honorius. Boniface was active in maintaining church discipline, and he restored certain privileges to the metropolitical sees of Narbonne and Vienne, exempting them from any subjection to the primacy of Arles. He was a contemporary of Augustine of Hippo, who dedicated to him some of his works.\nEarly life.\nLittle is known of his life antecedent to his election. He was married and his wife died before he became pope. The \"Liber Pontificalis\" calls him a Roman and the son of the presbyter Iocundus or Jocundus. He is believed to have been ordained by Pope Damasus I (366\u2013384) and to have served as representative of Innocent I at Constantinople (c. 405).\nElection.\nOn the day of Pope Zosimus's funeral, which was held at San Lorenzo fuori le Mura, partisans of Eulalius occupied the Lateran. Later that day, Eulalius arrived, with a crowd consisting of deacons, laity, and a few priests, and was elected bishop. The new pope and his supporters remained at the church until Sunday, 29 December, for the formal ordination customarily took place on a Sunday.\nMeanwhile, on the Saturday after the funeral, and of Eulalius' election, a majority of the priests of the Church elected Boniface, who had previously been a councilor of Pope Innocent. He also was consecrated on 29 December, at the Church of Saint Marcellus in the Campus Martius.\nThe Urban Prefect Aurelius Anicius Symmachus warned both parties to keep the peace and wrote to the Emperor Honorius that Eulalius, who had been elected first and in due order, was in the right. The Emperor answered on 3 January 419, recognizing Eulalius as the rightful bishop of Rome. Despite these official acts, violence broke out between the two groups of supporters, and Boniface was seized by the Prefect's police and taken to a lodging outside the walls where he was detained under the surveillance of the Prefect's agents.\nHowever, Boniface's partisans did not let the matter rest there and sent a petition to Emperor Honorius alleging irregularities in the election of Eulalius. In response, the Emperor suspended his previous order and summoned both parties to appear for judgment before him and certain Italian bishops on 8 February. This hearing then deferred the decision to a synod scheduled to meet at Spoleto on 13 June, but commanded both Boniface and Eulalius to stay out of Rome. Since Easter was approaching, the bishop of Spoleto, an outside party, was asked to celebrate the rites of this important holy day in Rome.\nBoth Empress Galla Placidia and her husband Constantius III favored Eulalius, who had been elected first. And Stewart Oost observes that papal elections at the time were \"still quite indefinite and both parties could thus with right claim proper election and consecration.\" Although Eulalius appeared to be destined to be confirmed to the post, he defied Honorius' order and entered Rome on 18 March \u2014 Easter Sunday that year fell on 30 March \u2014 thus losing the support of the authorities.\nSymmachus sent his police to occupy the Lateran, where Eulalius had established himself, and removed him to a house outside the walls of Rome. Bishop Achilleus of Spoleto celebrated the Mass in the Lateran. The proposed Council of Spoleto was canceled, and on 3 April 419, Emperor Honorius recognized Boniface as the rightful pope.\nPontificate.\nBoniface ordered the singing of the \"Gloria in excelsis\" on Maundy Thursday, and regulated several points of Church discipline. He reversed some of his predecessor's policies regarding church administration. He reduced the vicariate authority giving Patroclus, Bishop of Arles, jurisdiction over other Gallic sees and restored the metropolitan powers of the chief bishops of provinces. He supported Hilary, Archbishop of Narbonne, in his choice of a bishop of the vacant See of Lodeve, against Patroclus, who tried to install someone else. He also insisted that Maximus, Bishop of Valence, should be tried for his alleged crimes, not by a primate, but by a synod of the bishops of Gaul, and promised to sustain their decision.\nBoniface supported Augustine in combating Pelagianism, forwarding to him two Pelagian letters Boniface had received calumniating Augustine. In recognition of this solicitude, Augustine dedicated to Boniface his rejoinder contained in \"Contra duas Epistolas Pelagianoruin Libri quatuor\". He persuaded Emperor Theodosius II to return Illyricum to Western jurisdiction and defended the rights of the Holy See.\nBoniface I died 4 September 422, in Rome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24054", "revid": "25128593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24054", "title": "Pope Boniface II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 530 to 532\nPope Boniface II (; died 17 October 532) was the first Germanic Bishop of Rome. He ruled the Holy See from 22 September 530 until his death on 17 October 532. Boniface died of natural causes, likely an illness or old age. \nEarly life.\nBoniface's father's name was Sigibuld. He was probably born in Rome, and was designated to succeed to the papacy by his predecessor, Felix IV, who had been a strong adherent of the Arian Kings of Ostrogoths.\nPapacy.\nBoniface was later elected, largely due to the influence of Athalaric, King of Ostrogoths. For a time, he served as pope in competition with Dioscorus, who had been elected by most of the priests of Rome. Boniface and Dioscorus were both consecrated in Rome on 22 September 530, but Dioscurus died only twenty-two days later.\nBoniface II's most notable act was confirming the decisions of the Council of Orange, teaching that grace is always necessary to obtain salvation. \nDeath.\nBoniface died on 17 October 532. His body was buried in St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24055", "revid": "9182658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24055", "title": "Pope Boniface III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 607\nPope Boniface III () was the bishop of Rome from 19 February 607 to his death on 12 November of the same year. Despite his short pontificate, he made a significant contribution to the Catholic Church.\nEarly career.\nThe son of Iohannes (John) Cataadioce, Boniface was of Roman extraction. While serving as a deacon, Boniface impressed Pope Gregory I, who described him as a man \"of tried faith and character\" and selected him to be papal apocrisiarius to the imperial court in Constantinople in 603. This was to be a significant time in his life and helped to shape his short but eventful papacy.\nAs \"apocrisarius\", Boniface had the ear of Emperor Phocas and was held in esteem by him. This proved important when he was instructed by Pope Gregory to intercede with Emperor Phocas on behalf of Bishop Alcison of Cassiope on the island of Corcyra. Alcison found his episcopate being usurped by Bishop John of Euria in Epirus, who had fled his home along with his clergy to escape from attacks by the Slavs and Avars. John, having found himself safe on Corcyra, was not content to serve under Bishop Alcison; instead he set about trying to usurp his episcopal authority. Normally, this behaviour would not have been tolerated, but Emperor Phocas was sympathetic to Bishop John and not inclined to interfere. Alcison appealed to Pope Gregory, who left the problem to Boniface to resolve. In a stroke of diplomatic genius, Boniface managed to reconcile all the parties while still retaining the confidence of the emperor.\nPapacy.\nBoniface was elected to succeed Pope Sabinian, who died in February 606, but his return from Constantinople to Rome was delayed by almost a year. There is much debate over why there was such a long vacancy. Some authorities believe that it was to allow Boniface to complete his work in Constantinople, but the more widely held belief is that imperial ratification was delayed due to dissension between those who supported the policies of Gregory I and those who did not. Boniface himself is thought to have insisted on the elections being free and fair and may have refused to take up the papacy until convinced that they had been.\nBoniface III made two significant changes to papal selections. The first was the enacting of a decree forbidding anyone during the lifetime of a pope to discuss the appointment of his successor under pain of excommunication. The second change established that no steps could be taken to provide for a papal successor until three days after a pope's burial. This suggests that he was serious in his desire to keep papal elections free.\nBoniface's other notable act resulted from his close relationship with Emperor Phocas. He sought and obtained a decree from Phocas which restated that \"the See of Blessed Peter the Apostle should be the head of all the Churches\". This ensured that the title of \"universal bishop\" belonged exclusively to the bishop of Rome, and effectively ended the attempt by Patriarch Cyriacus of Constantinople to establish himself as \"universal bishop\".\nBoniface III was buried in Old St. Peter's Basilica, Rome, on 12 November 607.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24056", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24056", "title": "Pope Boniface IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 608 to 615\nPope Boniface IV (; 550 \u2013 8 May 615) was the bishop of Rome from 608 to his death on 8 May 615. He was a member of the Benedictine order. Boniface had served as a deacon under Pope Gregory I, and like his mentor, he ran the Lateran Palace as a monastery. As pope, he encouraged monasticism. With imperial permission, he converted the Pantheon into a church. In 610, he conferred with Bishop Mellitus of London regarding the needs of the English Church. He is venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church with a universal feast day on 8 May.\nFamily and early career.\nBoniface was born in what is now the Province of L'Aquila. His father was a physician named John. His family was of Marsi origins according to the Liber Pontificalis. During the pontificate of Gregory the Great, Boniface was a deacon of the Roman Church and held the position of \"dispensator\", that is, the first official in connection with the administration of the patrimonies.\nPontificate.\nBoniface IV was elected to succeed Boniface III but a vacancy of over nine months ensued, awaiting imperial confirmation from Constantinople. He was consecrated on either 25 August, according to Duchesne, or 15 September, according to Jaff\u00e9, in 608. The Vatican lists the official beginning of his papacy as 25 September. \nBoniface obtained leave from Emperor Phocas to convert the Pantheon in Rome into a Christian church, and on 13 May 609, the temple erected by Agrippa to Jupiter the Avenger, Venus, and Mars was consecrated by the pope in honor of the Virgin Mary and all the Martyrs. It was the first instance in Rome of the transformation of a pagan temple into a place of Christian worship. Twenty-eight cartloads of sacred bones were said to have been removed from the Catacombs and placed in a porphyry basin beneath the high altar.\nIn 610, Mellitus, the first bishop of London, went to Rome \"to consult the pope on important matters relative to the newly established English Church\". While in Rome, he assisted at a synod then being held concerning certain questions on \"the life and monastic peace of monks\", and, on his departure, took to England the decree of the council together with letters from the pope to Archbishop Laurence of Canterbury and to all the clergy, to King \u00c6thelberht of Kent, and to all the Anglo-Saxons. The decrees of the council now extant are spurious. The letter to \u00c6thelberht is considered spurious by Hefele, questionable by Haddan and Stubbs, and genuine by Jaff\u00e9.\nBetween 612 and 615, the Irish missionary Columbanus, then living at Bobbio in Italy, was persuaded by King Agilulf of Lombardy to address a letter on the condemnation of the \"Three Chapters\" to Boniface IV. He told the pope that he was suspected of heresy for accepting the Fifth Ecumenical Council and exhorted him to summon a council and prove his orthodoxy. There is no record of a rejoinder from Boniface.\nDeath.\nInspired by Gregory the Great, Boniface IV converted his house into a monastery, where he retired and died on 8 May. He was succeeded by Adeodatus I, who reversed his policy favouring monasticism. Boniface IV was buried in the portico of St. Peter's Basilica. His remains were three times removed \u2014 in the tenth or eleventh century, at the close of the thirteenth under Boniface VIII, and to the new St. Peter's on 21 October 1603. Boniface IV is commemorated as a saint in the Roman Martyrology on his feast day, 8 May.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "24057", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24057", "title": "Pope Boniface V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 619 to 625\nPope Boniface V (; died 25 October 625) was the bishop of Rome from 23 December 619 to his death on 25 October 625. He did much for the Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England, and enacted the decree by which churches became places of sanctuary.\nElection.\nBoniface came from Naples. His father's name was Ioannes or John. Nothing is known about his career before he became pope. He was elected to succeed Adeodatus I after the latter's death in November 618, but thirteen months of \"sede vacante\" ensued before the election was ratified by the imperial government in Constantinople. During that time, Italy was disturbed by the rebellion of the exarch of Ravenna, Eleutherius, who proclaimed himself emperor. Eleutherius advanced towards Rome, but before he reached the city, he was slain by his own troops. Boniface had been loyal to Emperor Heraclius, and his election was ratified on 23 December 619.\nPontificate.\nLike Adeodatus I, Boniface V opposed Gregory I's pro-monastic policy. For that reason, he prescribed that acolytes should not presume to translate the relics of martyrs and that, in the Basilica of Saint John Lateran, they should not take the place of deacons in administering baptism. Boniface made certain enactments relative to the rights of sanctuary, and that he ordered the ecclesiastical notaries to obey the laws of the empire on the subject of wills. Boniface completed and consecrated the cemetery of Saint Nicomedes on the Via Nomentana. In the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Boniface is described as \"the mildest of men\", whose chief distinction was his great love for the clergy.\nBede writes of the pope's affectionate concern for the English Church. The \"letters of exhortation\" which he is said to have addressed to Archbishop Mellitus of Canterbury and Bishop Justus of Rochester are no longer extant, but certain other letters of his have been preserved. One is written to Justus after he had succeeded Mellitus as archbishop of Canterbury in 624, conferring the pallium upon him and directing him to \"ordain bishops as occasion should require.\" According to Bede, Pope Boniface also sent letters to King Edwin of Northumbria in 625 urging him to embrace the Christian faith, and to Edwin's Christian wife, \u00c6thelburg of Kent, exhorting her to use her best endeavours for the conversion of her husband.\nBoniface V was buried in St. Peter's Basilica on 25 October 625. He was succeeded by Honorius I.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "24058", "revid": "35751661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24058", "title": "Pope Boniface VI", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 896\nPope Boniface VI (; died 26 April 896), a native of Rome, served very briefly as the bishop of Rome and ruler of the Papal States in April of 896. He was elected as a result of riots soon after the death of Pope Formosus on April 4. Prior to his reign, he had twice incurred a sentence of deprivation of orders as a subdeacon and as a priest. After a pontificate of fifteen days, he is said by some to have died of gout, and by others to have been forcibly ejected to make way for Stephen VI, the candidate of the Spoletan party.\nThe Papal historian Caesar Baronius describes him as a 'disgusting monster' guilty of adultery and homicide.\nAt a synod in Rome held by John IX in 898, his election was pronounced null and void.\nLittle is written about the life of Boniface VI. It is believed by historians that his father was a man called Adrian, who was also a bishop. He then likely served as a sub-deacon or priest before his election to the papacy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24059", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24059", "title": "Antipope Boniface VII", "text": "Antipope in 974, 984\u2013985\nAntipope Boniface VII (died 20 July 985), otherwise known as Franco Ferrucci, was a Catholic prelate who claimed the Holy See in 974 and from 984 until 985. A popular tumult compelled him to flee to Constantinople in 974; he carried off a vast treasure, and returned in 984 and removed Pope John XIV (983\u2013984) from office. He is supposed to have put Pope Benedict VI to death. After a brief second rule, he died under suspicious circumstances. He is today considered an antipope.\nEarly life.\nOriginally named Franco, he was the son of Ferrucius. He was born in Italy in the late 920s or early 930s AD, although the exact date is not known. Since his surname was Franco, it has been supposed that he belonged to a family of the name which is frequently mentioned in the documents of the tenth century, and which may have been of French origin. In 972 he became a cardinal deacon, a position which he held until he began his papacy in 974. However, little else is known about his early life simply due to the lack of documents available from this period of Rome as a whole.\nPapacy.\nUnder Benedict VI.\nWhen Pope John XIII, born Giovanni Crescentius, of the powerful Roman Crescentii family, died on 6 September 972, the majority of the electors who adhered to the imperial faction, elected Benedict, cardinal deacon of the church of Saint Theodore. The anti-imperial faction led by the Crescentii, supported Franco. Benedict was consecrated on 19 January 973 but lacked the support of much of the Roman aristocracy. On 7 May 973 Otto the Great died, and Otto II took over. Otto II's preoccupation with events in Germany created an opportunity for the Roman aristocracy to rebel against the imperial administration.\nFirst Reign.\nCrescentius, brother of the late Pope John XIII, led an insurrection and with the help of many Roman malcontents, kidnapped Pope Benedict VI. They imprisoned him in Castel Sant\u2019Angelo for nearly two months. In July 974 Franco assumed the papacy as Boniface VII. Although Otto II, who supported Pope Benedict VI, was still fighting in Bavaria, and could not make it to Rome, he sent Count Sicco, an imperial envoy from Spoleto, to demand the pope's release. When Sicco arrived at Castel Sant\u2019Angelo, a priest named Stephen strangled Benedict VI, possibly on orders of Boniface VII.\nBoniface VII's reign was short. In one month and twelve days, the imperial representative Count Sicco had taken possession of the city. As riots and chaos ensued, Boniface VII took refuge in Castel Sant\u2019Angelo where he robbed the treasury of the Vatican Basilica and fled to Byzantine territory in southern Italy. The banishment of the antipope must have been the work of the imperial faction, which were again triumphant in Rome, led by Pandulf the Ironhead. Boniface VII is described as a monster by contemporaries, who stated that he was stained by the blood of Benedict VI. The events of this period in Rome are only known to us through the insufficient notes, and we are barely aware of the rise of Boniface VII before we hear of his overthrow.\nUnder Benedict VII.\nUnder the influence of Sicco, Benedict, Bishop of Sutri, was elected by the Roman clergy and people, as a compromise candidate in October 974. He took the name of Benedict VII. He was from the noble family of the Counts of Tusculum, and connected to the Crescentii family. Benedict VII immediately held a synod where he excommunicated Boniface. The Emperor celebrated the Easter of 981 in Rome and so overawed the factions that Benedict was able to finish his pontificate in peace. Benedict died on 10 July 983.\nUnder John XIV.\nPeter of Pavia, Otto II's imperial chancellor for the Kingdom of Italy, was elected pope, taking the name of John XIV. However, shortly after the election, the Emperor fell seriously ill and died on 7 December 983. With Otto II's heir being only aged three, the anti-imperial faction finally felt free from the hated emperor and desired a Roman Pope. To this point, Boniface VII saw his opportunity and\u2014in league with Greeks and Saracens\u2014headed for Rome in April 984. With the help of both the treasury he had stolen from his first attempt at the papacy as well as the gold of his Greek followers, he was able to strike relationships with several powerful people. With the help of Crescentius\u2019 sons, John and Crescentius II, Boniface had Pope John XIV imprisoned in Castel Sant\u2019Angelo. Four months later, on 20 August 984, John XIV died in Sant\u2019Angelo either due to starvation, poison, or by the order of Boniface.\nAfter the death of Pope John XIV, Boniface once again took hold of the papal throne. He still believed himself to be the only rightful pope, and back-dated his reign to 974.\nFinal days.\nLittle is known of the reign of Boniface VII, but on 20 July 985 he suddenly died. It is possible that he was murdered, but it cannot be confirmed by any known sources. His body was dragged through the streets and stripped naked, ultimately being left beneath Marcus Aurelius's statue in front of the Lateran Palace.\nThere were undoubtedly many atrocities that Boniface committed in the eleven months he was in power in 984\u2013985, most of which were probably acts of revenge due to his previous exile. It is obvious he had become a stranger to the Roman people, and had most likely even become an inconvenience to his own followers. He was referred to as \u201cMalefatius\u201d instead of Bonifatius, and also \u201chorrendum monstrum\u201d by many, showing the turn of feelings the people of Rome had had.\nThe anti-imperial faction, previously headed by Crescentius and now headed by his two sons, that had helped him rise to his papal status was now not so much Byzantine as it was Roman. They likely overthrew Boniface VII in hopes of seizing control of a vulnerable Rome. After a reign spanning eleven years, in which he overthrew two popes, allowing both to die in Castel Sant\u2019Angelo, Boniface VII was finally dead. The following morning compassionate clerics removed the corpse and gave it a Christian burial.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain&amp;colon; 9th edition (1880s) of an unnamed encyclopedia"}
{"id": "24060", "revid": "8458841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24060", "title": "Pope Boniface VIII", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1294 to 1303\nPope Boniface VIII (, ; born Benedetto Caetani; c.\u20091230\u2013 11 October 1303) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 24 December 1294 until his death in 1303. The Caetani family was of baronial origin with connections to the papacy. He succeeded Pope Celestine V, who had abdicated from the papal throne. Boniface spent his early pontificate abroad in diplomatic roles.\nBoniface VIII put forward some of the strongest claims of any pope to temporal as well as spiritual power. He involved himself often with foreign affairs, including in France, Sicily, Italy, and the First War of Scottish Independence. These views, and his chronic intervention in temporal affairs, led to many bitter quarrels with Albert I of Germany, Philip IV of France, and Dante Alighieri, who expected the pope to soon arrive at the eighth circle of Hell in his \"Divine Comedy\", among the simoniacs.\nBoniface systematized canon law by collecting it in a new volume, the \"Liber Sextus\" (1298), which continues to be important source material for canon lawyers. He established the first Catholic jubilee year to take place in Rome. Boniface had first entered into conflict with King Philip IV in 1296 when the latter sought to reinforce the nascent nation state by imposing taxes on the clergy and barring them from administration of the law. Boniface excommunicated Philip and all others who prevented French clergy from traveling to the Holy See, after which the king sent his troops to attack the pope's residence in Anagni on 7 September 1303 and capture him. Boniface was held for three days. He died a month afterwards.\nKing Philip IV pressured Pope Clement V of the Avignon Papacy into staging a posthumous trial of Boniface. He was accused of heresy, but no verdict against him was delivered.\nLife and career.\nFamily.\nBenedetto Caetani was born in Anagni, some southeast of Rome. He was a younger son of Roffredo Caetani (Podest\u00e0 of Todi in 1274\u20131275), a member of a baronial family of the Papal States, the Caetani or \"Gaetani dell'Aquila\". Through his mother, Emilia Patrasso di Guarcino, a niece of Pope Alexander IV (Rinaldo dei Conti di Segni\u2014who was himself a nephew of Pope Gregory IX), he was not far distant from the seat of ecclesiastical power and patronage. His father's younger brother, Atenolfo, was Podest\u00e0 di Orvieto.\nEarly career.\nBenedetto took his first steps into religious life when he was sent to the monastery of the Friars Minor in Velletri, where he was put under the care of his maternal uncle Fra Leonardo Patrasso. He was granted a canonry at the cathedral in the family's stronghold of Anagni, with the permission of Pope Alexander IV. The earliest record of him is as a witness to an act of Bishop Pandulf of Anagni on 16 October 1250. In 1252, when his paternal uncle Pietro Caetani became Bishop of Todi, in Umbria, Benedetto followed him to Todi and began his legal studies there.\nHis uncle Pietro granted him a canonry in the Cathedral of Todi in 1260. He also came into possession of the small nearby castello of Sismano, a place with twenty-one fires (hearths, families). In later years Father Vitalis, the Prior of S. Egidio de S. Gemino in Narni testified that he knew him and conversed with him in Todi and that Benedetto was in a school run by Rouchetus, a Doctor of Laws, from that city.\nBenedetto never forgot his roots in Todi, later describing the city as \"the dwelling place of his early youth\", the city which \"nourished him while still of tender years\", and as a place where he \"held lasting memories.\" Later in life he repeatedly expressed his gratitude to Anagni, Todi, and his family.\nIn 1264, Benedetto entered the Roman Curia, perhaps with the office of Advocatus. He served as secretary to Cardinal Simon de Brion, the future Pope Martin IV, on a mission to France. Cardinal Simon had been appointed by Pope Urban IV (Jacques Pantal\u00e9on), between 25 and 27 April 1264, to engage in negotiations with Charles of Anjou, Comte de Provence, over the Crown of Naples and Sicily. On 1 May 1264 he was given permission to appoint two or three \"tabelliones\" (secretaries) for his mission, one of whom was Benedetto.\nOn 26 February 1265, only eleven days after his coronation, the new pope, Pope Clement IV wrote to Cardinal Simon, telling him to break off negotiations and travel immediately to Provence, where he would receive further instructions. On the same day, Clement wrote to Charles of Anjou, informing him that the pope had 35 conditions that Charles must agree to in accepting the crown; he also wrote to Henry III of England and his son Edmund Crouchback that they had never been possessors of the Kingdom of Sicily. He also commended to the Cardinal the Sienese bankers who had been working for Urban IV to raise funds for Charles of Anjou, and that he should transfer to them some 7,000 pounds Tournois from the \"decima\" (ten percent tax) of France. On 20 March 1265, in order to expedite the business with Charles of Anjou, Cardinal Simon was authorized to provide benefices from cathedrals or otherwise within his province to five of his clerics. This may have been the occasion on which Benedetto Caetani acquired at least some of his French benefices. On 9 April 1265, on the petition of Cardinal Simon de Brion, the legation which had been assigned him by Pope Urban was declared \"not\" to have expired on the death of Urban IV. There would have been no point in making such a ruling if Cardinal Simon had already ceased to be Legate.\nOn 4 May 1265 Cardinal Ottobono Fieschi was appointed Apostolic Legate to England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland by the new Pope Clement IV. In fact, he was sent as the successor of Cardinal Guy Folques, who had been elected Clement IV on 5 February 1265. On 29 August 1265 the Cardinal was received at the French Court by King Louis IX. There he learned that Simon de Montfort and his son Henry had been killed at the Battle of Evesham earlier that month. Cardinal Ottobono did not reach Boulogne until October 1265. He was accompanied by Benedetto Caetani. He was in England until July 1268, working to suppress the remnants of Simon de Montfort's barons who were still in arms against King Henry III of England. To finance their rebellion, the barons had imposed a 10% tax on church property, which the Pope wanted back because the tithe was uncanonical. This drawback was a major concern of Cardinal Ottobono and his entourage. While in England, Benedetto Caetani became rector of St. Lawrence's church in Towcester, Northamptonshire.\nUpon Benedetto's return from England, there is an eight-year period in which nothing is known about his life. This period, however, included the long vacancy of the papal throne from 29 November 1268 to February 1272, when Pope Gregory X accepted the papal throne. It also includes the time span when Pope Gregory and his cardinals went to France in 1273 for the second Council of Lyon, as well as the Eighth Crusade, led by Louis IX, in 1270. The Pope and some of the cardinals began their return to Italy at the end of November 1275. Pope Gregory celebrated Christmas in Arezzo and died there on 10 January 1276. In 1276, however, Benedetto was sent to France to supervise the collection of a tithe, which is perhaps when he held the office of Advocatus in the Roman Curia, and then was appointed a papal Notary in the late 1270s. During this time, Benedetto accumulated seventeen benefices, which he was permitted to keep when he was promoted. Some of these are enumerated in a bull by Pope Martin IV, in which he bestowed the deaconry of S. Nicolas in Carcere on Cardinal Benedetto Caetani.\nAt Orvieto, on 12 April 1281, Pope Martin IV created Benedetto Caetani cardinal deacon of Saint Nicholas in Carcere. In 1288 he was sent as Legate to Umbria to attempt to calm the strife between Guelphs and Ghibellines, which was taking the form of a war between the cities of Perugia and Foligno. In the winter of 1289, he was one of Pope Nicholas IV's advisors as he decided on a settlement of the disputes over the election or appointment of Portuguese bishops, in which King Denis played a major role. To give greater authority to the final mandate of the Pope, Cardinal Latino Orsini of Ostia, Cardinal Pietro Peregrosso of S. Marco, and Cardinal Benedetto of S. Nicola in Carcere appended their signatures and seals. Three years later, on 22 September 1291, Pope Nicholas IV (Girolamo Maschi d'Ascoli, O.Min.) promoted him to the Order of Cardinal Priests, with the title of SS. Silvester and Martin. Given the fact that there were only a dozen cardinals, Cardinal Benedetto was assigned the care (\"commenda\") of the deaconry of S. Agata, and his old deaconry of S. Nicola in Carcere. As cardinal, he served as papal legate in diplomatic negotiations to France, Naples, Sicily, and Aragon.\nPapal election.\nPope Celestine V (who had been Brother Peter, the hermit of Mount Murrone near Sulmone) abdicated on 13 December 1294 at Naples, where, much to the discomfort of a number of cardinals, he had established the papal court under the patronage of Charles II of Naples. He had continued to live like a monk there, even turning a room in the papal apartment into the semblance of a monastic cell. A contemporary, Bartholomew of Lucca, who was present in Naples in December 1294 and witnessed many of the events of the abdication and election, said that Benedetto Caetani was only one of several cardinals who pressured Celestine to abdicate. However, it is also on record that Celestine V abdicated by his own design after consultation with experts, and that Benedetto merely showed that it was allowed by Church law. Either way, Celestine V vacated the throne and Benedetto Caetani was elected in his place as pope, taking the name Boniface VIII.\nThe regulations promulgated in the 1274 papal bull \"Ubi periculum\" had not envisioned an abdication, but declared that election proceedings should begin ten days after the death of the incumbent. The 1294 papal conclave accordingly began on 23 December, ten days after Celestine's abdication. This gave all twenty-two cardinals the chance to assemble at the Castel Nuovo in Naples, the site of the abdication. Hugh Aycelin presided over the papal conclave as the senior cardinal bishop. Benedetto Caetani was elected by ballot and accession on Christmas Eve, 24 December 1294, taking the name Boniface VIII. On the first (secret) ballot, he had a majority of the votes, and at the \"accessio\" a sufficient number joined his majority to form the required two-thirds. He was consecrated bishop of Rome in Rome by Cardinal Hugh Aycelin on 23 January 1295. He immediately returned the Papal Curia to Rome, where he was crowned at the Vatican Basilica on Sunday, 23 January 1295. One of his first acts as pontiff was to imprison his predecessor in the Castle of Fumone in Ferentino, where he died on 19 May 1296 at the age of 81. In 1300, Boniface VIII formalized the custom of the Roman Jubilee, which afterwards became a source of both profit and scandal to the church. Boniface VIII founded Sapienza University of Rome in 1303.\nCanon law.\nIn the field of canon law Boniface VIII had considerable influence. Earlier collections of canon law had been codified in the \"Decretales Gregorii IX\", published under the authority of Pope Gregory IX in 1234, but in the succeeding sixty years, numerous legal decisions were made by one pope after another. By Boniface's time a new and expanded edition was needed. In 1298 Boniface ordered published as a sixth part (or Book) these various papal decisions, including some 88 of his own legal decisions, as well as a collection of legal principles known as the \"Regul\u00e6 Juris\". His contribution came to be known as the \"Liber Sextus\". This material is still of importance to canon lawyers or canonists today, to interpret and analyze the canons and other forms of ecclesiastical law properly. The \"\"Regulae Iuris\" appear at the end of the \"Liber Sextus (in VI\u00b0)\", and now published as part of the five \"Decretales\" in the \"Corpus Juris Canonici\". They appear as simple aphorisms, such as \"Regula VI: Nemo potest ad impossibile obligari.\"\" (\"No one can be obliged to do the impossible.\") Other systems of law also have their own \"Regul\u00e6 Juris\", whether by the same name or something serving a similar function.\nCardinals.\nIn 1297, Cardinal Jacopo Colonna disinherited his brothers Ottone, Matteo, and Landolfo of their lands. The latter three appealed to Pope Boniface VIII, who ordered Jacopo to return the land and furthermore to hand over the family's strongholds of Colonna, Palestrina, and other towns to the Papacy. Jacopo refused. Jacopo Colonna and his nephew, Pietro Colonna, had also seriously compromised themselves by maintaining highly questionable relations with the political enemies of the pope, James II of Aragon and Frederick III of Sicily. In May, Boniface removed them from the College of Cardinals and excommunicated them and their followers.\nThe Colonna family (aside from the three brothers allied with the Pope) declared that Boniface had been elected illegally following the unprecedented abdication of Pope Celestine V. The dispute led to open warfare, and in September Boniface appointed Landolfo to the command of his army to put down the revolt of Landolfo's relatives. By the end of 1298 Landolfo had captured Colonna, Palestrina and other towns and razed them to the ground after they had surrendered peacefully under Boniface's assurances that they would have been spared. Dante says it was got by treachery by \"long promises and short performances\" as Guido of Montefeltro counselled, but this account by the implacable Ghibelline has long since been discredited. Palestrina was razed to the ground, the plough driven through and salt strewn over its ruins. A new city \u2014 the Citt\u00e0 Papale \u2014 later replaced it. Only the city's cathedral was spared.\nTo deal with the problem of the cardinals left to him by his predecessors, Boniface created new cardinals on five occasions during his reign. In the first creation, in 1295, only one cardinal was appointed, the Pope's nephew Benedetto Caetano. This was no surprise. Nor was the second creation, on 17 December 1295. Two more relatives were appointed, Francesco Caetano, the son of Boniface VIII's brother Peter; and Jacopo (Giacomo) Tomassi Caetani, OFM, a son of the Pope's sister, was made Cardinal Priest of S. Clemente. Giacomo Caetani Stefaneschi, a grand-nephew of Pope Nicholas III, was also appointed, along with Francesco Napoleone Orsini, a nephew of Pope Nicholas III. Three years later, on 4 December 1298, four new cardinals were named: Gonzalo Gudiel (Gundisalvus Rodericus Innojosa), Archbishop of Toledo, was appointed Bishop of Albano; Teodorico Ranieri, Archbishop-elect of Pisa and papal Chamberlain, became Cardinal Priest of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme; Niccol\u00f2 Boccasini, OP, of Treviso, Master General of the Dominicans, became Cardinal Priest of Santa Sabina; and Riccardo Petroni of Siena, Vice-Chancellor of the Holy Roman Church, was named a Cardinal Deacon. A pattern begins to emerge, though one sees the pattern only in terms of negatives: of the ten new cardinals, only two are monks, and neither of them Benedictine (Celestine V had been excessively partial to Benedictines); and there are no Frenchmen (Celestine had named seven Frenchmen, under the influence of Charles II of Naples). Pope Boniface was distinctly changing the complexion of the membership of the Sacred College. Without the Colonnas, the influence of the King of France was greatly diminished.\nOn 2 March 1300, during the Great Jubilee, Boniface VIII created three more cardinals. The first was Leonardo Patrasso, Archbishop of Capua, who was Boniface VIII's uncle; he replaced the archbishop of Toledo, who had died in 1299, as Cardinal Bishop of Albano. The second was Gentile Partino, OFM, Doctor of Theology and Lector of Theology in the Roman Curia, who was made Cardinal Priest of S. Martin in montibus. The third was Luca Fieschi, of the Counts of Lavagna, of Genoa, named Cardinal Deacon of S. Maria in Via Lata (the deaconry which had once belonged to Jacopo Colonna). A relative, a Franciscan; all three Italians.\nIn his last Consistory for the promotion of Cardinals, on 15 December 1302, Boniface VIII named two more cardinals: Pedro Rodr\u00edguez, bishop of Burgos, Spain, became Suburbicarian Bishop of Sabina; and Giovanni Minio da Morrovalle (or da Muro), OFM, Minister General of the Franciscans, was appointed Suburbicarian Bishop of Porto. A Franciscan, a Spaniard, no Benedictines, no French. In fact, there were only two French in the Sacred College at Boniface's death, only five regular clergy (only one Benedictine).\nConflicts in Sicily and Italy.\nBoniface VIII put forward some of the strongest claims of any pope to temporal as well as spiritual power. He involved himself often with foreign affairs. In his Papal bull of 1302, \"Unam sanctam\", Boniface VIII stated that since the Church is one, since the Church is necessary for salvation, and since Christ appointed Peter to lead it, it is \"absolutely necessary for salvation that every human creature be subject to the Roman pontiff\". These views, and his chronic intervention in \"temporal\" affairs, led to many bitter quarrels with Albert I of Germany, Philip IV of France, and Dante Alighieri, who wrote his treatise \"De Monarchia\" to dispute Boniface's claims of papal supremacy.\nWhen Frederick III of Sicily attained his throne after the death of his father Peter III of Aragon, Boniface tried to dissuade him from accepting the throne of Sicily. When Frederick persisted, Boniface excommunicated him in 1296, and placed the island under interdict. Neither the king nor the people were moved. The conflict continued until the Peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Pedro's son Frederick III recognized as king of Sicily while Charles II was recognized as the king of Naples. To prepare for a Crusade, Boniface ordered Venice and Genoa to sign a truce; they fought each other for three more years, and turned down his offer to mediate peace.\nBoniface also placed the city of Florence under an interdict and invited the ambitious Charles, Count of Valois to enter Italy in 1300 to end the feud of the Black and White Guelphs, the poet Dante Alighieri being in the party of the Whites. Boniface's political ambitions directly affected Dante when the pope invited Count Charles to intervene in the affairs of Florence. Charles's intervention allowed the Black Guelphs to overthrow the ruling White Guelphs, whose leaders, including the poet Dante, allegedly in Rome at the time to argue Florence's case before Boniface, were sentenced to exile. Dante settled his score with Boniface in the first canticle of the \"Divine Comedy\", the \"Inferno\", by damning the pope, placing him within the circles of Fraud, in the \"bolgia\" (ditch) of the simoniacs. In the \"Inferno\", Pope Nicholas III, mistaking the Poet for Boniface, is surprised to see the latter, supposing him to be ahead of his time.\nConflicts with Philip IV.\nThe conflict between Boniface VIII and King PhilipIV of France (1268\u20131314) came at a time of expanding nation states and the desire for the consolidation of power by the increasingly powerful monarchs. The increase in monarchical power and its conflicts with the Church of Rome were only exacerbated by the rise to power of Philip IV in 1285. In France, the process of centralizing royal power and developing a genuine national state began with the Capetian kings. During his reign, Philip surrounded himself with the best civil lawyers and decidedly expelled the clergy from all participation in the administration of the law. With the clergy beginning to be taxed in France and England to finance their ongoing wars against each other, Boniface took a hard stand against it. He saw the taxation as an assault on traditional clerical rights and ordered the bull in February 1296, forbidding lay taxation of the clergy without prior papal approval. In the bull, Boniface states \"they exact and demand from the same the half, tithe, or twentieth, or any other portion or proportion of their revenues or goods; and in many ways they try to bring them into slavery, and subject them to their authority. And also whatsoever emperors, kings, or princes, dukes, earls or barons...presume to take possession of things anywhere deposited in holy buildings... should incur sentence of excommunication.\" It was during the issuing of that hostilities between Boniface and Philip began.\nAt war with both his English and his Flemish vassals, Philip was convinced that the wealth of the Catholic Church in France should be used in part to support the state. He countered the papal bull by decreeing laws prohibiting the export of gold, silver, precious stones, horses, arms, or food from France to the Papal States. These measures had the effect of blocking a main source of papal revenue. Philip also banished from France the papal agents who were raising funds for a new crusade in the Middle East. In the bull \"Ineffabilis amor\" of September 1296, Boniface pledged approval of reasonable taxation for genuine emergencies but contested Philip's demands, asking him rhetorically: \"What would happen to you\u2014God forbid!\u2014if you gravely offended the Apostolic See, and caused an alliance between Her and your enemies?.\" In the face of the support of French clergy such as Pierre de Mornay for Philip's general position and the need for French revenue to combat unrest in Rome from the Colonna family, Boniface retreated still further. In February 1297, the bull permitted voluntary clerical donations without papal approval in times of emergency as determined by the king. On 3 April 1297, seven French archbishops and forty bishops, provided this authorisation, agreed to concede to the King the fifth part of their ecclesiastical revenues under the form of two tithes, the first of which to be paid by Pentecost, the second at the end of September. This subsidy could be collected just in case the war with England should go on, with Church authority and not by means of the secular arm. By July 1297, Boniface yielded completely in the bull , conceding that kings could raise taxes on church property and incomes during emergencies without prior papal approval. Philip rescinded his embargoes and even accepted Boniface's nuncios as arbitrators to delay and conclude his war with the English, with the 1303 Treaty of Paris restoring the but obliging Edward to come to France in person to do homage for the return of Aquitaine.\nFirst jubilee year.\nBoniface proclaimed 1300 a \"jubilee\" year, the first of many such jubilees to take place in Rome. He probably wanted to gather money from pilgrims to Rome as a substitute for the missing money from France, or it may be that he was seeking moral and political support against the hostile behaviour of the French king. The event was a success; Rome had never received such crowds before. It is said that on one particular day some 30,000 people were counted. Giovanni Villani estimated that some 200,000 pilgrims came to Rome. Boniface and his aides managed the affair well, food was plentiful, and it was sold at moderate prices. It was an advantage to the pope that the great sums of money he collected could be used according to Boniface's own judgment.\nFirst Scottish War of Independence.\nAfter King Edward I of England invaded Scotland and forced the abdication of the Scottish King John Balliol, the deposed king was released into the custody of Pope Boniface on condition that he remain at a papal residence. The hard-pressed Scottish Parliament, then in the early stages of what came to be known as First Scottish War of Independence, condemned Edward\u00a0I's invasion and occupation of Scotland and appealed to the Pope to assert a feudal overlordship over the country. The Pope assented, condemning Edward's invasions and occupation of Scotland in the papal bull \"Scimus, Fili\" (Latin for \"We know, my son\") of 27 June 1299. The bull ordered Edward to desist from his attacks and start negotiations with the Scots. However, Edward ignored the bull; in 1301, a letter was composed in which the English rejected its authority, but it was never sent.\nContinued feud with Philip IV.\nThe feud between Boniface and Philip IV reached its peak in the early 14th century, when Philip began to launch a strong anti-papal campaign against Boniface. A quarrel arose between Philip's aides and a papal legate, Bernard Saisset. The legate was arrested on a charge of inciting an insurrection, was tried and convicted by the royal court, and committed to the custody of the archbishop of Narbonne, Giles Aycelin \u2013 one of his key ministers and allies, in 1301. In the bull \"Ausculta Fili\" (\"Listen, [My] Son\", December 1301) Boniface VIII appealed to Philip IV to listen modestly to the Vicar of Christ as the spiritual monarch over all earthly kings. He protested against the trial of churchmen before Philip's royal courts and the continued use of church funds for state purposes and he announced that he would summon the bishops and abbots of France to take measures \"for the preservation of the liberties of the Church\". When the bull was presented to Philip IV, Robert II, Count of Artois, reportedly snatched it from the hands of Boniface's emissary and flung it into the fire.\nOn 10 February 1302 the bull \"Ausculta Fili\" was officially burned at Paris before Philip IV and a large crowd. Nonetheless, on 4 March 1302, Pope Boniface sent cardinal Jean Lemoine as his legate to reassert papal control over the French clergy. To forestall the ecclesiastical council proposed by Boniface, Philip summoned the three estates of his realm to meet at Paris in April. At this first French Estates-General in history, all three classes \u2013 nobles, clergy, and commons \u2013 wrote separately to Rome in defence of the king and his temporal power. Some forty-five French prelates, despite Philip's prohibition, and the confiscation of their property, attended the council at Rome in October 1302.\nFollowing that council, on 18 November 1302, Boniface issued the bull \"Unam sanctam\" (\"One holy [catholic and apostolic Church]\"). It declared that both spiritual and temporal power were under the pope's jurisdiction, and that kings were subordinate to the power of the Roman pontiff. The Pope also appointed Cardinal Jean le Moine as Apostolic Legate to King Philip, to attempt to find some resolution of the impasse that had developed; he was granted the specific power of absolving King Philip from excommunication.\nAbduction and death.\nOn Maundy Thursday, 4 April 1303, the Pope again excommunicated all persons who were impeding French clerics from coming to the Holy See, \"etiam si imperiali aut regali fulgeant dignitati\" (\"even if they shone with imperial or royal dignity\"). This included King Philip IV, though not by name. In response, Guillaume de Nogaret, Philip's chief minister, denounced Boniface as a heretical criminal to the French clergy. On 15 August 1303, the Pope suspended the right of all persons in the Kingdom of France to name anyone as Regent or Doctor, including the King. And in another document of the same day, he reserved to the Holy See the provision of all present and future vacancies in cathedral churches and monasteries, until King Philip should come to the Papal Court and make explanations of his behavior.\nOn 7 September 1303, an army led by King Philip's minister Nogaret and Sciarra Colonna attacked Boniface at his palace in Anagni next to the cathedral. The Pope responded with a bull dated 8 September 1303, in which Philip and Nogaret were excommunicated. The French Chancellor and the Colonnas demanded the Pope's abdication; Boniface VIII responded that he would \"sooner die\". In response, Colonna allegedly slapped Boniface, a \"slap\" historically remembered as the \"schiaffo di Anagni\" (\"Anagni slap\").\nAccording to a modern interpreter, the 73-year-old Boniface was probably beaten and nearly executed, but was released from captivity after three days. He died a month later. The famous Florentine chronicler Giovanni Villani, wrote:\nAnd when Sciarra and the others, his enemies, came to him, they mocked at him with vile words and arrested him and his household which had remained with him. Among others, William of Nogaret, who had conducted the negotiations for the king of France, scorned him and threatened him, saying that he would take him bound to Lyons on the Rhone, and there in a general council would cause him to be deposed and condemned... no man dared to touch [Boniface], nor were they pleased to lay hands on him, but they left him robed under light arrest and were minded to rob the treasure of the Pope and the Church. In this pain, shame and torment, the great Pope Boniface abode prisoner among his enemies for three days... the People of Anagni beholding their error and issuing from their blind ingratitude, suddenly rose in arms... and drove out Sciarra della Colonna and his followers, with loss to them of prisoners and slain, and freed the Pope and his household. Pope Boniface... departed immediately from Anagni with his court and came to Rome and St. Peter's to hold a council... but... the grief which had hardened in the heart of Pope Boniface, by reason of the injury which he had received, produced in him, once he had come to Rome, a strange malady so that he gnawed at himself as if he were mad, and in this state he passed from this life on the twelfth day of October in the year of Christ 1303, and in the Church of St. Peter near the entrance of the doors, in a rich chapel which was built in his lifetime, he was honorably buried.\nHe died of a violent fever on 11 October, in full possession of his senses and in the presence of eight cardinals and the chief members of the papal household, after receiving the sacraments and making the usual profession of faith.\nBurial and exhumation.\nThe body of Boniface VIII was buried in 1303 in a special chapel that also housed the remains of Pope Boniface IV (A.D. 608\u2013615), which had been moved by Boniface VIII from a tomb outside the Vatican Basilica in the portico.\nThe body was accidentally exhumed in 1605, and the results of the excavation recorded by Giacomo Grimaldi (1568\u20131623), Apostolic Notary and Archivist of the Vatican Basilica, and others. The body lay within three coffins, the outermost of wood, the middle of lead, and the innermost of pine. The corporal remains were described as being \"unusually tall\" measuring seven palms when examined by doctors. The body was found quite intact, especially the shapely hands, thus disproving the myth that he had died in a frenzy, gnawing his hands, beating his brains out against the wall. The body wore ecclesiastical vestments common for Boniface's lifetime: long stockings covered legs and thighs, and it was garbed also with the maniple, cassock, and pontifical habit made of black silk, as well as stole, chasuble, rings, and bejeweled gloves.\nAfter this exhumation and examination, Boniface's body was moved to the Chapel of Pope Gregory and Andrew. His body now lies in the crypt (grotte) of St. Peter's in a large marble sarcophagus, inscribed BONIFACIVS PAPA VIII.\nPosthumous trial.\nAfter the papacy had been removed to Avignon in 1309, Pope Clement V, under extreme pressure from King Philip IV, consented to a posthumous trial. He said, \"[I]t was permissible for any persons who wanted to proceed against the memory of Boniface VIII to proceed.\" He gave a mandate to the Bishop of Paris, Guillaume de Baufet d'Aurillac, and to Guillaume Pierre Godin, OP, that the complainants should choose prosecutors and determine a day on which the Inquiry would begin in the presence of the Pope (\"coram nobis Avinione\"). The Pope signed his mandate at his current place of residence, the Priory of Grauselle near Malusan (Malaus\u00e8ne) in the diocese of Vasio (Vaison), on 18 October 1309. Both the King of Aragon and the King of Castile immediately sent ambassadors to Pope Clement, complaining that scandal was being poured into the ears of the Faithful, when they heard that a Roman pontiff was being charged with a crime of heresy. Complaints also came from Italy, Germany, and the Netherlands.\nOn 27 April 1310, in what was certainly a peace gesture toward the French, Clement V pardoned Guillaume Nogaret for his offences committed at Anagni against Boniface VIII and the Church, for which he had been excommunicated, with the condition that Nogaret personally go to the Holy Land in the next wave of soldiers and serve there in the military. By the end of Spring 1310, Clement was feeling the embarrassment and the pressure over the material being produced by Boniface's accusers. His patience was wearing thin. He issued a mandate on 28 June 1310, in which he complained about the quality of the testimony and the corruption of the various accusers and witnesses. Then he ordered the Quaesitores that future examinations should proceed under threat of excommunication for perjury. A process (judicial investigation) against the memory of Boniface was held by an ecclesiastical consistory at Priory Groseau, near Malauc\u00e8ne, which held preliminary examinations in August and September 1310. and collected testimonies that alleged many heretical opinions of Boniface VIII. This included the offence of sodomy, although there is no substantive evidence for this, and it is likely that this was the standard accusation Philip made against enemies. The same charge was brought against the Templars.\nBefore the actual trial could be held, Clement persuaded Philip to leave the question of Boniface's guilt to the Council of Vienne, which met in 1311. On 27 April 1311, in a public Consistory, with King Philip's agents present, the Pope formally excused the King for everything that he had said against the memory of Pope Boniface, on the grounds that he was speaking with good intentions. This statement was written down and published as a bull, and the bull contained the statement that the matter would be referred by the Pope to the forthcoming Council. The Pope then announced that he was reserving the whole matter to his own judgment.\nThe XV Ecumenical Council, the Council of Vienne, opened on 16 October 1311, with more than 300 bishops in attendance. When the Council met (so it is said), three cardinals appeared before it and testified to the orthodoxy and morality of the dead pope. Two Catalan knights, as challengers, threw down their gauntlets to maintain his innocence by trial by combat. No one accepted the challenge, and the Council declared the matter closed. Clement's order disbanding the Order of the Knights Templar was signed at the Council of Vienne on 2 May 1312.\nCharacter.\nThe pope is said to have been short-tempered, kicking an envoy in the face on one occasion, and on another, throwing ashes in the eyes of an archbishop who was kneeling to receive them as a blessing atop his head.\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24061", "revid": "50741098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24061", "title": "Pope Boniface IX", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1389 to 1404\nPope Boniface IX (; ; c. 1350 \u2013 1 October 1404, born Pietro Tomacelli Cybo) was head of the Catholic Church from 2 November 1389 to his death, in October 1404. He was the second Roman pope during the Western Schism. In this time, the Avignon claimants, Clement VII and Benedict XIII, maintained the Roman Curia in Avignon, under the protection of the French monarchy. He is the last pope to date to take on the pontifical name \"Boniface\".\nEarly life.\nBorn c. 1350 in Naples, Pietro (also Piero or Perino) Tomacelli Cybo was son of Baron Giacomo Tomacelli and Verdella Caracciolo, feudataries of Casarano and nearby Casaranello, from noble neapolitan families, and a descendant of Tamaso Cybo, who belonged to an influential noble family from Genoa and settled in Casarano in the Kingdom of Naples. He was baptized in the paleochristian church of Santa Maria della Croce (the church of Casaranello). An unsympathetic German contemporary source, Dietrich of Nieheim, asserted that he was illiterate (\"nesciens scribere etiam male cantabat\"). Neither a trained theologian nor skilled in the business of the Curia, he was tactful and prudent in a difficult era, but Ludwig Pastor, who passes swiftly over his pontificate, says, \"The numerous endeavours for unity made during this period form one of the saddest chapters in the history of the Church. Neither pope had the magnanimity to put an end to the terrible state of affairs\" by resigning. After his election at the papal conclave of 1389, Germany, England, Hungary, Poland, and the greater part of Italy accepted him as pope. The remainder of Europe recognized the Avignon Pope Clement VII. He and Boniface mutually excommunicated each other.\nThe day before Tomacelli's election by the fourteen cardinals who remained faithful to the papacy at Rome, Clement VII at Avignon had just crowned a French prince, Louis II of Anjou, as king of Naples. The youthful Ladislaus was the son of King Charles III of Naples, assassinated in 1386, and Margaret of Durazzo, scion of a line that had traditionally supported the popes in their struggles in Rome with the anti-papal party in the city itself. Boniface IX saw to it that Ladislaus was crowned King of Naples at Gaeta on 29 May 1390 and worked with him for the next decade to expel the Angevin forces from southern Italy.\nPontificate.\nDuring his reign, Boniface IX finally extinguished the troublesome independence of the commune of Rome and established temporal control, though it required fortifying not only the Castel Sant'Angelo, but the bridges also, and for long seasons he was forced to live in more peaceful surroundings at Assisi or Perugia. He also took over the port of Ostia from its Cardinal Bishop. In the Papal States, Boniface IX gradually regained control of the chief castles and cities, and he re-founded the States as they would appear during the fifteenth century.\nThe antipope Clement VII died at Avignon on 16 September 1394, but the French cardinals quickly elected a successor on 28 September: Cardinal Pedro de Luna, who took the name Benedict XIII. Over the next few years, Boniface IX was entreated to abdicate, even by his strongest supporters: King Richard II of England (in 1396), the Diet of Frankfurt (in 1397), and King Wenceslaus of Germany (at Reims, 1398). He refused. Pressure for an ecumenical council also grew as the only way to breach the Western Schism, but the conciliar movement made no headway during Boniface's papacy.\nDuring the reign of Boniface IX two jubilees were celebrated at Rome. The first, in 1390, had been declared by his predecessor, Urban VI, and was largely frequented by people from Germany, Hungary, Poland, Bohemia, and England. Several cities of Germany obtained the \"privileges of the jubilee\", as indulgences were called, but the preaching of indulgences led to abuses and scandal. The jubilee of 1400 drew to Rome great crowds of pilgrims, particularly from France, in spite of a disastrous plague. Pope Boniface IX remained in the city nonetheless.\nIn the latter part of 1399 there arose bands of flagellants, known as the \"Bianchi\", or \"Albati\" (\"White Penitents\"), especially in Provence, where the Albigenses had been exterminated less than a century before. Their numbers spread to Spain and northern Italy. These evoked uneasy memories of the mass processions of wandering flagellants of the Black Death period, 1348\u20131349. They went in procession from city to city, clad in white garments, with faces hooded, and wearing on their backs a red cross, following a leader who carried a large cross. Rumors of imminent divine judgement and visions of the Virgin Mary abounded. They sang the newly popular hymn \"Stabat Mater\" during their processions. For a while, as the White Penitents approached Rome, gaining adherents along the way, Boniface IX and the Curia supported their penitential enthusiasm, but when they reached Rome, Boniface IX had their leader burnt at the stake, and they soon dispersed. \"Boniface IX gradually discountenanced these wandering crowds, an easy prey of agitators and conspirators, and finally dissolved them\", as the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" reports.\nIn England, the anti-papal preaching of John Wyclif supported the opposition of the king and the higher clergy to Boniface IX's habit of granting English benefices as they fell vacant to favorites in the Roman Curia. Boniface IX introduced a revenue known as \"annates perpetu\u00e6\", withholding half the first year's income of every benefice granted in the Roman Court. The pope's agents also now sold not simply a vacant benefice but the \"expectation\" of one; and when an expectation had been sold, if another offered a larger sum for it, the pope voided the first sale. The unsympathetic observer Dietrich von Nieheim reports that he saw the same benefice sold several times in one week, and that the Pope talked business with his secretaries during Mass. There was resistance in England, the staunchest supporter of the Roman papacy during the Schism: the English Parliament confirmed and extended the statutes of Provisors and Praemunire of Edward III, giving the king veto power over papal appointments in England. Boniface IX was defeated in the face of a unified front, and the long controversy was finally settled to the English king's satisfaction. Nevertheless, at the Synod of London (1396), the English bishops convened to condemn Wyclif.\nIn Germany, the prince-electors met at Rhense on 20 August 1400 to depose Wenceslaus as King of Germany and chose in his place Rupert, Duke of Bavaria and Count Palatine of the Rhine. In 1403 Boniface IX recognized Rupert as king.\nIn 1398 and 1399, Boniface IX appealed to Christian Europe in favor of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaeologus, threatened at Constantinople by Sultan Bayezid I, but there was little enthusiasm for a new crusade at such a time. Saint Bridget of Sweden was canonized by Pope Boniface IX on 7 October 1391. The universities of Ferrara (1391) and Fermo (1398) owe him their origin, and that of Erfurt (in Germany), its confirmation (1392).\nBoniface IX died on 1 October 1404 after a brief illness.\nBoniface IX was a frank politician, strapped for cash like the other princes of Europe, as the costs of modern warfare rose and supporters needed to be encouraged by gifts, for fourteenth-century government depended upon such personal support as a temporal ruler could gather and retain. All the princes of the late 14th century were accused of avaricious money-grubbing by contemporary critics, but among them contemporaries ranked Boniface IX as exceptional. Traffic in benefices, the sale of dispensations, and the like, did not cover the loss of local sources of revenue in the long absence of the papacy from Rome, foreign revenue diminished by the schism, expenses for the pacification and fortification of Rome, the constant wars made necessary by French ambition and the piecemeal reconquest of the Papal States. Boniface IX certainly provided generously for his mother, his brothers Andrea and Giovanni, and his nephews in the spirit of the day. The Curia was perhaps equally responsible for new financial methods that were destined in the next century to arouse bitter feelings against Rome, particularly in Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24062", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24062", "title": "Peroxisome", "text": "Type of organelle\nA peroxisome () is a membrane-bound organelle, a type of microbody, found in the cytoplasm of virtually all eukaryotic cells. Peroxisomes are oxidative organelles. Frequently, molecular oxygen serves as a co-substrate, from which hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is then formed. Peroxisomes owe their name to hydrogen peroxide-generating and scavenging activities. They perform key roles in lipid metabolism and the reduction of reactive oxygen species. \nPeroxisomes are involved in the catabolism of very long chain fatty acids, branched chain fatty acids, bile acid intermediates (in the liver), D-amino acids, and polyamines. Peroxisomes also play a role in the biosynthesis of plasmalogens: ether phospholipids critical for the normal function of mammalian brains and lungs. Peroxisomes contain approximately 10% of the total activity of two enzymes (Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase) in the pentose phosphate pathway, which is important for energy metabolism. It is debated whether peroxisomes are involved in isoprenoid and cholesterol synthesis in animals. Other peroxisomal functions include the glyoxylate cycle in germinating seeds (\"glyoxysomes\"), photorespiration in leaves, glycolysis in trypanosomes (\"glycosomes\"), and methanol and amine oxidation and assimilation in some yeasts.\nHistory.\nPeroxisomes (microbodies) were first described by a Swedish doctoral student, J. Rhodin in 1954. They were identified as organelles by Christian de Duve and Pierre Baudhuin in 1966. De Duve and co-workers discovered that peroxisomes contain several oxidases involved in the production of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as well as catalase involved in the decomposition of H2O2 to oxygen and water. Due to their role in peroxide metabolism, De Duve named them \"peroxisomes\", replacing the formerly used morphological term \"microbodies\". Later, it was described that firefly luciferase is targeted to peroxisomes in mammalian cells, allowing the discovery of the import targeting signal for peroxisomes, and triggering many advances in the peroxisome biogenesis field.\nStructure.\nPeroxisomes are small (0.1\u20131\u00a0\u03bcm diameter) organelles with a fine, granular matrix, surrounded by a single biomembrane located in the cytoplasm of a cell. Compartmentalization creates an optimized environment to promote various metabolic reactions within peroxisomes required to sustain cellular functions and viability of the organism.\nThe number, size, and protein composition of peroxisomes are variable and depend on cell type and environmental conditions. For example, in baker's yeast (\"S. cerevisiae\"), it has been observed that, with a good glucose supply, only a few, small peroxisomes are present. In contrast, when the yeasts were supplied with long-chain fatty acids as sole carbon source up to 20 to 25 large peroxisomes can be formed.\nMetabolic functions.\nA major function of the peroxisome is the breakdown of very long chain fatty acids through beta oxidation. In animal cells, the long fatty acids are converted to medium chain fatty acids, which are subsequently shuttled to mitochondria where they eventually are broken down to carbon dioxide and water. In yeast and plant cells, this process is carried out exclusively in peroxisomes.\nThe first reactions in the formation of plasmalogen in animal cells also occur in peroxisomes. Plasmalogen is the most abundant phospholipid in myelin. Deficiency of plasmalogens causes profound abnormalities in the myelination of nerve cells, which is one reason why many peroxisomal disorders affect the nervous system. Peroxisomes also play a role in the production of bile acids important for the absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins, such as vitamins A and K. Skin disorders are features of genetic disorders affecting peroxisome function as a result.\nThe specific metabolic pathways that occur exclusively in mammalian peroxisomes are:\nPeroxisomes contain oxidative enzymes, such as D-amino acid oxidase and uric acid oxidase. However the last enzyme is absent in humans, explaining the disease known as gout, caused by the accumulation of uric acid. Certain enzymes within the peroxisome, by using molecular oxygen, remove hydrogen atoms from specific organic substrates (labeled as R), in an oxidative reaction, producing hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, itself toxic):\nformula_1\nCatalase, another peroxisomal enzyme, uses this H2O2 to oxidize other substrates, including phenols, formic acid, formaldehyde, and alcohol, by means of the peroxidation reaction:\nformula_2, thus eliminating the poisonous hydrogen peroxide in the process.\nThis reaction is important in liver and kidney cells, where the peroxisomes detoxify various toxic substances that enter the blood. About 25% of the ethanol that humans consume by drinking alcoholic beverages is oxidized to acetaldehyde in this way. In addition, when excess H2O2 accumulates in the cell, catalase converts it to H2O through this reaction:\nformula_3\nIn higher plants, peroxisomes contain also a complex battery of antioxidative enzymes such as superoxide dismutase, the components of the ascorbate-glutathione cycle, and the NADP-dehydrogenases of the pentose-phosphate pathway. It has been demonstrated that peroxisomes generate superoxide (O2\u2022\u2212) and nitric oxide (\u2022NO) radicals.\nThere is evidence now that those reactive oxygen species including peroxisomal H2O2 are also important signaling molecules in plants and animals and contribute to healthy aging and age-related disorders in humans.\nThe peroxisome of plant cells is polarised when fighting fungal penetration. Infection causes a glucosinolate molecule to play an antifungal role to be made and delivered to the outside of the cell through the action of the peroxisomal proteins (PEN2 and PEN3).\nPeroxisomes in mammals and humans also contribute to anti-viral defense. and the combat of pathogens \nPeroxisome assembly.\nPeroxisomes are derived from the smooth endoplasmic reticulum under certain experimental conditions and replicate by membrane growth and division out of pre-existing organelles. Peroxisome matrix proteins are translated in the cytoplasm prior to import. Specific amino acid sequences (PTS or peroxisomal targeting signal) at the \"C-terminus\" (PTS1) or \"N-terminus\" (PTS2) of peroxisomal matrix proteins signal them to be imported into the organelle by a targeting factor. There are currently 36 known proteins involved in peroxisome biogenesis and maintenance, called peroxins, which participate in the process of peroxisome assembly in different organisms. In mammalian cells, there are 13 characterized peroxins. In contrast to protein import into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or mitochondria, proteins do not need to be unfolded to be imported into the peroxisome lumen. The matrix protein import receptors, the peroxins PEX5 and PEX7, accompany their cargoes (containing a PTS1 or a PTS2 amino acid sequence, respectively) all the way to the peroxisome where they release the cargo into the peroxisomal matrix and then return to the cytosol \u2013 a step named \"recycling\". A special way of peroxisomal protein targeting is called piggybacking. Proteins transported by this unique method do not have a canonical PTS but bind on a PTS protein to be transported as a complex. A model describing the import cycle is referred to as the \"extended shuttle mechanism\". There is now evidence that ATP hydrolysis is required for the recycling of receptors to the cytosol. Also, ubiquitination is crucial for the export of PEX5 from the peroxisome to the cytosol. The biogenesis of the peroxisomal membrane and the insertion of peroxisomal membrane proteins (PMPs) requires the peroxins PEX19, PEX3, and PEX16. PEX19 is a PMP receptor and chaperone, which binds the PMPs and routes them to the peroxisomal membrane, where it interacts with PEX3, a peroxisomal integral membrane protein. PMPs are then inserted into the peroxisomal membrane.\nThe degradation of peroxisomes is called pexophagy.\nPeroxisome interaction and communication.\nThe diverse functions of peroxisomes require dynamic interactions and cooperation with many organelles involved in cellular lipid metabolisms such as the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, lipid droplets, and lysosomes.\nPeroxisomes interact with mitochondria in several metabolic pathways, including \u03b2-oxidation of fatty acids and the metabolism of reactive oxygen species. Both organelles are in close contact with the endoplasmic reticulum and share several proteins, including organelle fission factors. Peroxisomes also interact with the endoplasmic reticulum and cooperate in the synthesis of ether lipids (plasmalogens), which are important for nerve cells (see above). In filamentous fungi, peroxisomes move on microtubules by 'hitchhiking,' a process involving contact with rapidly moving early endosomes. Physical contact between organelles is often mediated by membrane contact sites, where membranes of two organelles are physically tethered to enable rapid transfer of small molecules, enable organelle communication and are crucial for coordination of cellular functions and hence human health. Alterations of membrane contacts have been observed in various diseases.\nAssociated medical conditions.\nPeroxisomal disorders are a class of medical conditions that typically affect the human nervous system as well as many other organ systems. Two common examples are X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy and the peroxisome biogenesis disorders.\nGenes.\nPEX genes encode the protein machinery (peroxins) required for proper peroxisome assembly. Peroxisomal membrane proteins are imported through at least two routes, one of which depends on the interaction between peroxin 19 and peroxin 3, while the other is required for the import of peroxin 3, either of which may occur without the import of matrix (lumen) enzymes, which possess the peroxisomal targeting signal PTS1 or PTS2 as previously discussed. Elongation of the peroxisome membrane and the final fission of the organelle are regulated by Pex11p.\nGenes that encode peroxin proteins include: PEX1, PEX2 (PXMP3), PEX3, PEX5, PEX6, PEX7, PEX9, PEX10, PEX11A, PEX11B, PEX11G, PEX12, PEX13, PEX14, PEX16, PEX19, PEX26, PEX28, PEX30, and PEX31. Between organisms, PEX numbering and function can differ.\nEvolutionary origins.\nThe protein content of peroxisomes varies across species or organism, but the presence of proteins common to many species has been used to suggest an endosymbiotic origin; that is, peroxisomes evolved from bacteria that invaded larger cells as parasites, and very gradually evolved a symbiotic relationship. However, this view has been challenged by recent discoveries. For example, peroxisome-less mutants can restore peroxisomes upon introduction of the wild-type gene.\nTwo independent evolutionary analyses of the peroxisomal proteome found homologies between the peroxisomal import machinery and the ERAD pathway in the endoplasmic reticulum, along with a number of metabolic enzymes that were likely recruited from the mitochondria. The peroxisome may have had an Actinomycetota origin; however, this is controversial.\nOther related organelles.\nOther organelles of the microbody family related to peroxisomes include glyoxysomes of plants and filamentous fungi, glycosomes of kinetoplastids, and Woronin bodies of filamentous fungi.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24064", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24064", "title": "Peter Handke", "text": "Austrian Nobel laureate novelist (born 1942)\nPeter Handke (; born 6 December 1942) is an Austrian novelist, playwright, translator, poet, film director, and screenwriter. He was awarded the 2019 Nobel Prize in Literature \"for an influential work that with linguistic ingenuity has explored the periphery and the specificity of human experience.\" Handke is considered to be one of the most influential and original German-language writers in the second half of the 20th century.\nIn the late 1960s, he earned his reputation as a member of the avant-garde with such plays as \"Offending the Audience\" (1966) in which actors analyze the nature of theatre and alternately insult the audience and praise its \"performance\", and \"Kaspar\" (1967). His novels, mostly ultra objective, deadpan accounts of characters in extreme states of mind, include \"The Goalie's Anxiety at the Penalty Kick\" (1970) and \"The Left-Handed Woman\" (1976). Prompted by his mother's suicide in 1971, he reflected her life in the novella \"A Sorrow Beyond Dreams\" (1972).\nA dominant theme of his works is the deadening effects and underlying irrationality of ordinary language, everyday reality, and rational order. Handke was a member of the \"Grazer Gruppe\" (an association of authors) and the Grazer Autorenversammlung, and co-founded the Verlag der Autoren publishing house in Frankfurt. He collaborated with director Wim Wenders, and wrote such screenplays as \"The Wrong Move\" and \"Wings of Desire\".\nIn 1973, he won the Georg B\u00fcchner Prize, the most important literary prize for German-language literature. In 1999, as a protest against the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia, Handke returned the prize money to the German Academy for Language and Literature. Handke has drawn significant controversy for his public support of Serbian nationalism in the wake of the Yugoslav Wars.\nLife.\nEarly life and family.\nHandke was born in Griffen, then in the German Reich's Reichsgau Carinthia. His father, Erich Sch\u00f6nemann, was a bank clerk and German soldier whom Handke did not meet until adulthood. His mother Maria, a Carinthian Slovene, married Bruno Handke, a tram conductor and Wehrmacht soldier from Berlin, before Peter was born. The family lived in the Soviet-occupied Pankow district of Berlin from 1944 to 1948, where Maria Handke had two more children: Peter's half-sister and half-brother. Then the family moved to his mother's home town of Griffen. Peter experienced his stepfather as more and more violent due to alcoholism.\nIn 1954, Handke was sent to the Catholic \"Marianum\" boys' boarding school at Tanzenberg Castle in Sankt Veit an der Glan. There, he published his first writing in the school newspaper, \"Fackel\". In 1959, he moved to Klagenfurt, where he went to high school, and commenced law studies at the University of Graz in 1961.\nHandke's mother took her own life in 1971, reflected in his novel \"Wunschloses Ungl\u00fcck\" (\"A Sorrow Beyond Dreams\").\nAfter leaving Graz, Handke lived in D\u00fcsseldorf, Berlin, Kronberg, Paris, the U.S. (1978\u20131979) and Salzburg (1979\u20131988). Since 1990, he has resided in Chaville near Paris. He is the subject of the documentary film \"\" (2016), directed by Corinna Belz. Since 2012, Handke has been a member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts. He is a member of the Serbian Orthodox Church.\nAs of early November 2019, there was an official investigation by the relevant authorities into whether Handke may have automatically lost his Austrian citizenship upon obtaining a Yugoslav passport and nationality in the late 1990s.\nCareer.\nWhile studying, Handke established himself as a writer, linking up with the \"Grazer Gruppe\" (the Graz Authors' Assembly), an association of young writers. The group published a magazine on literature, \"manuskripte\", which published Handke's early works. Group members included Wolfgang Bauer and Barbara Frischmuth.\nHandke abandoned his studies in 1965, after the German publishing house Suhrkamp Verlag accepted his novel \"Die Hornissen (The Hornets)\" for publication. He gained international attention after an appearance at a meeting of avant-garde artists belonging to the Gruppe 47 in Princeton, New Jersey, in 1966. The same year, his play \"Publikumsbeschimpfung\" (\"Offending the Audience\") premiered at the Theater am Turm in Frankfurt, directed by Claus Peymann. Handke became one of the co-founders of the publishing house Verlag der Autoren in 1969 with a new commercial concept, as it belonged to the authors. He co-founded the Grazer Autorenversammlung in 1973 and was a member until 1977.\nHandke's first play, \"Publikumsbeschimpfung\" (\"Offending the Audience\"), which premiered in Frankfurt in 1966 and made him well known, was the first of several experimental plays without a conventional plot. In his second play, \"Kaspar\", he treated the story of Kaspar Hauser as \"an allegory of conformist social pressures\".\nHandke collaborated with director Wim Wenders on a film version of \"Die Angst des Tormanns beim Elfmeter\", wrote the script for \"Falsche Bewegung\" (\"The Wrong Move\") and co-wrote the screenplay for \"Der Himmel \u00fcber Berlin\" (\"Wings of Desire\") including the poem at its opening and \"Les Beaux Jours d'Aranjuez\" (\"The Beautiful Days of Aranjuez\"). He also directed films, including adaptations from his novels \"The Left-Handed Woman\" after \"Die linksh\u00e4ndige Frau\", and \"The Absence\" after \"Die Abwesenheit\". \"The Left-Handed Woman\", was released in 1978 and was nominated for the Golden Palm Award at the Cannes Film Festival in 1978 and won the Gold Award for German Arthouse Cinema in 1980. \"Leonard Maltin's Movie Guide's\" description of the film is that a woman demands that her husband leave and he complies. \"Time passes... and the audience falls asleep.\" Handke also won the 1975 German Film Award in Gold for his screenplay for \"Falsche Bewegung\" (\"The Wrong Move\"). Since 1975, Handke has been a jury member of the European literary award Petrarca-Preis.\nIn 2019, Handke was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature \"for an influential work that with linguistic ingenuity has explored the periphery and the specificity of human experience.\"\nLiterary reception.\nIn 1977, reviewing \"A Moment of True Feeling\", Stanley Kauffmann wrote that Handke \"is the most important new writer on the international scene since Samuel Beckett.\" John Updike reviewed the same novel in The New Yorker and was equally impressed, noting that \"there is no denying his [Handke's] willful intensity and knifelike clarity of evocation. He writes from an area beyond psychology, where feelings acquire the adamancy of randomly encountered, geologically analyzed pebbles.\" The \"Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung\" described him as \"the darling of the West German critics.\" Hugo Hamilton stated that, since his debut, Handke \"has tested, inspired and shocked audiences.\" Joshua Cohen noted that Handke \"commands one of the great German-language prose styles of the post-war period, a riverine rhetoric deep and swift and contrary of current,\" while Gabriel Josipovici described him, \"despite reservations about some of his recent work,\" as one of the most significant German-language writers of the post-war era. W. G. Sebald was inspired by Handke's intricate prose. In an essay on \"Repetition\", he wrote about \"a great and, as I have since learned, lasting impression\" the book made on him. \"I don\u2019t know,\" he lauded, \"if the forced relation between hard drudgery and airy magic, particularly significant for the literary art, has ever been more beautifully documented than in the pages of \"Repetition.\"\" Karl Ove Knausg\u00e5rd described \"A Sorrow Beyond Dreams\" as one of the \"most important books written in German in our time.\" The book and its author were also praised in Knausg\u00e5rd's \"My Struggle\".\nControversies.\nIn 1996, Handke's travelogue \"Eine winterliche Reise zu den Fl\u00fcssen Donau, Save, Morawa und Drina oder Gerechtigkeit f\u00fcr Serbien\" (published in English as \"A Journey to the Rivers: Justice for Serbia\") created controversy, as Handke portrayed Serbia as being among the victims of the Yugoslav Wars. In the same essay, Handke also criticised Western media for misrepresenting the causes and consequences of the war. \nSebastian Hammelehle wrote that Handke's view of the Yugoslav Wars, which has provoked numerous controversies, was probably romanticized, but that it represented the view of a writer, not a war reporter. The American translator Scott Abbott, who travelled with Handke through Yugoslavia after which numerous essays were published, stated that Handke considered Yugoslavia as the \"incredible, rich multicultural state that lacked the kind of nationalisms that he saw in Germany and Austria\". Abbott added that Handke viewed the disintegration of country as the disappearance of utopia. Reviewing \"The Moravian Night\", Joshua Cohen stated that Handke's Yugoslavia was not a country, but a symbol of himself, a symbol of literature or the \"European Novel\". Volker Hage wrote that \"The Moravian Night\" is \"extremely cosmopolitan\" and connected to the present, while also that the book represents the autobiographical summary of Handke's life as a writer. Tanjil Rashid noted that \"Handke\u2019s novels, plays and memoirs demonstrate the evil of banality\".\nAfter his play \"Voyage by Dugout\" was staged in 1999, Handke was condemned by other writers: Susan Sontag proclaimed Handke to be \"finished\" in New York. Salman Rushdie declared him as a candidate for \"International Moron of the Year\" due to his \"idiocies\", while Alain Finkielkraut said that he was an \"ideological monster\", and Slavoj \u017di\u017eek stated that his \"glorification of the Serbs is cynicism\". When Handke was awarded the International Ibsen Award in 2014, the Norwegian author \u00d8yvind Berg called for the jury to resign.\nHowever, disputing such interpretations of his work as listed above as misinterpreted by the English press, Handke has described the Srebrenica massacre as an \"infernal vengeance, eternal shame for the Bosnian Serbs responsible.\" This concern about the imprecision and political nature of language, carries through Handke's view. In a 2006 interview, Handke commented on concerns about the stereotyped language of the media that \"knew everything\", endlessly recycling words like \"the butcher of Belgrade\".\nHandke\u2019s literary fame was overshadowed in 2006 by his politics. The writer\u2019s public support of Slobodan Milo\u0161evi\u0107, the former president of Yugoslavia who died that year while on trial for genocide and war crimes, caused controversy after Handke spoke at his funeral. Because of this the administrator of the theatre Com\u00e9die-Fran\u00e7aise, Marcel Bozonnet, removed Handke's play \"Voyage au pays sonore ou L'art de la question\" from the forthcoming 2007 schedule. This event once again drew both supportive and critical voices. Renaud Donnedieu de Vabres, the French minister of culture, implicitly criticized Bozonnet's action in a letter addressed to him, and by deciding to invite Handke to the ministry. A petition against the censorship of his work was signed by Emir Kusturica, Patrick Modiano (winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2014), Paul Nizon, Bulle Ogier, Luc Bondy and Handke\u2019s compatriot Elfriede Jelinek (winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature in 2004). \nHandke was subsequently selected to receive that year\u2019s Heinrich Heine Prize, though he refused it before it was to be revoked from him.\nIn 2013, Tomislav Nikoli\u0107, as the President of Serbia, expressed gratitude saying that some people still remember those who suffered for Christianity, implying that Handke was a victim of scorn for his views, to which Handke replied with an explanation, \"I was not anyone's victim, the Serbian people is victim.\" This was said during the ceremony at which Handke received the \"Gold Medal of Merit of the Republic of Serbia\".\nIn 2019, The Intercept published a number of articles by Peter Maass criticizing Peter Handke's Nobel Prize in Literature reception. In another article by Intercept, Maass went to great lengths accusing Handke of being an \"exponent of white nationalism\". Subsequently in an interview conducted by Maass in December 2019, asking Handke whether the 1995 Srebrenica massacre had happened, Handke responded: \u201cI prefer waste paper, an anonymous letter with waste paper inside, to your empty and ignorant questions.\u201d Maass also claims that two Nobel prize jurors were adhering to \"conspiracy theories\" with regard to American involvement in the Yugoslav conflicts, and that the jurors were \"misinformed\" about Handke's literary achievements. Peter Handke received countless mails that included threats, or unsanitary content. Germany's Eugen Ruge also protested against the scale of the criticism. In November, around 120 authors, literary scholars, translators and artists expressed their unease in an open letter. They felt that the criticism against Handke was no longer rational.\nIn February 2020, Handke was decorated with the Order of Kara\u0111or\u0111e's Star for \"special merits in representing Serbia and its citizens\" as he \"wholeheartedly defended the Serbian truth\". The current President of Serbia Aleksandar Vu\u010di\u0107 presented recipients on the occasion of the Serbian Statehood Day.\nWorks.\nHandke has written novels, plays, screenplays, essays and poems, often published by Suhrkamp. Many works were translated into English. His works are held by the German National Library, including:"}
{"id": "24065", "revid": "46512407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24065", "title": "Population inversion", "text": "Status with more excited species than ground-state species\nIn physics, specifically statistical mechanics, a population inversion occurs when a system (such as a group of atoms or molecules) exists in a state in which more members of the system are in higher, excited states than in lower, unexcited energy states. It is called an \"inversion\" because in many familiar and commonly encountered physical systems in thermal equilibrium, this is not possible. This concept is of fundamental importance in laser science because the production of a population inversion is a necessary step in the workings of a standard laser.\nCondition.\nTo understand the concept of a population inversion, it is necessary to understand some thermodynamics and the way that light interacts with matter. To do so, it is useful to consider a very simple assembly of atoms forming a laser medium.\nAssume there is a group of \"N\" atoms, each of which is capable of being in one of two energy states: either\nThe number of these atoms which are in the ground state is given by \"N\"1, and the number in the excited state \"N\"2. Since there are \"N\" atoms in total,\n formula_1\nThe energy difference between the two states, given by\n formula_2\ndetermines the characteristic frequency formula_3 of light which will interact with the atoms; This is given by the relation\n formula_4\n\"h\" being the Planck constant.\nIf the group of atoms is in thermal equilibrium, it can be shown from Maxwell\u2013Boltzmann statistics that the ratio of the number of atoms in each state is given by the ratio of two Boltzmann distributions, the Boltzmann factor:\n formula_5\nwhere \"T\" is the thermodynamic temperature of the group of atoms, \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant and \"g\"1 and \"g\"2 are the degeneracies of each state.\nCalculable is the ratio of the populations of the two states at room temperature (\"T\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a0300\u00a0K) for an energy difference \u0394\"E\" that corresponds to light of a frequency corresponding to visible light (\"\u03bd\"\u00a0\u2248\u00a0). In this case \u0394\"E\" = \"E\"2 \u2212 \"E\"1 \u2248 2.07\u00a0eV, and \"kT\" \u2248 0.026\u00a0eV. Since \"E\"2 \u2212 \"E\"1 \u226b \"kT\", it follows that the argument of the exponential in the equation above is a large negative number, and as such \"N\"2/\"N\"1 is vanishingly small; i.e., there are almost no atoms in the excited state. When in thermal equilibrium, then, it is seen that the lower energy state is more populated than the higher energy state, and this is the normal state of the system. As \"T\" increases, the number of electrons in the high-energy state (\"N\"2) increases, but \"N\"2 never exceeds \"N\"1 for a system at thermal equilibrium; rather, at infinite temperature, the populations \"N\"2 and \"N\"1 become equal. In other words, a population inversion (\"N\"2/\"N\"1 &gt; 1) can never exist for a system at thermal equilibrium. To achieve population inversion therefore requires pushing the system into a non-equilibrated state.\nInteraction of light with matter.\nThere are three types of possible interactions between a system of atoms and light that are of interest:\nAbsorption.\nIf light (photons) of frequency \u03bd12 passes through the group of atoms, there is a possibility of the light being absorbed by electrons which are in the ground state, which will cause them to be excited to the higher energy state. The rate of absorption is proportional to the radiation density of the light, and also to the number of atoms currently in the ground state, \"N\"1.\nSpontaneous emission.\nIf atoms are in the excited state, spontaneous decay events to the ground state will occur at a rate proportional to \"N\"2, the number of atoms in the excited state. The energy difference between the two states \u0394\"E\"21 is emitted from the atom as a photon of frequency \"\u03bd\"21 as given by the frequency-energy relation above.\nThe photons are emitted stochastically, and there is no fixed phase relationship between photons emitted from a group of excited atoms; in other words, spontaneous emission is incoherent. In the absence of other processes, the number of atoms in the excited state at time \"t\", is given by\n formula_6\nwhere \"N\"2(0) is the number of excited atoms at time \"t\"\u00a0=\u00a00, and \"\u03c4\"21 is the \"mean lifetime\" of the transition between the two states.\nStimulated emission.\nIf an atom is already in the excited state, it may be agitated by the passage of a photon that has a frequency \"\u03bd\"21 corresponding to the energy gap \u0394\"E\" of the excited state to ground state transition. In this case, the excited atom relaxes to the ground state, and it produces a second photon of frequency \"\u03bd\"21. The original photon is not absorbed by the atom, and so the result is two photons of the same frequency. This process is known as \"stimulated emission\".\nSpecifically, an excited atom will act like a small electric dipole which will oscillate with the external field provided. One of the consequences of this oscillation is that it encourages electrons to decay to the lowest energy state. When this happens due to the presence of the electromagnetic field from a photon, a photon is released in the same phase and direction as the \"stimulating\" photon, and is called stimulated emission.\nThe rate at which stimulated emission occurs is proportional to the number of atoms \"N\"2 in the excited state, and the radiation density of the light. The base probability of a photon causing stimulated emission in a single excited atom was shown by Albert Einstein to be exactly equal to the probability of a photon being absorbed by an atom in the ground state. Therefore, when the numbers of atoms in the ground and excited states are equal, the rate of stimulated emission is equal to the rate of absorption for a given radiation density.\nThe critical detail of stimulated emission is that the induced photon has the same frequency and phase as the incident photon. In other words, the two photons are coherent. It is this property that allows optical amplification, and the production of a laser system. During the operation of a laser, all three light-matter interactions described above are taking place. Initially, atoms are energized from the ground state to the excited state by a process called \"pumping\", described below. Some of these atoms decay via spontaneous emission, releasing incoherent light as photons of frequency, \"\u03bd\". These photons are fed back into the laser medium, usually by an optical resonator. Some of these photons are absorbed by the atoms in the ground state, and the photons are lost to the laser process. However, some photons cause stimulated emission in excited-state atoms, releasing another coherent photon. In effect, this results in \"optical amplification\".\nIf the number of photons being amplified per unit time is greater than the number of photons being absorbed, then the net result is a continuously increasing number of photons being produced; the laser medium is said to have a gain of greater than unity.\nRecall from the descriptions of absorption and stimulated emission above that the rates of these two processes are proportional to the number of atoms in the ground and excited states, \"N\"1 and \"N\"2, respectively. If the ground state has a higher population than the excited state (\"N\"1 &gt; \"N\"2), then the absorption process dominates, and there is a net attenuation of photons. If the populations of the two states are the same (\"N\"1 = \"N\"2), the rate of absorption of light exactly balances the rate of emission; the medium is then said to be \"optically transparent\".\nIf the higher energy state has a greater population than the lower energy state (\"N\"1 &lt; \"N\"2), then the emission process dominates, and light in the system undergoes a net increase in intensity. It is thus clear that to produce a faster rate of stimulated emissions than absorptions, it is required that the ratio of the populations of the two states is such that\n\"N\"2/\"N\"1 &gt; 1; In other words, a population inversion is required for laser operation.\nSelection rules.\nMany transitions involving electromagnetic radiation are strictly forbidden under quantum mechanics. The allowed transitions are described by so-called selection rules, which describe the conditions under which a radiative transition is allowed. For instance, transitions are only allowed if \u0394\"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00, \"S\" being the total spin angular momentum of the system. In real materials, other effects, such as interactions with the crystal lattice, intervene to circumvent the formal rules by providing alternate mechanisms. In these systems, the forbidden transitions can occur, but usually at slower rates than allowed transitions. A classic example is phosphorescence where a material has a ground state with \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00, an excited state with \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00, and an intermediate state with \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a01. The transition from the intermediate state to the ground state by emission of light is slow because of the selection rules. Thus emission may continue after the external illumination is removed. In contrast fluorescence in materials is characterized by emission which ceases when the external illumination is removed.\nTransitions that do not involve the absorption or emission of radiation are not affected by selection rules. The radiationless transition between levels, such as between the excited \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00 and \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a01 states, may proceed quickly enough to siphon off a portion of the \"S\"\u00a0=\u00a00 population before it spontaneously returns to the ground state.\nThe existence of intermediate states in materials is essential to the technique of optical pumping of lasers (see below).\nCreation.\nA population inversion is required for laser operation, but cannot be achieved in the above theoretical group of atoms with two energy-levels when they are in thermal equilibrium. In fact, any method by which the atoms are directly and continuously excited from the ground state to the excited state (such as optical absorption) will eventually reach equilibrium with the de-exciting processes of spontaneous and stimulated emission. At best, an equal population of the two states, \"N\"1 = \"N\"2 = \"N\"/2, can be achieved, resulting in optical transparency but no net optical gain. To achieve lasting non-equilibrium conditions, an indirect method of populating the excited state must be used.\nIn laser.\nIn three-level laser.\nA \"three-level laser\" may achieve population inversion. It consists of a group of \"N\" atoms, with each atom able to exist in any of three energy states, levels 1, 2 and 3, with energies \"E\"1, \"E\"2, and \"E\"3, and populations \"N\"1, \"N\"2, and \"N\"3, respectively. \"E\"1 &lt; \"E\"2 &lt; \"E\"3; that is, the energy of level 2 lies between that of level 1 and level 3. The level 1 is also referred to as the \"ground state\".\nInitially, the system of atoms is at thermal equilibrium, and the majority of the atoms will be in the ground state, i.e., \"N\"1 \u2248 \"N\", \"N\"2 \u2248 \"N\"3 \u2248 0. The atoms can be excited from level 1 to level 3 and this act is called \"pumping\". It can happen when the atoms are subjected to light of a frequency formula_7, the process of optical absorption will excite electrons from level 1 to level 3. There are also methods not directly involving light absorption; such as electrical discharge or chemical reactions. The level 3 is sometimes referred to as the \"pump level\" or \"pump band\", and the energy transition \"E\"1 \u2192 \"E\"3 as the \"pump transition\" (labeled transition P in the diagram on the right).\nUpon pumping the medium, an appreciable number of atoms will transition to level 3, such that \"N\"3 &gt; 0. To have a medium suitable for laser operation, it is necessary that these excited atoms quickly decay to level 2. The energy released in this transition may be emitted as a photon (spontaneous emission). However, in practice, the 3 \u2192 2 transition is usually \"non-radiative\" (labeled transition R in the diagram), with the energy being transferred to vibrational motion (heat) of the host material surrounding the atoms, without the generation of a photon. This phenomenon is called the Auger effect.\nAn electron in level 2 may decay by spontaneous emission to level 1, releasing a photon of frequency \"\u03bd\"12 (given by \"E\"2 \u2212 \"E\"1 = \"h\u03bd\"12), which is called the \"laser transition\"s (labelled transition L in the diagram). If the lifetime of this transition, \"\u03c4\"21 is much longer than the lifetime of the non-radiative 3 \u2192 2 transition \"\u03c4\"32 (if \"\u03c4\"21 \u226b \"\u03c4\"32, known as a \"favourable lifetime ratio\"), the population of the \"E\"3 will be essentially zero (\"N\"3 \u2248 0) and a population of excited state atoms will accumulate in level 2 (\"N\"2 &gt; 0). If over half the \"N\" atoms can be accumulated in this state, this will exceed the population of the ground state \"N\"1. A population inversion (\"N\"2 &gt; \"N\"1 ) has thus been achieved between level 1 and 2, and optical amplification at the frequency \"\u03bd\"21 can be obtained.\nBecause at least half the population of atoms must be excited from the ground state to obtain a population inversion, the laser medium must be very strongly pumped. This makes three-level lasers rather inefficient, despite being the first type of laser to be discovered (based on a ruby laser medium, by Theodore Maiman in 1960). A three-level system could also have a radiative transition between level 3 and 2, and a non-radiative transition between 2 and 1. In this case, the pumping requirements are weaker. In practice, most lasers are \"four-level lasers\", described below.\nIn four-level laser.\nIn a \"four-level laser,\" there are four energy levels, levels 1, 2, 3, 4, with energies \"E\"1, \"E\"2, \"E\"3, \"E\"4, and populations \"N\"1, \"N\"2, \"N\"3, \"N\"4, respectively. The energies of each level are such that \"E\"1 &lt; \"E\"2 &lt; \"E\"3 &lt; \"E\"4.\nIn this system, the pumping transition P excites the atoms from level 1 to level 4 (the pump level). From level 4, the atoms decay by a fast, non-radiative transition Ra into the level 3. Since the lifetime of the laser transition L is long compared to that of Ra (\"\u03c4\"32 \u226b \"\u03c4\"43), a population accumulates in level 3 (the \"upper laser level\"), which may relax by spontaneous or stimulated emission into level 2 (the \"lower laser level\"). This level likewise has a fast, non-radiative decay Rb into level 1.\nAs in three-level laser, the presence of a fast, non-radiative decay transition results in the population of the pump band being quickly depleted (\"N\"4 \u2248 0). In a four-level system, any atom in level 2 (the lower laser level) is also quickly de-excited, leading to a negligible population in that state (\"N\"2 \u2248 0). This is important, since any appreciable population accumulating in level 3 (the upper laser level) will form a population inversion with respect to level 2. That is, as long as \"N\"3 &gt; 0, then \"N\"3 &gt; \"N\"2, and a population inversion is achieved. Thus optical amplification, and laser operation, can take place at a frequency of \"\u03bd\"32 (\"E\"3 \u2212 \"E\"2 = \"h\u03bd\"32).\nSince only a few atoms must be excited into the upper laser level to form a population inversion, a four-level laser is much more efficient than a three-level one, and most practical lasers are of this type. In reality, many more than four energy levels may be involved in the laser process, with complex excitation and relaxation processes involved between these levels. In particular, the pump band may consist of several distinct energy levels, or a continuum of levels, which allow optical pumping of the medium over a wide range of wavelengths.\nProperties.\nNote that in both three- and four-level lasers, the energy of the pumping transition is greater than that of the laser transition. This means that, if the laser is optically pumped, the frequency of the pumping light must be greater than that of the resulting laser light. In other words, the pump wavelength is shorter than the laser wavelength. It is possible in some media to use multiple photon absorptions between multiple lower-energy transitions to reach the pump level; such lasers are called \"up-conversion\" lasers.\nWhile in many lasers the laser process involves the transition of atoms between different electronic energy states, as described in the model above, this is not the only mechanism that can result in laser action. For example, there are many common lasers (e.g., dye lasers, carbon dioxide lasers) where the laser medium consists of complete molecules, and energy states correspond to vibrational and rotational modes of oscillation of the molecules. This is the case with water masers, that occur in nature.\nIn some media it is possible, by imposing an additional optical or microwave field, to use quantum coherence effects to reduce the likelihood of a ground-state to excited-state transition. This technique, known as lasing without inversion, allows optical amplification to take place without producing a population inversion between the two states.\nIn maser.\nStimulated emission was first observed in the microwave region of the electromagnetic spectrum, giving rise to the acronym MASER for Microwave Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. In the microwave region, the Boltzmann distribution of molecules among energy states is such that, at room temperature, all states are populated almost equally.\nTo create a population inversion under these conditions, it is necessary to selectively remove some atoms or molecules from the system based on differences in properties. For instance, in a hydrogen maser, the well-known 21cm wave transition in atomic hydrogen, where the lone electron flips its spin state from parallel to the nuclear spin to antiparallel, can be used to create a population inversion because the parallel state has a magnetic moment and the antiparallel state does not. A strong inhomogeneous magnetic field will separate atoms in the higher energy state from a beam of mixed-state atoms. The separated population represents a population inversion that can exhibit stimulated emissions."}
{"id": "24067", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24067", "title": "Paolo Uccello", "text": "Italian painter and mathematician (1397\u20131475)\nPaolo Uccello ( , ; 1397 \u2013 10 December 1475), born Paolo di Dono, was an Italian Renaissance painter and mathematician from Florence who was notable for his pioneering work on visual perspective in art. In his book \"Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects\", Giorgio Vasari wrote that Uccello was obsessed by his interest in perspective and would stay up all night in his study trying to grasp the exact vanishing point. Uccello used perspective to create a feeling of depth in his paintings. His best known works are the three paintings representing the battle of San Romano, which were wrongly entitled the \"Battle of Sant'Egidio of 1416\" for a long period of time.\nPaolo worked in the Late Gothic tradition, emphasizing colour and pageantry rather than the classical realism that other artists were pioneering. His style is best described as idiosyncratic, and he left no school of followers. He has had some influence on twentieth-century art and literary criticism (e.g., in the \"Vies imaginaires\" by Marcel Schwob, \"Uccello le poil\" by Antonin Artaud and \"O Mundo Como Ideia\" by Bruno Tolentino).\nEarly life and training.\nThe sources for Paolo Uccello's life are few: Giorgio Vasari's biography, written 75 years after Paolo's death, and a few contemporary official documents. Uccello probably was born in 1397 in Pratovecchio (near Arezzo), the hometown of his father, Dono di Paolo, a barber-surgeon. His mother, Antonia, was a high-born Florentine. His nickname \"Uccello\" (\"little bird\") came from his fondness for painting birds.\nFrom 1412 until 1416 he was apprenticed to the famous sculptor Lorenzo Ghiberti. Ghiberti was the creator of the doors of the Florence Baptistery and his workshop was the premier centre for Florentine art at the time. Ghiberti's late-Gothic, narrative style and sculptural composition greatly influenced Paolo. It was also around this time that Paolo began his lifelong friendship with Donatello. In 1414, Uccello was admitted to the painters' guild, \"Compagnia di San Luca\", and just one year later, in 1415, he joined the official painter's guild of Florence \"Arte dei Medici e degli Speziali\". Although the young Uccello had probably left Ghiberti's workshop by the mid 1420s, he stayed on good terms with his master and may have been privy to the designs for Ghiberti's second set of Baptistery doors, \"The Gates of Paradise.\" These featured a battle scene \"that might well have impressed itself in the mind of the young Uccello,\" and thus influenced \"The Battle of San Romano\".\nCareer.\nAccording to Vasari, Uccello's first painting was a Saint Anthony between the saints Cosmas and Damianus, a commission for the hospital of Lelmo. Next, he painted two figures in the convent of Annalena. Shortly afterwards, he painted three frescoes with scenes from \"the life of Saint Francis\" above the left door of the church. For the Santa Maria Maggiore church, he painted a fresco of the Annunciation. In this fresco, he painted a large building with columns in perspective. According to Vasari, people found this to be a great and beautiful achievement because this was the first example of how lines could be expertly used to demonstrate perspective and size. As a result, this work became a model for artists who wished to craft illusions of space in order to enhance the realness of their paintings.\nPaolo painted \"the Lives of the Church Fathers\" in the cloisters of the church of San Miniato, which sat on a hill overlooking Florence. According to Vasari, Paolo protested against the monotonous meals of cheese pies and cheese soup served by the abbot by running away, and returned to finish the job only after the abbot promised him a more varied diet.\nUccello was asked to paint a number of scenes of distempered animals for the house of the Medici. The scene most appreciated by Vasari was his depiction of a fierce lion fighting with a venom-spouting snake. Uccello loved to paint animals and he kept a wide variety of pictures of animals, especially birds, at home. This love for birds is what led to his nickname, Paolo Uccelli (Paul of the birds).\nBy 1424, Paolo was earning his own living as a painter. In that year, he proved his artistic maturity by painting episodes of the now-badly-damaged \"Creation and the Fall\" for the Green Cloister (\"Chiostro Verde\") of Santa Maria Novella in Florence. Again, this assignment allowed him to paint a large number of animals in a lively manner. He also succeeded in painting trees in their natural colours. This was a skill that was difficult for many of his predecessors, so Uccello also began to acquire a reputation for painting landscapes. He followed this with \"Scenes from the Life of Noah\", also for the Green Cloister. These scenes brought him great fame in Florence.\nIn 1425, Uccello travelled to Venice, where he worked on the mosaics for the fa\u00e7ade of San Marco, which have all since been lost. During this time, he also painted some frescoes in the Prato Cathedral and Bologna. Some suggest he visited Rome with his friend Donatello before returning to Florence in 1431. After he returned, Uccello remained in Florence for most of the rest of his life, executing works for various churches and patrons, most notably the Duomo.\nDespite his leave from Florence, interest in Uccello did not diminish. In 1432, the Office of Works asked the Florentine ambassador in Venice to enquire after Uccello's reputation as an artist. In 1436, he was given the commission for the monochromatic fresco of \"Sir John Hawkwood\". This equestrian monument exemplified his keen interest in perspective. The condottiere and his horse are presented as if the fresco was a sculpture seen from below.\nIt is widely thought that he is the author of the frescoes \"Stories of the Virgin\" and \"Story of Saint Stephen\" in the Cappella dell'Assunta, Florence, so he likely visited nearby Prato sometime between 1435 and 1440. Later, in 1443, he painted the figures on the clock of the Duomo. In that same year and continuing into 1444, he designed a few stained glass windows for the same church. In 1444 he was also at work in Padua, and he travelled to Padua again in 1445 at Donatello's invitation.\nBack in Florence in 1446, he painted the \"Green Stations of the Cross\", again for the cloister of the church Santa Maria Novella. Around 1447\u20131454 he painted \"Scenes of Monastic Life\" for the church San Miniato al Monte, Florence.\n\"Battle of San Romano\" paintings.\nAround the mid-1450s, he painted his three most famous paintings, the panels depicting \"The Battle of San Romano\" for the Palazzo Medici in Florence, commemorating the victory of the Florentine army over the Sienese in 1432. The extraordinarily foreshortened forms extending in many planes accentuate Uccello's virtuosity as a draftsman, and provides a controlled visual structure to the chaos of the battle scene.\nLater life.\nBy 1453, Uccello was married to Tommasa Malifici. This is known because, in that year Donato (named after Donatello), was born. Three years later, in 1456, his wife gave birth to their daughter, Antonia. Antonia Uccello (1456\u20131491) was a Carmelite nun, whom Giorgio Vasari called \"a daughter who knew how to draw.\" She was even noted as a \"pittoressa\", a painter, on her death certificate. Her style and her skill remains a mystery as none of her work is extant.\nFrom 1465 to 1469, Uccello was in Urbino with his son Donato working for the Confraternity of Corpus Domini, a brotherhood of laymen. During this time, he painted the predella for their new altarpiece with the \"Miracle of the Profaned Host\". (The main panel representing the \"Communion of the Apostles\" was commissioned to Justus van Ghent and finished in 1474). Uccello's predella is composed of six meticulous, naturalistic scenes related to the antisemitic myth of host desecration, which was based upon an event that supposedly occurred in Paris in 1290. It has been suggested that the subject of the main panel, on which Duke Frederick of Montefeltro of Urbino appears in the background conversing with an Asian, is related to the antisemitic intention of the predella. However, Federico did allow a small Jewish community to live in Urbino and not all of these scenes are unanimously attributed to Paolo Uccello.\nIn his Florentine tax return of August 1469, Uccello declared, \"I find myself old and ailing, my wife is ill, and I can no longer work.\" In the last years of his life, Paolo was a lonesome and forgotten man who was afraid of hardship in life. His last known work is \"The Hunt\", c.\u20091470. He made his testament on 11 November 1475 and died shortly afterwards on 10 December 1475 at the hospital of Florence, at the age of 78. He was buried in his father's tomb in the Florentine church of Santo Spirito.\nWith his precise and analytical mind, Paolo Uccello tried to apply a scientific method to depict objects in three-dimensional space. In particular, some of his studies of the perspective foreshortening of the torus are preserved, and one standard display of drawing skill was his depiction of the mazzocchio. In the words of G. C. Argan: \"Paolo's rigour is similar to the rigour of Cubists in the early 20th century, whose images were more \"true\" when they were less \"true to life\". Paolo constructs space through perspective, and historic event through the structure of space; if the resulting image is unnatural and unrealistic, so much the worse for nature and history.\" The perspective in his paintings has influenced many famous painters, such as Piero della Francesca, Albrecht D\u00fcrer and Leonardo da Vinci, to name a few.\nWorks.\nPope-Hennessy is far more conservative than the Italian authors: he attributes some of the works below to a \"Prato Master\" and a \"Karlsruhe Master\". Most of the dates in the list (taken from Borsi and Borsi) are derived from stylistic comparison rather than from documentation.\n*\"Battle of San Romano: Niccol\u00f2 da Tolentino\" (c. 1450\u20131456) - National Gallery, London\n*\"Battle of San Romano: Bernadino della Ciarda unhorsed\" (c. 1450\u20131456) - , Florence\n*\"Battle of San Romano: Micheletto da Cotignola\" (c.\u20091450) - , Paris\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24068", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24068", "title": "Pope Pius I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from c. 140 to c. 154\nPius I (, Greek: \u03a0\u03af\u03bf\u03c2) was the bishop of Rome from c. 140 to his death c. 154, according to the \"Annuario Pontificio\". His dates are listed as 142 or 146 to 157 or 161, respectively. He is considered to have opposed both the Valentinians and Gnostics during his papacy. He is considered a saint by the Catholic Church with a feast day on 11 July, but it is unclear if he died as a martyr.\nEarly life.\nPius is believed to have been born at Aquileia, in Northern Italy, during the late 1st century. His father was an Italian called Rufinus, and according to the \"Liber Pontificalis\" was also a native of Aquileia. According to the 2nd-century Muratorian Canon and the \"Liberian Catalogue\", Pius was the brother of Hermas, author of the text known as \"The Shepherd of Hermas\". Its author identifies himself as a former slave, a fact which has led to speculation that both Hermas and Pius were freedmen. However Hermas' statement that he was a slave may just mean that he belonged to a low-ranking plebeian family.\nPontificate.\nAccording to Catholic tradition, Pius I governed the church in the middle of the 2nd century during the reigns of the Emperors Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius. He is held to be the ninth successor of Saint Peter, and to have decreed that Easter should only be kept on a Sunday. Although he is said to have ordered the publication of the \"Liber Pontificalis\", in fact compilation of that document was not started before the beginning of the 6th century. Pius is also said to have built one of the oldest churches in Rome, Santa Pudenziana.\nJustin Martyr taught Christian doctrine in Rome during the pontificate of Pius I but the account of Justin's martyrdom does not name Pius. Given the brevity of the account this is hardly remarkable. The heretics Valentinus, Cerdon, and Marcion visited Rome in Pius' time, and he is believed to have excommunicated both groups.\nCatholic apologists see this as an argument for the primacy of the Roman See during the 2nd century. \nThere is some conjecture that Pius was a martyr in Rome, a conjecture that entered earlier editions of the \"Roman Breviary\". The study that had produced the 1969 revision of the General Roman Calendar stated that there were no grounds for his being considered a martyr, and he is not presented as such in the current \"Roman Martyrology\".\nFeast day.\nPius I's feast day is 11 July. In the Tridentine calendar it was given the rank of \"Simple\" and celebrated as the feast of a martyr. The rank of the feast was reduced to a Commemoration in the 1955 General Roman Calendar of Pope Pius XII and the General Roman Calendar of 1960.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24069", "revid": "46296426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24069", "title": "Pope Pius II", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1458 to 1464\nPope Pius II (, ), born Enea Silvio Bartolomeo Piccolomini (; 18 October 1405 \u2013 14 August 1464), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 19 August 1458 to his death in 1464.\nAeneas Silvius was an author, diplomat, and orator, and private secretary of Antipope Felix V and then the Emperor Frederick III, and then Pope Eugenius IV. He participated in the Council of Basel, but left it in 1443 to follow Frederick, whom he reconciled to the Roman obedience. He became Bishop of Trieste in 1447, Bishop of Siena in 1450, and a cardinal in 1456.\nHe was a Renaissance humanist with an international reputation. Aeneas Silvius' longest and most enduring work is the story of his life, the \"Commentaries\", which was the first autobiography of a pope to have been published. It appeared posthumously, in 1584, 120 years after his death.\nEarly life.\nAeneas was born in Corsignano in Sienese territory of a noble but impoverished family. His father Silvio was a soldier and member of the House of Piccolomini, and his mother was Vittoria Forteguerri, who had eighteen children including several twins, though no more than ten were alive at one time. The plague (\"iniqua lues\") finally left him with only two sisters, Laudamia and Catherina. He worked with his father in the fields for some years.\nIn 1423, at the age of 18, he left to study at the university of Siena, where he first followed the humanities curriculum, and then that of civil law. At Siena he studied under the Augustinian Andreas of Milan, the noted historian. His preceptor and professor of civil law was Antonio de Rosellis. He also studied law under Mariano Sozzini. He then attended the university of Florence where he studied under Francesco Filelfo, and where he became friends with Poggio Bracciolini, Leonardo Bruni, and Guarino da Verona. He settled in Siena as a teacher.\nBasel.\nIn 1431 he accepted the post of secretary to Domenico Capranica, bishop of Fermo, then on his way to the Council of Basel. Capranica was protesting against the new Pope Eugene IV's refusal of a cardinalate for him, which had been designated by Pope Martin V. Arriving at Basel after enduring a stormy voyage to Genoa and then a trip across the Alps, he successively served Capranica, who ran out of money, and then other masters.\nIn 1435, he was sent by Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Albergati, Eugenius IV's legate at the council, on a secret mission to Scotland, the object of which is variously related even by himself. He visited England as well as Scotland, underwent many perils and vicissitudes in both countries and left an account of each. The journey to Scotland proved so tempestuous that Piccolomini swore that he would walk barefoot to the nearest shrine of Our Lady from their landing port. This proved to be Dunbar; the nearest shrine was distant at Whitekirk. The journey through the ice and snow left Aeneas afflicted with pain in his legs for the rest of his life. Only when he arrived at Newcastle did he feel that he had returned to \"a civilised part of the world and the inhabitable face of the Earth\", Scotland and the far north of England being \"wild, bare and never visited by the sun in winter\". In Scotland, he fathered a child but it died.\nUpon his return to Basel, Aeneas again served from 1436 to 1438 as secretary of Cardinal Domenico Capranica. He actively supported the council in its conflict with the Pope, and, although still a layman, eventually obtained a share in the direction of its affairs. He gave a speech advocating the choice of Pavia as the site of a meeting between council members and the Greek delegation, to discuss church union, which caught the attention of the duke of Milan, as he had hoped. The archbishop of Milan named him Provost of the church of S. Lorenzo in Milan, even though he had not been elected to the post by the chapter of the church and was still a layman. The Council granted him a dispensation, despite their policy against such dispensations, which they considered a feature of papal corruption. But when Aeneas was sent on a diplomatic mission to Vienna in 1438, it was reported that he had died; and the duke of Milan, who had abandoned the council and returned to Pope Eugenius' side, gave Aeneas' provostship to another candidate. In recompense, the Council appointed him a canon in the cathedral Chapter of Trent.\nHe refused the offer of the diaconate, shunning the ecclesiastical state because of the obligation of sexual continence which it imposed. Even the offer to become one of the electors of a successor to Pope Eugene IV was not enough for him to overcome his reluctance. He supported the creation of the Antipope Felix V (Amadeus, Duke of Savoy) in November 1439, and participated in his coronation.\nIn 1440, he composed a work in defense of the authority of the general council of Basel, the \"Libellus dialogorum de generalis concilii auctoritate et gestis Basileensium\".\nAeneas then was sent to Strasbourg, where he fathered a child, a son, with a Breton woman called Elizabeth. The baby died 14 months later.\nPiccolomini served briefly as secretary to Pope Felix, and in 1442 was sent as envoy to the Diet of Frankfurt. On 27 July 1442, in Frankfurt, Frederick III, King of the Romans celebrated him as Poet Laureate, and offered him a position at court as his secretary. In January 1443, Aeneas resigned as secretary of Felix V, and was appointed secretary and protonotary in the imperial chancellery. There he obtained the patronage of the emperor's chancellor, Kaspar Schlick. Some identify the love adventure that Aeneas related in his romance \"The Tale of Two Lovers\" (1444) with an escapade of the chancellor. Of his activities at this period in his life, Ferdinand Gregorovius, the historian of medieval Rome, wrote, \"Versed in the affairs of the Empire and the Roman Curia, in which occupations he incessantly strove to acquire benefices that should raise him out of poverty, Piccolomini was not inspired by any ardent longing for virtue, nor was he stirred by the sublime genius of an exalted nature. There was nothing great in him. Endowed with fascinating gifts, this man of brilliant parts possessed no enthusiasms. We cannot even say that he pursued any aim beyond that of his own advantage.\"\nAeneas' character had hitherto been that of a man of the world with no strictness in morals or consistency in politics. Being sent on a mission to Rome in 1445, with the ostensible object of inducing Pope Eugene to convoke a new council, he was absolved from ecclesiastical censures and returned to Germany under an engagement to assist the Pope. This he did most effectually by the diplomatic dexterity with which he smoothed away differences between the papal court of Rome and the German imperial electors. He played a leading role in concluding a compromise in 1447 by which the dying Pope Eugenius accepted the reconciliation tendered by the German princes. The documents were signed on 5 February and 7 February 1447. As a result, the council and the antipope were left without support.\nBishop.\nHe was ordained a priest in Vienna on 4 March 1446.\nPope Eugenius died on 23 February 1447, and the conclave to choose his successor lasted from 4 to 6 March 1447. Aeneas Sylvius was one of the four ambassadors chosen to be the guardians of the conclave. The new pope, Tommaso Parentucelli, chose the name Nicholas V, and immediately confirmed Aeneas in his posts of papal subdeacon and secretary, and appointed him to carry the papal cross at his coronation. One of the first acts of Pope Nicholas was to appoint Aeneas Bishop of Trieste on 17 April 1447.\nOn 13 August 1447, at Cologne, Bishop Aeneas wrote the first \"Epistola retractationis, ad Magistr. Jordanum\".\nPope Nicholas transferred him to the diocese of Siena on 23 September 1450.\nIn 1450, Aeneas was sent as ambassador by Emperor Frederick III to negotiate his marriage with Princess Eleonore of Portugal. In 1451, he undertook a mission to Bohemia and concluded a satisfactory arrangement with the Hussite leader George of Pod\u011bbrady. In 1452 he accompanied Frederick to Rome, where Frederick wedded Eleanor and was crowned emperor by the pope. At the coronation, speaking in the name of the emperor, Aeneas repudiated the conciliar theory, holding that the pope and his cardinals were the best council.\nBishop Aeneas Sylvius was a delegate of Frederick III at the Diet of Ratisbon in February 1454.\nIn August 1455, Aeneas again travelled to Rome on an embassy which included Johann Hinderbach to proffer the obedience of Germany to the new pope, Calixtus III. The ceremony took place on 12 August in a public consistory. As instructed, the envoys pressed the pope for a war against the Turks, which pleased Calixtus, who was of the same mind. He brought strong recommendations from Frederick and Ladislaus V of Hungary (also King of Bohemia) for the nomination of Aeneas to the cardinalate, but delays arose from the Pope's resolution to promote his own nephews first, which he did on 17 September 1456.\nFinally, on 17 December 1456, he was named a cardinal, and next day he was assigned the titular church of Santa Sabina on the Aventine. He was allowed to keep the diocese of Siena. He also acquired the bishopric of Warmia (Ermel and, Prussia; now in Poland) on 12 August 1457.\nElection to papacy.\nCalixtus III died on 6 August 1458. The leading candidate was Cardinal Domenico Capranica, but he died on 14 August, during the \"Novendiales\". The ambassador of the Duke of Milan wrote on 31 July that Cardinal Juan de Torquemada and Cardinal Filippo Calandrini, the half-brother of Pope Nicholas V, were also candidates, and he thought that Calandrini might win. Aeneas and his friend Cardinal Calandrini of Bologna immediately headed from Viterbo to Rome, and when they reached the gate of the city, they were met by a friendly assembly of courtiers and common people, who shouted that one or the other of them would be made pope. On the evening of the death of Cardinal Capranica, the Milanese ambassador indicated it would be possible to carry the election of Piccolomini, who was being supported by the king of Naples.\nOn 16 August, the cardinals entered into a papal conclave. Eighteen cardinals took part. The Italian cardinals were outnumbered by the foreigners. According to Aeneas' account, the wealthy cardinal Guillaume d'Estouteville, Archbishop of Rouen, though a Frenchman and a blood cousin of the king of France, seemed certain to be elected. On 18 August, the first scrutiny took place; Aeneas and Calandrini each received 5 votes, while no one else received more than three. Whether out of trickery or out of hatred, no cardinal gave a vote for d'Estouteville. The results contradicted the expectations. D'Estouteville then set out to frustrate the ambitions of Aeneas. The second ballot took place on 19 August; the results gave Piccolomini 9 votes, and D'Estouteville 6. After intense intrigue among the cardinals, including a private meeting of the Italian cardinals, who were urged by Cardinal Barbo of Venice to choose the Italian Piccolomini over the French d'Estouteville, Aeneas was able to secure enough votes for his candidacy after the second ballot at the \"accessio\", to be elected with 12 votes. All 18 cardinals then ratified the election. He was crowned Pope on the front steps of St. Peter's Basilica on 3 September 1458 by the Protodeacon, Cardinal Prospero Colonna.\nPapal policies and initiatives.\nFrom the first day of his papacy, Pius' greatest priority was freeing Europe from the threat of the Turks, through a great crusade. He had also been preparing a bull, which in the event he never published, outlining his plans for a reform of the Roman Curia.\nCongress at Mantua.\nAfter allying himself with Ferdinand (Ferrante), the Aragonese claimant to the throne of Naples, in opposition to the French House of Anjou, his next important act was to convene a congress of the representatives of Christian princes at Mantua for joint action against the Turks. In anticipation of his departure for Mantua, Pius issued the bull \"Cum Concedente Deo\" on 5 January 1459, in which he considered the possibility of the pope dying outside Rome; he ordered that the conclave to elect his successor should take place only in Rome, contrary to previous practice. On 11 January 1459 Pope Pius appointed Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa Vicar-General of the city of Rome and of the Patrimony of S. Peter; and on 15 January he named Bishop Galeazzo Cavrini of Mantua his Governor of Rome. He finally set out for the north on 22 January.\nWhile at Mantua, he undertook to mediate in the dispute between Sigismund of Austria and Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa over the bishopric of Brixen, which had been given Nicholas by Pope Nicholas V in 1450, without the consent of the emperor, the count of Tyrol (Sigismund), or the cathedral chapter of Brixen. A public reconciliation was arranged, but no resolution of the basic problem was achieved, but rather postponed to a Diet to be held at Trent two years in the future. Sigismund, who had not been friendly toward the papacy for some years, left Mantua on 29 November 1459, even more irritated than before. Pius' efforts had failed. Both returned to the north, and in April 1460 trouble broke out again. Cusa, who was at Bruneck and engaged in negotiations with Sigismund, was surrounded, captured by the archduke, and forced to agree to Sigismund's demands. Cusa appealed to Pius II. A restrained Pius only summoned Sigismund to appear before him and explain his conduct, but Sigismund appealed to a future council in a statement handed the pope by his proctor on 4 August 1460. On 8 August, Sigismund was excommunicated and his domains were placed under the interdict.\nOn 26 September 1459, Pope Pius had called for a new crusade against the Ottomans, and on 14 January 1460, he proclaimed the official crusade that was to last for three years. The pope influenced Vlad III Dracula, whom he held in high regard, to start a war against Sultan Mehmed II of Turkey. This conflict at its peak involved the Wallachians trying to assassinate the Sultan (see The Night Attack).\nAfter his departure from Mantua on 19 January 1460, Pius II reached his former bishopric of Siena on 30 January, where, exhausted by his exertions at Mantua, he was advised by his doctors to rest, either in the city or at the Petriolo hot springs. There he was joined by his recent host in Mantua, Ludovico Gonzaga. Pius described his delight with country life in very pleasing language.\nNew cardinals.\nAt the same time, since he had long been concerned with the content of the College of Cardinals and with the behavior of some of its members, The French faction among the cardinals, especially d'Estouteville and Alain de Co\u00ebtivy, obstructed every move that might harm King Louis XI, who was hostile to the idea of a crusade. Two cardinals had died six months previously, Antonio de la Cerda y Lloscos and the Infante Jaime of Portugal. Some of the Italian cardinals, led by the Patriarch of Aquileia, Lodovico Scampi, were hostile to him personally and skeptical of his project. Pius decided to hold a consistory for the creation of new cardinals. Suggestions poured in from all sides, petitioning for at least ten new cardinals. During Lent of 1460, he began consultations with the current cardinals, whose consent was necessary.\nOn 4 March 1460, the Wednesday of Ember Days, a formal consistory was held to make the final decisions on the candidates. Pope Pius' opening address was frank and detailed in cataloguing the shortcomings and faults of the luxurious lifestyle of the cardinals, and their activities on behalf of monarchs rather than the church: \"Your lifestyle is such that you would appear to have been chosen, not to govern the state, but called to enjoy pleasures. You avoid neither hunting, nor games, nor the company of women. You put together parties that are more opulent than is fitting. You wear clothes that are far too expensive. You overflow with gold and silver... We can't keep people from making requests, but we can easily refuse to entertain them. Think about who are appropriate, and I will choose from among their number...\" He then gave the names of those who nominated themselves, or who had been nominated by others.\" When he finished, Cardinal Scarampi rose to speak. He remarked that Pius' predecessors had named nobles, eminent for learning and holy life. But he was proposing people whom Scarampi would not employ in his kitchen or in his stables. In fact, according to the cardinal, there was no need for new cardinals: \"With too many of us, our value declines.\"\nFinally, Pius was able to secure a positive vote on five names, and he was able to pressure the cardinals into accepting his own nomination of a sixth. These were: Angelo Capranica, bishop of Rieti and brother of Cardinal Domenico Capranica; Bernardo Eroli, bishop of Spoleto; Niccol\u00f2 Fortiguerra, bishop of Teano; Alessandro Oliva de Saxoferrato, the Prior General of the Order of Hermits of Saint Augustine (the pope's choice, whose candidacy was much resisted); Pius' nephew Francesco Todeschini-Piccolomini, a protonotary apostolic; and Burkhard von Weisbriach, archbishop of Salzburg. The appointment of Weisbriach was made in pectore, and was not published until 31 May 1462, to avoid offending the foreign powers. The five cardinals whose names were published were all Italians. On 7 March 1460, Pope Pius had to write to the Duke of Burgundy, Philip the Good, apologizing for having been unable to convince the cardinals to vote for the duke's almoner, Jean Jouffroy, bishop of Arras. He wrote that it was because the cardinals would have no ultramontanes as cardinals.\nPius was recalled to Rome, reaching the city on 6 October 1460. His presence was urged by the disturbances occasioned by Tiburzio di Maso, who, when captured, confessed that he had planned to overthrow the papal government and plunder the cardinals and merchants. He was executed on 31 October.\nThe European powers, however, had not ceased their pressure for the appointment of more cardinals. The cardinals, however, were insistent that there should be no creation of non-Italians. An agreement was finally reached that there would be six new cardinals, three Italians and three \"ultramontani\", thereby preserving the balance of power. On 18 December 1461, six cardinals were announced: Bartolomeo Roverella, archbishop of Ravenna; Jacopo Piccolomini-Ammannati, bishop of Pavia; Francesco Gonzaga, who was only 17; Jean Jouffroy, the nomination of Louis XI and Philip the Good; Louis d'Albret, son of the Count of Dreux; and Jaume Cardona, bishop of Urgel. The name of Burkhard von Weisbriach of Salzburg was also finally published.\nNaples, Rimini, Poland.\nIn the struggle for the Kingdom of Naples between the supporters of the House of Aragon and the House of Anjou, the Papal States were at this time troubled by rebellious barons and marauding condottieri, whom he gradually, though momentarily, quelled. The Neapolitan War was also concluded by the success of the Pope's ally the Aragonese Ferdinand.\nIn particular, the Pope engaged for most of his reign in what looked like a personal war against Sigismondo Pandolfo Malatesta, Lord of Rimini, with the result of the almost complete submission of that condottiero.\nPius II also tried mediation in the Thirteen Years' War of 1454\u201366 between Poland and the Teutonic Knights, but, when he failed to achieve success, cast an anathema over Polish and Prussians both.\nPius II was also engaged in a series of disputes with King George of Bohemia and Archduke Sigismund of Austria (who was excommunicated for having arrested Nicholas of Cusa, Bishop of Brixen).\nIn June 1461, Pius II canonized Saint Catherine of Siena.\nIn October 1461, he gained what at first appeared to be a brilliant success by inducing the new king of France, Louis XI, to abolish the Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges, by which the papal authority in France had been weakened. But Louis XI had expected that Pius II would in return espouse the French cause in Naples, and when he found himself disappointed he virtually re-established the Pragmatic Sanction by royal ordinances. Pius II built a fortress in Tivoli called Rocca Pia in 1461.\nThe Diocese of Ljubljana was established on 6 December 1461 by Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor. On 9 September 1462, Pope Pius confirmed the action.\nCrusade.\nThe crusade for which the Congress of Mantua had been convoked made no progress. In November 1463, Pope Pius II tried to organize the crusade against the Ottomans, similar to what Nicholas V and Calixtus III had tried to do before him. Pius II invited all the Christian nobility to join, and the Venetians immediately answered the appeal. So did George Kastriot Skanderbeg the leader of Albanian resistance, who on 27 November 1463 declared war on the Ottomans and attacked their forces near Ohrid. Pius II's planned crusade envisioned assembling 20,000 soldiers in Taranto, and another 20,000 would be gathered by Skanderbeg. They would have been marshaled in Durazzo under Skanderbeg's leadership and would have formed the central front against the Ottomans. The Pope did his best: he addressed an eloquent letter to the Ottoman ruler, Mehmet II, urging him to become a Christian. The pope even suggested that if Mehmed were to convert, he would be recognized as \"Emperor of the Greeks and of the East.\" If it was delivered, the invitation was not successful. In April 1462, a public pageant was staged for the pope to receive the relics of the head of Saint Andrew when it was brought from Patras in the Peloponnese to Rome by Thomas Palaeologus.\nPius II succeeded in reconciling the Emperor and the King of Hungary, and derived great encouragement as well as pecuniary advantage from the discovery of mines of alum in the papal territory at Tolfa, c. 1459. However, France was estranged; the Duke of Burgundy broke his positive promises; Milan was engrossed with the attempt to seize Genoa; Florence cynically advised the Pope to let the Turks and the Venetians wear each other out. Pius II was aware that he was nearing his end, and his malady probably prompted the feverish impatience with which, on 18 June 1464, he assumed the cross and departed for Ancona to conduct the crusade in person.\nSlavery.\nPius condemned the enslavement of newly baptized Christians as a \"great crime\". In a letter of 7 October 1462, addressed to the Bishop of Rubico in the Canary Islands, Pius instructed bishops to impose ecclesiastical penalties on transgressors. Pius did not condemn the concept of trading in slaves, only the enslavement of Christians, who represented a very small minority of those captured and taken to Portugal.\nPienza.\nPope Pius II inaugurated an unusual urban project, perhaps the first city-planning exercise in modern Europe. He refurbished his hometown of Corsignano (province of Siena) and renamed it Pienza, after himself. A cathedral and palaces were built in the best style of the day to decorate the city. They survive to this day. He also issued a papal bull, \"Cum almam nostram urbem\", on 28 April 1462, prohibiting damage to ancient ruins in Rome or Campagna.\nIllness and death.\nOn 26 April 1463, Pius II published his most famous retraction in the bull \"In Minoribus Agentes,\" addressed to the rector and members of the University of Cologne. In it, he withdrew his treatise against Pope Eugene IV and in favor of the Council of Basel. It contained the famous remark, \"reject Aeneas, retain Pius\" (\"Aeneam rejicite, Pium recipite\").\nIn spite of suffering from a fever, Pope Pius II left Rome for Ancona on 18 June 1464, arriving on 18 July. He hoped to increase the morale of the crusading army. However, the armed forces melted away at Ancona for want of transport and the outbreak of pestilence, and when at last the Venetian fleet arrived, led by Doge Cristoforo Moro, the dying Pope could only view it from a window. He died two days later, on 14 August 1464.\nThe cardinals at Ancona decided to put the papal galleys in the hands of the doge of Venice, on the understanding that they would be handed over to the next pope. They also sent the 48,000 gold ducats which Pius had on hand for the crusade to Matthias of Hungary. The crusade of Pius II was at an end.\nDespite the canonical requirement that the conclave to elect a successor should take place in the place where he died, Pius II's body was taken to Rome and interred at the Vatican, in Old St. Peter's Basilica, in the Chapel of St. Andrew. When his nephew, Pius III, died in 1503, he was buried next to Pius II. In 1506, because of the demolition of Old St. Peter's, the tombs were moved to the crypt. In 1612, when the church of St. Andrea della Valle was completed, the bodies of both popes, as well as parts of their funeral monuments, were moved there and re-entombed on 1 February 1613.\nLiterary reputation and legacy.\nPius II was a prominent author of poetry in his lifetime, being named imperial poet laureate in 1442. But his reputation in \"belles lettres\" rests principally upon his \"The Tale of Two Lovers\", an erotic novel. He also composed some comedies, of which only one (\"Chrysis\") is extant. All of his works are in Latin. He also wrote numerous erotic poems. All of the erotic material was written before he was elected to the papacy.\nHis \"Epistles\", which were collected by himself, are also an important source of historical information. His \"Epistles\" contain one of the best known descriptions of the enthronement ceremony of the Carinthian dukes on the Prince's Stone and the Duke's Chair. It is generally considered to be the source for Jean Bodin's description of the ceremony in his \"Six Livres de la R\u00e9publique\".\nThe most valuable of his historical writings are his histories of Bohemia and of Emperor Frederick III. He sketched biographical treatises on Europe and Asia, and in early and middle life produced numerous tracts on the political and theological controversies of his day. The pontiff even wrote an exhaustive refutation of Islam.\nHis most important and longest work is his autobiographical \"Commentaries\", first published in 1584 in Rome by Archbishop Francesco Bandini Piccolomini, a distant relative. Bandini Piccolomini published it under the name of Iohannes Gobellinus, the scribe of the manuscript archetype of 1464, who was then named the author. Pius II chose to write \"Commentaries\" from the third-person perspective, following Caesar's example. This posthumous edition altered some content judged inappropriate.\nOf his own work, Aeneas Silvius wrote, \"My style of writing is unpolished and bald, but it is frank, and without trappings. I never write with labour, because I do not stretch after things which are too high for me, and which I do not know; but what I have learned I write.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24071", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24071", "title": "Phoebe Hearst", "text": "American philanthropist, feminist and suffragist (1842\u20131919)\nPhoebe Elizabeth Apperson Hearst (December 3, 1842 \u2013 April 13, 1919) was an American philanthropist, feminist and suffragist. Hearst was the founder of the University of California Museum of Anthropology, now called the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology, and the co-founder of the National Parent-Teacher Association.\nEarly life.\nShe was born Phoebe Elizabeth Apperson in St. Clair, Missouri, in Franklin County, the daughter of Drucilla (Whitmire) and Randolph Walker Apperson. In her early years, Phoebe studied to be a teacher. Her childhood consisted of helping her father with finances at his store, learning French, and playing the piano. In 1860, businessman George Hearst met Phoebe when he returned to St. Clair to care for his dying mother. When they married on June 15, 1862, George Hearst was 41 years old, and Phoebe was 19. \nFamily life.\nSoon after their marriage, the couple left Missouri and moved to San Francisco, California, where Phoebe gave birth to their only child, William Randolph Hearst. As a very successful miner who later became a U.S. senator, George often left Phoebe alone during his work. She and her son were close and had many similar interests, including art and design. After Phoebe's death in 1919, William inherited a $10 million fortune.\nPhilanthropy.\nIn the 1880s, she became a major benefactor and director of the Golden Gate Kindergarten Association and the first president of the Century Club of California. In 1902, Hearst funded the construction of a building to provide teacher training and to house kindergarten classes and the association's offices. The association had 26 schools at the time of the San Francisco earthquake in 1906.\nHearst was a major benefactor of the University of California, Berkeley, and its first woman regent, serving on the board from 1897 until her death. That year, she contributed to the establishment of the National Congress of Mothers, which evolved eventually into the National Parent-Teacher Association. In 1900, she co-founded the all-girls National Cathedral School in Washington, DC. In addition, a nearby public elementary school bears her name. Hearst funded the Hearst Library in Anaconda, Montana, in 1898. She maintained it until 1904.\nHearst became a close friend of Dr. William Pepper, provost of the University of Pennsylvania, who was also a medical doctor who treated her for a heart condition. In 1896, in her first major act of museum philanthropy, she donated more than two hundred objects to the Penn Museum, many of them items such as Anasazi ceramics excavated from the Cliff Palace site of Mesa Verde, Colorado. Later, she also funded a Penn Museum expedition to Russia, and sent the Aztec specialist, Zelia Nuttall, to Moscow for this purpose.\nIn 1901, Phoebe Hearst founded the University of California Museum of Anthropology, later called the Robert H. Lowie Museum of Anthropology and renamed the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology in 1992. The original collection comprised 230,000 objects representing cultures and civilizations throughout history.\nThe museum now contains about 3.8 million objects. Throughout her lifetime and as provided in her will, Hearst donated over 60,000 objects to the museum. She also funded expeditions such as the Pepper\u2013Hearst expedition (1895\u20131897) on the coast of Florida, near Tarpon Springs. Most notable are the 1899 expeditions in Egypt by American archaeologist George A. Reisner and in Peru by German archaeologist Max Uhle. These ventures further contributed to the museum's collection. Among these are approximately 20,000 ancient Egyptian artifacts, the largest such collection west of Chicago. Hearst also realized the importance of preserving Native Californian culture. With her support, anthropologist Alfred L. Kroeber and his students, including Robert F. Heizer, documented Native Californian culture in the form of photographs, audio recordings, texts, and artifacts. This research helped to preserve approximately 250,000 Native Californian artifacts, the most extensive in the world. The museum collection is available to students and researchers for examination. A gallery located on the University of California Berkeley campus is available for public view.\nHearst was named to the Mount Vernon Ladies' Association as the second vice-regent representing California. She held that position from 1889 to 1918, contributing much time and money to the restoration of George Washington's home at Mount Vernon, furnishing it with Washington-owned objects and improving the visitor experience. The William Randolph Hearst Foundation continues to fund projects at Mount Vernon in her memory.\nHearst also donated money to the restoration of Pohick Church in Virginia, and donated a pipe organ to St. Stephen's Church in California, where she was also a parishioner.\nHearst chose a \"different way\" than radical feminists. While she believed in women having financial freedom, in her support for women's suffrage she did not strongly believe in women gaining political power. She thought women should have the right to vote \"to protect homes and children.\" In 1895, when the Women's Congress resolved for the passage of a federal amendment, Hearst supported it \"distantly\". She officially declared herself in favor of suffrage in the summer of 1911, saying it would enable \"the betterment of conditions affecting children and women particularly.\"\nReligion.\nHearst was raised a member of the Christian Cumberland Presbyterian community in the 1840s. In 1898 she declared her belief in the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, and helped play a key role in the spread of the religion in the United States.\nHearst had already been an early investor in the initiative of Sarah Farmer using the Greenacre Inn as a summer center of cross-religion gatherings and cultural development shortly after the 1893 Parliament of Religions. In November 1898, Hearst, with Lua Getsinger and others, briefly stopped off in Paris, on their way to Palestine, and was shocked to see May Bolles (later Maxwell), later a well known American member of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, bedridden with the chronic malady with which she had been afflicted. Hearst invited Bolles to travel to Palestine with her, believing that the change of air would be conducive to her health. Getsinger disclosed to Bolles the purpose of the journey: a pilgrimage to visit the then head of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith: \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. The group travelled to Akka and Haifa in Ottoman Palestine on pilgrimage, arriving on December 14, 1898. They were the very first Westerners to make the pilgrimage and meet \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1. Hearst later wrote, \"Those three days were the most memorable days of my life.\" Yet after the first pilgrimage attempts at correspondence on behalf of Hearst by Lua Getsinger were leaked naming her involvement in the religion at a time of rising considerations of her son's political activities and so Hearst dismissed the Getsingers from their stay at her home in 1901.Kindle:6195 Still in the spring of 1901 Hearst also met with Sarah Farmer again, and invested again in Green Acre, as it came to be called, in 1902, and, further, an agent of Hearst acted for Sarah Farmer when she changed her will in 1909 to bequeath Green Acre to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds in the event of Farmer's death. Hearst had also been a victim of an incident seeking to extort money from her, which had caused her estrangement from some Bah\u00e1'\u00eds. In October 1912, she invited \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1, who was travelling throughout the United States, to stay at her home for a long weekend, even though at that time she had become estranged from the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed community. During his stay, \u02bbAbdu'l-Bah\u00e1 mentioned that anyone who tried to extort money or goods from others should not be considered a true Bah\u00e1'\u00ed.\nDeath.\nShe died at her home, Hacienda del Pozo de Verona, in Pleasanton, California, aged 76, on April 13, 1919, during the worldwide influenza epidemic of 1918\u20131919, and was buried at Cypress Lawn Memorial Park in Colma, California.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24072", "revid": "1427850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24072", "title": "Pope Pius IV", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1559 to 1565\nPope Pius IV (; 31 March 1499 \u2013 9 December 1565), born Giovanni Angelo Medici, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 25 December 1559 to his death, in December 1565. Born in Milan, his family considered itself a branch of the House of Medici and used the same coat of arms. Although modern historians have found no proof of this connection, the Medici of Florence recognised the claims of the Medici of Milan in the early 16th century.\nPope Paul III appointed Medici Archbishop of Ragusa, and sent him on diplomatic missions to the Holy Roman Empire and Hungary. He presided over the final session of the Council of Trent. His nephew, Cardinal Charles Borromeo, was a close adviser. As pope, Pius IV initiated a number of building projects in Rome, including one to improve the water supply.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nGiovanni Angelo Medici was born in Milan on 31 March 1499 as the second of eleven children to Bernardino Medici and Clelia Serbelloni.\nGiovanni Medici was the younger brother of condottiero Gian Giacomo Medici, and the maternal uncle of Charles Borromeo. Medici studied philosophy and medicine in Pavia.\nAfter studying at University of Bologna and acquiring a reputation as a jurist he obtained his doctorate in both canon and civil law on 11 May 1525. Medici went in 1527 to Rome, and as a favourite of Pope Paul III was rapidly promoted to the governorship of several towns, the archbishopric of Ragusa (1545\u20131553), and the vice-legateship of Bologna.\nCardinalate.\nOn 8 April 1549, Pope Paul III made Medici a cardinal, receiving his red hat and titular church title on the following 10 May. Under Papal authority, he was sent on diplomatic missions to the Holy Roman Empire and also to Hungary.\nPontificate.\nElection.\nOn the death of Pope Paul IV, he was elected pope on 25 December 1559, taking the name Pius IV, and installed on 6 January 1560. His first public acts of importance were to grant a general pardon to the participants in the riot after the death of his predecessor, and to bring to trial the nephews of his predecessor. One, Cardinal Carlo Carafa, was strangled, and Duke Giovanni Carafa of Paliano, with his nearest associates, was beheaded.\nCouncil of Trent.\nOn 18 January 1562 the Council of Trent, which had been suspended by Pope Julius III, was convened by Pius IV for the third and final time. Great skill and caution were necessary to effect a settlement of the questions before it, inasmuch as the three principal nations taking part in it, though at issue with regard to their own special demands, were prepared to unite their forces against the demands of Rome. Pius IV, however, aided by Giovanni Morone and Charles Borromeo, proved himself equal to the emergency, and by judicious management \u2013 and concession \u2013 brought the council to a termination satisfactory to the disputants and favourable to the pontifical authority. Its definitions and decrees were confirmed by a papal bull (\"Benedictus Deus\") dated 26 January 1564; and, though they were received with certain limitations by France and Spain, the famous Creed of Pius IV, or Tridentine Creed, became an authoritative expression of the Catholic faith. The more marked manifestations of stringency during his pontificate appear to have been prompted rather than spontaneous, his personal character inclining him to moderation and ease.\nSo, although he summoned Jeanne d'Albret, the Queen of Navarre, before the Inquisition on a charge of Calvinism, he backed down after the indignant protest of Charles IX of France. In the same year he published a bull granting the use of the cup to the laity of Austria and Bohemia. One of his strongest passions appears to have been that of building, which somewhat strained his resources in contributing to the adornment of Rome (including the new Porta Pia and Via Pia, named after him, and the northern extension (\"Addizione\") of the rione of Borgo), and in carrying on the work of restoration, erection, and fortification in various parts of the ecclesiastical states.\nOn the other hand, others bemoaned the austere Roman culture during his papacy; Giorgio Vasari in 1567 spoke of a time when \"the grandeurs of this place reduced by stinginess of living, dullness of dress, and simplicity in so many things; Rome is fallen into much misery, and if it is true that Christ loved poverty and the City wishes to follow in his steps she will quickly become beggarly...\".\nDoctrinal teachings.\nIn addition to \"Benedictus Deus\", Pius issued a papal bull on 24 March 1564 entitled \"Dominici Gregis Custodiae\" which set out the rules for forbidding books, including the stipulation that reading a vernacular translation of the Old Testament was restricted to learned and pious men who had episcopal permission.\nConsistories.\nPius IV created 46 cardinals in four consistories during his pontificate, and elevated three nephews to the cardinalate, including Charles Borromeo. The pope also made Ugo Boncompagni, who would later be elected Pope Gregory XIII, a cardinal. In 1561, the pope nominated Daniele Barbaro as a cardinal \"in pectore\"; however, the nomination was never publicly revealed. In 1565, Pius IV offered the cardinalate to Jean Parisot de Valette, the grand master of the Order of Malta, in recognition for his defense of Malta against the Ottoman Empire; however, he declined the pope's invitation.\nConspiracy.\nA conspiracy against Pope Pius IV was discovered and suppressed in 1565. The plot was led by Benedetto Accolti, who planned to present the Pope with a demand for his abdication and, if that failed, to assassinate him with a poisoned dagger. Accolti's motivations were partly personal, but also stemmed from dissatisfaction among Romans with Pius IV's pontificate, particularly his tax increases. Accolti was the illegitimate son of a cardinal.\nRoman ghetto.\nThe strict laws established by Pope Paul IV establishing the Jewish Roman Ghetto were loosened by Pius IV, allowing Jews to own property worth up to 1500 ducats, and to do business of any kind with Christians except hire them as servants. Rent in the ghetto could not be \"exorbitant\", but would be set by the executive of the city.\nArchitectural achievements.\nDuring the reign of Pius IV, Michelangelo rebuilt the basilica of Santa Maria degli Angeli (in Diocletian's Baths) and the eponymous Villa Pia, now known as Casina Pio IV, in the Vatican Gardens designed by Pirro Ligorio. It is now the headquarters of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences. He also assigned Michelangelo to build Porta Pia.\nPius IV also ordered public construction to improve the water supply of Rome.\nBeatifications.\nDuring his papacy, Pius IV canonised no saints and only beatified one individual, Gundisalvus of Amarante, on 16 September 1561.\nDeath.\nPius IV died on 9 December 1565 from complications following an infection in the urinary tract and a high fever. He was buried in Santa Maria degli Angeli on 4 January 1583 after his remains were initially housed at Saint Peter's Basilica. His successor was Pius V.\nPius IV suffered from many illnesses such as gout which restricted his mobility. Giacomo Soranzo remarked between May and August 1565 to the Venetian Senate about the pope's health, commenting that he possessed a great natural vigor. However, gout impeded movement in his legs, shoulders, arms, and hands. Sorzano also mentioned that this meant that the pope, more often than not, needed to be carried in the sedia gestatoria to avoid walking. Pius IV also suffered from a major illness in 1564 from which he recovered.\nHowever, the pope fell ill eight days before his death with a constant fever throughout the duration. Borromeo, who arrived in Rome during the evening on 8 December, was with the pope when Pius died alongside Saint Philip Neri.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24073", "revid": "50169191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24073", "title": "Pope Pius III", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church in 1503\nPope Pius III (, ; 9 May 1439\u00a0\u2013 18 October 1503), born Francesco Todeschini, then Francesco Todeschini-Piccolomini, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 22 September 1503 to his death. At just twenty-six days, he had one of the shortest pontificates in papal history.\nFrancesco was the nephew of Pope Pius II, who granted him the use of the family name \"Piccolomini\", and appointed the twenty-one-year old Francesco as Archbishop of Siena. He served as papal legate in a number of places. In 1503, the now-frail Francesco, known as Cardinal Piccolomini, was elected pope as a compromise candidate between the Borgia and della Rovere factions. Although he announced plans for reforms, he died less than a month later.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nFrancesco Todeschini-Piccolomini, a member of the House of Piccolomini was born in Sarteano on 9 May 1439, as the fourth child of Nanno Todeschini and Laudomia Piccolomini, the sister of Pope Pius II.\nFrancesco was received as a boy into the household of Aeneas Silvius who permitted him to assume the name and arms of the Piccolomini family. He studied Canon law at the University of Perugia, and obtained a doctorate after the completion of his studies.\nCardinalate.\nIn 1457, Todeschini-Piccolomini was granted the office of Provost of the Collegiate Church of Sankt Viktor in Xanten (later Xanten Cathedral), which had been a benefice of his uncle. Francesco held the benefice from 1457 to 1466, and again from 1476 to 1495.\nCardinal Aeneas Silvius Piccolomini was elected pope as Pius II on 19 August 1458. In the excited tumult following the announcement, the Roman mob sacked his house, which was located near the church of S. Agostino, not far from the north end of the Piazza Navona; even the marble stones were taken. When the Piccolomini family arrived in Rome, therefore, they had no palazzo of their own to use as their base of operations. Francesco moved into the Vatican Palace with his uncle. Pius II was aware that this was a temporary situation; he remarked in a letter to his nephew Antonio that \"One is not the nephew of a pope forever (\"non-semper pontificis nepos\"). In 1461, the Pope authorized Cardinal Francesco to purchase a property near the Campo de' Fiori in Rome which had belonged to the recently deceased Cardinal Giovanni Castiglione. The documents made it clear that it was not the Pope or the Papacy which were buying the property, but the Piccolomini family, and that it was private property, not property of the Church, even though Cardinal Francesco's deaconry was not far distant. On this land, Cardinal Francesco, with the Pope's help, built the Piccolomini Palace. In 1476, Cardinal Francesco deeded the palace to his brothers Giacomo and Andrea, and their descendants, on the condition that it not be alienated from the male line. The Palazzo Piccolomini no longer survives, having been razed to make room for the new church of Sant'Andrea della Valle, which was begun in 1591.\nPiccolomini already held the office of protonotary apostolic at the time that he was appointed the administrator of the Archdiocese of Siena in 1460. He was granted the title and the insignia of an archbishop, but he did not receive episcopal consecration until a week before his coronation as pope. The episcopal duties at Siena were carried out by an auxiliary bishop, Antonio Fatati.\nPope Pius II, who was visiting Siena at the time, appointed his nephew a cardinal on 5 March 1460, naming him Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Eustachio on 26 March.\nHe was also named commendatory abbot of the monastery of San Vigilio, Siena. He reconstructed and extended the residence next to the church, which he continued to use throughout his life.\nIn 1460, the Pope appointed him legate of the March of Ancona, with the experienced Bishop of Marsico as his counsellor. He departed Rome on 30 April, and returned on 1 February 1461 for consultations; he returned to Ancona on 1 June 1461, and was back in Rome on 8 November. He proved studious and effective in his job.\nPiccolomini was made the archdeacon of Brabant in Cambrai in 1462 and he held that benefice until 1503. On 26 March 1463, Pope Pius II granted Cardinal Francesco the monastery of San Saba on the Aventine Hill \"in commendam\". The cardinal immediately began extensive restoration, construction, and decoration works on the ancient buildings, spending at least 3,000 ducats on the work.\nPiccolomini was named Vicar of Rome and the rest of the Papal States on 21 June 1464, as Pius II departed Rome for Ancona, where he intended to meet the Venetians and launch a crusade in the Balkans. However, Pius II died at Ancona on 14 August 1464, terminating the project.\nConclaves of 1464 and 1471.\nFrancesco Todeschini Piccolomini participated in the conclave that elected Pope Paul II in 1464. As a nephew of the late pope, he should have had considerable influence in the politics of the election. Of the twenty cardinals who participated, however, the twelve who had not been named by Pius II agreed among themselves that they would not vote to elect anyone except one of themselves. This excluded Francesco Piccolomini and all of his uncle's cardinals. As it happened, the first vote was still in progress when Cardinal Pietro Barbo of Venice received the required two-thirds of the votes, and the scrutiny was quickly made unanimous. He chose the name Paul II (1464\u20131471).\nCardinal Piccolomini was named \"Legatus de latere\" in Germany on 20 February 1471. He was accompanied as his secretary by Agostino Patrizi Piccolomini, the former private secretary of Pius II, who wrote an account of the mission. He departed on 18 March, and served in this important legation for the Imperial diet at Regensburg/Ratisbon, and was still there when the Pope died on 26 July 1471. Consequently, he was absent for the Conclave of 1471 which elected Pope Sixtus IV. He returned to Rome on 27 December 1471.\nHe succeeded to the position of Cardinal Protodeacon in 1471, upon the promotion of Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia to the see of Albano on 30 August 1471.\nFrancesco served in a new legation for Pope Sixtus IV, to restore ecclesiastical authority in Umbria.\nConclaves of 1484 and 1492.\nTodeschini-Piccolomini participated in the conclave of 1484 which resulted in the election of Pope Innocent VIII, and as the protodeacon he made the first public announcement of the election and crowned the new pope. According to Stefano Infessura, he was one of the half-dozen cardinals who had slept soundly in their beds on the night between 28 August and 29 August, and had not participated in the clandestine midnight conferences that produced a two-thirds majority for Cardinal Giovanni Battista Cibo. Neither had he engaged in the extensive simoniac trading that took place.\nHe was made the administrator of Fermo in 1485; he resigned the position in 1494, in favor of Agostino Piccolomini. He was reappointed when Agostino resigned in 1496, and he kept that post until his election to the Papacy.\nHe was appointed papal legate to Perugia on 5 November 1488, and departed Rome on 15 November. He served in Perugia until 1489.\nTodeschini-Piccolomini participated in the conclave of 1492 which elected Pope Alexander VI. He belonged to the faction of the more senior cardinals who gathered around Cardinal Oliviero Carafa of Naples. Cardinal Francesco was sufficiently respected that he received six votes at the first scrutiny (Sixteen were needed to elect), seven on the second, and one on the third. He resisted the election of Cardinal Rodrigo Borgia almost to the end, as one of the five hold-outs. As Cardinal Protodeacon Piccolomini announced and crowned the new pontiff.\nHe served as the protector of England at the Roman Curia from 1492 to 1503, and of Germany.\nHe was appointed legate to King Charles VIII of France, whose army was then entering Tuscany, in the consistory of 1 October 1494, departing Rome on 17 October; he returned to Rome on 5 March 1495, after the King declined to meet him. On 27 May 1495, he and numerous other cardinals accompanied Pope Alexander VI on a visit to Orvieto, which had been arranged to avoid a meeting between the Pope and King Charles, who was returning from his expedition against Naples. Charles was in Rome from 1 to 4 June, and the Pope and his retinue returned to the city on 27 June.\nHe was named the administrator of the diocese of Pienza and Montalcino on 31 October 1495, and occupied it until 14 March 1498, when he resigned in favor of his relative, Girolamo Piccolomini.\nFollowing the murder of his son Giovanni Borgia in 1497, Alexander VI appointed Francesco Piccolomini a member of a commission of six cardinals, in a short-lived effort to reform the Roman Curia. On 8 February 1501, Pope Alexander also appointed Piccolomini, in his capacity as Protodeacon, to a commission to take charge of the income from the tithe (\"decuma\"), and dispensing it for yet another contemplated crusade against the Turks.\nThe Piccolomini Library.\nIn 1502 he commissioned a library with access from an aisle of Siena Cathedral that was intended to house the library of humanist texts assembled by his uncle. Francesco commissioned the artist Pinturicchio to fresco its vault and ten narrative panels along the walls, depicting scenes from the life of Pope Pius II. Its iconography illustrating the donor's career gives an edited version of Pius II's life, passing over his former support of the Antipope Felix V. Though Pinturicchio labored for five years, the books never reached their splendid destination; yet the Piccolomini Library is a monument of the High Renaissance in Siena. Some of Pope Pius III's most famous portraits can be viewed in the Louvre Museum.\nPontificate.\nElection to papacy.\nPope Alexander VI died on 18 August 1503, and amid the disturbances consequent upon his death, it took the combined pressures of all the ambassadors in Rome to induce Cesare Borgia to withdraw from the city, so that an unpressured conclave might take place. Despite urgent pleas of the cardinals to stay away, both the Orsini and the Colonna factions entered the city with troops, intending to avenge old and new grievances. Because of these negotiations, the Conclave did not begin until 16 September. Cardinal Piccolomini was elected on 22 September 1503 and took the name \"Pius III\" after his uncle Pius II. This selection can be seen as a compromise between factions, Borgia and della Rovere, picking a frail cardinal with long experience in the Roman Curia over the kin of either Sixtus IV or Alexander VI.\nProgramme.\nOn 25 September the new pontiff held an unusual Consistory meeting of cardinals and other officials, including the ambassadors of several states. Normally, a pope did not hold such meetings until after his coronation, but Pius III was faced with an emergency, and he was being hard pressed by the Spanish cardinals. A French army, which was nominally under the command of Cesare Borgia, who was ill and in bed, was demanding passage through Rome in order to attack the Spanish government in Naples. Naples was a papal fief, which complicated diplomacy. At the consistory, Pius first announced his desire to bring about peace between the kings of France and Spain. Then he promulgated the aims of his pontificate: the immediate reform of the church, with the establishment of a council of cardinals; strict reform of the expenses and financial situation of the church; peace in the Papal States; and the support of Cesare Borgia, now without his French support, against his enemies who were planning to murder him. The next day, he told the Venetian ambassador, Antonio Giustinian: \"In consequence of the pressure put upon me by the Spanish cardinals, I have been compelled to some briefs in favour of Cesare Borgia, but I will not give him any further help. I do not intend to be a warlike, but a peace-loving pope.\"\nIllness and death.\nOn the morning of 26 September, the newly elected pope underwent an operation on his ulcerous left leg, enduring the pain of cutting in two places. The next day, he announced that he would not carry out the ceremony of the possession of his cathedral on the day of the coronation, as the custom was, because of his lameness.\nPiccolomini was never ordained a priest, remaining in diaconal orders, until 30 September 1503, when he finally received ordination. Cardinal Giuliano della Rovere ordained him in one of the halls of the papal palace. Della Rovere and two other bishops consecrated him a bishop on 1 October 1503, in the same hall.\nA Venetian agent in Rome reported the pope's ill health on 3 October, and politicking for the next conclave began.\nThe coronation took place on 8 October 1503. Cardinal Raffaello Riario, the Protodeacon, performed the coronation. Several of the features of the ritual had to be omitted due to Pius' troublesome leg. Johann Burchard, the papal master of ceremonies, noted that the pope said Mass sitting.\nOn Thursday, 12 October, as Beltrando Costabili reported to the Ercole I d'Este, Duke of Ferrara, Pope Pius had a long audience and did not eat during the day, having been taking medicine the previous day, on which the fever struck and never left him.\nAfter a brief pontificate of 26 days he died on 18 October 1503, of a septic ulcer in his leg. Some have alleged that Pope Pius died of poison administered at the instigation of Pandolfo Petrucci, the ruler of Siena.\nHe was buried in the chapel of San Andrea in Saint Peter's Basilica, next to his uncle Pius II, his brothers Giacomo and Andrea serving as his executors. He had already chosen his burial place when he wrote his will in 1493. When the basilica was being rebuilt, the monument was transferred below to the grottoes and the remains of Pius III and his uncle to the church of San Andrea della Valle in Rome put in a mausoleum created by Cardinal Alessandro Peretti di Montalto in 1614.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "24074", "revid": "50014652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24074", "title": "Pope Pius V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1566 to 1572\nPope Pius V, OP (; 17 January 1504\u00a0\u2013 1 May 1572), born Antonio Ghislieri (and from 1518 called Michele Ghislieri), was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 7 January 1566 to his death, in May 1572. He was an inquisitor and is venerated as a saint of the Catholic Church. He is chiefly notable for his role in the implementation of the Council of Trent, the Counter-Reformation, and the standardization of the Roman Rite within the Latin Church, known as the Tridentine mass. Pius V declared Thomas Aquinas a Doctor of the Church.\nAs a cardinal, Ghislieri gained a reputation for putting orthodoxy before personalities, prosecuting eight French bishops for heresy. He also stood firm against nepotism, rebuking his predecessor Pope Pius IV to his face when he wanted to make a 13-year-old member of his family a cardinal and subsidize a nephew from the papal treasury.\nBy means of the papal bull of 1570, \"Regnans in Excelsis\", Pius V excommunicated Elizabeth I of England for heresy and persecution of English Catholics during her reign. He also arranged the formation of the Holy League, an alliance of Catholic states to combat the advancement of the Ottoman Empire in Eastern Europe. Although outnumbered, the Holy League famously defeated the Ottomans at the Battle of Lepanto in 1571. Pius V attributed the victory to the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary and instituted the feast of Our Lady of Victory. Biographers report that as the Battle of Lepanto ended, Pius rose and went over to a window, where he stood gazing toward the East. \"...[L]ooking at the sky, he cried out, 'A truce to business; our great task at present is to thank God for the victory which He has just given the Christian army'.\"\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nAntonio Ghislieri was born 17 January 1504, to Paolo Ghislieri and Domenica Augeri, in Bosco in the Duchy of Milan (now Bosco Marengo in the province of Alessandria, Piedmont), Italy. At the age of fourteen he entered the Dominican Order, taking the name \"Michele\", passing from the monastery of Voghera to that of Vigevano, and thence to Bologna. Ordained a priest at Genoa in 1528, he was sent by his order to Pavia, where he lectured for sixteen years. At Parma he advanced thirty propositions in support of the papacy and against Protestantism.\nHe became master of novices and was on several occasions elected prior of more than one Dominican priory. During a time of great moral laxity, he insisted on discipline, and strove to develop the practice of the monastic virtues. He fasted, did penance, passed long hours of the night in meditation and prayer, traveled on foot without a cloak in deep silence, or only speaking to his companions of the things of God. As his reformist zeal provoked resentment, he was compelled to return to Rome in 1550, where, after having been employed in several inquisitorial missions, he was appointed to the commissariat of the Holy Office.\nIn 1556 he was made Bishop of Sutri by Pope Paul IV and was selected as inquisitor of the faith in Milan and Lombardy. In 1557 he was made a cardinal and named inquisitor general for all Christendom. His defense of Bartolom\u00e9 Carranza, Archbishop of Toledo, who had been suspected of heresy by the Spanish Inquisition, earned him a reprimand from the pope.\nUnder Pope Pius IV (1559\u201365) he became Bishop of Mondov\u00ec in Piedmont. Frequently called to Rome, he displayed his unflinching zeal in all the questions on which he was consulted. Thus he offered opposition to Pius IV when the latter wished to make Ferdinand de' Medici, then only thirteen years old, a cardinal. His opposition to the pontiff led to his dismissal from the palace and limits being placed on his authority as inquisitor.\nPapal election.\nBefore Michele Ghislieri could return to his diocese, Pope Pius IV died. On 4 January, a courier from Spain arrived, prompting rumors that King Philip II favoured the election of Cardinal Ghislieri. This in turn gave additional momentum to the efforts of Cardinal Charles Borromeo and his allies, who already supported the candidacy of Ghislieri. As the cardinals conferred with each other more intensely, the number of those who looked to Ghislieri increased, and this led eventually to his election as the new pope on the afternoon of 8 January 1566. Ghislieri took the regnal name Pope Pius V. He was crowned ten days later, on his 62nd birthday, by the protodeacon.\nSix weeks after the conclave, Cardinal Borromeo wrote to Cardinal Henry of Portugal recalling the election. He spoke of the new pope, and of his \"high esteem for him on account of his singular holiness and zeal\", seeing these qualities as a sign that he would make a good pope \"to the great satisfaction of all\".\nPontificate.\nHis pontificate saw him deal with internal reform of the Church, the spread of Protestant doctrines in the West, and Turkish armies advancing from the East.\nChurch discipline.\nAware of the necessity of restoring discipline and morality in Rome to ensure success, he at once proceeded to reduce the cost of the papal court after the manner of the Dominican Order to which he belonged, compel residence among the clergy, regulate inns, and assert the importance of the ceremonial in general and the liturgy of the Mass in particular.\nIn his wider policy, which was characterized throughout by an effective stringency, the maintenance and increase of the efficacy of the Inquisition and the enforcement of the canons and decrees of the Council of Trent had precedence over other considerations.\nLiturgy.\nAccordingly, to implement a decision of that council, he standardized the Mass by promulgating the 1570 edition of the Roman Missal. Pius V made this Missal mandatory throughout the Latin Church, except where a Mass liturgy dating from before 1370 was in use. This form of the Mass remained essentially unchanged for 400 years until Pope Paul VI's revision of the Roman Missal in 1969\u201370, after which it has become widely known as the Tridentine Mass. This missal continues to be used in about 90 countries and by several religious orders.\nThomism.\nPius V, who had declared Thomas Aquinas the fifth Latin Doctor of the Church in 1567, commissioned the first edition of Aquinas' \"opera omnia\", often called the \"editio Piana\" in honor of the Pope. This work was produced in 1570 at the studium generale of the Dominican Order at Santa Maria sopra Minerva, which would be transformed into the College of Saint Thomas in 1577, and again into the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, \"Angelicum\" in the 20th century.\nHoly League.\nPius V arranged the forming of the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire, as the result of which the Battle of Lepanto (7 October 1571) was won by the combined fleet under Don John of Austria. It is attested in his canonisation that he miraculously knew when the battle was over, himself being in Rome at the time. Pius V also helped financially in the construction of Valletta, Malta's capital city, by sending his military engineer Francesco Laparelli to design the fortification walls (A bronze bust of Pius V was installed at the Gate of Valletta in 1892.) To commemorate the victory, he instituted the Feast of Our Lady of Victory.\nProtestant Reformation.\nBy the time Pius V ascended the throne, Protestantism had swept over all of England and Scotland, as well as half of Germany, the Netherlands, and parts of France; only Spain, Ireland, Portugal and Italy remained unswervingly Catholic. Pius V was thus determined to prevent its insurgency into Italy\u2014which he believed would come via the Alps and Milan.\nIn the first year of his papacy, Pius urged Mary, Queen of Scots to restore Catholicism in her realm, providing funding and sending Jesuit Vincenzo Lauro to Scotland as Nuncio to further this cause. However, with Mary's Protestant half-brother James Stewart, Earl of Moray, back at the heart of government and her Catholic husband Henry Stuart, Lord Darnley, in disfavour, the political circumstances did not prove favourable.\nHuguenots.\nPius V recognized attacks on papal supremacy in the Catholic Church and was desirous of limiting their advancement. In France, where his influence was stronger, he took several measures to oppose the Protestant Huguenots. He directed the dismissal of Cardinal Odet de Coligny and seven bishops, nullified the royal edict tolerating the extramural services of the Reformers, introduced the Roman catechism, restored papal discipline, and strenuously opposed all compromise with the Huguenot nobility.\nElizabeth I.\nHis response to Queen Elizabeth I of England assuming the position of Supreme Governor of the Church of England included support of the imprisoned Mary, Queen of Scots and her supporters in their attempts to rescue England \"ex turpissima muliebris libidinis servitute\" (\"from a most sordid slavery to a woman's voracity\"). A brief English Catholic uprising, the Rising of the North, had just failed. Pius then issued a papal bull, \"Regnans in Excelsis\" (\"Reigning on High\"), dated 27 April 1570, that declared Elizabeth I a heretic and released her subjects from their allegiance to her. It was the official decree of excommunication on her and it also declared an ipso facto excommunication on anyone who obeyed her. In response, Elizabeth now actively started persecuting English Catholics for treason.\nCharacter and policy.\nAs a young man, Michele Ghislieri was eager to join the Inquisition. Under Paul IV, he rose to Grand Inquisitor, and from there ascended to the papacy.\nUpon election to the papacy as Pius V, Ghislieri immediately started to get rid of many of the extravagant luxuries then prevalent in the court. One of his first acts was to dismiss the papal court jester, and no subsequent pope had one. He forbade horse racing in St. Peter's Square. Severe sanctions were imposed against blasphemy, adultery, and sodomy. These laws quickly made Pius V the subject of Roman hatred; he was accused of trying to turn the city into a vast monastery. He was not a hypocrite: in day-to-day life Pius V was highly ascetic. He wore a hair shirt beneath the simple habit of a Dominican friar and was often seen in bare feet.\nHis governing efforts weren't entirely punitive: he planned distribution of alms to the poor, imported cheap grain in times of famine and cracked down on hired killers and brigands, what Mullett calls a \"programme of restoring Rome as the Church's ideal city.\" Katherine Rinne writes in \"Waters of Rome\" that Pius V ordered the construction of public works to improve the water supply and sewer system of the city\u2014a welcome step, particularly in low-lying areas, where typhoid and malaria were inevitable summer visitors.\nPapal bulls.\nIn 1567, he issued \"Super prohibitione agitationis Taurorum &amp; Ferarum\" prohibiting bull-fighting.\nBesides \"In Coena Domini\" (1568), there are several others of note, including his prohibition of quaestuary (February 1567 and January 1570); condemnation of ideas associated with Michael Baius, a professor of Leuven (1567); reform of the Roman Breviary (July 1568); formal condemnation of homosexual behaviour (\"dirum nefas\") by the clergy (1568); the banishment of the Jews from all ecclesiastical dominions except Rome and Ancona (1569); declaring the primacy of the Lateran over St. Peter's (1569); an injunction against use of the reformed missal (July 1570); the confirmation of the privileges of the Society of Crusaders for the protection of the Inquisition (October 1570); the suppression of the Fratres Humiliati (February 1571); the approbation of the new office of the Blessed Virgin (March 1571); and the enforcement of the daily recitation of the Canonical Hours (September 1571).\nPapal garments.\nPius V is often credited with the origin of the Pope's white garments, supposedly because after his election Pius continued to wear his white Dominican habit. However, many of his predecessors also wore white with a red mozzetta, as can be seen on many paintings where neither they nor Pius is wearing a cassock, but thin, wide, white garments.\nAn article by Agostino Paravicini Bagliani in \"L'Osservatore Romano\" of 31 August 2013 states that the earliest document that speaks explicitly of the Pope wearing white is the \"Ordo XIII\", a book of ceremonies compiled c.\u20091274 under Pope Gregory X. From that date onward, the books of ceremonies speak ever more explicitly of the Pope as wearing a red mantle, mozzetta, camauro and shoes, and a white cassock and stockings.\nCanonizations.\nPius V canonized one saint during his reign: Ivo of Chartres on 18 December 1570.\nConsistories.\nPius V created 21 cardinals in three consistories, including Felice Piergentile who would become Pope Sixtus V.\nDeath and canonization.\nPius V died on 1 May 1572. Pius V suffered from bladder stones, a condition for which he was unwilling to have an operation. Additionally, Pius V fasted and served extensively in his last years, leading to \"great weakness\". After his death, three stones were discovered in his bladder. He was buried in the chapel of S. Andrea which was close to the tomb of Pope Pius III, in the Vatican. Although his will requested he be buried in Bosco, Pope Sixtus V built a monument in the chapel of SS. Sacramento in the Liberian basilica. His remains were transferred there on 9 January 1588.\nIn 1696, the process of Pius V's canonisation was started through the efforts of the Master of the Order of Preachers, Antonin Cloche. He also immediately commissioned a representative tomb from the sculptor Pierre Le Gros the Younger to be erected in the Sistine Chapel of the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore. The pope's body was placed in it in 1698. Pope Pius V was beatified by Pope Clement X in 1672, and was later canonized by Pope Clement XI (1700\u201321) on 22 May 1712.\nIn the following year, 1713, his feast day was inserted in the General Roman Calendar, for celebration on 5 May, with the rank of \"Double\", the equivalent of \"Third-Class Feast\" in the General Roman Calendar of 1960, and of its present rank of \"Memorial\". In 1969 the celebration was moved to 30 April, the day before the anniversary of his death (1 May).\nCardinal John Henry Newman declared that \"St. Pius V was stern and severe, as far as a heart burning and melted with divine love could be so ... Yet such energy and vigour as his were necessary for the times. He was a soldier of Christ in a time of insurrection and rebellion, when in a spiritual sense, martial law was proclaimed.\"\nThe front of his tomb has a lid of gilded bronze which shows a likeness of the dead pope. Most of the time this is left open to allow the veneration of the saint's relics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain:\u00a0"}
{"id": "24075", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24075", "title": "Peripheral Component Interconnect", "text": "Local computer bus for attaching hardware devices\nPeripheral Component Interconnect (PCI) is a local computer bus for attaching hardware devices in a computer and is part of the PCI Local Bus standard. The PCI bus supports the functions found on a processor bus but in a standardized format that is independent of any given processor's native bus. Devices connected to the PCI bus appear to a bus master to be connected directly to its own bus and are assigned addresses in the processor's address space. It is a parallel bus, synchronous to a single bus clock.\nAttached devices can take either the form of an integrated circuit fitted onto the motherboard (called a \"planar device\" in the PCI specification) or an expansion card that fits into a slot. The PCI Local Bus was first implemented in IBM PC compatibles, where it displaced the combination of several slow Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) slots and one fast VESA Local Bus (VLB) slot as the bus configuration. It has subsequently been adopted for other computer types. Typical PCI cards used in PCs include: network cards, sound cards, modems, extra ports such as Universal Serial Bus (USB) or serial, TV tuner cards and hard disk drive host adapters. PCI video cards replaced ISA and VLB cards until rising bandwidth needs outgrew the abilities of PCI. The preferred interface for video cards then became Accelerated Graphics Port (AGP), a superset of PCI, before giving way to PCI Express.\nThe first version of PCI found in retail desktop computers was a 32-bit bus using a bus clock and signaling, although the PCI 1.0 standard provided for a 64-bit variant as well. These have one locating notch in the card. Version 2.0 of the PCI standard introduced 3.3\u00a0V slots, physically distinguished by a flipped physical connector to prevent accidental insertion of 5\u00a0V cards. Universal cards, which can operate on either voltage, have two notches. Version 2.1 of the PCI standard introduced optional 66\u00a0MHz operation. A server-oriented variant of PCI, PCI Extended (PCI-X) operated at frequencies up to 133\u00a0MHz for PCI-X 1.0 and up to 533\u00a0MHz for PCI-X 2.0. An internal connector for laptop cards, called Mini PCI, was introduced in version 2.2 of the PCI specification. The PCI bus was also adopted for an external laptop connector standard\u00a0\u2013 the CardBus. The first PCI specification was developed by Intel, but subsequent development of the standard became the responsibility of the \"PCI Special Interest Group\" (PCI-SIG).\nPCI and PCI-X sometimes are referred to as either \"Parallel PCI\" or \"Conventional PCI\" to distinguish them technologically from their more recent successor PCI Express, which adopted a serial, lane-based architecture. PCI's heyday in the desktop computer market was approximately 1995 to 2005. PCI and PCI-X have become obsolete for most purposes and has largely disappeared from many other modern motherboards since 2013; however they are still common on some modern desktops as of 2020[ [update]] for the purposes of backward compatibility and the relative low cost to produce. Another common modern application of parallel PCI is in industrial PCs, where many specialized expansion cards, used here, never transitioned to PCI Express, just as with some ISA cards. Many kinds of devices formerly available on PCI expansion cards are now commonly integrated onto motherboards or available in USB and PCI Express versions.\nHistory.\nWork on PCI began at the Intel Architecture Labs (IAL, also Architecture Development Lab) c.\u20091990. A team of primarily IAL engineers defined the architecture and developed a proof of concept chipset and platform (Saturn) partnering with teams in the company's desktop PC systems and core logic product organizations.\nPCI was immediately put to use in servers, replacing Micro Channel architecture (MCA) and Extended Industry Standard Architecture (EISA) as the server expansion bus of choice. In mainstream PCs, PCI was slower to replace VLB, and did not gain significant market penetration until late 1994 in second-generation Pentium PCs. By 1996, VLB was all but extinct, and manufacturers had adopted PCI even for Intel 80486 (486) computers. EISA continued to be used alongside PCI through 2000. Apple Computer adopted PCI for professional Power Macintosh computers (replacing NuBus) in mid-1995, and the consumer Performa product line (replacing LC Processor Direct Slot (PDS)) in mid-1996.\nOutside the server market, the 64-bit version of plain PCI remained rare in practice though, although it was used for example by all (post-iMac) G3 and G4 Power Macintosh computers.\nLater revisions of PCI added new features and performance improvements, including a 66\u00a0MHz 3.3\u00a0V standard and 133\u00a0MHz PCI-X, and the adaptation of PCI signaling to other form factors. Both PCI-X\u00a01.0b and PCI-X\u00a02.0 are backward compatible with some PCI standards. These revisions were used on server hardware but consumer PC hardware remained nearly all 32-bit, 33\u00a0MHz and 5 volt.\nThe PCI-SIG introduced the serial PCI Express in c.\u20092004. Since then, motherboard manufacturers gradually included fewer or zero PCI slots in favor of the new standard. Bridge adapters allow the use of legacy PCI cards with PCI Express motherboards.\nAuto configuration.\nPCI provides separate memory and memory-mapped I/O port address spaces for the x86 processor family, 64 and 32 bits, respectively. Addresses in these address spaces are assigned by software. A third address space, called the PCI Configuration Space, which uses a fixed addressing scheme, allows software to determine the amount of memory and I/O address space needed by each device. Each device can request up to six areas of memory space or input/output (I/O) port space via its configuration space registers.\nIn a typical system, the firmware (or operating system) queries all PCI buses at startup time (via PCI Configuration Space) to find out what devices are present and what system resources (memory space, I/O space, interrupt lines, etc.) each needs. It then allocates the resources and tells each device what its allocation is.\nThe PCI configuration space also contains a small amount of device type information, which helps an operating system choose device drivers for it, or at least to have a dialogue with a user about the system configuration.\nDevices may have an on-board read-only memory (ROM) containing executable code for x86 or PA-RISC processors, an Open Firmware driver, or an Option ROM. These are typically needed for devices used during system startup, before device drivers are loaded by the operating system.\nIn addition, there are \"PCI Latency Timers\" that are a mechanism for \"PCI Bus-Mastering\" devices to share the PCI bus fairly. \"Fair\" in this case means that devices will not use such a large portion of the available PCI bus bandwidth that other devices are not able to get needed work done. Note, this does not apply to PCI Express.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;How this works is that each PCI device that can operate in bus-master mode is required to implement a timer, called the Latency Timer, that limits the time that device can hold the PCI bus. The timer starts when the device gains bus ownership, and counts down at the rate of the PCI clock. When the counter reaches zero, the device is required to release the bus. If no other devices are waiting for bus ownership, it may simply grab the bus again and transfer more data.\nInterrupts.\nDevices are required to follow a protocol so that the interrupt-request (IRQ) lines can be shared. The PCI bus includes four interrupt lines, INTA# through INTD#, all of which are available to each device. Up to eight PCI devices share the same IRQ line (INTINA# through INTINH#) in APIC-enabled x86 systems. Interrupt lines are not wired in parallel as are the other PCI bus lines. The positions of the interrupt lines rotate between slots, so what appears to one device as the INTA# line is INTB# to the next and INTC# to the one after that. Single-function devices usually use their INTA# for interrupt signaling, so the device load is spread fairly evenly across the four available interrupt lines. This alleviates a common problem with sharing interrupts.\nThe mapping of PCI interrupt lines onto system interrupt lines, through the PCI host bridge, is implementation-dependent. Platform-specific firmware or operating system code is meant to know this, and set the \"interrupt line\" field in each device's configuration space indicating which IRQ it is connected to.\nPCI interrupt lines are level-triggered. This was chosen over edge-triggering to gain an advantage when servicing a shared interrupt line, and for robustness: edge-triggered interrupts are easy to miss.\nLater revisions of the PCI specification add support for message-signaled interrupts. In this system, a device signals its need for service by performing a memory write, rather than by asserting a dedicated line. This alleviates the problem of scarcity of interrupt lines. Even if interrupt vectors are still shared, it does not suffer the sharing problems of level-triggered interrupts. It also resolves the routing problem, because the memory write is not unpredictably modified between device and host. Finally, because the message signaling is in-band, it resolves some synchronization problems that can occur with posted writes and out-of-band interrupt lines.\nPCI Express does not have physical interrupt lines at all. It uses message-signaled interrupts exclusively.\nConventional hardware specifications.\nThese specifications represent the most common version of PCI used in normal PCs:\nThe PCI specification also provides options for 3.3\u00a0V signaling, 64-bit bus width, and 66\u00a0MHz clocking, but these are not commonly encountered outside of PCI-X support on server motherboards.\nThe PCI bus arbiter performs bus arbitration among multiple masters on the PCI bus. Any number of bus masters can reside on the PCI bus, as well as requests for the bus. One pair of request and grant signals is dedicated to each bus master.\nCard voltage and keying.\nTypical PCI cards have either one or two key notches, depending on their signaling voltage. Cards requiring 3.3\u00a0volts have a notch 56.21\u00a0mm from the card backplate in pin positions 12 and 13; those requiring 5\u00a0volts have a notch 104.41\u00a0mm from the backplate in pin positions 50 and 51. This allows cards to be fitted only into slots with a voltage they support. \"Universal cards\" accepting either voltage have both key notches.\nConnector pinout.\nThe PCI connector is defined as having 62 contacts on each side of the edge connector, but two or four of them are replaced by key notches, so a card has 60 or 58 contacts on each side. Side A refers to the 'solder side' and side B refers to the 'component side': if the card is held with the connector pointing down, a view of side A will have the backplate on the right, whereas a view of side B will have the backplate on the left. The pinout of B and A sides are as follows, looking down into the motherboard connector (pins A1 and B1 are closest to backplate).\n64-bit PCI extends this by an additional 32 contacts on each side which provide AD[63:32], C/BE[7:4]#, the PAR64 parity signal, and a number of power and ground pins.\nMost lines are connected to each slot in parallel. The exceptions are:\nNotes:\nMixing of 32-bit and 64-bit PCI cards in different width slots.\nMost 32-bit PCI cards will function properly in 64-bit PCI-X slots, but the bus clock rate will be limited to the clock frequency of the slowest card, an inherent limitation of PCI's shared bus topology. For example, when a PCI 2.3, 66-MHz peripheral is installed into a PCI-X bus capable of 133\u00a0MHz, the entire bus backplane will be limited to 66\u00a0MHz. To get around this limitation, many motherboards have two or more PCI/PCI-X buses, with one bus intended for use with high-speed PCI-X peripherals, and the other bus intended for general-purpose peripherals.\nMany 64-bit PCI-X cards are designed to work in 32-bit mode if inserted in shorter 32-bit connectors, with some loss of performance. An example of this is the Adaptec 29160 64-bit SCSI interface card. However, some 64-bit PCI-X cards do not work in standard 32-bit PCI slots.\nInstalling a 64-bit PCI-X card in a 32-bit slot will leave the 64-bit portion of the card edge connector not connected and overhanging. This requires that there be no motherboard components positioned so as to mechanically obstruct the overhanging portion of the card edge connector.\nPhysical dimensions.\nPCI brackets heights:\nPCI Card lengths (Standard Bracket &amp; 3.3\u00a0V):\nPCI Card lengths (Low Profile Bracket &amp; 3.3\u00a0V):\nMini PCI.\nMini PCI was added to PCI version 2.2 for use in laptops and some routers; it uses a 32-bit, 33\u00a0MHz bus with powered connections (3.3\u00a0V only; 5\u00a0V is limited to 100\u00a0mA) and support for bus mastering and DMA. The standard size for Mini PCI cards is approximately a quarter of their full-sized counterparts. There is no access to the card from outside the case, unlike desktop PCI cards with brackets carrying connectors. This limits the kinds of functions a Mini PCI card can perform.\nMany Mini PCI devices were developed such as Wi-Fi, Fast Ethernet, Bluetooth, modems (often Winmodems), sound cards, cryptographic accelerators, SCSI, IDE\u2013ATA, SATA controllers and combination cards. Mini PCI cards can be used with regular PCI-equipped hardware, using Mini PCI-to-PCI \"converters\". Mini PCI has been superseded by the much narrower PCI Express Mini Card\nTechnical details of Mini PCI.\nMini PCI cards have a 2\u00a0W maximum power consumption, which limits the functionality that can be implemented in this form factor. They also are required to support the CLKRUN# PCI signal used to start and stop the PCI clock for power management purposes.\nThere are three card form factors: Type I, Type II, and Type III cards. The card connector used for each type include: Type I and II use a 100-pin stacking connector, while Type III uses a 124-pin edge connector, i.e. the connector for Types I and II differs from that for Type III, where the connector is on the edge of a card, like with a SO-DIMM. The additional 24 pins provide the extra signals required to route I/O back through the system connector (audio, AC-Link, LAN, phone-line interface). Type II cards have RJ11 and RJ45 mounted connectors. These cards must be located at the edge of the computer or docking station so that the RJ11 and RJ45 ports can be mounted for external access.\nMini PCI is distinct from 144-pin Micro PCI.\nPCI bus transactions.\nPCI bus traffic consists of a series of PCI bus transactions. Each transaction consists of an \"address phase\" followed by one or more \"data phases\". The direction of the data phases may be from initiator to target (write transaction) or vice versa (read transaction), but all of the data phases must be in the same direction. Either party may pause or halt the data phases at any point. (One common example is a low-performance PCI device that does not support burst transactions, and always halts a transaction after the first data phase.)\nAny PCI device may initiate a transaction. First, it must request permission from a PCI bus arbiter on the motherboard. The arbiter grants permission to one of the requesting devices. The initiator begins the address phase by broadcasting a 32-bit address plus a 4-bit command code, then waits for a target to respond. All other devices examine this address and one of them responds a few cycles later.\n64-bit addressing is done using a two-stage address phase. The initiator broadcasts the low 32 address bits, accompanied by a special \"dual address cycle\" command code. Devices that do not support 64-bit addressing can simply not respond to that command code. The next cycle, the initiator transmits the high 32 address bits, plus the real command code. The transaction operates identically from that point on. To ensure compatibility with 32-bit PCI devices, it is forbidden to use a dual address cycle if not necessary, i.e. if the high-order address bits are all zero.\nWhile the PCI bus transfers 32 bits per data phase, the initiator transmits 4 active-low byte enable signals indicating which 8-bit bytes are to be considered significant. In particular, a write must affect only the enabled bytes in the target PCI device. They are of little importance for memory reads, but I/O reads might have side effects. The PCI standard explicitly allows a data phase with no bytes enabled, which must behave as a no-op.\nPCI address spaces.\nPCI has three address spaces: memory, I/O address, and configuration.\nMemory addresses are 32\u00a0bits (optionally 64 bits) in size, support caching and can be burst transactions.\nI/O addresses are for compatibility with the Intel x86 architecture's I/O port address space. Although the PCI bus specification allows burst transactions in any address space, most devices only support it for memory addresses and not I/O.\nFinally, PCI configuration space provides access to 256 bytes of special configuration registers per PCI device. Each PCI slot gets its own configuration space address range. The registers are used to configure devices memory and I/O address ranges they should respond to from transaction initiators. When a computer is first turned on, all PCI devices respond only to their configuration space accesses. The computer's BIOS scans for devices and assigns Memory and I/O address ranges to them.\nIf an address is not claimed by any device, the transaction initiator's address phase will time out causing the initiator to abort the operation. In case of reads, it is customary to supply all-ones for the read data value (0xFFFFFFFF) in this case. PCI devices therefore generally attempt to avoid using the all-ones value in important status registers, so that such an error can be easily detected by software.\nPCI command codes.\nThere are 16 possible 4-bit command codes, and 12 of them are assigned. With the exception of the unique dual address cycle, the least significant bit of the command code indicates whether the following data phases are a read (data sent from target to initiator) or a write (data sent from an initiator to target). PCI targets must examine the command code as well as the address and not respond to address phases that specify an unsupported command code.\nThe commands that refer to cache lines depend on the PCI configuration space cache line size register being set up properly; they may not be used until that has been done.\n This is a special form of read cycle implicitly addressed to the interrupt controller, which returns an interrupt vector. The 32-bit address field is ignored. One possible implementation is to generate an interrupt acknowledge cycle on an ISA bus using a PCI/ISA bus bridge. This command is for IBM PC compatibility; if there is no Intel 8259 style interrupt controller on the PCI bus, this cycle need never be used.\n This cycle is a special broadcast write of system events that PCI card may be interested in. The address field of a special cycle is ignored, but it is followed by a data phase containing a payload message. The currently defined messages announce that the processor is stopping for some reason (e.g. to save power). No device ever responds to this cycle; it is always terminated with a master abort after leaving the data on the bus for at least 4 cycles.\n This performs a read from I/O space. All 32 bits of the read address are provided, so that a device may (for compatibility reasons) implement less than 4 bytes worth of I/O registers. If the byte enables request data not within the address range supported by the PCI device (e.g. a 4-byte read from a device which only supports 2 bytes of I/O address space), it must be terminated with a target abort. Multiple data cycles are permitted, using linear (simple incrementing) burst ordering.\n The PCI standard is discouraging the use of I/O space in new devices, preferring that as much as possible be done through main memory mapping.\n This performs a write to I/O space.\n A PCI device must not respond to an address cycle with these command codes.\n This performs a read cycle from memory space. Because the smallest memory space a PCI device is permitted to implement is 16 bytes, the two least significant bits of the address are not needed during the address phase; equivalent information will arrive during the data phases in the form of byte select signals. They instead specify the order in which burst data must be returned. If a device does not support the requested order, it must provide the first word and then disconnect.\n If a memory space is marked as \"prefetchable\", then the target device must ignore the byte-select signals on a memory read and always return 32 valid bits.\n This operates similarly to a memory read. The byte select signals are more important in a write, as unselected bytes must not be written to memory.\n Generally, PCI writes are faster than PCI reads, because a device may buffer the incoming write data and release the bus faster. For a read, it must delay the data phase until the data has been fetched.\n A PCI device must not respond to an address cycle with these command codes.\n This is similar to an I/O read, but reads from PCI configuration space. A device must respond only if the low 11 bits of the address specify a function and register that it implements, and if the special IDSEL signal is asserted. It must ignore the high 21 bits. Burst reads (using linear incrementing) are permitted in PCI configuration space.\n Unlike I/O space, standard PCI configuration registers are defined so that reads never disturb the state of the device. It is possible for a device to have configuration space registers beyond the standard 64 bytes which have read side effects, but this is rare.\n Configuration space accesses often have a few cycles of delay to allow the IDSEL lines to stabilize, which makes them slower than other forms of access. Also, a configuration space access requires a multi-step operation rather than a single machine instruction. Thus, it is best to avoid them during routine operation of a PCI device.\n This operates analogously to a configuration read.\n This command is identical to a generic memory read, but includes the hint that a long read burst will continue beyond the end of the current cache line, and the target should internally prefetch a large amount of data. A target is always permitted to consider this a synonym for a generic memory read.\n When accessing a memory address that requires more than 32 bits to represent, the address phase begins with this command and the low 32 bits of the address, followed by a second cycle with the actual command and the high 32 bits of the address. PCI targets that do not support 64-bit addressing may simply treat this as another reserved command code and not respond to it. This command code may only be used with a non-zero high-order address word; it is forbidden to use this cycle if not necessary.\n This command is identical to a generic memory read, but includes the hint that the read will continue to the end of the cache line. A target is always permitted to consider this a synonym for a generic memory read.\n This command is identical to a generic memory write, but comes with the guarantee that one or more whole cache lines will be written, with all byte selects enabled. This is an optimization for write-back caches snooping the bus. Normally, a write-back cache holding dirty data must interrupt the write operation long enough to write its own dirty data first. If the write is performed using this command, the data to be written back is guaranteed to be irrelevant, and may simply be invalidated in the write-back cache.\n This optimization only affects the snooping cache, and makes no difference to the target, which may treat this as a synonym for the memory write command.\nPCI bus latency.\nSoon after promulgation of the PCI specification, it was discovered that lengthy transactions by some devices, due to slow acknowledgments, long data bursts, or some combination, could cause buffer underrun or overrun in other devices. Recommendations on the timing of individual phases in Revision 2.0 were made mandatory in revision 2.1:\nAdditionally, as of revision 2.1, all initiators capable of bursting more than two data phases must implement a programmable latency timer. The timer starts counting clock cycles when a transaction starts (initiator asserts FRAME#). If the timer has expired \"and\" the arbiter has removed GNT#, then the initiator must terminate the transaction at the next legal opportunity. This is usually the next data phase, but Memory Write and Invalidate transactions must continue to the end of the cache line.\nDelayed transactions.\nDevices unable to meet those timing restrictions must use a combination of posted writes (for memory writes) and delayed transactions (for other writes and all reads). In a delayed transaction, the target records the transaction (including the write data) internally and aborts (asserts STOP# rather than TRDY#) the first data phase. The initiator \"must\" retry exactly the same transaction later. In the interim, the target internally performs the transaction, and waits for the retried transaction. When the retried transaction is seen, the buffered result is delivered.\nA device may be the target of other transactions while completing one delayed transaction; it must remember the transaction type, address, byte selects and (if a write) data value, and only complete the correct transaction.\nIf the target has a limit on the number of delayed transactions that it can record internally (simple targets may impose a limit of 1), it will force those transactions to retry without recording them. They will be dealt with when the current delayed transaction is completed. If two initiators attempt the same transaction, a delayed transaction begun by one may have its result delivered to the other; this is harmless.\nA target abandons a delayed transaction when a retry succeeds in delivering the buffered result, the bus is reset, or when 215=32768 clock cycles (approximately 1\u00a0ms) elapse without seeing a retry. The latter should never happen in normal operation, but it prevents a deadlock of the whole bus if one initiator is reset or malfunctions.\nPCI bus bridges.\nThe PCI standard permits multiple independent PCI buses to be connected by bus bridges that will forward operations on one bus to another when required. Although PCI tends not to use many bus bridges, PCI Express systems use many PCI-to-PCI bridge usually called \"PCI Express Root Port\"; each PCI Express slot appears to be a separate bus, connected by a bridge to the others. The PCI host bridge (usually northbridge in x86 platforms) interconnect between CPU, main memory and PCI bus.\nPosted writes.\nGenerally, when a bus bridge sees a transaction on one bus that must be forwarded to the other, the original transaction must wait until the forwarded transaction completes before a result is ready. One notable exception occurs in the case of memory writes. Here, the bridge may record the write data internally (if it has room) and signal completion of the write before the forwarded write has completed. Or, indeed, before it has begun. Such \"sent but not yet arrived\" writes are referred to as \"posted writes\", by analogy with a postal mail message. Although they offer great opportunity for performance gains, the rules governing what is permissible are somewhat intricate.\nCombining, merging, and collapsing.\nThe PCI standard permits bus bridges to convert multiple bus transactions into one larger transaction under certain situations. This can improve the efficiency of the PCI bus.\nCombining.\nWrite transactions to consecutive addresses may be combined into a longer burst write, as long as the order of the accesses in the burst is the same as the order of the original writes. It is permissible to insert extra data phases with all byte enables turned off if the writes are almost consecutive.\nMerging.\nMultiple writes to disjoint portions of the same word may be merged into a single write with multiple byte enables asserted. In this case, writes that were presented to the bus bridge in a particular order are merged so they occur at the same time when forwarded.\nCollapsing.\nMultiple writes to the same byte or bytes may \"not\" be combined, for example, by performing only the second write and skipping the first write that was overwritten. This is because the PCI specification permits writes to have side effects.\nPCI bus signals.\nPCI bus transactions are controlled by five main control signals, two driven by the initiator of a transaction (FRAME# and IRDY#), and three driven by the target (DEVSEL#, TRDY#, and STOP#). There are two additional arbitration signals (REQ# and GNT#) that are used to obtain permission to initiate a transaction. All are active-low, meaning that the active or \"asserted\" state is a low voltage. Pull-up resistors on the motherboard ensure they will remain high (inactive or \"deasserted\") if not driven by any device, but the PCI bus does not depend on the resistors to \"change\" the signal level; all devices drive the signals high for one cycle before ceasing to drive the signals.\nSignal timing.\nAll PCI bus signals are sampled on the rising edge of the clock. Signals nominally change on the falling edge of the clock, giving each PCI device approximately one half a clock cycle to decide how to respond to the signals it observed on the rising edge, and one half a clock cycle to transmit its response to the other device.\nThe PCI bus requires that every time the device driving a PCI bus signal changes, one \"turnaround cycle\" must elapse between the time the one device stops driving the signal and the other device starts. Without this, there might be a period when both devices were driving the signal, which would interfere with bus operation.\nThe combination of this turnaround cycle and the requirement to drive a control line high for one cycle before ceasing to drive it means that each of the main control lines must be high for a minimum of two cycles when changing owners. The PCI bus protocol is designed so this is rarely a limitation; only in a few special cases (notably fast back-to-back transactions) is it necessary to insert additional delay to meet this requirement.\nArbitration.\nAny device on a PCI bus that is capable of acting as a bus master may initiate a transaction with any other device. To ensure that only one transaction is initiated at a time, each master must first wait for a bus grant signal, GNT#, from an arbiter located on the motherboard. Each device has a separate request line REQ# that requests the bus, but the arbiter may \"park\" the bus grant signal at any device if there are no current requests.\nThe arbiter may remove GNT# at any time. A device that loses GNT# may complete its current transaction, but may not start one (by asserting FRAME#) unless it observes GNT# asserted the cycle before it begins.\nThe arbiter may also provide GNT# at any time, including during another master's transaction. During a transaction, either FRAME# or IRDY# or both are asserted; when both are deasserted, the bus is idle. A device may initiate a transaction at any time that GNT# is asserted and the bus is idle.\nAddress phase.\nA PCI bus transaction begins with an \"address phase\". The initiator (usually a chipset), seeing that it has GNT# and the bus is idle, drives the target address onto the AD[31:0] lines, the associated command (e.g. memory read, or I/O write) on the C/BE[3:0]# lines, and pulls FRAME# low.\nEach other device examines the address and command and decides whether to respond as the target by asserting DEVSEL#. A device must respond by asserting DEVSEL# within 3 cycles. Devices that promise to respond within 1 or 2 cycles are said to have \"fast DEVSEL\" or \"medium DEVSEL\", respectively. (Actually, the time to respond is 2.5 cycles, since PCI devices must transmit all signals half a cycle early so that they can be received three cycles later.)\nA device must latch the address on the first cycle; the initiator is required to remove the address and command from the bus on the following cycle, even before receiving a DEVSEL# response. The additional time is available only for interpreting the address and command after it is captured.\nOn the fifth cycle of the address phase (or earlier if all other devices have medium DEVSEL or faster), a catch-all \"subtractive decoding\" is allowed for some address ranges. This is commonly used by an ISA bus bridge for addresses within its range (24 bits for memory and 16 bits for I/O).\nOn the sixth cycle, if there has been no response, the initiator may abort the transaction by deasserting FRAME#. This is known as \"master abort termination\" and it is customary for PCI bus bridges to return all-ones data (0xFFFFFFFF) in this case. PCI devices, therefore, are generally designed to avoid using the all-ones value in important status registers, so that such an error can be easily detected by software.\nAddress phase timing.\nNotes:\nOn the rising edge of clock 0, the initiator observes FRAME# and IRDY# both high, and GNT# low, so it drives the address, command, and asserts FRAME# in time for the rising edge of clock 1. Targets latch the address and begin decoding it. They may respond with DEVSEL# in time for clock 2 (fast DEVSEL), 3 (medium) or 4 (slow). Subtractive decode devices, seeing no other response by clock 4, may respond on clock 5. If the master does not see a response by clock 5, it will terminate the transaction and remove FRAME# on clock 6.\nTRDY# and STOP# are deasserted (high) during the address phase. The initiator may assert IRDY# as soon as it is ready to transfer data, which could theoretically be as soon as clock 2.\nDual-cycle address.\nTo allow 64-bit addressing, a master will present the address over two consecutive cycles. First, it sends the low-order address bits with a special \"dual-cycle address\" command on the C/BE[3:0]#. On the following cycle, it sends the high-order address bits and the actual command. Dual-address cycles are forbidden if the high-order address bits are zero, so devices that do not support 64-bit addressing can simply not respond to dual-cycle commands.\nConfiguration access.\nAddresses for PCI configuration space access use special decoding. For these, the low-order address lines specify the offset of the desired PCI configuration register, and the high-order address lines are ignored. Instead, an additional address signal, the IDSEL input, must be high before a device may assert DEVSEL#. Each slot connects a different high-order address line to the IDSEL pin and is selected using one-hot encoding on the upper address lines.\nData phases.\nAfter the address phase (specifically, beginning with the cycle that DEVSEL# goes low) comes a burst of one or more \"data phases\". In all cases, the initiator drives active-low byte select signals on the C/BE[3:0]# lines, but the data on the AD[31:0] may be driven by the initiator (in case of writes) or target (in case of reads).\nDuring data phases, the C/BE[3:0]# lines are interpreted as active-low \"byte enables\". In case of a write, the asserted signals indicate which of the four bytes on the AD bus are to be written to the addressed location. In the case of a read, they indicate which bytes the initiator is interested in. For reads, it is always legal to ignore the byte-enable signals and simply return all 32 bits; cacheable memory resources are required to always return 32 valid bits. The byte enables are mainly useful for I/O space accesses where reads have side effects.\nA data phase with all four C/BE# lines deasserted is explicitly permitted by the PCI standard, and must have no effect on the target other than to advance the address in the burst access in progress.\nThe data phase continues until both parties are ready to complete the transfer and continue to the next data phase. The initiator asserts IRDY# (\"initiator ready\") when it no longer needs to wait, while the target asserts TRDY# (\"target ready\"). Whichever side is providing the data must drive it on the AD bus before asserting its ready signal.\nOnce one of the participants asserts its ready signal, it may not become un-ready or otherwise alter its control signals until the end of the data phase. The data recipient must latch the AD bus each cycle until it sees both IRDY# and TRDY# asserted, which marks the end of the current data phase and indicates that the just-latched data is the word to be transferred.\nTo maintain full burst speed, the data sender then has half a clock cycle after seeing both IRDY# and TRDY# asserted to drive the next word onto the AD bus.\nThis continues the address cycle illustrated above, assuming a single address cycle with medium DEVSEL, so the target responds in time for clock 3.\nHowever, at that time, neither side is ready to transfer data. For clock 4, the initiator is ready, but the target is not. On clock 5, both are ready, and a data transfer takes place (as indicated by the vertical lines). For clock 6, the target is ready to transfer, but the initiator is not. On clock 7, the initiator becomes ready, and data is transferred. For clocks 8 and 9, both sides remain ready to transfer data, and data is transferred at the maximum possible rate (32 bits per clock cycle).\nIn case of a read, clock 2 is reserved for turning around the AD bus, so the target is not permitted to drive data on the bus even if it is capable of fast DEVSEL.\nFast DEVSEL# on reads.\nA target that supports fast DEVSEL could in theory begin responding to a read on the cycle after the address is presented. This cycle is, however, reserved for AD bus turnaround. Thus, a target may not drive the AD bus (and thus may not assert TRDY#) on the second cycle of a transaction. Most targets will not be this fast and will not need any special logic to enforce this condition.\nEnding transactions.\nEither side may request that a burst end after the current data phase. Simple PCI devices that do not support multi-word bursts will always request this immediately. Even devices that do support bursts will have some limit on the maximum length they can support, such as the end of their addressable memory.\nInitiator burst termination.\nThe initiator can mark any data phase as the final one in a transaction by deasserting FRAME# at the same time as it asserts IRDY#. The cycle after the target asserts TRDY#, the final data transfer is complete, both sides deassert their respective RDY# signals, and the bus is idle again. The master may not deassert FRAME# before asserting IRDY#, nor may it deassert FRAME# while waiting, with IRDY# asserted, for the target to assert TRDY#.\nThe only minor exception is a \"master abort termination\", when no target responds with DEVSEL#. Obviously, it is pointless to wait for TRDY# in such a case. However, even in this case, the master must assert IRDY# for at least one cycle after deasserting FRAME#. (Commonly, a master will assert IRDY# before receiving DEVSEL#, so it must simply hold IRDY# asserted for one cycle longer.) This is to ensure that bus turnaround timing rules are obeyed on the FRAME# line.\nTarget burst termination.\nThe target requests the initiator end a burst by asserting STOP#. The initiator will then end the transaction by deasserting FRAME# at the next legal opportunity; if it wishes to transfer more data, it will continue in a separate transaction. There are several ways for the target to do this:\n If the target asserts STOP# and TRDY# at the same time, this indicates that the target wishes this to be the last data phase. For example, a target that does not support burst transfers will always do this to force single-word PCI transactions. This is the most efficient way for a target to end a burst.\n If the target asserts STOP# without asserting TRDY#, this indicates that the target wishes to stop without transferring data. STOP# is considered equivalent to TRDY# for the purpose of ending a data phase, but no data is transferred.\n A Disconnect without data before transferring any data is a \"retry\", and unlike other PCI transactions, PCI initiators are required to pause slightly before continuing the operation. See the PCI specification for details.\n Normally, a target holds DEVSEL# asserted through the last data phase. However, if a target deasserts DEVSEL# before disconnecting without data (asserting STOP#), this indicates a \"target abort\", which is a fatal error condition. The initiator may not retry, and typically treats it as a bus error. A target may not deassert DEVSEL# while waiting with TRDY# or STOP# low; it must do this at the beginning of a data phase.\nIt will always take at least one cycle for the initiator to notice a target-initiated disconnection request and respond by deasserting FRAME#. There are two sub-cases, which take the same amount of time, but one requires an additional data phase:\n If the initiator observes STOP# before asserting its own IRDY#, then it can end the burst by deasserting FRAME# at the same time as it asserts IRDY#, ending the burst after the current data phase.\n If the initiator has already asserted IRDY# (without deasserting FRAME#) by the time it observes the target's STOP#, it is committed to an additional data phase. The target must wait through an additional data phase without data, holding STOP# asserted without TRDY#, before the transaction can end.\nIf the initiator ends the burst at the same time as the target requests disconnection, there is no additional bus cycle.\nBurst addressing.\nFor memory space accesses, the words in a burst may be accessed in several orders. The unnecessary low-order address bits AD[1:0] are used to convey the initiator's requested order. A target which does not support a particular order must terminate the burst after the first word. Some of these orders depend on the cache line size, which is configurable on all PCI devices.\nIf the starting offset within the cache line is zero, all of these modes reduce to the same order.\nCache line toggle and cache line wrap modes are two forms of critical-word-first cache line fetching. Toggle mode XORs the supplied address with an incrementing counter. This is the native order for Intel 486 and Pentium processors. It has the advantage that it is not necessary to know the cache line size to implement it.\nPCI version 2.1 obsoleted toggle mode and added the cache line wrap mode,2 where fetching proceeds linearly, wrapping around at the end of each cache line. When one cache line is completely fetched, fetching jumps to the starting offset in the next cache line.\nMost PCI devices only support a limited range of typical cache line sizes; if the cache line size is programmed to an unexpected value, they force single-word access.\nPCI also supports burst access to I/O and configuration space, but only linear mode is supported. (This is rarely used, and may be buggy in some devices; they may not support it, but not properly force single-word access either.)\nTransaction examples.\nThis is the highest-possible speed four-word write burst, terminated by the master:\nOn clock edge 1, the initiator starts a transaction by driving an address, command, and asserting FRAME# The other signals are idle (indicated by ^^^), pulled high by the motherboard's pull-up resistors. That might be their turnaround cycle. On cycle 2, the target asserts both DEVSEL# and TRDY#. As the initiator is also ready, a data transfer occurs. This repeats for three more cycles, but before the last one (clock edge 5), the master deasserts FRAME#, indicating that this is the end. On clock edge 6, the AD bus and FRAME# are undriven (turnaround cycle) and the other control lines are driven high for 1 cycle. On clock edge 7, another initiator can start a different transaction. This is also the turnaround cycle for the other control lines.\nThe equivalent read burst takes one more cycle, because the target must wait 1 cycle for the AD bus to turn around before it may assert TRDY#:\nA high-speed burst terminated by the target will have an extra cycle at the end:\nOn clock edge 6, the target indicates that it wants to stop (with data), but the initiator is already holding IRDY# low, so there is a fifth data phase (clock edge 7), during which no data is transferred.\nParity.\nThe PCI bus detects parity errors, but does not attempt to correct them by retrying operations; it is purely a failure indication. Due to this, there is no need to detect the parity error before it has happened, and the PCI bus actually detects it a few cycles later. During a data phase, whichever device is driving the AD[31:0] lines computes even parity over them and the C/BE[3:0]# lines, and sends that out the PAR line one cycle later. All access rules and turnaround cycles for the AD bus apply to the PAR line, just one cycle later. The device listening on the AD bus checks the received parity and asserts the PERR# (parity error) line one cycle after that. This generally generates a processor interrupt, and the processor can search the PCI bus for the device which detected the error.\nThe PERR# line is only used during data phases, once a target has been selected. If a parity error is detected during an address phase (or the data phase of a Special Cycle), the devices which observe it assert the SERR# (System error) line.\nEven when some bytes are masked by the C/BE# lines and not in use, they must still have \"some\" defined value, and this value must be used to compute the parity.\nFast back-to-back transactions.\nDue to the need for a turnaround cycle between different devices driving PCI bus signals, in general it is necessary to have an idle cycle between PCI bus transactions. However, in some circumstances it is permitted to skip this idle cycle, going directly from the final cycle of one transfer (IRDY# asserted, FRAME# deasserted) to the first cycle of the next (FRAME# asserted, IRDY# deasserted).\nAn initiator may only perform back-to-back transactions when:\nAdditional timing constraints may come from the need to turn around are the target control lines, particularly DEVSEL#. The target deasserts DEVSEL#, driving it high, in the cycle following the final data phase, which in the case of back-to-back transactions is the first cycle of the address phase. The second cycle of the address phase is then reserved for DEVSEL# turnaround, so if the target is different from the prior one, it must not assert DEVSEL# until the third cycle (medium DEVSEL speed).\nOne case where this problem cannot arise is if the initiator knows somehow (presumably because the addresses share sufficient high-order bits) that the second transfer is addressed to the same target as the prior one. In that case, it may perform back-to-back transactions. All PCI targets must support this.\nIt is also possible for the target to keep track of the requirements. If it never does fast DEVSEL, they are met trivially. If it does, it must wait until medium DEVSEL time unless:\nTargets that have this ability indicate it by a special bit in a PCI configuration register, and if all targets on a bus have it, all initiators may use back-to-back transfers freely.\nA subtractive decoding bus bridge must know to expect this extra delay in the event of back-to-back cycles, to advertise back-to-back support.\n64-bit PCI.\nStarting from revision 2.1, the PCI specification includes optional 64-bit support. This is provided via an extended connector which provides the 64-bit bus extensions AD[63:32], C/BE[7:4]#, and PAR64, and a number of additional power and ground pins. The 64-bit PCI connector can be distinguished from a 32-bit connector by the additional 64-bit segment.\nMemory transactions between 64-bit devices may use all 64\u00a0bits to double the data transfer rate. Non-memory transactions (including configuration and I/O space accesses) may not use the 64-bit extension. During a 64-bit burst, burst addressing works just as in a 32-bit transfer, but the address is incremented twice per data phase. The starting address must be 64-bit aligned; i.e. AD2 must be 0. The data corresponding to the intervening addresses (with AD2 = 1) is carried on the upper half of the AD bus.\nTo initiate a 64-bit transaction, the initiator drives the starting address on the AD bus and asserts REQ64# at the same time as FRAME#. If the selected target can support a 64-bit transfer for this transaction, it replies by asserting ACK64# at the same time as DEVSEL#. A target may decide on a per-transaction basis whether to allow a 64-bit transfer.\nIf REQ64# is asserted during the address phase, the initiator also drives the high 32 bits of the address and a copy of the bus command on the high half of the bus. If the address requires 64 bits, a dual address cycle is still required, but the high half of the bus carries the upper half of the address and the final command code during both address phase cycles; this allows a 64-bit target to see the entire address and begin responding earlier.\nIf the initiator sees DEVSEL# asserted without ACK64#, it performs 32-bit data phases. The data which would have been transferred on the upper half of the bus during the first data phase is instead transferred during the second data phase. Typically, the initiator drives all 64 bits of data before seeing DEVSEL#. If ACK64# is missing, it may cease driving the upper half of the data bus.\nThe REQ64# and ACK64# lines are held asserted for the entire transaction save the last data phase and deasserted at the same time as FRAME# and DEVSEL#, respectively.\nThe PAR64 line operates just like the PAR line, but provides even parity over AD[63:32] and C/BE[7:4]#. It is only valid for address phases if REQ64# is asserted. PAR64 is only valid for data phases if both REQ64# and ACK64# are asserted.\nCache snooping (obsolete).\nPCI originally included optional support for write-back cache coherence. This required support by cacheable memory targets, which would listen to two pins from the cache on the bus, SDONE (snoop done) and SBO# (snoop backoff).\nBecause this was rarely implemented in practice, it was deleted from revision 2.2 of the PCI specification, and the pins re-used for SMBus access in revision 2.3.\nThe cache would watch all memory accesses, without asserting DEVSEL#. If it noticed an access that might be cached, it would drive SDONE low (snoop not done). A coherence-supporting target would avoid completing a data phase (asserting TRDY#) until it observed SDONE high.\nIn the case of a write to data that was clean in the cache, the cache would only have to invalidate its copy and would assert SDONE as soon as this was established. However, if the cache contained dirty data, the cache would have to write it back before the access could proceed. so it would assert SBO# when raising SDONE. This would signal the active target to assert STOP# rather than TRDY#, causing the initiator to disconnect and retry the operation later. In the meantime, the cache would arbitrate for the bus and write its data back to memory.\nTargets supporting cache coherency are also required to terminate bursts before they cross cache lines.\nDevelopment tools.\nWhen developing and/or troubleshooting the PCI bus, examination of hardware signals can be very important. Logic analyzers and bus analyzers are tools that collect, analyze, and decode signals for users to view in useful ways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
