{"id": "26036", "revid": "27766576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26036", "title": "Reform Judaism", "text": "Denomination of Judaism\nReform Judaism, also known as Liberal Judaism or Progressive Judaism, is a major Jewish denomination that emphasizes the evolving nature of Judaism, the superiority of its ethical aspects to its ceremonial ones, and belief in a continuous revelation which is closely intertwined with human reason and not limited to the theophany at Mount Sinai. A liberal strand of Judaism, it is characterized by little stress on ritual and personal observance, regarding Jewish law as non-binding and the individual Jew as autonomous, and by a great openness to external influences and progressive values.\nThe origins of Reform Judaism lie in mid-19th-century Germany, where Rabbi Abraham Geiger and his associates formulated its basic principles, attempting to harmonize Jewish tradition with modern sensibilities in the age of emancipation. Understanding Jewish tradition in terms of historical-critical methods and modern philosophy, seeing it as constantly evolving, the early Reform movement sanctioned a conscious adaptation of religious life and the ommission of observances and beliefs considered irrelevant or superstitious. In the public sphere it removed parts of the liturgy pertaining to concepts discarded by it, like bodily resurrection of the dead or the restoration of the sacrifical cult in Jerusalem, and translated much of the prayer from Hebrew to the vernacular German. In the private sphere it condoned and legitimized the widespread abandonment of personal observance of dietary, Sabbath and other ritual laws. European Reform was often conservative, having to co-exist with traditionalist elements within long-established communities. Brought to America by German-born rabbis, the denomination gained prominence in the United States, flourishing from the 1860s to the 1930s in an era known as \"Classical Reform\". In the American setting, Reform Judaism was free to exercise its ideas without restriction, adopting a universalist approach with little place for Jewish particularism and disposing of most traditional practice. Almost all of the liturgy was in English, converts and male babies were not required to undergo circumcision, and many congregations celebreated the Sabbath also on Sunday. The arrival in America of numerous Eastern European Jewish immigrants, who were generally traditional, led to a renewed interest in observance and collective identity, officially enshrined by the 1937 Columbus platform. Since the 1970s, the movement has adopted a policy of inclusiveness and acceptance, inviting as many as possible to partake in its communities rather than adhering to strict theoretical clarity, becoming extremely diverse. It is strongly identified with progressive and liberal agendas in political and social terms, mainly under the traditional Jewish rubric \"tikkun olam\" (\"repairing of the world\"). \"Tikkun olam\" is a central motto of Reform Judaism, and acting in its name is one of the main channels for adherents to express their affiliation. The movement's most significant center is in North America.\nVarious regional branches exist, including the Union for Reform Judaism (URJ) in the United States and Canada, the Movement for Reform Judaism (MRJ) and Liberal Judaism in the United Kingdom, the Israel Movement for Reform and Progressive Judaism (IMPJ) in Israel, and the UJR-AmLat in Latin America; these are united within the international World Union for Progressive Judaism (WUPJ). Founded in 1926, the WUPJ estimates it represents at least 1.8 million people in 50 countries, about 1 million of whom are registered adult congregants, and the rest are unaffiliated but identify with the movement. This makes Reform the second-largest Jewish denomination worldwide, after Orthodox Judaism.\nDefinitions.\nIts inherent pluralism and the importance it places on individual autonomy impedes any simplistic definition of Reform Judaism; its various strands regard Judaism throughout the ages as a religion that was derived from a process of constant evolution. They warrant and obligate further modifications and reject any fixed, permanent set of beliefs, laws or practices. A clear description of Reform Judaism became particularly challenging since the turn toward a policy that favored inclusiveness (\"Big Tent\" in the United States) over a coherent theology in the 1970s. This transition largely overlapped with what researchers termed the transition from \"Classical\" to \"New\" Reform Judaism in the United States, paralleled in the other, smaller branches of Reform across the world. The movement ceased stressing principles and core beliefs, focusing more on the personal spiritual experience and communal participation. This shift was not accompanied by a distinct new doctrine or by the abandonment of the former, but rather with ambiguity. The leadership allowed and encouraged a wide variety of positions, from selective adoption of \"halakhic\" observance to elements approaching religious humanism.\nThe declining importance of the theoretical foundation, in favour of pluralism and equivocalness, drew large crowds of newcomers. It also diversified Reform to a degree that made it hard to formulate a clear definition of it. Early and \"Classical\" Reform were characterized by a move away from traditional forms of Judaism combined with a coherent theology; \"New Reform\" sought, to a certain level, the reincorporation of many formerly discarded elements within the framework established during the \"Classical\" stage, though this very doctrinal basis became increasingly obfuscated. \nCritics, like Rabbi Dana Evan Kaplan, warned that Reform became more of a \"Jewish activities club\", a means to demonstrate some affinity to one's heritage in which even rabbinical students do not have to believe in any specific theology or engage in any particular practice, rather than a defined belief system.\nTheology.\nGod.\nIn regard to God, the Reform movement has always officially maintained a theistic stance, affirming the belief in a personal God. Despite this official position, some voices among the spiritual leadership have approached religious and even secular humanism. This tendency has grown since the mid-20th century among both clergy and constituents, leading to broader, dimmer definitions of the concept.\nEarly Reform thinkers in Germany clung to this precept; the 1885 Pittsburgh Platform described the \"One God... The God-Idea as taught in our sacred Scripture\" as consecrating the Jewish people to be its priests. It was grounded on a wholly theistic understanding, although the term \"God-idea\" was excoriated by outside critics. So was the 1937 Columbus Declaration of Principles, which spoke of \"One, living God who rules the world\". Even the 1976 San Francisco Centenary Perspective, drafted at a time of great discord among Reform theologians, upheld \"the affirmation of God... Challenges of modern culture have made a steady belief difficult for some. Nevertheless, we ground our lives, personally and communally, on God's reality.\" The 1999 Pittsburgh Statement of Principles declared the \"reality and oneness of God\". British Liberal Judaism affirms the \"Jewish conception of God: One and indivisible, transcendent and immanent, Creator and Sustainer\".\nRevelation.\nThe basic tenet of Reform theology is a belief in a continuous, or progressive, revelation, occurring continuously and not limited to the theophany at Sinai, the defining event in traditional interpretation. According to this view, all holy scripture of Judaism, including the Torah, were authored by human beings who, although under divine inspiration, inserted their understanding and reflected the spirit of their consecutive ages. All the People of Israel are a further link in the chain of revelation, capable of reaching new insights: religion can be renewed without necessarily being dependent on past conventions. The chief promulgator of this concept was Abraham Geiger, generally considered the founder of the movement. After critical research led him to regard scripture as a human creation, bearing the marks of historical circumstances, he abandoned the belief in the unbroken perpetuity of tradition derived from Sinai and gradually replaced it with the idea of progressive revelation.\nAs in other liberal denominations, this notion offered a conceptual framework for reconciling the acceptance of critical research with the maintenance of a belief in some form of divine communication, thus preventing a rupture among those who could no longer accept a literal understanding of revelation. No less importantly, it provided the clergy with a rationale for adapting, changing and excising traditional mores and bypassing the accepted conventions of Jewish Law, rooted in the orthodox concept of the explicit transmission of both scripture and its oral interpretation. While also subject to change and new understanding, the basic premise of progressive revelation endures in Reform thought.\nIn its early days, this notion was greatly influenced by the philosophy of German idealism, from which its founders drew much inspiration: belief in humanity marching toward a full understanding of itself and the divine, manifested in moral progress towards perfection. This highly rationalistic view virtually identified human reason and intellect with divine action, leaving little room for direct influence by God. Geiger conceived revelation as occurring via the inherent \"genius\" of the People Israel, and his close ally Solomon Formstecher described it as the awakening of oneself into full consciousness of one's religious understanding. The American theologian Kaufmann Kohler also spoke of the \"special insight\" of Israel, almost fully independent from direct divine participation, and English thinker Claude Montefiore, founder of Liberal Judaism, reduced revelation to \"inspiration\", according intrinsic value only to the worth of its content, while \"it is not the place where they are found that makes them inspired\". Common to all these notions was the assertion that present generations have a higher and better understanding of divine will, and they can and should unwaveringly change and refashion religious precepts.\nIn the decades around World War II, this rationalistic and optimistic theology was challenged and questioned. It was gradually replaced, mainly by the Jewish existentialism of Martin Buber and Franz Rosenzweig, centered on a complex, personal relationship with the creator, and a more sober and disillusioned outlook. The identification of human reason with Godly inspiration was rejected in favour of views such as Rosenzweig's, who emphasized that the only content of revelation is it in itself, while all derivations of it are subjective, limited human understanding. However, while granting higher status to historical and traditional understanding, both insisted that \"revelation is certainly not Law giving\" and that it did not contain any \"finished statements about God\", but, rather, that human subjectivity shaped the unfathomable content of the Encounter and interpreted it under its own limitations. The senior representative of postwar Reform theology, Eugene Borowitz, regarded theophany in postmodern terms and closely linked it with quotidian human experience and interpersonal contact. He rejected the notion of \"progressive revelation\" in the meaning of comparing human betterment with divine inspiration, stressing that past experiences were \"unique\" and of everlasting importance. Yet he stated that his ideas by no means negated the concept of ongoing, individually experienced revelation by all.\nRitual, autonomy and law.\nReform Judaism emphasizes the ethical facets of the faith as its central attribute, superseding the ceremonial ones. Reform thinkers often cited the Prophets' condemnations of ceremonial acts, lacking true intention and performed by the morally corrupt, as testimony that rites have no inherent quality. Geiger centered his philosophy on the Prophets' teachings (he had already named his ideology \"Prophetic Judaism\" in 1838), regarding morality and ethics as the stable core of a religion in which ritual observance transformed radically through the ages. However, practices were seen as a means to elation and a link to the heritage of the past, and Reform generally argued that rituals should be maintained, discarded or modified based on whether they served these higher purposes. This stance allowed a great variety of practice both in the past and the present. In \"Classical\" times, personal observance was reduced to little beyond nothing. The postwar \"New Reform\" lent renewed importance to practical, regular action as a means to engage congregants, abandoning the sanitized forms of the \"Classical\".\nAnother key aspect of Reform doctrine is the personal autonomy of each adherent, who may formulate their own understanding and expression of their religiosity. Reform is unique among all Jewish denominations in placing the individual as the authorized interpreter of Judaism. This position was originally influenced by Kantian philosophy and the great weight it lent to personal judgement and free will. This highly individualistic stance also proved one of the movement's great challenges, for it impeded the creation of clear guidelines and standards for positive participation in religious life and definition of what was expected from members.\nThe notion of autonomy coincided with the gradual abandonment of traditional practice (largely neglected by most members, and the Jewish public in general, before and during the rise of Reform) in the early stages of the movement. It was a major characteristic during the \"Classical\" period, when Reform closely resembled Protestant surroundings. Later, it was applied to encourage adherents to seek their own means of engaging Judaism. \"New Reform\" embraced the criticism levied by Rosenzweig and other thinkers at extreme individualism, laying a greater stress on community and tradition. Though by no means declaring that members were bound by a compelling authority of some sort \u2013 the notion of an intervening, commanding God remained foreign to denominational thought. The \"New Reform\" approach to the question is characterized by an attempt to strike a mean between autonomy and some degree of conformity, focusing on a dialectic relationship between both.\nThe movement never entirely abandoned \"halachic\" (traditional jurisprudence) argumentation, both due to the need for precedent to counter external accusations and the continuity of heritage. Instead, the movement had largely made ethical considerations or the spirit of the age the decisive factor in determining its course. The German founding fathers undermined the principles behind the legalistic process, which was based on a belief in an unbroken tradition through the ages merely elaborated and applied to novel circumstances, rather than subject to change. Rabbi Samuel Holdheim advocated a particularly radical stance, arguing that the \"halachic\" Law of the Land is Law principle must be universally applied and subject virtually everything to current norms and needs, far beyond its weight in conventional Jewish Law.\nWhile Reform rabbis in 19th-century Germany had to accommodate conservative elements in their communities, at the height of \"Classical Reform\" in the United States, \"halakhic\" considerations could be virtually ignored and Holdheim's approach embraced. In the 1930s and onwards, Rabbi Solomon Freehof and his supporters reintroduced such elements, but they too regarded Jewish Law as too rigid a system. Instead, they recommended that selected features will be readopted and new observances established in a piecemeal fashion, as spontaneous \"minhag\" (custom) emerging by trial and error and becoming widespread if it appealed to the masses. The advocates of this approach also stress that their responsa are of non-binding nature, and their recipients may adapt them as they see fit. Freehof's successors, such as Rabbis Walter Jacob and Moshe Zemer, further elaborated the notion of \"Progressive \"Halakha\"\" along the same lines.\nMessianic age and election.\nReform sought to accentuate and greatly augment the universalist traits in Judaism, turning it into a faith befitting the Enlightenment ideals ubiquitous at the time it emerged. The tension between universalism and the imperative to maintain uniqueness characterized the movement throughout its entire history. Its earliest proponents rejected Deism and the belief that all religions would unite into one, and it later faced the challenges of the Ethical movement and Unitarianism. Parallel to that, it sought to diminish all components of Judaism that it regarded as overly particularist and self-centered: petitions expressing hostility towards gentiles were toned down or excised, and practices were often streamlined to resemble surrounding society. \"New Reform\" laid a renewed stress on Jewish particular identity, regarding it as better suiting popular sentiment and need for preservation.\nOne major expression of that, which is the first clear Reform doctrine to have been formulated, is the idea of universal Messianism. The belief in redemption was unhinged from the traditional elements of return to Zion and restoration of the Temple and the sacrificial cult therein, and turned into a general hope for salvation. This was later refined when the notion of a personal Messiah who would reign over Israel was officially abolished and replaced by the concept of a Messianic Age of universal harmony and perfection. The considerable loss of faith in human progress around World War II greatly shook this ideal, but it endures as a precept of Reform.\nAnother key example is the reinterpretation of the election of Israel. The movement maintained the idea of the Chosen People of God, but recast it in a more universal fashion: it isolated and accentuated the notion (already present in traditional sources) that the mission of Israel was to spread among all nations and teach them divinely-inspired ethical monotheism, bringing them all closer to the Creator. One extreme \"Classical\" promulgator of this approach, Rabbi David Einhorn, substituted the lamentation on the Ninth of Av for a celebration, regarding the destruction of Jerusalem as fulfilling God's scheme to bring his word, via his people, to all corners of the earth. Highly self-centered affirmations of Jewish exceptionalism were moderated, although the general notion of \"a kingdom of priests and a holy nation\" retained. On the other hand, while embracing a less strict interpretation compared to the traditional one, Reform also held to this tenet against those who sought to deny it. When secularist thinkers like Ahad Ha'am and Mordecai Kaplan forwarded the view of Judaism as a civilization, portraying it as a culture created by the Jewish people, rather than a God-given faith defining them, Reform theologians decidedly rejected their position \u2013 although it became popular and even dominant among rank-and-file members. Like the Orthodox, they insisted that the People Israel was created by divine election alone, and existed solely as such. The 1999 Pittsburgh Platform and other official statements affirmed that the \"Jewish people is bound to God by an eternal \"b'rit\", covenant\".\nSoul and afterlife.\nAs part of its philosophy, Reform Judaism anchored reason in divine influence, accepted scientific criticism of hallowed texts and sought to adapt Judaism to modern notions of rationalism. Judaism was viewed by Enlightenment thinkers both as irrational and an import from ancient middle-eastern pagans. The only perceived form of retribution for the wicked, if any, was the anguish of their soul after death, and vice versa, bliss was the single accolade for the spirits of the righteous. Angels and heavenly hosts were also deemed a foreign superstitious influence, especially from early Zoroastrian sources, and denied. Notions of afterlife according to Enlightenment thinkers were given to be reduced merely to the immortality of the soul, while the founding thinkers of Reform Judaism, like Montefiore, all shared this belief, the existence of a soul became harder to cling to with the passing of time. In the 1980s, Borowitz could state that the movement had nothing coherent to declare in the matter. The various streams of Reform still largely, though not always or strictly, uphold the idea. The 1999 Pittsburgh Statement of Principles, for example, used the somewhat ambiguous formula \"the spirit within us is eternal\".\nPractice.\nLiturgy.\nThe first and primary field in which Reform convictions were expressed was that of prayer forms. From its beginning, Reform Judaism attempted to harmonize the language of petitions with modern sensibilities and what the constituents actually believed in. Jakob Josef Petuchowski, in his extensive survey of Progressive liturgy, listed several key principles that defined it through the years and many transformations it underwent. The prayers were abridged, whether by omitting repetitions, excising passages or reintroducing the ancient triennial cycle for reading the Torah; vernacular segments were added alongside or instead of the Hebrew and Aramaic text, to ensure the congregants understood the petitions they expressed; and some new prayers were composed to reflect the spirit of changing times. But chiefly, liturgists sought to reformulate the prayerbooks and have them express the movement's theology. Blessings and passages referring to the coming of the Messiah, return to Zion, renewal of sacrificial practices, resurrection of the dead, reward and punishment and overt particularism of the People Israel were replaced, recast or excised altogether.\nIn its early stages, when Reform Judaism was more a tendency within unified communities in Central Europe than an independent movement, its advocates had to practice considerable moderation, lest they provoke conservative animosity. German prayerbooks often relegated the more contentious issues to the vernacular translation, treating the original text with great care and sometimes having problematic passages in small print and untranslated. When institutionalized and free of such constraints, it was able to pursue a more radical course. In American \"Classical\" or British Liberal prayerbooks, a far larger vernacular component was added and liturgy was drastically shortened, and petitions in discord with denominational theology eliminated.\n\"New Reform\", both in the United States and in Britain and the rest of the world, is characterized by larger affinity to traditional forms and diminished emphasis on harmonizing them with prevalent beliefs. Concurrently, it is also more inclusive and accommodating, even towards beliefs that are officially rejected by Reform theologians, sometimes allowing alternative differing rites for each congregation to choose from. Thus, prayerbooks from the mid\u201320th century onwards incorporated more Hebrew, and restored such elements as blessing on phylacteries. More profound changes included restoration of the \"Gevorot\" benediction in the 2007 \"Mishkan T'filah\", with the optional \"give life to all/revive the dead\" formula. The CCAR stated this passage did not reflect a belief in Resurrection, but Jewish heritage. On the other extreme, the 1975 \"Gates of Prayer\" substituted \"the Eternal One\" for \"God\" in the English translation (though not in the original), a measure that was condemned by several Reform rabbis as a step toward religious humanism.\nObservance.\nDuring its formative era, Reform was oriented toward lesser ceremonial obligations. In 1846, the Breslau rabbinical conference abolished the second day of festivals; during the same years, the Berlin Reform congregation held prayers without blowing the Ram's Horn, phylacteries, mantles or head covering, and held its Sabbath services on Sunday. In the late 19th and early 20th century, American \"Classical Reform\" often emulated Berlin on a mass scale, with many communities conducting prayers along the same style and having additional services on Sunday. An official rescheduling of Sabbath to Sunday was advocated by Kaufmann Kohler for some time, though he retracted it eventually. Religious divorce was declared redundant and the civil one recognized as sufficient by American Reform in 1869, and in Germany by 1912; the laws concerning dietary and personal purity, the priestly prerogatives, marital ordinances and so forth were dispensed with, and openly revoked by the 1885 Pittsburgh Platform, which declared all ceremonial acts binding only if they served to enhance religious experience. From 1890, converts were no longer obligated to be circumcised. Similar policy was pursued by Claude Montefiore's Jewish Religious Union, established at Britain in 1902. The Vereinigung f\u00fcr das Liberale Judentum in Germany, which was more moderate, declared virtually all personal observance voluntary in its 1912 guidelines.\n\"New Reform\" saw the establishment and membership lay greater emphasis on the ceremonial aspects, after the former sterile and minimalist approach was condemned as offering little to engage in religion and encouraging apathy. Numerous rituals became popular again, often after being recast or reinterpreted, though as a matter of personal choice for the individual and not an authoritative obligation. Circumcision or Letting of Blood for converts and newborn babies became virtually mandated in the 1980s; ablution for menstruating women gained great grassroots popularity at the turn of the century, and some synagogues built mikvehs (ritual baths). A renewed interest in dietary laws (though by no means in the strict sense) also surfaced at the same decades, as were phylacteries, prayer shawls and head coverings. Reform is still characterized by having the least service attendance on average: for example, of those polled by Pew in 2013, only 34% of registered synagogue members (and only 17% of all those who state affinity) attend services once a month and more.\nThe Proto-Reform movement did pioneer new rituals. In the 1810s and 1820s, the circles (Israel Jacobson, Eduard Kley and others) that gave rise to the movement introduced confirmation ceremonies for boys and girls, in emulation of parallel Christian initiation rite. These soon spread outside the movement, though many of a more traditional leaning rejected the name \"confirmation\". In the \"New Reform\", Bar Mitzvah largely replaced it as part of the re-traditionalization, but many young congregants in the United States still perform one, often at Shavuot. Confirmation for girls eventually developed into the Bat Mitzvah, now popular among all except strictly Orthodox Jews.\nSome branches of Reform, while subscribing to its differentiation between ritual and ethics, chose to maintain a considerable degree of practical observance, especially in areas where a conservative Jewish majority had to be accommodated. Most Liberal communities in Germany maintained dietary standards and the like in the public sphere, both due to the moderation of their congregants and threats of Orthodox secession. A similar pattern characterizes the Movement for Reform Judaism in Britain, which attempted to appeal to newcomers from the United Synagogue, or to the Israel Movement for Reform and Progressive Judaism (IMPJ) in Israel.\nOpenness.\nIts philosophy of continuous revelation made Progressive Judaism, in all its variants, much more able to embrace change and new trends than any of the other major denominations. \nReform Judaism is considered to be the first major Jewish denomination to adopt gender equality in religious life. As early as 1846, the Breslau conference announced that women must enjoy identical obligations and prerogatives in worship and communal affairs, though this decision had virtually no effect in practice. Lily Montagu, who served as a driving force behind British Liberal Judaism and WUPJ, was the first woman in recorded history to deliver a sermon at a synagogue in 1918, and set another precedent when she conducted a prayer two years later. Regina Jonas, ordained in 1935 by later chairman of the Vereinigung der liberalen Rabbiner Max Dienemann, was the earliest known female rabbi to officially be granted the title. In 1972, Sally Priesand was ordained by Hebrew Union College, which made her the first female rabbi of the US ordained by a rabbinical seminary, and the second formally ordained female rabbi in Jewish history, after Regina Jonas. Reform also pioneered family seating, an arrangement that spread throughout American Jewry but was only applied in continental Europe after World War II. Egalitarianism in prayer became universally prevalent in the WUPJ by the end of the 20th century.\nReligious inclusion for LGBT people and ordination of LGBT rabbis were also pioneered by the movement. Intercourse between consenting adults was declared as legitimate by the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR) in 1977, Hebrew Union College - Jewish Institute of Religion accepted its first open LGBTQ students in 1990 (Leslie Bergson, Stephen Roberts and Burt Schuman) and the CCAR openly gay clergy were admitted in 1990. Same-sex marriage was sanctioned by the year 2000. In 2015, the URJ adopted a Resolution on the Rights of Transgender and Gender Non-Conforming People, urging clergy and synagogue attendants to actively promote tolerance and inclusion of such individuals.\nAmerican Reform, especially, turned action for social and progressive causes into an important part of religious commitment. From the second half of the 20th century, it employed the old rabbinic notion of \"Tikkun Olam\", \"repairing the world\", as a slogan under which constituents were encouraged to partake in various initiatives for the betterment of society. The Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism became an important lobby in service of progressive causes such as the rights of minorities. \"Tikkun Olam\" has become the central venue for active participation for many affiliates, even leading critics to negatively describe Reform as little more than a means employed by Jewish liberals to claim that commitment to their political convictions was also a religious activity and demonstrates fealty to Judaism. Dana Evan Kaplan stated that \"\"Tikkun Olam\" has incorporated only leftist, socialist-like elements. In truth, it is political, basically a mirror of the most radically leftist components of the Democratic Party platform, causing many to say that Reform Judaism is simply 'the Democratic Party with Jewish holidays'.\" In Israel, the Religious Action Center is very active in the judicial field, often using litigation both in cases concerning civil rights in general and the official status of Reform Judaism within the state, in particular.\nJewish identity.\nWhile opposed to interfaith marriage in principle, officials of the major Reform rabbinical organisation, the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR), estimated in 2012 that about half of their rabbis partake in such ceremonies. The need to cope with this phenomenon \u2013 80% of all Reform-raised Jews in the United States wed between 2000 and 2013 were intermarried \u2013 led to the recognition of patrilineal descent: all children born to a couple in which a single member was Jewish, whether mother or father, was accepted as a Jew on condition that they received corresponding education and committed themselves as such. Conversely, offspring of a Jewish mother only are not accepted if they do not demonstrate affinity to the faith. A Jewish status is conferred unconditionally only on the children of two Jewish parents.\nThis decision was taken by the British Liberal Judaism in the 1950s. The North American Union for Reform Judaism (URJ) accepted it in 1983, and the British Movement for Reform Judaism affirmed it in 2015. The various strands also adopted a policy of embracing the intermarried and their spouses. British Liberals offer \"blessing ceremonies\" if the child is to be raised Jewish, and the MRJ allows its clergy to participate in celebration of civil marriage, though none allow a full Jewish ceremony with \"chupah\" and the like. In American Reform, 17% of synagogue-member households have a converted spouse, and 26% an unconverted one. Its policy on conversion and Jewish status led the WUPJ into conflict with more traditional circles, and a growing number of its adherents are not accepted as Jewish by either the Conservative or the Orthodox. Outside North America and Britain, patrilineal descent was not accepted by most. As in other fields, small WUPJ affiliates are less independent and often have to deal with more conservative Jewish denominations in their countries, such as vis-\u00e0-vis the Orthodox rabbinate in Israel or continental Europe.\nConversion.\nConversion within Reform Judaism has been seen as controversial by the Orthodox and Masorti sects. Due to the Reform movement's progressive views on what it means to be a Jew, the conversion process has been criticized and often unrecognized by more conservative sects, yet conversions through the Reform movement are legally recognized by the Israeli government and thus entitled to citizenship under the Law of Return. \nConverts through Reform Judaism are accepted based on their sincerity, regardless of their background or previous beliefs. Studying with a rabbi is the norm and can take anywhere from several months to several years. The process focuses on participation in congregational activities and observation of holidays and Halakha. Conversions are finalized with a meeting of the Beit Din and usually a Brit Milah and a Tevilah, though the extent to which the practice of Brit Milah is observed varies from country to country. Furthermore, the acceptance of Reform converts by other sects is rare, with many Orthodox and Masorti temples rejecting Reform Converts.\nOrganization and demographics.\nThe term \"Reform\" was first applied institutionally \u2013 not generically, as in \"for reform\" \u2013 to the Berlin Reformgemeinde (Reform Congregation), established in 1845. Apart from it, most German communities that were oriented in that direction preferred the more ambiguous \"Liberal\", which was not exclusively associated with Reform Judaism. It was more prevalent as an appellation for the religiously apathetic majority among German Jews, and also to all rabbis who were not clearly Orthodox (including the rival Positive-Historical School). The title \"Reform\" became much more common in the United States, where an independent denomination under this name was fully identified with the religious tendency. However, Isaac Meyer Wise suggested in 1871 that \"Progressive Judaism\" was a better epithet. When the movement was institutionalized in Germany between 1898 and 1908, its leaders chose \"Liberal\" as self-designation, founding the Vereinigung f\u00fcr das Liberale Judentum. In 1902, Claude Montefiore termed the doctrine espoused by his new Jewish Religious Union as \"Liberal Judaism\", too, though it belonged to the more radical part of the spectrum in relation to the German one.\nIn 1926, British Liberals, American Reform and German Liberals consolidated their worldwide movement \u2013 united in affirming tenets such as progressive revelation, supremacy of ethics above ritual and so forth \u2013 at a meeting held in London. Originally carrying the provisional title \"International Conference of Liberal Jews\", after deliberations between \"Liberal\", \"Reform\" and \"Modern\", it was named World Union for Progressive Judaism on 12 July, at the conclusion of a vote. The WUPJ established further branches around the planet, alternatively under the names \"Reform\", \"Liberal\" and \"Progressive\". In 1945, the Associated British Synagogues (later Movement for Reform Judaism) joined as well. In 1990, Reconstructionist Judaism entered the WUPJ as an observer. Espousing another religious worldview, it became the only non-Reform member. The WUPJ claims to represent a total of at least 1.8 million people \u2013 these figures do not take into account the 2013 PEW survey, and rely on the older URJ estimate of a total of 1.5 million presumed to have affinity, since updated to 2.2 million \u2013 both registered synagogue members and non-affiliates who identify with it.\nWorldwide, the movement is mainly centered in North America. The largest WUPJ constituent by far is the Union for Reform Judaism (until 2003: Union of American Hebrew Congregations) in the United States and Canada. As of 2013, a Pew Research Center survey calculated it represented about 35% of all 5.3 million Jewish adults in the U.S., making it the single most numerous Jewish religious group in the country. Steven M. Cohen deduced there were 756,000 adult Jewish synagogue members \u2013 about a quarter of households had an unconverted spouse (according to 2001 findings), adding some 90,000 non-Jews and making the total constituency roughly 850,000 \u2013 and further 1,154,000 \"Reform-identified non-members\" in the United States. There are also 30,000 in Canada. Based on these, the URJ claims to represent 2.2 million people. It has 814 congregations in the U.S. and 27 in Canada, the vast majority of the 1,170 affiliated with the WUPJ that are not Reconstructionist. Its rabbinical arm is the Central Conference of American Rabbis, with some 2,300 member rabbis, mainly trained in Hebrew Union College. As of 2015, the URJ was led by President Rabbi Richard Jacobs, and the CCAR headed by Rabbi Denise Eger.\nThe next in size, by a wide margin, are the two British WUPJ-affiliates. In 2010, the Movement for Reform Judaism and Liberal Judaism respectively had 16,125 and 7,197 member households in 45 and 39 communities, or 19.4% and 8.7% of British Jews registered at a synagogue. Other member organizations are based in forty countries around the world. They include the Union progressiver Juden in Deutschland, which had some 4,500 members in 2010 and incorporates 25 congregations, one in Austria; the Nederlands Verbond voor Progressief Jodendom, with 3,500 affiliates in 10 communities; the 13 Liberal synagogues in France; the Israel Movement for Reform and Progressive Judaism (5,000 members in 2000, 35 communities); the Movement for Progressive Judaism (\u0414\u0432\u0438\u0436\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u043f\u0440\u043e\u0433\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0441\u0438\u0432\u043d\u043e\u0433\u043e \u0418\u0443\u0434\u0430\u0438\u0437\u043c\u0430) in the CIS and Baltic States, with 61 affiliates in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus and several thousands of regular constituents; and many other, smaller ones.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nWith the advent of Jewish emancipation and acculturation in Central Europe during the late 18th century, and the breakdown of traditional Jewish life, the proper response to the changed circumstances became a heated concern. Radical, second-generation Berlin \"maskilim\" (Enlightened), like Lazarus Bendavid and David Friedl\u00e4nder, proposed to reduce Judaism to little above Deism, or allow it to dissipate entirely. A more palatable course was the reform of worship in synagogues, making them more attractive to a generation whose aesthetic and moral taste became attuned to that of Christian surroundings. The first considered to have implemented such a course was the Amsterdam Ashkenazi congregation, \"Adath Jessurun\", In 1796. Emulating the local Sephardic custom, it omitted the \"Father of Mercy\" prayer, beseeching God to take revenge upon the gentiles. The short-lived community employed fully traditional (\"orthodox\") argumentation to legitimize its actions, but is often regarded a harbinger by historians.\nA relatively thoroughgoing program was adopted by Israel Jacobson, a philanthropist from the Kingdom of Westphalia. Faith and observance were eroded for decades both by Enlightenment criticism and apathy, but Jacobson himself did not bother with those. He was interested in decorum, believing its lack in services was driving the young away. Many of the aesthetic reforms he pioneered, like a regular vernacular sermon on moralistic themes, would be later adopted by the modernist Orthodox. On 17 July 1810, he dedicated a synagogue in Seesen that employed an organ and a choir during prayer and introduced some German liturgy. While Jacobson was far from full-fledged Reform Judaism, this day was adopted by the movement worldwide as its foundation date. The Seesen temple \u2013 a designation quite common for prayerhouses at the time; \"temple\" would later become, somewhat misleadingly (and not exclusively), identified with Reform institutions via association with the elimination of prayers for the Jerusalem Temple \u2013 closed in 1813. Jacobson moved to Berlin and established a similar synagogue, which became a hub for like-minded intellectuals, interested in the betterment of religious experience. Though the prayerbook used in Berlin did introduce several deviations from the received text, it did so without an organizing principle. In 1818, Jacobson's acquaintance Edward Kley founded the Hamburg Temple. Here, changes in the rite were eclectic no more and had severe dogmatic implications: prayers for the restoration of sacrifices by the Messiah and Return to Zion were quite systematically omitted. The Hamburg edition is considered the first comprehensive Reform liturgy.\nWhile Orthodox protests to Jacobson's initiatives had been scant, dozens of rabbis throughout Europe united to ban the Hamburg Temple. The Hamburg reformers, still attempting to play within the limits of rabbinic tradition, cited canonical sources in defence of their actions; they had the grudging support of one liberal-minded rabbi, Aaron Chorin of Arad, though even he never acceded to the removal of prayers for the sacrifices. \nThe massive Orthodox reaction halted the advance of early Reform, confining it to the port city for the next twenty years. As acculturation and resulting religious apathy spread, many synagogues introduced mild aesthetic changes, such as vernacular sermons or somber conduct, yet these were carefully crafted to assuage conservative elements (though the staunchly Orthodox opposed them anyhow; secular education for rabbis, for example, was much resisted). One of the first to adopt such modifications was Hamburg's own Orthodox community, under the newly appointed modern Rabbi Isaac Bernays. The less strict but still traditional Isaac Noah Mannheimer of the Vienna Stadttempel and Michael Sachs in Prague, set the pace for most of Central and Western Europe. They significantly altered custom, but wholly avoided dogmatic issues or overt injury to Jewish Law.\nAn isolated, yet much more radical step in the same direction as Hamburg's, was taken across the ocean in 1824. The younger congregants in the Charleston synagogue \"Beth Elohim\" were disgruntled by present conditions and demanded change. Led by Isaac Harby and other associates, they formed their own prayer group, \"The Reformed Society of Israelites\". Apart from strictly aesthetic matters, like having sermons and synagogue affairs delivered in English, rather than Middle Spanish (as was customary among Western Sephardim), they had almost their entire liturgy solely in the vernacular, in a far greater proportion compared to the Hamburg rite. And chiefly, they felt little attachment to the traditional Messianic doctrine and possessed a clearly heterodox religious understanding. In their new prayerbook, authors Harby, Abram Mo\u00efse and David Nunes Carvalho unequivocally excised pleas for the restoration of the Jerusalem Temple; during his inaugural address on 21 November 1825, Harby stated their native country was their only Zion, not \"some stony desert\", and described the rabbis of old as \"Fabulists and Sophists... Who tortured the plainest precepts of the Law into monstrous and unexpected inferences\". The Society was short-lived, and they merged back into Beth Elohim in 1833. As in Germany, the reformers were laymen, operating in a country with little rabbinic presence.\nConsolidation in German lands.\nIn the 1820s and 1830s, philosophers like Solomon Steinheim imported German idealism into the Jewish religious discourse, attempting to draw from the means it employed to reconcile Christian faith and modern sensibilities. But it was the new scholarly, critical Science of Judaism (\"Wissenschaft des Judentums\") that became the focus of controversy. Its proponents vacillated whether and to what degree it should be applied against the contemporary plight. Opinions ranged from the strictly Orthodox Azriel Hildesheimer, who subjugated research to the predetermined sanctity of the texts and refused to allow it practical implication over received methods; via the Positive-Historical Zecharias Frankel, who did not deny \"Wissenschaft\" a role, but only in deference to tradition, and opposed analysis of the Pentateuch; and up to Abraham Geiger, who rejected any limitations on objective research or its application. He is considered the founding father of Reform Judaism.\nGeiger wrote that at seventeen already, he discerned that the late \"Tannaim\" and the \"Amoraim\" imposed a subjective interpretation on the Oral Torah, attempting to diffuse its revolutionary potential by linking it to the biblical text. Believing that Judaism became stale and had to be radically transformed if it were to survive modernity, he found little use in the legal procedures of \"halakha\", arguing that hardline rabbis often demonstrated they will not accept major innovations anyway. His venture into higher criticism led him to regard the Pentateuch as reflecting power struggles between the Pharisees on one hand, and the Saducees who had their own pre-Mishnaic \"halakha\". Having concluded the belief in an unbroken tradition back to Sinai or a divinely dictated Torah could not be maintained, he began to articulate a theology of progressive revelation, presenting the Pharisees as reformers who revolutionized the Saducee-dominated religion. His other model were the Prophets, whose morals and ethics were to him the only true, permanent core of Judaism. He was not alone: Solomon Formstecher argued that Revelation was God's influence on human psyche, rather than encapsulated in law; Aaron Bernstein was apparently the first to deny inherent sanctity to any text when he wrote in 1844 that, \"The Pentateuch is not a \"chronicle\" of God's revelation, it is a \"testimony\" to the inspiration His consciousness had on our forebears.\" Many others shared similar convictions.\nIn 1837, Geiger hosted a conference of like-minded young rabbis in Wiesbaden. He told the assembled that the \"Talmud must go\". In 1841, the Hamburg Temple issued a second edition of its prayerbook, the first Reform liturgy since its predecessor of 1818. Orthodox response was weak and quickly defeated. Most rabbinic posts in Germany were now manned by university graduates susceptible to rationalistic ideas, which also permeated liberal Protestantism led by such figures as Leberecht Uhlich. They formed the backbone of the nascent Reform rabbinate. Geiger intervened in the Second Hamburg Temple controversy not just to defend the prayerbook against the Orthodox, but also to denounce it, stating the time of mainly aesthetic and unsystematic reforms has passed. In 1842, the power of progressive forces was revealed again: when Geiger's superior Rabbi Solomon Tiktin attempted to dismiss him from the post of preacher in Breslau, 15 of 17 rabbis consulted by the board stated his unorthodox views were congruous with his post. He himself differentiated between his principled stance and quotidian conduct. Believing it could be implemented only carefully, he was moderate in practice and remained personally observant.\nSecond only to Geiger, Rabbi Samuel Holdheim distinguished himself as a radical proponent of change. While the former stressed continuity with the past and described Judaism as an entity that gradually adopted and discarded elements along time, Holdheim accorded present conditions the highest status, sharply dividing the universalist core from all other aspects that could be unremittingly disposed of. Declaring that old laws lost their hold on Jews as it were and the rabbi could only act as a guide for voluntary observance, his principle was that the concept of \"the Law of the Land is the Law\" was total. He declared mixed marriage permissible \u2013 almost the only Reform rabbi to do so in history; his contemporaries and later generations opposed this \u2013 for the Talmudic ban on conducting them on Sabbath, unlike offering sacrifice and other acts, was to him sufficient demonstration that they belonged not to the category of sanctified obligations (\"issurim\") but to the civil ones (\"memonot\"), where the Law of the Land applied. Another measure he offered, rejected almost unanimously by his colleagues in 1846, was the institution of a \"Second Sabbath\" on Sunday, modeled on Second Passover, as most people desecrated the day of rest.\nThe pressures of the late Vorm\u00e4rz era were intensifying. In 1842, a group of radical laymen determined to achieve full acceptance into society was founded in Frankfurt, the \"Friends of Reform\". They abolished circumcision and declared that the Talmud was no longer binding. In response to pleas from Frankfurt, virtually all rabbis in Germany, even Holdheim, declared circumcision obligatory. Similar groups sprang in Breslau and Berlin. These developments, and the need to bring uniformity to practical reforms implemented piecemeal in the various communities, motivated Geiger and his like-minded supporters into action. Between 1844 and 1846, they convened three rabbinical assemblies, in Braunschweig, Frankfurt am Main and Breslau respectively. Those were intended to implement the proposals of Aaron Chorin and others for a new \"Sanhedrin\", made already in 1826, that could assess and eliminate various ancient decrees and prohibitions. A total of forty-two people attended the three meetings, including moderates and conservatives, all quite young, usually in their thirties.\nThe conferences made few concrete far-reaching steps, albeit they generally stated that the old mechanisms of religious interpretation were obsolete. The first, held on 12\u201319 June 1844, abolished \"Kol Nidrei\" and the humiliating Jewish oath, still administered by rabbis, and established a committee to determine \"to which degree the Messianic ideal should be mentioned in prayer\". Repeating the response of the 1806 Paris Grand Sanhedrin to Napoleon, it declared intermarriage permissible as long as children could be raised Jewish; this measure effectively banned such unions without offending Christians, as no state in Germany allowed mixed-faith couples to have non-Christians education for offspring. It enraged critics anyhow. A small group of traditionalists also attended, losing all votes. On the opposite wing were sympathizers of Holdheim, who declared on 17 June that \"science already demonstrated that the Talmud has no authority either from the dogmatic or practical perspective... The men of the Great Assembly had jurisdiction only for their time. We possess the same power, when we express the spirit of ours.\" The majority was led by Geiger and Ludwig Philippson and was keen on moderation and historical continuity.\nThe harsh response from the strictly Orthodox came as no surprise. Moshe Schick declared \"they have blasphemed against the Divinity of the Law, they are no Israelites and equal to Gentiles\". Yet they also managed to antagonize more moderate progressives. Both S. L. Rapoport and Zecharias Frankel strongly condemned Braunschweig. Another discontented party were Christian missionaries, who feared Reform on two accounts: it could stem the massive tide of conversions, and loosen Jewish piety in favor of liberal, semi-secularized religion that they opposed among Christians as well, reducing the possibility they would ever accept new dogma fully.\nFrankel was convinced to attend the next conference, held in Frankfurt on 15\u201328 July 1845, after many pleas. But he walked out after it passed a resolution that there were subjective, but no objective, arguments for retaining Hebrew in the liturgy. While this was quite a trivial statement, well grounded in canonical sources, Frankel regarded it as a deliberate breach with tradition and irreverence toward the collective Jewish sentiment. The 1840s, commented Meyer, saw the crystallization of Reform, narrowing from \"reformers (in the generic sense)\" who wished to modernize Judaism to some degree or other (including both Frankel and the Neo-Orthodox Samson Raphael Hirsch) \"a broad stream that embraced all opponents of the premodern status quo... to a more clearly marked current which rejected not only the religious mentality of the ghetto, but also the modernist Orthodoxy which altered form but not substance\". After his withdrawal, the conference adopted another key doctrine that Frankel opposed, and officially enshrined the idea of a future Messianic era rather than a personal redeemer. Rabbi David Einhorn elucidated a further notion, that of the Mission to bring ethical monotheism to all people, commenting that, \"Exile was once perceived as a disaster, but it was progress. Israel approached its true destiny, with sanctity replacing blood sacrifice. It was to spread the Word of the Lord to the four corners of the earth.\"\nThe last meeting, convened in Breslau (13\u201324 July 1846), was the most innocuous. The Sabbath, widely desecrated by the majority of German Jews, was discussed. Participants argued whether leniencies for civil servants should be enacted but could not agree and released a general statement about its sanctity. Holdheim shocked the assembled when he proposed his \"Second Sabbath\" scheme, astonishing even the radical wing, and his motion was rejected offhand. They did vote to eliminate the Second Day of Festivals, noting it was both an irrelevant rabbinic ordinance and scarcely observed anyway.\nWhile eliciting protest from the Orthodox, Frankfurt and Breslau also incensed the radical laity, which regarded them as too acquiescent. In March 1845, a small group formed a semi-independent congregation in Berlin, the Reformgemeinde. They invited Holdheim to serve as their rabbi, though he was often at odds with the board led by Sigismund Stern. They instituted a drastically abridged prayerbook in German and allowed the abolition of most ritual aspects.\nPractice and liturgy were modified in numerous German congregations. Until the conferences, the only Reform prayerbooks ever printed in Europe were the two Hamburg editions. In the 1850s and 1860s, dozens of new prayerbooks which omitted or rephrased the cardinal theological segments of temple sacrifice, ingathering of exiles, Messiah, resurrection and angels \u2013 rather than merely abbreviating the service; excising non-essential parts, especially piyyutim, was common among moderate Orthodox and conservatives too \u2013 were authored in Germany for mass usage, demonstrating the prevalence of the new religious ideology. And yet, Geiger and most of the conferences' participants were far more moderate than Holdheim. While he administered in a homogeneous group, they had to serve in unified communities, in which traditionalists held separate services but still had to be respected. Changes were decidedly restrained. Liturgists were often careful when introducing their changes into the Hebrew text of prayers, less than with the German translation, and some level of traditional observance was maintained in public. Except Berlin, where the term \"Reform\" was first used as an adjective, the rest referred to themselves as \"Liberal\".\nTwo further rabbinical conferences much later, in 1869 and 1871 at Leipzig and Augsburg respectively, were marked with a cautious tone. Their only outcome was the bypassing of the Loosening of the Shoe ceremony via a prenuptial agreement and the establishment of the Hochschule f\u00fcr die Wissenschaft des Judentums, though officially non-denominational, as a rabbinical seminary. While common, noted Michael Meyer, the designation \"Liberal Jew\" was more associated with political persuasion than religious conviction. The general Jewish public in Germany demonstrated little interest, especially after the 1876 law under which communal affiliation and paying parish taxes were no longer mandatory.\nOutside Germany, Reform had little to no influence in the rest of the continent. Radical lay societies sprang in Hungary during the 1848 Revolution but soon dispersed. Only in Germany, commented Steven M. Lowenstein, did the extinction of old Jewish community life led to the creation of a new, positive religious ideology that advocated principled change. In Western and Central Europe, personal observance disappeared, but the public was not interested in bridging the gap between themselves and the official faith. Secular education for clergy became mandated by mid-century, and \"yeshivas\" all closed due to lack of applicants, replaced by modern seminaries; the new academically trained rabbinate, whether affirming basically traditional doctrines or liberal and influenced by \"Wissenschaft\", was scarcely prone to anything beyond aesthetic modifications and de facto tolerance of the laity's apathy. Further to the east, among the unemancipated and unacculturated Jewish masses in Poland, Romania and Russia, the stimulants that gave rise either to Reform or modernist Orthodoxy were scarce. The few rich and westernized Jews in cities like Odessa or Warsaw constructed modern synagogues where mild aesthetic reforms, like vernacular sermons or holding the wedding canopy indoors, rather than under the sky, were introduced. Regarded as boldly innovative in their environs, these were long since considered trivial even by the most Orthodox in Germany, Bohemia or Moravia. In the east, the belated breakdown of old mores led not to the remodification of religion, but to the formulation of secular conceptions of Jewishness, especially nationalistic ones.\nIn 1840, several British Jews formed the West London Synagogue of British Jews, headed by Reverend David Woolf Marks. While the title \"Reform\" was occasionally applied to them, their approach was described as \"neo-Karaite\" and was utterly opposite to continental developments. Only a century later did they and other synagogues embrace mainland ideas and established the British Movement for Reform Judaism.\nThe US and Classical Reform.\nAt Charleston, the former members of the Reformed Society gained influence over the affairs of \"Beth Elohim\". In 1836, Gustavus Poznanski was appointed minister. At first traditional, but around 1841, he excised the Resurrection of the Dead and abolished the Second day of festivals, five years before the same was done at the Breslau conference.\nApart from that, the American Reform movement was chiefly a direct German import. In 1842, Har Sinai Congregation was founded by German-Jewish immigrants in Baltimore. Adopting the Hamburg rite, it was the first synagogue established as Reformed on the continent. In the new land, there were neither old state-mandated communal structures, nor strong conservative elements among the newcomers. While the first generation was still somewhat traditional, their Americanized children were keen on a new religious expression. Reform quickly spread even before the Civil War. While fueled by the condition of immigrant communities, in matters of doctrine, wrote Michael Meyer, \"However much a response to its particular social context, the basic principles are those put forth by Geiger and the other German Reformers \u2013 progressive revelation, historical-critical approach, the centrality of the Prophetic literature.\"\nThe rabbinate was almost exclusively transplanted \u2013 Rabbis Samuel Hirsch, Samuel Adler, Gustav Gottheil, Kaufmann Kohler, and others all played a role both in Germany and across the ocean \u2013 and led by two individuals: the radical Rabbi David Einhorn, who participated in the 1844\u20131846 conferences and was very much influenced by Holdheim (though utterly rejecting mixed marriage), and the moderate pragmatist Isaac Meyer Wise, who while sharing deeply heterodox views was more an organizer than a thinker. Wise was distinct from the others, arriving early in 1846 and lacking much formal education. He was of little ideological consistency, often willing to compromise.\nQuite haphazardly, Wise instituted a major innovation when introducing family pews in 1851, after his Albany congregation purchased a local church building and retained sitting arrangements. While it was gradually adopted even by many Orthodox Jews in the US, and remained so well into the 20th century, the same was not applied in Germany until after World War II. Wise attempted to reach consensus with the traditionalist leader Rabbi Isaac Leeser in order to forge a single, unified, American Judaism. In the 1855 Cleveland Synod, he was at first acquiescent to Leeser, but reverted immediately after the other departed. The enraged Leeser disavowed any connection with him. Yet Wise's harshest critic was Einhorn, who arrived from Europe in the same year. Demanding clear positions, he headed the radical camp as Reform turned into a distinct current.\nOn 3\u20136 November 1869, the two and their followers met in Philadelphia. Described by Meyer as American Reform's \"declaration of independence\", they stated their commitment to the principles already formulated in Germany: priestly privileges, the belief in Resurrection, and a personal Messiah were denied. A practical, far-reaching measure, not instituted in the home country until 1910, was acceptance of civil marriage and divorce. A \"get\" was no longer required. In 1873, Wise founded the Union of American Hebrew Congregations (since 2003, Union for Reform Judaism), the denominational body. In 1875, he established the movement's rabbinical seminary, Hebrew Union College, at Cincinnati, Ohio. He and Einhorn also quarreled in the matter of liturgy, each issuing his own prayerbook, \"Minhag America\" (American Rite) and \"Olat Tamid\" (Regular Burnt Offering) respectively, which they hoped to make standard issue. Eventually, the Union Prayer Book was adopted in 1895. The movement spread rapidly: in 1860, when it began its ascent, there were few Reform synagogues and 200 Orthodox in the United States. By 1880, a mere handful of the existing 275 were not affiliated with it.\nThe proponents of Reform or progressive forms of Judaism had consistently claimed since the early nineteenth-century that they sought to reconcile Jewish religion with the best of contemporary scientific thought. The science of evolution was arguably the scientific idea that drew the most sustained interest. A good example is the series of twelve sermons published as \"The Cosmic God\" (1876) by Isaac Meyer Wise, who offered an alternative theistic account of transmutation to that of Darwinism, which he dismissed as 'homo-brutalism'. Other Reform rabbis who were more sympathetic to Darwinian conceptions of evolution were Kaufmann Kohler, Emil G. Hirsch, and Joseph Krauskopf. These engaged with high-profile sceptics and atheists such as Robert Ingersoll and Felix Adler as well as with proponents of biological evolutionary theory, with the result that a distinctly panentheistic character of US Reform Jewish theology was observable.\nIn 1885, Reform Judaism in America was confronted by challenges from both flanks. To the left, Felix Adler and his Ethical Movement rejected the need for the Jews to exist as a differentiated group. On the right, the recently arrived Rabbi Alexander Kohut, an adherent of Zecharias Frankel, lambasted it for having abandoned traditional Judaism. Einhorn's son-in-law and chief ideologue, Rabbi Kaufmann Kohler, invited leading rabbis to formulate a response. The eight clauses of the Pittsburgh Platform were proclaimed on 19 November. It added virtually nothing new to the tenets of Reform, but rather elucidated them, declaring unambiguously that: \"Today, we accept as binding only the moral laws, and maintain only such ceremonies as elevate and sanctify our lives.\" The platform was never officially ratified by either the UAHC or HUC, and many of their members even attempted to disassociate from it, fearing that its radical tone would deter potential allies. It indeed motivated a handful of conservatives to cease any cooperation with the movement and withdraw their constituencies from the UAHC. Those joined Kohut and Sabato Morais in establishing the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. It united all non-Reform currents in the country and would gradually develop into the locus of Conservative Judaism.\nThe Pittsburgh Platform is considered a defining document of the sanitized and rationalistic \"Classical Reform\", dominant from the 1860s to the 1930s. At its height, some forty congregations adopted the Sunday Sabbath and UAHC communities had services without most traditional elements, in a manner seen in Europe only at the Berlin Reformgemeinde. In 1889, Wise founded the Central Conference of American Rabbis (CCAR), the denominational rabbinic council.\nHowever, change loomed on the horizon. From 1881 to 1924, over 2,400,000 immigrants from Eastern Europe drastically altered American Jewry, increasing it tenfold. The 40,000 members of Reform congregations became a small minority overnight. The newcomers arrived from backward regions, where modern education was scarce and civil equality nonexistent, retaining a strong sense of Jewish ethnicity. Even the ideological secularists among them, all the more so the common masses which merely turned lax or nonobservant, had a very traditional understanding of worship and religious conduct. The leading intellectuals of Eastern European Jewish nationalism castigated western Jews in general, and Reform Judaism in particular, not on theological grounds which they as laicists wholly rejected, but for what they claimed to be assimilationist tendencies and the undermining of peoplehood. This sentiment also fueled the often cool manner in which the denomination is perceived in Israeli society, originally established on the basis of these ideologies.\nWhile at first alienated from all native modernized Jews, a fortiori the Reform ones, the Eastern Europeans did slowly integrate. Growing numbers did begin to enter UAHC prayerhouses. The CCAR soon readopted elements long discarded in order to appeal to them: In the 1910s, inexperienced rabbis in the East Coast were given ram horns fitted with a trumpet mouthpiece, seventy years after the Reformgemeinde first held High Holiday prayers without blowing the instrument. The five-day workweek soon made the Sunday Sabbath redundant. Temples in the South and the Midwest, where the new crowd was scant, remained largely Classical.\nThe World Union.\nIn Germany, Liberal communities stagnated since mid-century. Full and complete Jewish emancipation granted to all in the German Empire in 1871 largely diffused interest in harmonizing religion with \"Zeitgeist\". Immigration from Eastern Europe also strengthened traditional elements. In 1898, seeking to counter these trends, Rabbi Heinemann Vogelstein established the Union of Liberal Rabbis (Vereinigung der liberalen Rabbiner). It numbered 37 members at first and grew to include 72 by 1914, about half of Germany's Jewish clergy, a proportion maintained until 1933. In 1908, Vogelstein and Rabbi C\u00e4sar Seligmann also founded a congregational arm, the Union for Liberal Judaism in Germany (\"Vereinigung f\u00fcr das Liberale Judentum in Deutschland\"), finally institutionalizing the current that until then was active as a loose tendency. The Union had some 10,000 registered members in the 1920s. In 1912, Seligmann drafted a declaration of principles, \"Guiding Lines towards a Program for Liberal Judaism\" (Richtlinien zu einem Programm f\u00fcr das liberale Judentum). It stressed the importance of individual consciousness and the supremacy of ethical values to ritual practice, declared a belief in a messianic age and was adopted as \"a recommendation\", rather than a binding decision.\nIn 1902, Claude Montefiore and several friends, including Lily Montagu and Israel Abrahams, founded the Jewish Religious Union (JRU) in London. It served as the cornerstone of Liberal Judaism in Britain. Montefiore was greatly influenced by the ideas of early German Reformers. He and his associates were mainly driven by the example and challenge of Unitarianism, which offered upper-class Jews a universal, enlightened belief. Meyer noted that while he had original strains, Montefiore was largely dependent on Geiger and his concepts of progressive revelation, instrumentality of ritual et cetera. His Liberal Judaism was radical and puristic, matching and sometimes exceeding the Berlin and American variants. They sharply abridged liturgy and largely discarded practice. Langton has argued for the distinctly Anglo-Jewish character of the movement, which was dominated by Montefiore's idiosyncratic ideas.\nIn 1907, the former Consistorial rabbi Louis Germain L\u00e9vy who shared a similar worldview, formed the Union Lib\u00e9rale Isra\u00e9lite de France, a small congregation that numbered barely a hundred families. It eventually evolved into the Liberal Jewish Movement of France.\nSeligmann first suggested the creation of an international organization. On 10 July 1926, representatives from around the world gathered in London. Rabbi Jacob K. Shankman wrote they were all \"animated by the convictions of Reform Judaism: emphasized the Prophets' teachings as the cardinal element, progressive revelation, willingness to adapt ancient forms to contemporary needs\". The conference was attended by representatives of the German Liberal Union, the British JRU, the American UAHC and CCAR, and L\u00e9vy from France. After weighing their options, they chose \"Progressive\", rather than either \"Liberal\" or \"Reform\", as their name, founding the World Union for Progressive Judaism. It began to sponsor new chapters globally. The first was founded in the Netherlands, where two synagogues formed the Verbond voor Liberaal-Religieuze Joden in Nederland on 18 October 1931.\nAlready in 1930, the West London Synagogue affiliated with WUPJ. In the coming decade, waves of refugees from Nazi Germany arrived in Britain, bringing with them both the moderation of German Liberal Judaism (few mingled with the radical JRU) and a cadre of trained rabbis. Only then did British Reform emerge as a movement. 1942 saw the founding of the Associated British Synagogues, which joined the WUPJ in 1945. Preserving the relative traditionalism of Germany, they later adopted the name \"Reform Synagogues of Great Britain\" (since 2005, Movement for Reform Judaism), distinct from the smaller \"Union of Liberal and Progressive Synagogues\", which succeeded the JRU. Tens of thousands of refugees from Germany brought their Liberal Judaism to other lands as well. In 1930, the first Liberal congregation, Temple Beth Israel Melbourne, was founded in Australia. In June 1931, the South African Jewish Religious Union for Liberal Judaism was organised, soon employing HUC-ordained Moses Cyrus Weiler. The Congrega\u00e7\u00e3o Israelita Paulista of S\u00e3o Paulo, first branch in South America, was established in 1936. German refugees also founded a Liberal community named \"Emet ve-Emuna\" in Jerusalem, but it joined the Conservatives by 1949.\nThe New Reform Judaism.\nKohler retired in 1923. Rabbi Samuel S. Cohon was appointed HUC Chair of Theology in his stead, serving until 1956. Cohon, born near Minsk, was emblematic of the new generation of East European-descended clergy within American Reform. Deeply influenced by Ahad Ha'am and Mordecai Kaplan, he viewed Judaism as a Civilization, rather than a religion, though he and other Reform sympathizers of Kaplan fully maintained the notions of Election and revelation, which the latter denied. Cohon valued Jewish particularism over universalist leanings, encouraging the reincorporation of traditional elements long discarded, not as part of a comprehensive legalistic framework but as means to rekindle ethnic cohesion. His approach echoed popular sentiment in the East Coast. So did Solomon Freehof, son to immigrants from Chernihiv, who advocated a selective rapprochement with \"halakha\", which was to offer \"guidance, not governance\"; Freehof advocated replacing the sterile mood of community life, allowing isolated practices to emerge spontaneously and reincorporating old ones. He redrafted the Union Prayer Book in 1940 to include more old formulae and authored many responsa, though he always stressed compliance was voluntary.\nCohon and Freehof rose against the background of the Great Depression, when many congregations teetered on the threshold of collapse. Growing Antisemitism in Europe led German Liberals on similar paths. Rabbis Leo Baeck, Max Dienemann and Seligmann himself turned to stressing Jewish peoplehood and tradition. The Nazis' takeover in 1933 effected a religious revival in communities long plagued by apathy and assimilation. The great changes convinced the CCAR to adopt a new set of principles. On 29 May 1937, in Columbus, Ohio, a \"Declaration of Principles\" (eschewing the more formal, binding \"platform\"), promoted a greater degree of ritual observance, supported Zionism \u2013 considered by the Classicists in the past as, at best, a remedy for the unemancipated Jewish masses in Russia and Romania, while they did not regard the Jews as a nation in the modern sense \u2013 and opened not with theology, but by the statement, \"Judaism is the historical religious experience of the Jewish people\". The Columbus Principles signified the transformation from \"Classical\" to the \"New Reform Judaism\", characterized by a lesser focus on abstract concepts and a more positive attitude to practice and traditional elements.\nThe Holocaust and the establishment of the State of Israel reinforced the tendency. The Americanization and move to the suburbs in the 1950s facilitated a double effect: the secular Jewish ideologies of the immigrants' generation, like Bundism or Labour Zionism, became anachronistic. Military service exposed recruits to the family-oriented, moderate religiosity of the middle-class United States. Many sought an affiliation in the early years of the Cold War, when lack of such raised suspicion of leftist or communist sympathies. The \"Return to Tradition\", as it was termed, smoothed the path for many such into UAHC. It grew from 290 communities with 50,000 affiliated households in 1937 to 560 with 255,000 in 1956. A similar shift to nostalgic traditionalism was expressed overseas. Even the purist Liberals in Britain introduced minor customs that bore sentimental value; Bar Mitzvah replaced confirmation.\nWorld War II shattered many of the assumptions about human progress and benevolence held by liberal denominations, Reform included. A new generation of theologians attempted to formulate a response. Thinkers such as Eugene Borowitz and J.J. Petuchowski turned mainly to existentialism, portraying humans in a fragile, complex relationship with the divine. While religious humanism was ever-present, it remained confined to a small group, and official positions retained a theistic approach. But the main focus in American Reform lay elsewhere: in 1946, Rabbi Maurice Eisendrath was appointed President of the UAHC. He turned the notion of Tikkun Olam, \"repairing of the world\", into the practical expression of affiliation, leading involvement in the civil rights movement, Vietnam War opposition and other progressive causes. In 1954, the first permanent Reform congregation was established in the State of Israel, again at Jerusalem. The Israel Movement for Reform and Progressive Judaism was registered in 1971, and the worldwide movement moved the WUPJ's headquarters to Jerusalem in 1974, signalling its growing attachment to Zionism.\nThe 1960s and 70s saw the rise of multiculturalism and the weakening of organized religion in favour of personal spirituality. A growing \"return to ethnicity\" among the young made items such as prayer shawls fashionable again. In 1963, HUC-graduate Sherwin Wine seceded to form the openly atheistic Birmingham Temple, declaring that for him Judaism was a cultural tradition, not a faith. Knowing that many in their audience held quite overlapping ideas, the pressure on the CCAR to move toward nontheism grew.\nIn 1975, the lack of consensus surfaced during the compilation of a new standard prayer book, \"Gates of Prayer\". To accommodate all, ten liturgies for morning service and six for the evening were offered for each congregation to choose of, from very traditional to one that retained the Hebrew text for God but translated it as \"Eternal Power\", condemned by many as de facto humanistic. \"Gates of Prayer\" symbolized the movement's adoption of what would be termed \"Big Tent Judaism\", welcoming all, over theological clarity. In the following year, an attempt to draft a new platform for the CCAR in San Francisco ended with poor results. Led by Borowitz, any notion of issuing guidelines was abandoned in favour of a \"Centenary Perspective\" with few coherent statements. The \"Big Tent\", while taking its toll on the theoreticians, did substantially bolster constituency. The UAHC slowly caught up with Conservative Judaism on the path toward becoming the largest American denomination. Yet it did not erase boundaries completely and rejected outright those who held syncretic beliefs like Jewbu and Messianic Judaism, and also Sherwin Wine-style Secular Humanistic Judaism. Congregation Beth Adam, which excised all references to God from its liturgy, was denied UAHC membership by a landslide vote of 113:15 in 1994.\nIn 1972, the first Reform female rabbi, Sally Priesand, was ordained at HUC. In 1977, the CCAR declared that the biblical ban on male same-sex intercourse referred only to the pagan customs prevalent at the time it was composed, and gradually accepted openly LGBT constituents and clergy. The first LGBT rabbi, Stacy Offner, was instated in 1988, and full equality was declared in 1990. Same-sex marriage guidelines were published in 1997. In 1978, UAHC President Alexander Schindler admitted that measures aimed at curbing intermarriage rates by various sanctions, whether on the concerned parties or on rabbis assisting or acknowledging them (ordinances penalizing such involvement were passed in 1909, 1947 and 1962), were no longer effective. He called for a policy of outreach and tolerance, rejecting \"intermarriage, but not the intermarried\", hoping to convince gentile spouses to convert. In 1983, the CCAR accepted patrilineal descent, a step taken by British Liberals already in the 1950s. UAHC membership grew by 23% in 1975\u20131985, to 1.3 million. An estimated 10,000 intermarried couples were joining annually.\nOn 26 May 1999, after a prolonged debate and six widely different drafts rejected, a \"Statement of Principles for Reform Judaism\" was adopted in Pittsburgh by the Central Conference of American Rabbis. It affirmed the \"reality and oneness of God\", the Torah as \"God's ongoing revelation to our people\" and committed to the \"ongoing study of the whole array of Commandments and to the fulfillment of those that address us as individuals and as a community. Some of these sacred obligations have long been observed by Reform Jews; others, both ancient and modern, demand renewed attention.\" While the wording was carefully crafted in order not to displease the estimated 20%\u201325% of membership that retained Classicist persuasions, it did raise condemnation from many of them. In 2008, the Society for Classical Reform Judaism was founded to mobilize and coordinate those who preferred the old universalist, ethics-based and de-ritualized religious style, with its unique aesthetic components.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nSourcebooks\nStudies"}
{"id": "26037", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26037", "title": "Reconstructionist Judaism", "text": "Movement of Rabbinical Judaism\nReconstructionist Judaism is a Jewish movement based on the concepts developed by Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan (1881\u20131983)\u2014namely, that Judaism is a progressively evolving civilization rather than just a religion. The movement originated as a semi-organized stream within Conservative Judaism, developed between the late 1920s and the 1940s before seceding in 1955, and established a rabbinical college in 1967. Reconstructionist Judaism is recognized by many scholars as one of the five major streams of Judaism in America alongside Orthodox, Conservative, Reform, and Humanistic.\nThere is substantial theological diversity within the movement. Halakha (Jewish law) is not considered normative or binding, but rather serves as the basis for the ongoing evolution of meaningful Jewish practice. In contrast with the Reform movement's stance during the time he was writing, Kaplan believed that \"Jewish life [is] meaningless without Jewish law.\" One of the planks he wrote for the proto-Reconstructionist Society for the Jewish Renaissance stated, \"We accept the halakha, which is rooted in the Talmud, as the norm of Jewish life, availing ourselves, at the same time, of the method implicit therein to interpret and develop the body of Jewish Law by the actual conditions and spiritual needs of modern life.\" The movement also emphasizes positive views toward modernity. It has an approach to Jewish customs that aims toward communal decision-making through a process of education and distillation of values from traditional Jewish sources.\nThe movement's 2011 \"A Guide to Jewish Practice\" describes a Reconstructionist approach to Jewish practice as \"post-\"halakhic\"\" because the modern world is one in which Jewish law cannot be enforced. Obligation and spiritual discipline exist without the enforcement of a functioning legal system. Thus, Reconstructionist Jews take Jewish law seriously as a source and resource that can shape expectations while not necessarily seeing themselves as bound by inherited claims of obligation. Therefore, the practices in the guide are not monolithic, and commentators provide further insights, arguments, and alternative approaches that span the broad range of views advocated by Reconstructionist rabbis and scholars. The guide states that it \"assumes that thoughtful individuals and committed communities can handle diversity and will of necessity reach their own conclusions.\"\nOrigin.\nReconstructionism was developed by Rabbi Mordecai Kaplan (1881\u20131983) and his son-in-law, Ira Eisenstein (1906\u20132001), between the late 1920s to the 1940s. After being rejected by Orthodox rabbis for his focus on issues in the community and the sociopolitical environment, Kaplan and a group of followers founded the Society for the Advancement of Judaism (SAJ) in 1922. Its goal was to allow rabbis to form new outlooks on Judaism in a more progressive manner. Kaplan was the leader of the SAJ until Eisenstein succeeded him in 1945. In 1935, Kaplan published his book, \"Judaism as a Civilization: Toward a Reconstruction of American Jewish Life\". It was this book that Kaplan claimed was the beginning of the Reconstructionist movement. \"Judaism as a Civilization\" suggested that historical Judaism be given a \"revaluation... in terms of present-day thought.\" Reconstructionism was able to spread with several other forms of literature\u2014most notably, the \"New Haggadah\" (1941), which for the first time blended Kaplan's ideologies in Jewish ceremonial literature.\nAlthough Kaplan did not want Reconstructionism to branch into another Jewish denomination, it became apparent that such an outcome was inevitable. At the Montreal conference in 1967, Reconstructionist leaders called for a rabbinical school in which rabbis could be ordained under the Reconstructionist ideology and lead Reconstructionist congregations. By the fall of 1968, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College was opened in Philadelphia. Along with the establishment of the college, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association formed, which gave rabbis a strong network in the religious leadership of Reconstructionism. The founding of these institutions were great strides in it becoming the fourth movement in North American Judaism (Orthodox, Conservative, and Reform being the other three).\nReconstructionist Judaism is the first major movement of Judaism to originate in North America; the second is the Humanistic Judaism movement founded in 1963 by Sherwin Wine.\nReconstructionist theology is a variant of the naturalism of John Dewey, which combined atheistic beliefs with religious terminology to construct a religiously satisfying philosophy for those who had lost faith in traditional religion. [See id. at 385; but see Caplan at p. 23, fn.62 (\"The majority of Kaplan's views ... were formulated before he read Dewey or [William] James.\")]\nTheology.\nMordecai Kaplan argued that contemporary Jews can no longer maintain many traditional theological claims or sociocultural practices of Judaism due to advances in philosophy, science, and history. Kaplan affirmed a wholly non-anthropomorphic God, a position articulated by prominent medieval Jewish thinkers like Maimonides and in agreement with the rest of Rabbinic Judaism. All anthropomorphic descriptions of God, he argued, are understood to be metaphorical.\nKaplan's theology went further to claim that God is neither a personal god nor a conscious one; God cannot relate to or communicate with humanity in any way. Kaplan's theology defines God as the \"sum of all natural processes that allow people to become self-fulfilled\"\u2014a religious and spiritual naturalism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To believe in God means to accept life on the assumption that it harbors conditions in the outer world and drives in the human spirit which together impel man to transcend himself. To believe in God means to take for granted that it is man's destiny to rise above the brute and to eliminate all forms of violence and exploitation from human society. In brief, God is the Power in the cosmos that gives human life the direction that enables the human being to reflect the image of God.\nMost \"classical\" Reconstructionist Jews (i.e., those agreeing with Kaplan) reject traditional forms of theism, though this is by no means universal. Many Reconstructionist Jews are deists, but the movement also includes Jews who hold Kabbalistic, pantheistic, personal, and/or panentheistic views of God. As he explicitly stated, Kaplan's theology does not represent the only Reconstructionist understanding of theology; theology is not the cornerstone of the Reconstructionist movement. Much more central is the idea that \"Judaism as a Civilization\" and that the Jewish people must take an active role in ensuring its future by participating in its ongoing evolution.\nConsequently, a strain of distinctly non-Kaplanian Reconstructionism exists. In this view, Kaplan's assertions concerning Jewish belief and practice are largely rejected while his principle of Judaism being an \"evolving religious civilization\" is sustained. The basis for this approach is that Kaplan spoke for \"his\" generation; he also wrote that every generation would need to define itself and its civilization for itself. In the thinking of these Reconstructionists, what Kaplan said concerning Jewish belief and practice is inapplicable to the generations of Reconstructionism since his death. As such, non-Kaplanian Reconstructionist Judaism could include belief in a personal God, endorsement of the concept of Jews as the chosen people, a belief in some form of resurrection and/or an afterlife, and adherence to some version of binding halakha. In the latter context, novel interpretations of domains of halakha like kashrut have emerged, such as Eco-Kashrut.\nJewish law and tradition.\nReconstructionist Judaism holds that the traditional halakhic system is incapable of producing a code of conduct that is meaningful for, and acceptable to, the vast majority of contemporary Jews, and thus must be reinterpreted in each new time. Unlike classical Reform Judaism, Reconstructionism holds that a person's default position should be to incorporate Jewish laws and tradition into their lives, unless they have a specific reason to do otherwise. However, some Reconstructionists believe that halakha is neither normative nor binding, but are general guidelines.\nReconstructionism promotes many traditional Jewish practices. Thus, the commandments have been replaced with \"folkways\", non-binding customs that can be democratically accepted or rejected by the congregations. Folkways that are promoted include keeping the Hebrew language in the prayer service, studying Torah, daily prayer, wearing kippot (yarmulkes), tallitot and tefillin during prayer, and observance of the Jewish holidays.\nReconstructionists may use distinct prayer books, such as the \"Kol haneshamah\" Hebrew/English Reconstructionist prayer book. Marc Shapiro called attention to the Reconstructionist \"Kol haneshamah\" taking liberties with the text, sometimes with an English translation \"so blatantly inaccurate that we have no choice but to regard it as a conscious alteration.\"\nBeliefs.\nIn practice, Kaplan's books, especially \"The Meaning of God in Modern Jewish Religion\" and \"Judaism as a Civilization\" are \"de facto\" statements of principles. In 1986, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association (RRA) and the Federation of Reconstructionist Congregations and Havurot (FRCH) adopted the official \"Platform on Reconstructionism\". It is not a mandatory statement of principles, but rather a consensus of current beliefs. Major points of the platform state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Judaism is the result of natural human development. There is no such thing as divine intervention; Judaism is an evolving religious civilization; Zionism and aliyah (immigration to Israel) are encouraged; Reconstructionist Judaism is based on a democratic community where the laity can make decisions, not just rabbis; The Torah was not inspired by God; it only comes from the social and historical development of Jewish people; The classical view of God is rejected. God is redefined as the sum of natural powers or processes that allows mankind to gain self-fulfillment and moral improvement; The idea that God chose the Jewish people for any purpose, in any way, is \"morally untenable\", because anyone who has such beliefs \"implies the superiority of the elect community and the rejection of others.\"\nMost Reconstructionists do not believe in revelation (the idea that God reveals his will to human beings). This is dismissed as supernaturalism. Kaplan posits that revelation \"consists in disengaging from the traditional context those elements in it which answer permanent postulates of human nature, and in integrating them into our own ideology... the rest may be relegated to archaeology\".\nMany writers have criticized the movement's most widely held theology, religious naturalism. David Ray Griffin and Louis Jacobs have objected to the redefinitions of the terms \"revelation\" and \"God\" as being intellectually dishonest, and as being a form of \"conversion by definition\"; in their critique, these redefinitions take non-theistic beliefs and attach theistic terms to them. Similar critiques have been put forth by Rabbis Neil Gillman, Milton Steinberg, and Michael Samuels.\nReconstructionist Judaism is egalitarian concerning gender roles. All positions are open to all genders; they are open to lesbians, gay men, and transgender individuals as well.\nJewish identity.\nReconstructionist Judaism allows its rabbis to determine their own policy regarding officiating at interfaith marriages. Some congregations accept patrilineal as well as matrilineal descent, and children of one Jewish parent, of any gender, are considered Jewish by birth if raised as Jews. This contrasts with the traditional interpretations of Jewish law of both Rabbinic Judaism, in which a child is Jewish by birth if its mother was Jewish and of Karaite Judaism, in which a child is Jewish by birth if its father was Jewish.\nThe role of non-Jews in Reconstructionist congregations is a matter of ongoing debate. Practices vary between synagogues. Most congregations strive to strike a balance between inclusivity and the integrity of boundaries. The Jewish Reconstructionist Federation (JRF) has issued a non-binding statement attempting to delineate the process by which congregations set policy on these issues, and sets forth sample recommendations. These issues are ultimately decided by local lay leadership.\nIn 2015, the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College voted to accept rabbinical students in interfaith relationships, making Reconstructionist Judaism the first type of Judaism officially to allow rabbis in relationships with non-Jewish partners. In making the decision, the movement considered that \"many younger progressive Jews, including many rabbis and rabbinical students, now perceive restrictions placed on those who are intermarried as reinforcing a tribalism that feels personally alienating and morally troubling in the 21st century.\"\nIn April 2016, nineteen Reconstructionist rabbis announced the formation of Beit Kaplan, originally to protest the decision to allow rabbis to have non-Jewish partners, but more recently to challenge the ordination and inclusion of non-Zionist rabbis. As of July 2025, Beit Kaplan had 92 members.\nAlthough the Reconstructionist movement officially supports liberal Zionism, it also has a disproportionate number of anti-Zionist members. Of the Jewish Voice for Peace rabbinical council, about 60 percent of their members were trained at the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College.\nOrganizations.\nOver 100 synagogues and \"havurot\", mostly in the United States and Canada, were affiliated with the Jewish Reconstructionist Federation. As of June 3, 2012, the Reconstructionist movement has been restructured. A joint institution consisting of the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College (RRC) and the congregational organization is now the primary organization of the movement. \nThe movement's new designation was first \"Jewish Reconstructionist Communities,\" and in 2018 became https://. Deborah Waxman was inaugurated as the president of the RRC and Jewish Reconstructionist Communities on October 26, 2014. As the president of the RRC, she is believed to be the first woman and first lesbian to lead a Jewish congregational union, and the first lesbian to lead a Jewish seminary; the RRC is both a congregational union and a seminary. Waxman is a 1999 graduate of RRC.\nThe RRC educates rabbis. The Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association is the professional organization of Reconstructionist rabbis. The Jewish Reconstructionist youth organization is named No'ar Hadash. Camp Havaya (formerly Camp JRF) in South Sterling, Pennsylvania, is the Reconstructionist movement's summer sleep away camp.\nIn April 2016, a new Reconstructionist rabbinical organization was formed: Beit Kaplan: The Rabbinic Partnership for Jewish Peoplehood. Originally, Beit Kaplan was focused upon opposing both the decision to allow Reconstructionist rabbis to have non-Jewish partners, and the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement within Reconstructionist circles. Following the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel, Beit Kaplan's membership increased to 72 rabbis and rabbinical students in six countries. Presently, Beit Kaplan focuses on a \"course correction\" to reestablish the Reconstructionist movement's support for Israel and emphasis on the centrality of Jewish peoplehood. As of July 2025, Beit Kaplan had 92 members.\nAccording to the 2010 US Religion Census, there were 41,436 members of Reconstructionist Judaism within 95 synagogues.\nAs of 2020, the Pew Research Center estimated that Reconstructionist Judaism, along with Humanistic Judaism and other smaller denominations, constituted 4% of the United States's 7.5 million Jews.\nRelation to other Jewish movements.\nOriginally an offshoot of Conservative Judaism, Reconstructionism retains warm relations with Reform Judaism; however, Orthodox Judaism considers Reconstructionism, and every other non-Orthodox denomination, to be in violation of proper observance of interpretation of Jewish law. The Jewish Reconstructionist Federation is a member of the World Union for Progressive Judaism, in which it gained an observer status in 1990.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26038", "revid": "51208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26038", "title": "Reciprocal piston", "text": ""}
{"id": "26039", "revid": "11231818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26039", "title": "Photek", "text": "English composer, producer, and DJ (born 1971)\nRupert Parkes (born 6 September 1971), known as Photek, is a Los Angeles-based British electronic music DJ/record producer, and TV and film score composer. Photek was born and raised in Ipswich, Suffolk, England.\nPhotek has contributed music to several film, TV and video game productions, such as \"Blade\" in 1998. He also scored the show \"Gang Related\" with director Allen Hughes.\nHe received three consecutive Grammy Award nominations in the category of Best Remixed Recording, Non-Classical for Daft Punk's \"End of Line\" from the \"\" in 2012, Moby's \"Lie Down in Darkness\" in 2013 and One Love/People Get Ready\" in 2014.\nPhotek composed the TV score for the show \"How to Get Away with Murder\".\nBiography.\nEducation.\nInitially interested in hip hop, Parkes expanded his style with elements of soul and jazz. His first instrument was a tenor saxophone, but when a piano arrived in the family home his focus shifted to composition as opposed to performance. By 1992, he had switched from the saxophone to a sequencer. Within the next year he started to perform under the stage name Photek.\nEarly career 1993\u20131999.\nParkes began his first forays into releasing music in 1993 under a plethora of different names. Some of the early releases include the jungle-styled tracks \"Jump\" under the name Studio Pressure on Certificate 18, 'Dolphin Tune' under the name Aquarius on LTJ Bukem's Good Looking Records and 'Pulse Of Life' under the name The Sentinel on Basement Records. The first release under the Photek production name came in 1994 with \"Touching Down... Planet Photek\", released on his own Photek label. Photek's breakthrough release in 1995 was the \"Natural Born Killa\" drum'n'bass EP for Goldie's Metalheadz. In 1996, Photek contributed one track on the \"Wipeout 2097\"/\"Wipeout\" XL soundtracks.\nPhotek's debut album was \"Modus Operandi\" in 1997, through Virgin Records. In 1997, Virgin Records released Photek's \"Ni Ten Ichi Ryu\". A year later, Photek released his second album \"Form &amp; Function\". The album comprised four tracks that had previously only been available on limited release vinyl in the early 1990s, plus six remixes and versions by Photek himself as well as other contemporaries Digital, Peshay &amp; Decoder, Doc Scott, and J Majik.\n2000\u20132012.\nIn 2000, Photek released his \"Solaris\" album, turning his attention from drum and bass to Chicago house and minimal techno. On the single \"Mine to Give\", he collaborated with Robert Owens to create a No. 1 \"Billboard\" single.\n\"One Nation\" \u2013 the dubplate that had been available as a white label record for over a decade, saw an official release on \"Form &amp; Function Vol. 2\". The newer productions on the album showed Photek using a broader sound palette, taking influence from his composition and soundtrack work by including orchestrated passages. There are references to a more rock and industrial sound.\nAfter a four-year hiatus from releasing music under the Photek moniker, Parkes produced a series of EPs in 2011. He was invited to contribute to BBC Radio 1's 'Essential Mix' series in October 2012. In the same year, Parkes released the album \"KU:PALM\".\nGrammy nominations.\nPhotek's remix of Daft Punk's \"End of Line\" for the Disney movie \"\" earned him a Grammy nomination for Best Remix in 2012. He received Grammy nominations in the same category for the following 2 years, with remixes for Moby and Bob Marley.\nRecent activities.\nNow based in Los Angeles, Photek scored the second season of ABC's \"How to Get Away with Murder\" in fall of 2015, and continued recording of the follow-up to \"KU:PALM\" and various movie and computer game scoring projects. More recently in 2023, he composed the Season 5 Music for Call of Duty Modern Warfare II.\nRemixes.\nPhotek has remixed many artists in his career such as David Bowie, Bj\u00f6rk and Goldie. Additional production work on the Nine Inch Nails album \"With Teeth\" led to his remix of their track, \"The Hand That Feeds\", which got him KROQ daytime rotation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26040", "revid": "16109316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26040", "title": "Homosexuality and religion", "text": "Relationship between organized religions and homosexuality\nThe relationship between religion and homosexuality has varied greatly across time and place, within and between different religions and denominations, with regard to different forms of homosexuality and bisexuality. The present-day doctrines of the world's major religions and their denominations differ in their attitudes toward these sexual orientations. Adherence to anti-gay religious beliefs and communities is correlated with the prevalence of emotional distress and suicidality in sexual minority individuals, and is a primary motivation for seeking conversion therapy.\nAmong the religious denominations which generally reject these orientations, there are many different types of opposition, ranging from quietly discouraging homosexual activity, explicitly forbidding same-sex sexual practices among their adherents and actively opposing social acceptance of homosexuality, supporting criminal sanctions up to capital punishment, and even to condoning extrajudicial killings. Religious fundamentalism often correlates with anti-homosexual bias. Psychological research has connected religiosity with homophobic attitudes and physical antigay hostility, and has traced religious opposition to gay adoption to collectivistic values (loyalty, authority, purity) and low flexibility in existential issues, rather than to high prosocial inclinations for the weak. Attitudes toward homosexuality have been found to be determined not only by personal religious beliefs, but by the interaction of those beliefs with the predominant national religious context\u2014even for people who are less religious or who do not share their local dominant religious context. Many argue that it is homosexual actions which are sinful, rather than same-sex attraction itself. To this end, some discourage labeling individuals according to sexual orientation. Several organizations assert that conversion therapy can help diminish same-sex attraction.\nSome adherents of many religions view homosexuality and bisexuality positively, and some denominations routinely bless same-sex marriages and support LGBT rights, a growing trend as much of the developed world enacts laws supporting LGBT rights.\nHistorically, some cultures and religions accommodated, institutionalized, or revered same-sex love and sexuality; such mythologies and traditions can be found around the world. While Hinduism does not condemn homosexuality exclusively, it does often have a negative view on sexual activity generally (especially for the upper class of monks and priests), and one can find numerous portrayals of homosexuality in Hindu literature and artworks. Also there is an important point to note that Hindus have a god or a symbol called Hari Hara which resembles both men and women. i.e Half man and half woman. Sikh wedding ceremonies are non-gender specific, and so same-sex marriage is possible within Sikhism.\nRegardless of their position on homosexuality, many people of faith look to both sacred texts and tradition for guidance on this issue. However, the authority of various traditions or scriptural passages and the correctness of translations and interpretations are continually disputed.\nSpecific religious groups.\nAncient Mesopotamian religion.\nIndividuals who went against the traditional gender binary were heavily involved in the cult of Inanna, an ancient Mesopotamian goddess. During Sumerian times, a set of priests known as \"gala\" worked in Inanna's temples, where they performed elegies and lamentations. Men who became \"gala\" sometimes adopted female names and their songs were composed in the Sumerian \"eme-sal\" dialect, which, in literary texts, is normally reserved for the speech of female characters. Some Sumerian proverbs seem to suggest that \"gala\" had a reputation for engaging in anal sex with men. During the Akkadian Period, \"kurgarr\u016b\" and \"assinnu\" were servants of Ishtar who dressed in female clothing and performed war dances in Ishtar's temples. Several Akkadian proverbs seem to suggest that they may have also had homosexual proclivities. Gwendolyn Leick, an anthropologist known for her writings on Mesopotamia, has compared these individuals to the contemporary Indian \"hijra.\" In one Akkadian hymn, Ishtar is described as transforming men into women. Some modern pagans include Inanna in their worship.\nAbrahamic religions.\nThe Abrahamic religions of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, have traditionally forbidden sodomy, believing and teaching that such behavior is sinful. Today some denominations within these religions are accepting of homosexuality and inclusive of homosexual people, such as Reform Judaism, the United Church of Christ and the Metropolitan Community Church. Some Presbyterian, Anglican, Lutheran, and Methodist churches welcome members regardless of same-sex sexual practices, with some provinces allowing for the ordination and inclusion of gay and lesbian clerics, and affirmation of same-sex unions. Reform Judaism incorporates lesbian and gay rabbis and same-sex marriage liturgies, while Reconstructionist Judaism and Conservative Judaism in the US allows for lesbian and gay rabbis and same-sex unions.\nJudaism.\nThe Torah (first five books of the Hebrew Bible) is the primary source for Jewish views on homosexuality. It states that: \"[A man] shall not lie with another man as [he would] with a woman, it is (, \"abomination\")\" (Leviticus 18:22). (Like many similar commandments, the stated punishment for willful violation is the death penalty, although in practice rabbinic Judaism no longer believes it has the authority to implement death penalties.)\nOrthodox Judaism views homosexual acts as sinful. In recent years, there have been approaches claiming that only the sexual anal act is forbidden and considered an abomination by the Torah, while sexual orientation and even other sexual activities are not considered a sin. Conservative Judaism has engaged in an in-depth study of homosexuality since the 1990s, with various rabbis presenting a wide array of responsa (papers with legal arguments) for communal consideration. The official position of the movement is to welcome homosexual Jews into their synagogues, and also campaign against any discrimination in civil law and public society, but also to uphold a ban on anal sex as a religious requirement.\nReform Judaism and Reconstructionist Judaism in North America and Liberal Judaism in the United Kingdom view homosexuality to be acceptable on the same basis as heterosexuality. Progressive Jewish authorities believe either that traditional laws against homosexuality are no longer binding or that they are subject to changes that reflect a new understanding of human sexuality. Some of these authorities rely on modern biblical scholarship suggesting that the prohibition in the Torah was intended to ban coercive or ritualized male-male sex, such as those practices ascribed to Egyptian and Canaanite fertility cults and temple prostitution.\nChristianity.\nThe Hebrew Bible/Old Testament and its traditional interpretations in Judaism and Christianity have historically affirmed and endorsed a patriarchal and heteronormative approach towards human sexuality, favouring exclusively penetrative vaginal intercourse between men and women within the boundaries of marriage over all other forms of human sexual activity, including autoeroticism, masturbation, oral sex, non-penetrative and non-heterosexual sexual intercourse (all of which have been labeled as \"sodomy\" at various times), believing and teaching that such behaviors are forbidden because they are considered sinful, and further compared to or derived from the behavior of the alleged residents of Sodom and Gomorrah.\nChristian denominations hold a variety of views on homosexual sex, ranging from outright condemnation to complete acceptance. Throughout the majority of Christian history, most Christian theologians and denominations have considered homosexual sex as immoral or sinful. Most Christian denominations welcome people attracted to the same sex, but teach that homosexual sex is sinful. These denominations include the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox church, the Oriental Orthodox churches, Confessional Lutheran denominations such as the Lutheran Church\u2013Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, and some other mainline denominations, such as the Reformed Church in America and the American Baptist Church, as well as Conservative Evangelical organizations and churches, such as the Evangelical Alliance, and fundamentalist groups and churches, such as the Southern Baptist Convention. Pentecostal churches such as the Assemblies of God, as well as Restorationist churches, like Iglesia ni Cristo, the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, also take the position that homosexual sexual activity is sinful.\nLiberal Christians are generally supportive of homosexuals. Some Christian denominations do not view monogamous same sex relationships as bad or evil. These include the United Church of Canada, the United Church of Christ, the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.), the churches of the Old Catholic Union of Utrecht, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada, the Church of Sweden, the Lutheran, reformed and united churches in Evangelical Church of Germany, the Church of Denmark, the Icelandic Church, the Church of Norway and the Protestant Church of the Netherlands. In particular, the Metropolitan Community Church, a denomination of 40,000 members, was founded specifically to serve the Christian LGBT community, and is devoted to being open and affirming to LGBTQ people. The United Church of Christ, the United Methodist Church (UMC) and the Alliance of Baptists also condone gay marriage, and some parts of the Anglican and Lutheran churches allow for the blessing of gay unions. Within the Anglican communion there are openly gay clergy; for example, Gene Robinson and Mary Glasspool are openly homosexual bishops in the US Episcopal Church and Eva Brunne in Lutheran Church of Sweden. The Episcopal Church's recent actions vis-a-vis homosexuality have brought about increased ethical debate and tension within the Church of England and worldwide Anglican churches. In the United States and many other nations, the religious people are becoming more affirming of same-sex relationships. Even those in denominations with official stances are liberalizing, though not as quickly as those in more affirming religious groups. \nPassages from the Mosaic Covenant and its broader Old Testament context have been interpreted to mean that anyone who is engaging in homosexual practices should be punished with death (Leviticus 20:13; cf. Genesis 19:4\u201325; Judges 19:22\u201320:48; 2 Peter 2:6\u201310; Jude 7). HIV/AIDS has also been portrayed by some Christian fundamentalists such as Fred Phelps and Jerry Falwell as a punishment by God against homosexuals. In the 20th century, theologians like Karl Barth, J\u00fcrgen Moltmann, Hans K\u00fcng, John Robinson, Bishop David Jenkins, Don Cupitt, and Bishop Jack Spong challenged traditional theological positions and understandings of the Bible; following these developments some have suggested that passages have been mistranslated, are taken out of context, or that they do not refer to what is generally understood as \"homosexuality.\"\nConservative denominations generally oppose same-sex sexual relations based on Old Testament and New Testament texts that describe human sexual relations as strictly heterosexual by God's design. As such, it is argued that sexual desires and actions that contradict God's design are deemed sinful and are condemned by God (e.g. ; cf. ). Since love does not rejoice in unrighteousness or iniquity (cf. 1 Corinthians 13:6), and since homosexual desires and actions are believed to remain contrary to God's design and condemned by God as sinful/iniquity (e.g. \"in general\", Romans 126\u201327; \"passively\", 1 Corinthians 6:96:9; \"actively\", including but not limited to \"pederasty,\" 1 Corinthians 6:9; 1 Timothy 1:9-11; considered sexually \"immoral\", Galatians 5:19-21; Colossians 3:5-7; Ephesians 5:3), adherents of conservative denominations believe that genuine love for God and humanity is best expressed by following God rather than the world (Acts 5:29; cf. Jeremiah 23:1-40; Romans 12:9).\nWhile the Catholic view is founded on a natural law argument informed by scripture and proposed by Thomas Aquinas, the traditional conservative Protestant view is based on an interpretation of scripture alone. Protestant conservatives also see homosexual relationships as an impediment to heterosexual relationships. They interpret some Biblical passages to be commandments to be heterosexually married. Catholics, on the other hand, have accommodated unmarried people as priests, monks, nuns and single lay people for over 1,000 years. A number of self-described gay and 'ex-gay' Christians have reported satisfaction in mixed-orientation marriages.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church teaches that those who are attracted to persons of the same sex are called to practice chastity, just like everyone else has to before they get married. The Catholic Church does not regard homosexual activity as an expression of the marital sacrament, which it teaches is only possible within a lifelong commitment of a marriage between a man and a woman. According to the Church's sexual ethics, homosexual activity falls short in the complementarity (male and female organs complement each other) and fecundity (openness to new life) of the sexual act. Few studies of parishioners' individual views are sometimes at variance with the church's non-acceptance of homosexuality.\nLatter-day Saints.\nAll homosexual or same-sex sexual activity is forbidden by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) in its law of chastity, and the church teaches that God does not approve of same-sex marriage and may punish same-sex sexual behavior with a disciplinary council. Members of the church who experience homosexual attractions, including those who self-identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual remain in good standing in the church if they abstain from same-sex marriage and all sexual relations outside an opposite-sex marriage, but all, including those participating in same-sex activity and relationships, are allowed to attend weekly church worship services. However, in order to receive church ordinances such as baptism, and to enter church temples, adherents are required to abstain from same-sex relations. Additionally, in the church's plan of salvation noncelibate gay and lesbian individuals will not be allowed in the top tier of heaven to receive exaltation unless they repent, and a heterosexual marriage is a requirement for exaltation.\nThe LDS Church previously taught that homosexuality was a curable condition and counseled members that they could and should change their attractions and provided therapy and programs with that goal. From 1976 until 1989 the Church Handbook called for church discipline for members attracted to the same sex equating merely being homosexual with the seriousness of acts of adultery and child molestation\u2014even celibate gay people were subject to excommunication. Church publications now state that \"individuals do not choose to have such attractions\", its church-run therapy services no longer provides sexual orientation change efforts, and the church has no official stance on the causes of homosexuality. These current teachings and policies leave homosexual members with the options of entering a mixed-orientation opposite-sex marriage, or living a celibate lifestyle without any sexual expression (including masturbation).\nIslam.\nClassical Islamic jurists did not deal with homosexuality as a sexual orientation, since the latter concept is modern and has no equivalent in traditional law, which dealt with it under the technical terms of \"liwata\" and \"zin\u0101\". Most legal schools treat homosexual intercourse with penetration similarly to unlawful heterosexual intercourse under the rubric of \"zin\u0101\", but there are differences of opinion with respect to methods of punishment, as evident from an eleventh-century discussion among the scholars of Baghdad, some scholars argued that homosexual desires are natural, but only allowed in the afterlife.152 Some gay individuals undergo sex reassignment surgery to transition into the opposite gender to legally marry.\nThe discourse on homosexuality in Islam is primarily concerned with activities between men. There are, however, a few hadiths that mention homosexual behavior among women. Although punishment for lesbianism is rarely mentioned in the histories, al-Tabari records an example of the execution in the year 170\u00a0AH (786 or 787\u00a0AD) of a pair of lesbian slavegirls in the harem of al-Hadi in a collection of highly critical anecdotes pertaining to that Caliph's actions as ruler.\nSome jurists viewed sexual intercourse as possible only for an individual who possesses a phallus, hence those definitions of sexual intercourse that rely on the entry of as little as the corona of the phallus into a partner's orifice. Since women do not possess a phallus and, in this interpretation, cannot have intercourse with one another, they are therefore physically incapable of committing \"zin\u0101\".\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nThe Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith considers same-sex sexual behavior and same-sex marriage to be against God's will.381 Sex is only permitted in a marriage between a man and a woman for Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds.381 Lesbian, gay, and bisexual members who engage in any same-sex sexual behavior are subject to sanctions from the Baha\u2019i administration, including being excluded from community gatherings and denied participation in organizational elections. Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds have been discouraged from both promoting or opposing efforts to legalize same-sex marriage.\nIndian religions.\nAmong the religions that originated in ancient and medieval India, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism, teachings regarding homosexuality are less clear than among the Abrahamic traditions, and religious authorities voice diverse opinions. Sikhism has no specific teachings about homosexuality and the Sikh holy scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, does not explicitly mention heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. The universal goal of a Sikh is to have no hate or animosity to any person, regardless of factors like race, caste, color, creed or gender. Hinduism is diverse, with no supreme governing body, but the majority of swamis opposed same-sex relationships in a 2004 survey, and a minority supported them. Ancient religious texts such as the Vedas do not restrict homosexuality and often refer to people of a third gender, who are neither female nor male. Some see this third gender as an ancient parallel to lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex identities.\nHinduism.\nHinduism does not have a central authority. Many Hindu sects have taken various positions on homosexuality, ranging from positive to neutral or antagonistic. Referring to the nature of Samsara, the Rigveda, one of the four canonical sacred texts of Hinduism says 'Vikruti Evam Prakriti' (\"Perversity/diversity is what nature is all about\", or, \"What seems unnatural is also natural\"). A \"third gender\" has been acknowledged within numerous Hindu texts. Several Hindu texts, such as Manu Smriti and Sushruta Samhita, assert that some people are born with either mixed male and female natures, or sexually neuter, as a matter of natural biology (while at the same time there are examples of speaking negatively in regards to male homosexuality as shown by the Manu Smriti and Arthashastra). In addition, each Hindu denomination had developed distinct rules regarding sexuality, as Hinduism is not unified and is decentralized in essence.\nHindu groups are historically not unified regarding the issue of homosexuality, each one having a distinct doctrinal view.\nThe Indian Kama Sutra, written around 150\u00a0BC, contains passages describing eunuchs or \"third-sex\" males performing oral sex on men. The text describes Kama as one of the three objectives to be achieved in life. Though it forbids the educated Brahmins, bureaucrats and wisemen from practicing Auparishtaka (oral sex).\nSimilarly, some medieval Hindu temples and artifacts openly depict both male homosexuality and lesbianism within their carvings, such as the temple walls at Khajuraho. Some infer from these images that at least part of the Hindu society and religion were previously more open to variations in human sexuality than they are at present.\nAyoni sex, which includes oral and anal sex, never came to be viewed as much of a sin like in Christianity nor a serious crime and could be practiced in some cases. Close friendship between people of same genders has also been seen as permissible in Hindu texts.\nSeveral Hindu priests have performed same-sex marriages, arguing that love is the result of attachments from previous births and that marriage, as a union of spirit, is transcendental to gender.\nBuddhism.\nThe most common formulation of Buddhist ethics are the Five Precepts and the Eightfold Path, one should neither be attached to nor crave sensual pleasure. The third of the Five Precepts is \"To refrain from committing sexual misconduct.\" However, \"sexual misconduct\" is a broad term, and is subjected to interpretation relative to the social norms of the followers. \nThe determination of whether or not same-gender relations are appropriate for a layperson is not considered a religious matter by many Buddhists.\nAccording to the P\u0101li Canon and \u0100gama (the Early Buddhist scriptures), there is not any saying that same or opposite gender relations have anything to do with sexual misconduct, and some Theravada monks express that same-gender relations do not violate the rule to avoid sexual misconduct, which means not having sex with someone under age (thus protected by their parents or guardians), someone betrothed or married or who has taken vows of religious celibacy.\nSome later traditions gradually began to add new restrictions on sexual misconduct, like non-vagina sex, though some academics argue it usually involves situations seen as coerced sex. This non-vagina sex as sexual misconduct view is not based on Buddha's teachings, but from later Abhidharma texts.\nBuddhism is often characterized as distrustful of sensual enjoyment and sexuality in general. Traditionally, sex and lust are seen as hindering to spiritual progress in most schools of Buddhism; as such monks are expected to refrain from all sexual activity, and the Vinaya (the first book of the Tripitaka) specifically prohibits sexual intercourse, then further explain that anal, oral, and vaginal intercourse amount to sexual intercourse, which will result in permanent exclusion from Sangha. A notable exception in the history of Buddhism occurred in Japan during the Edo period, in which male homosexuality, or more specifically, love between young novices and older monks, were celebrated.\nReferences to pandaka, a eunuch/impotence category that is sometimes interpreted to include homosexual males, can be found throughout the Pali canon as well as other Sanskrit scriptures. In the Chinese version of Sarvastivada Vinaya, the pandaka is mentioned as also trying to have sex with women, not just men. Leonard Zwilling refers extensively to Buddhaghosa's Samantapasadika, where \"pandaka\" are described as being filled with defiled passions and insatiable lusts, and are dominated by their libido. Some texts of the Abhidharma state that a \"pandaka\" cannot achieve enlightenment in their own lifetime, (but must wait for rebirth) and Asanga and Vasubandhu discussed if a pandaka was able to be enlightened or not. According to one scriptural story, Ananda\u2014Buddha's cousin and disciple\u2014was a \"pandaka\" in one of his many previous lives.\nSome later classic Buddhist masters and texts disallow contact between monks/Bodhisattva and \"pandakas\"/women and classify non-vagina sex as sexual misconduct, including for lay followers.\nThe third of the five precepts of Buddhism states that one is to refrain from sexual misconduct; this precept has sometimes been interpreted to include homosexuality. The Dalai Lama of the Gelug sect of Tibetan Buddhism previously interpreted sexual misconduct to include lesbian and gay sex, and indeed any sex other than penis-vagina intercourse, including oral sex, anal sex, and masturbation or other sexual activity with the hand; the only time sex is acceptable is when it performed for its purpose of procreation. In 2009, when interviewed by Canadian TV news anchor Evan Solomon on \"\" about whether or not homosexuality is acceptable in Buddhism, the Dalai Lama responded that \"it is sexual misconduct.\" However, the Dalai Lama supports human rights for all, \"regardless of sexual orientation.\" In the most recent interview on this topic (March 10, 2014), the Dalai Lama said gay marriage is \"OK\", provided it is not in contradiction with the values of one's chosen religion. Also in an Indian and Tibetan tradition, the Nalandabodhi sangha has stated that they are welcoming of all sexual orientations.\nIn Thailand, some accounts propose that \"homosexuality arises as a karmic consequence of violating Buddhist proscriptions against heterosexual misconduct. These karmic accounts describe homosexuality as a congenital condition which cannot be altered, at least in a homosexual person's current lifetime, and have been linked with calls for compassion and understanding from the non-homosexual populace.\" However, Buddhist leaders in Thailand have also condemned homosexuality, ousted monks accused of homosexual acts, and banned kathoey from ordination. In 2009, Senior monk Phra Maha Wudhijaya Vajiramedh introduced a \"good manners\" curriculum for novices in the monkhood, stating to the BBC that he was concerned by \"the flamboyant behaviour of gay and transgender monks, who can often be seen wearing revealingly tight robes, carrying pink purses and having effeminately-shaped eyebrows.\" However, in Thailand, several leaders in the Theravada tradition including Phra Payom Kalayano have expressed support for LGBT rights.\nA later popular Japanese legend attributed the introduction of monastic homosexuality to Japan to Shingon founder Kukai, although scholars now dismiss the veracity of this assertion, pointing out his strict adherence to the Vinaya. Nonetheless, the legend served to \"affirm same sex relation between men and boys in seventeenth century Japan.\" However, Japanese Buddhist scholar and author of \"Wild Azaleas\" Kitamura Kigin argued that there was a tendency in monasteries to avoid heterosexuality and to encourage homosexuality.\nAlthough Mahayana Buddhism has some texts against homosexuality (from later Abhidharma texts and Buddhist apocrypha), the majority of its teachings assert that all beings who correctly practice the dharma may reach enlightenment, since all possess an innate Buddha nature. Enlightenment being achievable even in a single life. Some Mahayana Buddhist leaders were active in the movement for same-sex marriage rights in Taiwan which legalized same-sex marriages in 2019.\nWell known Zen Buddhist, Thich Nhat Hanh, notes the spirit of Buddhism is inclusiveness and states \"when you look at the ocean, you see different kinds of waves, many sizes and shapes, but all the waves have water as their foundation and substance. If you are born gay or lesbian, your ground of being is the same as mine. We are different, but we share the same ground of being.\"\nThe capacity of Buddhism to reform itself and its great variety of distinct beliefs and schools, provide many liberal streams of Buddhism, which are accepting of all sexual orientations. Reformists of Buddhism are mainly predominant in cosmopolitan cities. In global traditions, there is a widescale support for LGBT rights including the European Buddhist Union, the Buddhist Churches of America, many Shin Buddhist groups, and Zen leaders such as Thich Nhat Hanh. The Federation of Australian Buddhist Councils (FABC), representing Buddhist laypeople, and the Australian Sangha Association vocally supported same-sex marriage in Australia. Soka Gakkai International-USA (SGI-USA) is the most diverse Buddhist community in the United States with more than 500 chapters and some 100 centers throughout the country supports LGBT rights. In a PEW research poll, 88% of American Buddhists stated that homosexuality should be accepted. This was a higher level of support than any other religious group studied.\nSikhism.\nSikhism has no specific teachings about homosexuality and the Sikh holy scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, does not explicitly mention heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality. The universal goal of a Sikh is to have no hate or animosity to any person, regardless of factors like race, caste, color, creed or gender.\nAkal Takhat, the highest religious authority of the Sikhs, issued an edict (hukamnaama) in 2005 against any homosexual marriage in front of Sikh Scriptures (11th Guru of the Sikhs\u2014Shri Guru Granth Sahib). This was again reiterated when one couple performed an Anand Karaj (Sikh religious marriage) of two homosexual men in 2020 in California. The couple was thrown out of the Sikh religion for this violation.\nGurbani based view:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... much of Sikh teaching is couched in metaphors from family life. Even the adoration of God is explored in terms of the closest relationship that humans can comprehend\u2014that between a man and a woman. The heterosexual relationship is defined as sacred in Sikhism; an honest family life is described as the first duty\u2014the primary religion of humans.\u2014\u200a\nIn Sikh Scripture\nIn Guru Granth Sahib, marriage is seen as a union of souls. In Sikhism, the soul is seen as genderless, and the outward appearance of human beings (man, woman) is a temporary state. Same-sex marriage advocates refer to this fact.\nZoroastrianism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatleft\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:left; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nThe Vendidad, one of the later Zoroastrian texts composed in the Artificial Young Avestan language, has not been dated precisely. It is thought that some concepts of law, uncleanliness, dualism, and salvation were shared between the religions, and subsequent interactions between the religions are documented by events such as the release of the Jews from the Babylonian captivity by Zoroastrian Cyrus the Great in 537\u00a0BC, and the Biblical account of the Magi visiting the infant Jesus.\nThe Vendidad generally promotes procreation: \"the man who has a wife is far above him who lives in continence; he who keeps a house is far above him who has none; he who has children is far above the childless man; he who has riches is far above him who has none.\" It details the penance for a worshipper who submits to sodomy under force as \"Eight hundred stripes with the Aspahe-astra, eight hundred stripes with the Sraosho-charana.\" (equal to the penalty for breaking a contract with the value of an ox), and declares that for those participating voluntarily \"For that deed there is nothing that can pay, nothing that can atone, nothing that can cleanse from it; it is a trespass for which there is no atonement, for ever and ever\". However, those not practicing the Religion of Mazda were pardoned for past actions upon conversion. It has been argued that, in ancient times, those prohibitions against sodomy did not apply to eunuchs.\nEast Asian religions.\nAmong the Taoic religions of East Asia, such as Taoism, passionate homosexual expression is usually discouraged because it is believed to not lead to human fulfillment.\nBurmese folk religion.\nMany \"Nat Kadaws\" in traditional Burmese folk religion are members of the LGBT community.\nChinese folk religion.\nTu'er Shen, also known as the Rabbit God, is a gay Chinese deity. In 2006, Lu Wei-ming founded a temple for Tu'er Shen and Taoist worship in Yonghe District in the New Taipei City in Taiwan. About 9,000 pilgrims visit the temple each year praying for a suitable (same-sex) partner. The Wei-ming temple also performs love ceremonies for gay couples. It is the world's only religious shrine for homosexuals.\nConfucianism.\nConfucianism, being primarily a social and political philosophy, focused little on sexuality; whether homosexual or heterosexual. However, the ideology did emphasize male friendships, and Louis Crompton has argued that the \"closeness of the master-disciple bond it fostered may have subtly facilitated homosexuality\". Homosexuality is not mentioned in the Analects of Confucius.\n\u0110\u1ea1o M\u1eabu.\nIn Vietnam, many LGBT people find a safe community within the \"\u0110\u1ea1o M\u1eabu\" religion, which is worship of the mother god\".\" Many LGBT people act as mediums during \"\u0110\u1ea1o M\u1eabu\" rituals\".\"\nShinto.\nHistorically, Shinto \"had no special code of morals and seems to have regarded sex as a natural phenomenon to be enjoyed with few inhibitions.\" While Shinto beliefs are diverse, Japanese Shinto does not condemn homosexuality, and the formally organized Konkokyo sect is fully affirming. Multiple Shinto leaders advocated in support of gay marriage in Hawaii.\nTaoism.\nThere is no single official position on homosexuality in Taoism, as the term Taoism is used to describe a number of disparate religious traditions encompassing a variety of views. Although Taoist alchemy generally emphasized that ejaculation in heterosexual relationships represented a draining of the male's \"life essence,\" this concept was not generally extended to non-heterosexual sex.\nIn a similar way to Buddhism, Taoist schools sought throughout history to define what would be sexual misconduct. Broadly speaking, the precept against \"sexual misconduct\" in Taoism relates to extramarital sex. The term for a married couple (\u592b\u5a66) usually in Chinese suggests a male with a female, though Taoist scripture itself does not explicitly say anything against same-sex relations. Many sorts of precepts mentioned in the Yunji Qiqian (), The Mini Daoist Canon, does not explicitly say anything against same-gender relations as well.\nHomosexuality is not unknown in Taoist history, such as during the Tang dynasty when Taoist nuns exchanged love poems. As a sexual misconduct however would depend on what sect or school they were from as some traditions considered homosexuality to be misconduct and others did not mention it at all. There are also certain talismans recorded in different traditions that claim to \"cure\" a person of the \"homosexual disease/desire\". Attitudes about homosexuality within Taoism often reflect the values and sexual norms of broader Chinese society and what region of China the sect resided in (see Homosexuality in China).\nAfrican Diasporic religions.\nCandombl\u00e9.\nWithin Candombl\u00e9, a syncretic religion found primarily in Brazil, there is widespread (though not universal) support for gay rights, many members are LGBT, and have performed gay marriages. In Candombl\u00e9, homosexuality is usually accepted and explained by the sex of one's orisha. Homosexuality would be more probable in a man with a female orisha, a woman with a male orisha, or any of them with an androgynous orisha (such as Olokun).\nHaitian Vodou.\nHomosexuality is religiously acceptable in Haitian Vodou. The lwa or loa (spirits) Erzulie Dantor and Erzulie Freda are often associated with and viewed as protectors of queer people. The lao Ghede Nibo is sometimes depicted as an effeminate drag queen and inspires those he inhabits to lascivious sexuality of all kinds.\nSanter\u00eda.\nPractitioners of Santer\u00eda, primarily found in Cuba, generally (though not universally) welcome LGBT members and include them in religious or ritual activities.\nUmbanda.\nAlso a Brazilian syncretic religion, Umbanda houses generally support LGBT rights and have performed gay marriages.\nNew religious movements.\nAntoinism.\nAntoinism, a new religious movement founded in Belgium in 1910, does not provide any prescription on issues such as sexuality, as it considers that this is not related to spirituality; homosexuality is not deemed a sin and there is nothing wrong to be gay and antoinist.\nEckankar.\nEckankar, an American new religious movement founded by Paul Twitchell in 1965, says on its website that \"where legally recognized, same-sex marriages are performed, in the form of the ECK Wedding Ceremony, by ordained ministers of Eckankar\".\nNeo-Druidism.\nThe Order of Bards, Ovates and Druids is a worldwide group dedicated to practicing, teaching, and developing modern Druidry and has more than 25,000 members in 50 countries. The Order is LGBT-affirming within a larger framework of support for civil rights, love of justice, and the love of all existences.\nRa\u00eblism.\nRa\u00eblism, an international new religious movement and UFO religion which was founded in France in 1974, promotes a positive outlook towards human sexuality, including homosexuality. Its founder Ra\u00ebl recognised same-sex marriage, and a Ra\u00eblian press release stated that sexual orientation is genetic and it also likened discrimination against gay people to racism. Some Ra\u00eblian leaders have performed licensed same-sex marriages.\nSanta Muerte.\nThe cult of Santa Muerte is a new religious movement centered on the worship of Santa Muerte, a cult image, female deity, and folk saint which is popularly revered in Mexican Neopaganism and folk Catholicism. A personification of death, she is associated with healing, protection, and safe delivery to the afterlife by her devotees. Santa Muerte is also revered and seen as a saint and protector of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) communities in Mexico, since LGBTQ+ people are considered and treated as outcasts by the Catholic Church, evangelical churches, and Mexican society at large. Many LGBTQ+ people ask her for protection from violence, hatred, disease, and to help them in their search for love. Her intercession is commonly invoked in same-sex marriage ceremonies performed in Mexico. The Iglesia Cat\u00f3lica Tradicional M\u00e9xico-Estados Unidos, also known as the Church of Santa Muerte, recognizes gay marriage and performs religious wedding ceremonies for homosexual couples. According to R. Andrew Chesnut, Ph.D. in Latin American history and professor of Religious studies, the cult of Santa Muerte is the single fastest-growing new religious movement in the Americas.\nScientology.\nThe Church of Scientology opposes same-sex marriage and its founder L. Ron Hubbard called homosexuality a dangerous perversion. The Church of Scientology's perspectives on homosexuality are based on the writings of its founder, and his statements about homosexuality have led critics to assert that Scientology promotes homophobia, and being gay or accused of being gay is viewed as negative in the Scientology community. According to a 2018 source, currently used, updated editions of Hubbard's canonical book,21 \", continue to use heteronormative and anti-gay language and list gay people as perverts who are physically ill and extremely dangerous to society.78 Some critics have stated that the church tried to change their gay attractions through forms of therapy.\nPre-colonial religions of the Americas.\nMany Nations had respected ceremonial, religious, and social roles for gender nonconforming Native American and First Nations communities, and these roles still exist. Homosexual and gender-variant individuals were also common among other pre-conquest civilizations in Latin America, such as the Aztecs, Mayans, Quechuas, Moches, Zapotecs, and the Tupinamb\u00e1 of Brazil and were accepted in their various religions.\nHowever, the indigenous peoples of the Americas include hundreds of cultures with varying views on sex, gender, and spirituality. Additionally, First Nations and indigenous views on gender and sexuality may not fall within modern Western categorizations of sex and gender.\nPre-colonial religions of the Philippines.\nFilipino shamans, often known as \"babaylan\" held positions of authority as religious leaders or healers in some precolonial Philippine societies\".\" Cross-dressing or gender nonconforming males sometimes took on the role of the female babaylan. Early historical accounts record the existence of male \"babaylans\" who wore female clothes and took the demeanor of a woman. Anatomy was not the only basis for gender. Being male or female was based primarily on occupation, appearance, actions and sexuality. A male \"babaylan\" could partake in romantic and sexual relations with other men without being judged by society. A small number of Filipinos practice local indigenous religions today.\nPaganism.\nRadical Faeries.\nThe Radical Faeries are a worldwide queer spiritual movement, founded in 1979 in the United States.\nWicca.\nThe Wiccan \"Charge of the Goddess\", one of the most famous texts in Neopaganism, states in the words of the Goddess, \"all acts of love and pleasure are my rituals\". In traditional forms of Wicca, such as Gardnerian and Alexandrian Wicca, magic is often performed between a man and a woman, and the \"Great Rite\" is a sex ritual performed between a Priest and Priestess representing the God and Goddess; however, this is not generally seen as excluding homosexuals or magic between same-sex couples. While many groups still insist that initiations be conferred from man to woman or woman to man, Wicca has become a very diverse religion with varying views. As there is no central governing body nor a core authoritative text, individual covens and practitioners often establish their own guidelines. Many self-initiates are LGBTQ+ and form queer-centered covens and traditions.\nSatanism.\nBoth major Satanic traditions, The Satanic Temple and the Church of Satan, emphasise the right of the individual to free sexual expression. Lucien Greaves, spokesperson of The Satanic Temple, has stated the Temple \"will always fight... to the death to ensure that there are equal rights for the gay community.\" \nSome Theistic Satanists like the Order of Nine Angles are extremely homophobic, and support and perpetrate hate crimes against gay people, like the Keillers Park murder perpetrated by the ONA group Temple of the Black Light. The London nailbomber that targeted the LGBT people and migrants was also inspired by ONA founder David Myatt.\nUnitarian Universalism.\nThe first ordained minister of a major religious sect in the U.S. or Canada to come out as gay was the UU Minister James Stoll in 1969. There have been denominational resolutions supporting LGBTQ people since 1970, when a resolution was passed that condemned discrimination against homosexuals. Unitarian Universalism was the first denomination to accept openly transgender people as full members with eligibility to become clergy; in 1988 the first openly transgender person was ordained by the Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA).\nThe UUA has supported marriage equality since 1996 and compared those who resisted such equality to the resistance to the abolition of slavery, women's suffrage, and the end of anti-miscegenation laws. Three-quarters of all UU congregations have undertaken a series of organizational, procedural, and practical steps to become acknowledged as a \"Welcoming Congregation\": a congregation that is intentionally welcoming and inclusive of LGBTQ members. On June 29, 1984, the UUA became the first major denomination \"to approve religious blessings on homosexual unions.\" Unitarian Universalists were in the forefront of the work to make same-sex marriages legal in their local states and provinces, as well as on the national level. In May 2004, Arlington Street Church, Boston, was the site of the first state-sanctioned same-sex marriage in the United States. LGBTQ people are regularly ordained as ministers, and have also served at the highest levels of leadership in the denomination, including as president of the Canadian Unitarian Council, interim co-president of the Unitarian Universalist Association, and co-moderator of the UUA.\nHumanism.\nHumanism is a non-religious, non-theistic approach to life that supports full equality for LGBTQ individuals, including the right to marry. \"Humanism and Its Aspirations\", a statement of humanist principles from the American Humanist Association, states that \"humanists are concerned for the well being of all, are committed to diversity, and respect those of differing yet humane views...work to uphold the equal enjoyment of human rights and civil liberties in an open, secular society and maintain it is a civic duty to participate in the democratic process and a planetary duty to protect nature's integrity, diversity, and beauty in a secure, sustainable manner.\" The American Humanist Association provides an LGBT Humanist Pride award and has funded an LGBT-inclusive prom for Itawamba County Agricultural High School in Mississippi. The organisation LGBT Humanists UK \"is a United Kingdom-based not-for-profit that campaigns for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) equality and human rights and promotes Humanism as an ethical worldview.\" It was formerly an independent group, but since 2012 has been a part of the charity Humanists UK. In 2009 they gave Stephen Fry an award \"for his services to humanism and gay rights.\"\nHumanists UK Chief Executive Andrew Copson, who is gay, once wrote that \"humanists have always been champions of LGBT rights\" and cited his organisation's many years campaigning for decriminalisation and LGBT equality in the UK, including legal same-sex marriages. He pointed out the large number of LGBT people in the movement, including Stephen Fry, Christian Jessen, and Peter Tatchell, as well as historical associations with humanism like the writer Virginia Woolf and E M Forster. In a statement following the Orlando nightclub shooting for the International Humanist and Ethical Union, of which Copson is also President, he went further, saying \"Humanism is the ultimate, long-standing and unfaltering ally of LGBTI people everywhere\".\nUnification Church.\nUnification Church views heterosexual marriage which becomes \"fruitful\" by raising their children as God's ideal. Any other sexual relationship, than between husband and wife, is considered a sin. \nUnification Church founder Sun Myung Moon opposed homosexuality and free sex and in some of his speeches compared such relationships to \"dirty dung filled water\" and that \"Satan and dirty dung-eating dogs go after that\". He prophesied that \"gays will be eliminated\" in a \"purge on God's orders\".\nReligious groups and public policy.\nOpposition to same-sex marriage and LGBT rights is often associated with conservative religious views. The American Family Association and other religious groups have promoted boycotts of corporations whose policies support the LGBT community.\nIn conservative Islamic nations, laws generally prohibit same-sex sexual behaviour, and interpretation of Sharia Law on male homosexuality carries the death penalty. This has been condemned as a violation of human rights by human rights organisation Amnesty International and by the writers of the Yogyakarta principles. With the signature of the US in 2009, the proposed UN declaration on LGBT rights has now been signed by every European secular state and all western nations, as well as other countries\u201467 members of the UN in total. An opposing statement put forward by Muslim nations was signed by 57 member states, mostly in Africa and Asia. 68 out of the total 192 countries have not yet signed either statement. In 2011 the United Nations Human Rights Council passed a landmark resolution initiated by South Africa supporting LGBT rights (\"See Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity at the United Nations\").\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26041", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26041", "title": "RPGnet", "text": "Forum for tabletop role-playing games\nRPGnet is a role-playing game website. It includes sections on wargames, tabletop games and video games, as well as columns on gaming topics.\nRPGnet was founded in 1996 by Emma and Sandy Antunes, Shawn Althouse (aka etrigan) and Brian David Phillips, as a way to unify a number of transient game sites. In 2001 it was purchased by Skotos Tech, but maintains creative and editorial autonomy. Currently it is being run by Shannon Appelcline of Skotos, while a number of volunteer moderators and administrators help maintain the forums.\nIn 2024, RPG.net was sold to RPGMatch, who would take over development duties while the administration of the forums was to remain independent.\nRPGnet services.\nForums.\nOriginally based on Matt's WWWBoard script, the 1997 RPGnet forums were formatted in earlier message boards' threaded style, being mostly dedicated to game design and industry news. With the change to vBulletin on 2002, new sections catering to the growing player and enthusiast user bases were added. The boards used vBulletin for the next sixteen years, until November, 2018, when they were migrated to the XenForo 2 software package.\nOver time, the RPGnet forums have grown to encompass a broad range of subjects related to gaming and modern media. \"Tabletop Roleplaying Open\", the general game discussion forum, has the most posts per day. There are also video games, play-by-post and board games forums, a section dedicated to game design, publishing and brainstorming in general, while the \"Other Media\" covers television, comic books, movies and books. The site also hosts small forums for photography, parenting, and other specific interests.\nLike most large forums, RPGnet has developed numerous in-jokes, taglines, and recurring flame wars. Many game writers, artists, and designers post. Content and conduct rules are enforced by moderators, who \"can do what they feel is necessary in their best judgment to promote the well-being of the forums,\" even going beyond any written rules, \"in order to keep the forums friendly and welcoming.\" A list of sanctions and bans on users assessed by the moderators is available for public view. RPGnet policies have occasionally been referenced by other platforms and forums when drawing their own policies.\nA wide range of tastes are present on the forums. Smaller niche and indie role-playing games are particularly well represented and the latest releases often generate a great deal of discussion. Threads on Dungeons &amp; Dragons, World of Darkness, GURPS and other popular systems are fairly common. Exalted is known for generating a particularly large number of discussion threads.\nOther websites will excerpt or reference forum posts that (much as with the Fark PhotoShop contests) have lasting value, such as ZenDesign excerpting WoW-erizing movie quotes and From the Shop Floor borrowing from the Demotivators thread.\nReviews.\nReviews have been an important part of RPGnet since its inception. Today, RPGnet has an active archive of approximately 13,000 reviews. Most reviews are of roleplaying games or supplements. In the last few years, users have contributed numerous reviews of board and card games. RPGnet also publishes reviews of movies, books, music albums and comics, though less frequently.\nThe review system was overhauled in early 2003 and since then reviews have appeared with numerous cross-references in an effort to improve navigation of the large review archive.\nCurrently, reviews appear on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. RPG reviews are published on Mondays and Fridays, while reviews of other products are published on Wednesdays.\nColumns and articles.\nRPGnet currently has approximately 20 regular columns. Columns are posted on a four-week, Monday-Friday schedule (with 3 to 4 columns posted during a typical week, as per columnist cooperation), with any \"extra weeks\" in the schedule filled in with additional columns, as they become available. Most columns cover gamemasters offering advice on running roleplaying games to other gamemasters, but there is some variety. This site has become noted as a source for player theory on role-playing games, and these are often written by authors with an academic background.\nNotable columns have included: 52 Pickup which promised to offer a new game every week for a year (it got to about a dozen before the initial author gave up, then another dozen before the second one did); Behind the Counter which continues to detail the runnings of a gaming retail store; and Freelancing is Not Free which describes how to freelance in the gaming industry. Noteworthy columnists have included game industry veterans such as Ross Winn, Chad Underkoffler and Matt Drake. Sandy Antunes' monthly column has run without interruption since inception.\nThe forums include threads describing actual play of role-playing games in concrete terms. These threads include descriptions of how players have overcome specific challenges, and they allow observers to view how a role-playing game is performed without having to actually participate.\nThe columns software was upgraded in 2006, and it now includes full RSS feeds as well as a variety of database-oriented lookups and full integration into the RPGnet forums.\nPrior to 2008, Columns Editing was handled by C.W. Richeson (2008), Shannon Appelcline (2006\u20132007), Michael Fiegel (2001\u20132005) and Sandy Antunes (inception - 2001). As of January 2008, it is handled by Shannon Appelcline.\nRPGnet columns have been referenced on Slashdot (including \"Gaming Girls of GenCon\" and \"A History of Wizards of the Coast\"), as well as on many blogs and gaming sites.\nWiki.\nThe RPGnet wiki was added in early 2005. Initially conceived as a place for people jointly design roleplaying supplements and game systems, it has also been used assemble an encyclopedia of roleplaying terms and resources, and compile information about ongoing campaigns taking place on the forums.\nThe RPGnet Wiki is built on MediaWiki, the same software used by Wikipedia.\nGaming Index.\nIn 2006, RPGnet added a catalog of role-playing games known as the Gaming Index. This system is intended to hold every English RPG product, and is searchable through a variety of means, notable hyperlinks to other products by the publisher, authors or game line and links to RPGnet's reviews of the product. Users can add products, rank, and comment on them. As of November 13, 2018, the site has 19832 games, 3250 additional editions, and 2245 magazines, accounting for 1458 unique game systems.\nOther features.\nRPGnet formerly featured a RPG store, which is a RPGnet-branded version of RPGShop. The site also offers a membership program which gives subscribers early access to reviews, a few forum privileges, and online access to some Days of Wonder games.\nThe Game Manufacturers Association (GAMA) publishes a semi-annual journal called \"Games and Education\". As of 1998, past issues of this journal are archived on the RPGnet site.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26042", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26042", "title": "Revelation", "text": "Communication from a deity\nRevelation, or divine revelation, is the disclosing of some form of truth or knowledge through communication with a deity (god) or other supernatural entity or entities in the view of religion and theology.\nTypes.\nIndividual revelation.\nThomas Aquinas believed in two types of individual revelation from God, \"general revelation\" and \"special revelation\". In general revelation, God reveals himself through his creation, such that at least some truths about God can be learned by the empirical study of nature, physics, cosmology, etc., to an individual. Special revelation is the knowledge of God and spiritual matters which can be discovered through supernatural means, such as scripture or miracles, by individuals. Direct revelation refers to communication from God to someone in particular.\nThough one may deduce the existence of God and some of God's attributes through general revelation, certain specifics may be known only through special revelation. Aquinas believed that special revelation is equivalent to the revelation of God in Jesus. The major theological components of Christianity, such as the Trinity and the Incarnation, are revealed in the teachings of the church and the scriptures and may not otherwise be deduced. The teachings of Muhammad, the prophet of Islam, are also of this nature. The holy book of Muslims, the Quran, is the product of a special revelation from God to Muhammad, which led to the emergence of the last divine religion, Islam. Special revelation and general revelation are complementary rather than contradictory in nature. That is, in understanding a \"special revelation\", first a \"general revelation\" provides the conditions, and after that \"special revelation\" occurs, the subsequent conditions for the occurrence of the \"general revelation\" also change at will.\nAccording to Dumitru St\u0103niloae, Eastern Orthodox Church\u2019s position on general/special revelation is in stark contrast to Protestant and Catholic theologies that see a clear difference between general and special revelation and tend to argue that the former is not sufficient to salvation. In Orthodox Christianity, he argues, there is no separation between the two and supernatural revelation merely embodies the former in historical persons and actions.\n\"Continuous revelation\" is a term for the theological position that God continues to reveal divine principles or commandments to humanity.\nIn the 20th century, religious existentialists proposed that revelation held no content in and of itself but rather that God inspired people with his presence by coming into contact with them. Revelation is a human response that records how we respond to God.\nThe philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche wrote of his personal experience of inspiration and his own experience of \"the idea of revelation\" in his work \"Ecce Homo\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion of what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration? If not, I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of superstition left in one, it would hardly be possible completely to set aside the idea that one is the mere incarnation, mouthpiece, or medium of an almighty power. The idea of revelation, in the sense that something which profoundly convulses and upsets one becomes suddenly visible and audible with indescribable certainty and accuracy\u2014describes the simple fact. One hears\u2014one does not seek; one takes\u2014one does not ask who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up like lightning, it comes with necessity, without faltering\u2014I have never had any choice in the matter.\nPublic revelation.\nSome religious groups believe a deity has been revealed or spoken to a large group of people or have legends to a similar effect. In the Book of Exodus, Yahweh is said to have given Ten Commandments to the Israelites at Mount Sinai. In Christianity, the Book of Acts describes the Day of Pentecost wherein the Holy Spirit descended on the disciples of Jesus in the form of fire that they began praising in tongues and experienced mass revelation. The Lakota people believe Ptes\u00e1\u014bwi\u014b spoke directly to the people in the establishment of Lakota religious traditions. Some versions of an Aztec legend tell of Huitzilopochtli speaking directly to the Aztec people upon their arrival at An\u00e5huac. Historically, some emperors, cult leaders, and other figures have also been deified and treated as though their words are themselves revelations.\nMethods.\nVerbal.\nSome people hold that God can communicate with people in a way that gives direct, propositional content: This is termed \"verbal revelation\". Orthodox Judaism and some forms of Christianity hold that the first five books of Moses were dictated by God in such a fashion. Isaiah writes that he received his message through visions, where he would see YHWH, the God of Israel, speaking to angelic beings that surrounded him. Isaiah would then write down the dialogue exchanged between YHWH and the angels. This form of revelation constitutes the major part of the text of the Book of Isaiah. The same formula of divine revelation is used by other prophets throughout the Tanakh, such as Micaiah in http://.\nNon-verbal propositional.\nOne school of thought holds that revelation is non-verbal and non-literal, yet it may have propositional content. People were divinely inspired by God with a message but not in a verbal-like sense.\nRabbi Abraham Joshua Heschel wrote, \"To convey what the prophets experienced, the Bible could either use terms of descriptions or terms of indication. Any description of the act of revelation in empirical categories would have produced a caricature. That is why all the Bible does is to state that revelation happened; how it happened is something they could only convey in words that are evocative and suggestive.\"\nEpistemology.\nMembers of Abrahamic religions, including Judaism, Christianity and Islam, believe that God exists and can in some way reveal his will to people. Members of those religions distinguish between true prophets and false prophets, and there are documents offering criteria by which to distinguish true from false prophets. The question of epistemology then arises: how to know?\nSome believe that revelation can originate directly from a deity or through an agent such as an angel. One who has experienced such contact with, or communication from, the divine is often called a prophet. \"The Norton Dictionary of Modern Thought\" suggests that the more proper and wider term for such an encounter would be \"mystical\", making such a person a mystic. All prophets would be mystics, but not all mystics would be prophets.\nRevelation from a supernatural source is of lesser importance in some other religious traditions, such as Taoism and Confucianism.\nIn various religions.\nBah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith.\nThe B\u00e1b, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h and `Abdu'l-Bah\u00e1, the central figures of the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith, received thousands of written enquiries, and wrote thousands of responses, hundreds of which amount to whole and proper books, while many are shorter texts, such as letters. In addition, the Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Faith has large works which were divinely revealed in a very short time, as in a night, or a few days. Additionally, because many of the works were first recorded by an amanuensis, most were submitted for approval and correction and the final text was personally approved by the revelator.\nBah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h would occasionally write the words of revelation down himself, but normally the revelation was dictated to his amanuensis, who sometimes recorded it in what has been called \"revelation writing\", a shorthand script written with extreme speed owing to the rapidity of the utterance of the words. Afterwards, Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h revised and approved these drafts. These \"revelation drafts\" and many other transcriptions of Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h's writings, around 15,000 items, some of which are in his own handwriting, are kept in the International Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Archives in Haifa, Israel.\nChristianity.\nMany Christians believe in the possibility and even reality of private revelations, messages from God for individuals, which can come in a variety of ways. Montanism is an example in early Christianity and there are alleged cases today also. However, Christians see as of a much higher level the revelation recorded in the collection of books known as the Bible. They consider those books to have been written by human authors under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. They regard Jesus as the supreme revelation of God, with the Bible being a revelation in the sense of a witness to him. The \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" states that \"the Christian faith is not a 'religion of the book.' Christianity is the religion of the 'Word of God', a word which is 'not a written and mute word, but the Word which is incarnate and living\".\nGeisler and Nix speak of Biblical inerrancy as meaning that in its original form, the Bible is totally without error and free from all contradiction, including the historical and scientific parts. Coleman speaks of Biblical infallibility as meaning that the Bible is inerrant on issues of faith and practice but not history or science. The Catholic Church speaks not about infallibility of Scripture but about its freedom from error, holding \"the doctrine of the inerrancy of Scripture\". The Second Vatican Council, citing earlier declarations, stated: \"Since everything asserted by the inspired authors or sacred writers must be held to be asserted by the Holy Spirit, it follows that the books of Scripture must be acknowledged as teaching solidly, faithfully and without error that truth which God wanted put into sacred writings for the sake of salvation\". It added: \"Since God speaks in Sacred Scripture through men in human fashion, the interpreter of Sacred Scripture, in order to see clearly what God wanted to communicate to us, should carefully investigate what meaning the sacred writers really intended, and what God wanted to manifest by means of their words.\" The Reformed Churches believe in the Bible is inerrant in the sense spoken of by Gregory and Nix and \"deny that Biblical infallibility and inerrancy are limited to spiritual, religious, or redemptive themes, exclusive of assertions in the fields of history and science\". The Westminster Confession of Faith speaks of \"the infallible truth and divine authority\" of the Scriptures.\nIn the New Testament, Jesus treats the Old Testament as authoritative and says that it \"cannot be broken\" . 2 Timothy 3:16 says: \"All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness\". The Second Epistle of Peter claims that \"no prophecy of Scripture comes from someone's own interpretation. For no prophecy was ever produced by the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit\". It also speaks of Paul's letters as containing some things \"hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction, as they do the other Scriptures\".\nThis letter does not specify \"the other Scriptures\", and the term \"all Scripture\" in 2 Timothy does not indicate the writings that were or would be breathed out by God and useful for teaching, since it does not preclude later works, such as the Book of Revelation and the Epistles of John may have been. The Catholic Church recognizes 73 books as inspired and forming the Bible (46 books of the Old Testament and 27 books of the New Testament). The most common versions of the Bible that Protestants have today consist of 66 of these books. None of the 66 or 73 books gives a list of revealed books.\nThe theologian and Christian existentialist philosopher Paul Johannes Tillich (1886\u20131965), who sought to correlate culture and faith so that \"faith need not be unacceptable to contemporary culture and contemporary culture need not be unacceptable to faith\", argued that revelation never runs counter to reason (affirming Thomas Aquinas, who considered faith to be eminently rational) and that both poles of the subjective human experience are complementary.\nKarl Barth argued that God is the object of God's own self-knowledge, and revelation in the Bible means the self-unveiling to humanity of the God who cannot be discovered by humanity simply through its own efforts. For him, the Bible is not \"The Revelation\"; rather, it points to revelation. Human concepts can never be considered as identical to God's revelation, and Scripture is written in human language, expressing human concepts. It cannot be considered identical with God's revelation. However, God does reveal himself through human language and concepts, and thus Christ is truly presented in scripture and the preaching of the church.\nCatholic Church.\nThe \"Catechism of the Catholic Church\" of the Catholic Church states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'Our holy mother, the Church, holds and teaches that God, the first principle and last end of all things, can be known with certainty from the created world by the natural light of human reason.' Without this capacity, man would not be able to welcome God's revelation. Man has this capacity because he is created 'in the image of God'.\nIn the historical conditions in which he finds himself, however, man experiences many difficulties in coming to know God by the light of reason alone [...]\nThis is why man stands in need of being enlightened by God's revelation, not only about those things that exceed his understanding, but also 'about those religious and moral truths which of themselves are not beyond the grasp of human reason, so that even in the present condition of the human race, they can be known by all men with ease, with firm certainty and with no admixture of error'\nThe Catholic Church also asserts that Jesus Christ is the \"fullness and mediator of all Revelations\", and that no new divine revelation will come until the Second Coming. Revelation is seen as the source of an obligation on the part of those who recognize it, namely an obligation to believe or to submit intellectually to \"God who reveals\".\nIt also believes that God gradually leads the church into a deeper understanding of divine revelation, such as by private revelations, which do not fulfill, complete, substitute, or supersede divine revelation but help one live by divine revelation. The church does not obligate the faithful to believe in, follow, or publish private revelations whether or not they are approved.\nLatter Day Saint movement.\nThe Latter Day Saint movement teaches that the movement began with a revelation from God, which began a process of restoring the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth. Latter Day Saints also teach that revelation is the foundation of the church established by Jesus Christ and that it remains an essential element of his true church today. Continuous revelation provides individual Latter Day Saints with a testimony, described by Richard Bushman as \"one of the most potent words in the Mormon lexicon\".\nLatter Day Saints believe in an open scriptural canon, and in addition to the Bible and the Book of Mormon, have books of scripture containing the revelations of modern-day prophets such as the Doctrine and Covenants and the Pearl of Great Price. In addition, many Latter Day Saints believe that ancient prophets in other regions of the world received revelations that resulted in additional scriptures that have been lost and may, one day, be forthcoming. Latter Day Saints also believe that the United States Constitution is a divinely inspired document.\nChurch of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.\nMembers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints sustain the President of the Church as prophet, seer, and revelator, the only person on earth who receives revelation to guide the entire church. They also sustain the two counselors in the First Presidency, as well as the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, as prophets, seers, and revelators. They believe that God has followed a pattern of continued revelation to prophets throughout the history of mankind to establish doctrine and maintain its integrity, as well as to guide the church under changing world conditions. When this pattern of revelation was broken, it was because the receivers of revelation had been rejected and often killed. In the meridian of time, Paul described prophets and apostles in terms of a foundation, with Christ as the cornerstone, which was built to prevent doctrinal shift\u2014\"that we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about by every wind of doctrine\". To maintain that foundation, new apostles were chosen and ordained to replace those lost to death or transgression, as when Matthias was called by revelation to replace Judas (Acts 1:15\u201326). However, as intensifying persecution led to the imprisonment and martyrdom of the apostles, it eventually became impossible to continue the apostolic succession.\nOnce the foundation of apostles and prophets was lost, the integrity of Christian doctrine as established by Christ and the apostles began to be compromised by those who continued to develop doctrine despite not being called or authorized to receive revelation for the body of the church. In the absence of revelation, the post-apostolic theologians had no choice but introduced elements of human reasoning, speculation, and personal interpretation of scripture (2 Pet 1:19\u201320), which over time led to the loss or corruption of various doctrinal truths, as well as to the addition of new man-made doctrines. That naturally led to much disagreement and schism, which over the centuries culminated in the large number of Christian churches on the earth today. Mormons believe that God resumed his pattern of revelation when the world was again ready by calling the Prophet Joseph Smith to restore the fullness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the earth. Since that time there has been a consistent succession of prophets and apostles, which God has promised will not be broken before the Second Coming of Christ (Dan 2:44).\nEach member of the LDS Church is also confirmed a member of the church following baptism and given the \"gift of the Holy Ghost\" by which each member is encouraged to develop a personal relationship with that divine being and receive personal revelation for their own direction and that of their family. The Latter Day Saint concept of revelation includes the belief that revelation from God is available to all those who earnestly seek it with the intent of doing good. It also teaches that everyone is entitled to personal revelation with respect to his or her stewardship (leadership responsibility). Thus, parents may receive inspiration from God in raising their families, individuals can receive divine inspiration to help them meet personal challenges, church officers may receive revelation for those whom they serve, and so forth.\nThe important consequence of this is that each person may receive confirmation that particular doctrines taught by a prophet are true, as well as gain divine insight in using those truths for their own benefit and eternal progress. In the church, personal revelation is expected and encouraged, and many converts believe that personal revelation from God was instrumental in their conversion. Joseph F. Smith, the sixth president of the LDS Church, summarized this church's belief concerning revelation by saying, \"We believe... in the principle of direct revelation from God to man\" (Smith, 362).\nQuakers.\nQuakers, known formally as the Religious Society of Friends, are generally united by a belief in each human's ability to experience the light within or see \"that of God in every one.\" Most Quakers believe in continuing revelation: God continuously reveals truth directly to individuals. George Fox said, \"Christ has come to teach His people Himself.\" Friends often focus on feeling the presence of God. As Isaac Penington wrote in 1670, \"It is not enough to hear of Christ, or read of Christ, but this is the thing \u2013 to feel him to be my root, my life, and my foundation...\" Quakers reject the idea of priests and believe in the priesthood of all believers. Some express their concept of God using phrases such as \"the inner light\", \"inward light of Christ\", or \"Holy Spirit\". Quakers first gathered around George Fox in the mid\u201317th century and belong to a historically Protestant Christian set of denominations.\nDeism.\nWith the development of rationalism, materialism, and atheism during the Age of Enlightenment in Europe beginning about the mid-17th century, the concept of supernatural revelation began to face skepticism. In \"The Age of Reason\" (1794\u20131809), Thomas Paine developed the theology of deism, rejecting the possibility of miracles and arguing that a revelation may be considered valid only for the original recipient, with all else being hearsay.\nHinduism.\n\u015aruti, Sanskrit for \"that which is heard\", refers to the body of most authoritative, ancient religious texts comprising the central canon of Hinduism. It includes the four Vedas including its four types of embedded texts\u2014the Samhitas, the early Upanishads. \u015arutis have been variously described as a revelation through \"anubhava\" (direct experience), or of primordial origins realized by ancient Rishis. In Hindu tradition, they have been referred to as \"apauru\u1e63eya\" (not created by humans). The \"\u015aruti\" texts themselves assert that they were skillfully created by Rishis (sages), after inspired creativity, just as a carpenter builds a chariot.\nIslam.\nMuslims believe that God ( \"Allah\") revealed his final message to all of existence through Muhammad via the angel Gabriel. Muhammad is considered to have been the Seal of the Prophets and the last revelation, the Qur'an, is believed by Muslims to be the flawless final revelation of God to humanity, valid until the Last Day. The Qur'an claims to have been revealed word by word and letter by letter.\nMuslims hold that the message of Islam is the same as the message preached by all the messengers sent by God to humanity since Adam. Muslims believe that Islam is the oldest of the monotheistic religions because it represents both the original and the final revelation of God to Abraham, Moses, David, Jesus, and Muhammad. Likewise, Muslims believe that every prophet received revelation in their lives, as each prophet was sent by God to guide mankind. Jesus is significant in this aspect as he received revelation in a twofold aspect, as Muslims believe he preached the Gospel while also having been taught the Torah.\nAccording to Islamic traditions, Muhammad began receiving revelations from the age of 40 that were delivered through the angel Gabriel over the last 23 years of his life. The content of these revelations, known as the Qur'an, was memorized and recorded by his followers and compiled from dozens of hafiz as well as other various parchments or hides into a single volume shortly after his death. In Muslim theology, Muhammad is considered equal in importance to all other prophets of God and to make distinction among the prophets is a sin, as the Qur'an itself promulgates equality between God's prophets.\nMany scholars have made the distinction between revelation and inspiration, which according to Muslim theology, all righteous people can receive. Inspiration refers to God inspiring a person to commit some action, as opposed to revelation, which only the prophets received. Moses's mother, Jochebed, being inspired to send the infant Moses in a cradle down the Nile river is a frequently cited example of inspiration, as is Hagar searching for water for the infant Ishmael.\nJudaism.\nThe term \"revelation\" is used in two senses in Jewish theology; (1) what in rabbinical language is called \"Gilluy Shekinah\", a manifestation of God by some wondrous act of his which overawes man and impresses him with what he sees, hears, or otherwise perceives of his glorious presence; or (2) a manifestation of his will through oracular words, signs, statutes, or laws.\nIn Judaism, issues of epistemology have been addressed by Jewish philosophers such as Saadiah Gaon (882\u2013942) in his Book of Beliefs and Opinions; Maimonides (1135\u20131204) in his Guide for the Perplexed; Samuel Hugo Berman, professor of philosophy at the Hebrew University; Joseph Dov Soloveitchik (1903\u20131993), talmudic scholar and philosopher; Neil Gillman, professor of philosophy at the Jewish Theological Seminary of America, and Elliot N. Dorff, professor of philosophy at the American Jewish University.\nOne of the major trends in modern Jewish philosophy was the attempt to develop a theory of Judaism through existentialism. One of the primary players in this field was Franz Rosenzweig. His major work, \"Star of Redemption\", expounds a philosophy in which he portrays the relationships between God, humanity and world as they are connected by creation, revelation and redemption.\nConservative Jewish philosophers Elliot N. Dorff and Neil Gillman take the existentialist philosophy of Rosenzweig as one of their starting points for understanding Jewish philosophy. (They come to different conclusions, however.)\nRabbinic Judaism, and contemporary Orthodox Judaism, hold that the Torah (Pentateuch) extant today is essentially the same one that the whole of the Jewish people received on Mount Sinai, from God, upon their Exodus from Egypt. Beliefs that God gave a \"Torah of truth\" to Moses (and the rest of the people), that Moses was the greatest of the prophets, and that the Law given to Moses will never be changed, are three of the Thirteen Principles of Faith of Orthodox Judaism according to Maimonides.\nOrthodox Judaism believes that in addition to the written Torah, God also revealed to Moses a set of oral teachings, called the Oral Torah. In addition to this revealed law, Jewish law contains decrees and enactments made by prophets, rabbis, and sages over the course of Jewish history. Haredi Judaism tends to regard even rabbinic decrees as being of divine origin or divinely inspired, while Modern Orthodox Judaism tends to regard them as being more potentially subject to human error, although due to the Biblical verse \"Do not stray from their words\" (\"Deuteronomy 17:11) it is still accepted as binding law.\nConservative Judaism tends to regard both the Torah and the Oral law as not verbally revealed. The Conservative approach tends to regard the Torah as compiled by redactors in a manner similar to the Documentary Hypothesis. However, Conservative Jews also regard the authors of the Torah as divinely inspired, and many regard at least portions of it as originating with Moses. Positions can vary from the position of Joel Roth, following David Weiss HaLivni, that while the Torah originally given to Moses on Mount Sinai became corrupted or lost and had to be recompiled later by redactors, the recompiled Torah is nonetheless regarded as fully Divine and legally authoritative, to the position of Gordon Tucker that the Torah, while Divinely inspired, is a largely human document containing significant elements of human error, and should be regarded as the beginning of an ongoing process which is continuing today. Conservative Judaism regards the Oral Law as divinely inspired, but nonetheless subject to human error.\nReform and Reconstructionist Jews also accept the Documentary Hypothesis for the origin of the Torah, and tend to view all of the Oral law as an entirely human creation. Reform believe that the Torah is not a direct revelation from God, but is a document written by human ancestors, carrying human understanding and experience, and seeking to answer the question: 'What does God require of us?'. They believe that, though it contains many 'core-truths' about God and humanity, it is also time bound. They believe that God's will is revealed through the interaction of humanity and God throughout history, and so, in that sense, Torah is a product of an ongoing revelation. Reconstructionist Judaism denies the notion of revelation entirely.\nProphets.\nAlthough the Nevi'im (the books of the Prophets) are considered divine and true, this does not imply that the books of the prophets are always read literally. Jewish tradition has always held that prophets used metaphors and analogies. There exists a wide range of commentaries explaining and elucidating those verses consisting of metaphor. Rabbinic Judaism regards Moses as the greatest of the prophets, and this view is one of the Thirteen Principles of Faith of traditional Judaism. Consistent with the view that revelation to Moses was generally clearer than revelation to other prophets, Orthodox views of revelation to prophets other than Moses have included a range of perspectives as to directness. For example, Maimonides in \"The Guide for the Perplexed\" said that accounts of revelation in the Nevi'im were not always as literal as in the Torah and that some prophetic accounts reflect allegories rather than literal commands or predictions.\nConservative Rabbi and philosopher Abraham Joshua Heschel (1907\u20131972), author of a number of works on prophecy, said that, \"Prophetic inspiration must be understood \"as an event\", not as \"a process\".\" In his work \"God in Search of Man\", he discussed the experience of being a prophet. In his book \"Prophetic Inspiration After the Prophets: Maimonides and Others\", Heschel references to continued prophetic inspiration in Jewish rabbinic literature following the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem and into medieval and even Modern times. He wrote that:\n\"To convey what the prophets experienced, the Bible could either use terms of descriptions or terms of indication. Any description of the act of revelation in empirical categories would have produced a caricature. That is why all the Bible does is to state that revelation happened. How it happened is something they could only convey in words that are evocative and suggestive.\"\nSikhism.\nThe Guru Granth Sahib is considered to be a divine revelation by God to the Sikh gurus. \nIn various verses of Guru Granth Sahib, the Sikh gurus themselves state that they merely speak what the divine teacher (God) commands them to speak.\nGuru Nanak frequently used to tell his ardent follower Mardana \"Oh Mardana, play the rabaab the Lord's word is descending onto me.\"\nIn certain passages of Guru Granth Sahib, it is clearly said the authorship is of divine origin and the gurus are merely the channel through which such revelations came.\nRevealed religion.\nRevealed religions have religious texts which they view as divinely or supernaturally revealed or inspired. For instance, Orthodox Jews, Christians, and Muslims believe that the \"Torah\" was received from God on biblical Mount Sinai. Most Christians believe that both the Old Testament and the New Testament were inspired by God. Muslims believe the Quran was revealed by God to Muhammad word by word through the angel Gabriel (\"Jibril\"). In Hinduism, the Vedas are considered \"\", \"not human compositions\", and are supposed to have been directly revealed, and thus are called \"\u015bruti\", \"what is heard\". Hindus also consider the Bhagavad Gita to contain direct revelation from Krishna.\nA revelation communicated by a supernatural entity reported as being present during the event is called a vision. Direct conversations between the recipient and the supernatural entity, or physical marks such as stigmata, have been reported. In rare cases, such as that of Saint Juan Diego, physical artifacts accompany the revelation. The Roman Catholic concept of interior locution includes just an inner voice heard by the recipient.\nIn the Abrahamic religions, the term is used to refer to the process by which God reveals knowledge of himself, his will, and his divine providence to the world of human beings. In secondary usage, revelation refers to the resulting human knowledge about God, prophecy, and other divine things. Revelation from a supernatural source plays a less important role in some other religious traditions such as Buddhism, Confucianism and Taoism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26044", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26044", "title": "Track running", "text": ""}
{"id": "26048", "revid": "32579849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26048", "title": "Rules of evidence", "text": ""}
{"id": "26049", "revid": "44120587", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26049", "title": "Rotterdam", "text": "City in South Holland, Netherlands\nRotterdam ( , ; ; lit.\u2009'The Dam on the River Rotte') is the second-largest city in the Netherlands by population and the largest by area (319.4\u00a0km\u00b2). It is in the province of South Holland, part of the North Sea mouth of the Rhine\u2013Meuse\u2013Scheldt delta, via the New Meuse inland shipping channel, dug to connect to the Meuse at first and now to the Rhine.\nRotterdam's history goes back to 1270, when a dam was constructed in the Rotte. In 1340, Rotterdam was granted city rights by William IV, Count of Holland. The Rotterdam\u2013The Hague metropolitan area, with a population of approximately 2.7\u00a0million, is the 10th-largest in the European Union and the most populous in the country.\nA major logistic and economic centre, Rotterdam is Europe's largest seaport. In 2022, Rotterdam had a population of 655,468 and is home to over 180 different nationalities.\nRotterdam is known for its university, riverside setting, lively cultural life, maritime heritage and modern architecture. The near-complete destruction of the city centre during the World War II German bombing has resulted in a varied architectural landscape, including skyscrapers designed by architects such as Rem Koolhaas, Piet Blom and Ben van Berkel.\nThe Rhine, Meuse and Scheldt give waterway access into the heart of Western Europe, including the highly industrialized Ruhr. The extensive distribution system including rail, roads, and waterways have earned Rotterdam the nicknames \"Gateway to Europe\" and \"Gateway to the World\".\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe settlement at the lower end of the fen stream \"Rotte\" (or \"Rotta\", as it was then known, from \"rot\", \"muddy\" and \"a\", \"water\", thus \"muddy water\") dates from at least the year 950. Around 1150, large floods in the area ended development, leading to the construction of protective dikes and dams, including \"Schielands Hoge Zeedijk\" (\"Schieland's High Sea Dike\") along the northern banks of the present-day Nieuwe Maas river. A dam on the Rotte was built in the 1260s and was located at the present-day \"Hoogstraat\" (\"High Street\").\nOn 7 July 1340, Count Willem IV of Holland granted city rights to Rotterdam, which then had a population of only a few thousand. Around the year 1350, a shipping canal (the \"Rotterdamse Schie\") was completed, which provided Rotterdam access to the larger towns in the north, allowing it to become a local trans-shipment centre between the Netherlands, England and Germany, and to urbanize.\nBeginning in the 1600s, Rotterdam was involved in the Atlantic slave trade. According to historian Gerhard de Kok, \"Rotterdam merchants were the pioneers of the Dutch slave trade\". From the 17th century until 1814, when the United Netherlands abolished the Netherlands' involvement in the slave trade at the request of the British government, Dutch slave ships from Rotterdam sailed to Africa and the Americas as part of the triangular trade. Rotterdam merchants also sold significant quantities of gunpowder to Zeeland-based slave ships.\nThe port of Rotterdam grew slowly but steadily into a port of importance, becoming the seat of one of the six \"chambers\" of the \"Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie\" (VOC), the Dutch East India Company and one of the five \"chambers\" of the \" West-Indische Compagnie\" (WIC), the Dutch West India Company.\nThe greatest spurt of growth, both in port activity and population, followed the completion of the Nieuwe Waterweg in 1872. The city and harbour started to expand on the south bank of the river. The \"Witte Huis\" or \"White House\" skyscraper, inspired by American office buildings and built in 1898 in the French Art Nouveau style, is evidence of Rotterdam's rapid growth and success. When completed, it was the tallest office building in Europe, with a height of .\n20th century.\nDuring World War I, the city was the world's largest spy centre because of Dutch neutrality and its strategic location between Britain, Germany and German-occupied Belgium. Many spies who were arrested and executed in Britain were led by German secret agents operating from Rotterdam. MI6 had its main European office on de Boompjes. From there the British coordinated espionage in Germany and occupied Belgium. During World War I, an average of 25,000 Belgian refugees lived in the city, as well as hundreds of German deserters and escaped Allied prisoners of war.\nDuring World War II, the German army invaded the Netherlands on 10 May 1940. Adolf Hitler had hoped to conquer the country in just one day, but his forces met unexpectedly fierce resistance. The Dutch army was forced to capitulate on 15 May 1940, following the bombing of Rotterdam on 14 May and the threat of bombing other Dutch cities. The heart of Rotterdam was almost completely destroyed by the Luftwaffe. Some 80,000 civilians were made homeless and 900 were killed; a relatively low number since many had fled the city because of the warfare and bombing going on in Rotterdam since the start of the invasion three days earlier. The City Hall survived the bombing. Ossip Zadkine later attempted to capture the event with his statue \"De Verwoeste Stad\" ('The Destroyed City'). The statue stands near the Leuvehaven, not far from the Erasmusbrug in the centre of the city, on the north shore of the river Nieuwe Maas. In 1941, 11,000 Jews still lived in Rotterdam. Before the war there were 13,000. Between 30 July 1942, and 22 April 1943, 6,790 people were deported in 8 transports via Loods 24. The vast majority of the Jews who were deported via Loods 24 were murdered in Sobib\u00f3r and Auschwitz-Birkenau. Research in 2000 showed that 144 people survived the deportations. In 2013 the Jewish Children's Monument was unveiled.\nIn January 1948, Queen Wilhelmina presented the motto 'Sterker door strijd' (Stronger through effort) as part of the coat of arms of Rotterdam to the city government:\n\"...as a reminder also for posterity of the courage and strength with which the people of Rotterdam bore all the trials of the war and the important part they took in the liberation of the fatherland...\"\n\u2014Wilhelmina of the Netherlands\nRotterdam was gradually rebuilt from the 1950s through to the 1970s. Because the city centre was largely destroyed, new spatial infrastructure could be built, making it an open and modern city. In 1953 the Lijnbaan was opened, the first car-free shopping street in Europe. The progressive design attracted a lot of international attention, in which film and television played an important role. The new Central Station was completed in 1957, with the Groothandelsgebouw from 1953 next to it. The Euromast was erected in 1960 on the occasion of the Floriade.\nFrom the 1980s onwards the city councils began developing an active architectural policy. The harbours were moving westwards and the old environment had to be reshaped. Daring and new styles of apartments, office buildings and recreation facilities resulted in a more 'livable' city centre with a new skyline. In the 1990s, the Kop van Zuid was built on the south bank of the river as a new business centre. Rotterdam was voted 2015 European City of the Year by the Academy of Urbanism. A profile of Rem Koolhaas in \"The Guardian\" begins \"If you put the last 50 years of architecture in a blender, and spat it out in building-sized chunks across the skyline, you would probably end up with something that looked a bit like Rotterdam\".\nGeography.\nRotterdam is divided into a northern and a southern part by the river Nieuwe Maas, connected by (from west to east): the Beneluxtunnel; the Maastunnel; the Erasmusbrug; a subway tunnel; the Willemsspoortunnel ('Willems railway tunnel'); the Willemsbrug ('Willems Bridge') together with the Koninginnebrug ('Queen's Bridge'); and the Van Brienenoordbrug ('Van Brienenoord Bridge'). The former railway lift bridge De Hef ('the Lift') is preserved as a Rijksmonument (national heritage site) in lifted position between the Noordereiland ('North Island') and the south of Rotterdam.\nThe city centre is located on the northern bank of the Nieuwe Maas, although recent urban development has extended the centre to parts of southern Rotterdam known as Kop van Zuid ('the Head of South', i.e. the northern part of southern Rotterdam). From its inland core, Rotterdam reaches the North Sea by a swathe of predominantly harbour area.\nBuilt mostly behind dikes, large parts of Rotterdam are below sea level. For instance, the Prins Alexander Polder in the northeast of Rotterdam extends below sea level, or rather below Normaal Amsterdams Peil (NAP) or 'Amsterdam Ordnance Datum'. The lowest point in the Netherlands ( below NAP) is situated just to the east of Rotterdam, in the municipality of Nieuwerkerk aan den IJssel.\nThe Rotte river no longer joins the Nieuwe Maas directly. Since the early 1980s, when the construction of Rotterdam's second underground line interfered with the Rotte's course, its waters have been pumped through a pipe into the Nieuwe Maas via the Boerengat. \nBetween the summers of 2003 and 2008, an artificial beach was created at the Boompjeskade along the Nieuwe Maas, between the Erasmus Bridge and the Willems Bridge. Swimming was not possible, digging pits was limited to the height of the layer of sand, about . Alternatively, people go to the beach of Hook of Holland (which is a Rotterdam district) or one of the beaches in Zeeland: Renesse or the Zuid Hollandse Eilanden: Ouddorp, Oostvoorne.\nRotterdam forms the centre of the Rijnmond conurbation, bordering the conurbation surrounding The Hague to the north-west. The two conurbations are close enough to be a single conurbation. They share the Rotterdam The Hague Airport and a light rail system called RandstadRail. Consideration is being given to creating an official Metropolitan region Rotterdam The Hague (\"Metropoolregio Rotterdam Den Haag\"), which would have a combined population approaching 2.5 million.\nIn its turn, the Rijnmond conurbation is part of the southern wing (the Zuidvleugel) of the Randstad, which is one of the most important economic and densely populated areas in the north-west of Europe. Having a population of 7.1 million, the Randstad is the sixth-largest urban area in Europe (after Moscow, London, Paris, Istanbul, and the Rhein-Ruhr Area). The Zuidvleugel, situated in the province of South Holland, has a population of around 3 million.\nClimate.\nRotterdam experiences a temperate oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\") similar to all of the coastal areas in the Netherlands. Located near to the coast, its climate is slightly milder than locations further inland. Winters are cool with frequent cold days, while the summers are mild to warm, with occasional hot temperatures. Temperature rises above 30\u00a0\u00b0C on average 4 days each summer, while (night) temperatures can drop below \u22125\u00a0\u00b0C during winter for short periods of time, mostly during periods of sustained easterly (continental) winds. Precipitation is generally moderate throughout the year, although spring and summer (particularly before August) are relatively drier and sunnier, while autumn and winter are cloudier with more frequent rain (or snow). The following climate data is from the airport, which is slightly cooler than the city, being surrounded by water canals which make the climate milder and with a higher relative humidity. The city has an urban heat island, especially inside the city centre.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRotterdam is diverse, with the demographics differing by neighbourhood. The city centre has a disproportionately high number of single people when compared to other cities, with 70% of the population between the ages of 20 and 40 identifying as single. Those with higher education and higher income live disproportionately in the city centre, as do foreign-born citizens.\nComposition.\nThe municipality of Rotterdam is part of the Rotterdam\u2013The Hague metropolitan area which, as of 2015, covers an area of 1,130\u00a0km2, of which 990\u00a0km\u00a0km2 is land, and has a population of approximately 2,563,197. As of 2019, the municipality itself occupies an area of 325.79\u00a0km2, 208.80\u00a0km2 of which is land, and is home to 638,751 inhabitants. Its population peaked at 731,564 in 1965, but the dual processes of suburbanization and counterurbanization saw this number steadily decline over the next 2 decades, reaching 560,000 by 1985. Although Rotterdam has experienced population growth since then, it has done so at a slower pace than comparable cities in the Netherlands, like Amsterdam, The Hague and Utrecht.\nRotterdam consists of 14 submunicipalities: Centrum, Charlois (including Heijplaat), Delfshaven, Feijenoord, Hillegersberg-Schiebroek, Hook of Holland, Hoogvliet, IJsselmonde, Kralingen-Crooswijk, Noord, Overschie, Pernis, and Prins Alexander (the most populous submunicipality with around 85,000 inhabitants). One other area, Rozenburg, does have an official submunicipality status since 18 March 2010. Since the status of a submunicipality was lifted on 19 March 2014, it became an integral part of the municipality of Rotterdam.\nThe size of the municipality of Rotterdam is the result of the amalgamation of the following former municipalities, some of which were a submunicipality prior to 19 March 2014:\nOrigin background makeup.\nIn the Netherlands, Rotterdam has the highest percentage of residents with a recent migration background from non-industrialised nations. They form a large part of Rotterdam's multi-ethnic and multicultural diversity. 52.9% of the population have at least one parent born outside the country. There are 80,000 Muslims, constituting 13% of the population in 2010. The former mayor of Rotterdam, Ahmed Aboutaleb (2009\u20132024), is of Moroccan descent and is a practicing Muslim. The city is home to the largest Dutch Antillean community in the Netherlands. The city also has its own China Town at the West-Kruiskade, close to Rotterdam Centraal.\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristianity is the largest religion in Rotterdam, with 36.3% of the population identifying. The second and third largest religions are Islam (13.1%) and Hinduism (3.3%), while about half of the population has no religious affiliation.\nSince 1795 Rotterdam has hosted the chief congregation of the liberal Protestant brotherhood of Remonstrants. From 1955 it has been the seat of the Catholic bishop of Rotterdam when the Rotterdam diocese was split from the Haarlem diocese. Since 2010 the city is home to the largest mosque in the Netherlands, the Essalam Mosque (capacity 1,500).\nPolitics.\nThe municipal council consists of 45 members, the largest party is Livable Rotterdam. The municipal executive consists of mayor Carola Schouten and nine elderman, belonging to four parties.\nEconomy.\nRotterdam has always been one of the main centres of the shipping industry in the Netherlands. From the Rotterdam Chamber of the VOC, the world's first multinational, established in 1602, to the merchant shipping leader Royal Nedlloyd established in 1970, with its corporate headquarters located in the landmark building the 'Willemswerf' in 1988. In 1997, Nedlloyd merged with the British shipping industry leader P&amp;O forming the third largest merchant shipping company in the world. The Anglo-Dutch P&amp;O Nedlloyd was bought by the Danish giant corporation 'AP Moller Maersk' in 2005 and its Dutch operations are still headquartered in the 'Willemswerf'. Nowadays, well-known companies with headquarters in Rotterdam are consumer goods company Unilever (since 2020 London), asset management firm Robeco, energy company Eneco, dredging company Van Oord, oil company Royal Dutch Shell (since 2021 London), terminal operator Vopak, commodity trading company Vitol and architecture firms MVRDV and Office for Metropolitan Architecture.\nIt is also home to the regional headquarters of chemical company LyondellBasell, commodities trading company Glencore, pharmaceutical company Pfizer, logistics companies Stolt-Nielsen, electrical equipment company ABB and consumer goods company Procter &amp; Gamble. Furthermore, Rotterdam has the Dutch headquarters of Allianz, Maersk, Petrobras, Samskip, Louis Dreyfus Group, and Aon. The City of Rotterdam makes use of the services of semi-government companies Roteb (to take care of sanitation, waste management and assorted services) and the Port of Rotterdam Authority (to maintain the Port of Rotterdam). Both these companies were once municipal bodies; now they are autonomous entities, owned by the city.\nBeing the largest port and one of the largest cities of the country, Rotterdam attracts many people seeking jobs, especially in the cheap labour segment. The city's unemployment rate is 12%, almost twice the national average. Rotterdam is the largest port in Europe, with the rivers Maas and Rhine providing excellent access to the hinterland upstream reaching to Basel, Switzerland and into France. In 2004 Shanghai took over as the world's busiest container port. In 2006, Rotterdam was the world's seventh largest container port in terms of twenty-foot equivalent units (TEU) handled. The port's main activities are petrochemical industries and general cargo handling and transshipment. The harbour functions as an important transit point for bulk materials between the European continent and overseas. From Rotterdam, goods are transported by ship, river barge, train or road. In 2007, the \"Betuweroute\", a new fast freight railway from Rotterdam to Germany, was completed.\nWell-known streets in Rotterdam are the Lijnbaan (the first set of pedestrian streets of the country, opened in 1953), the Hoogstraat, the Coolsingel with the city hall, which was renovated between 2018 and 2021 giving cyclists and pedestrians more space, meaning that car traffic was reduced from 4 lanes (2 in each direction) to 2 lanes (1 in each direction). Another mainstreet is the Weena, which runs from the Central Station to the Hofplein (square). A modern shopping venue is the Beurstraverse (\"Stock Exchange Traverse\"), better known by its informal name 'Koopgoot' ('Buying/Shopping Gutter', after its subterranean position), which crosses the Coolsingel below street level. The Kruiskade is a more upscale shopping street, with retailers like Michael Kors, 7 For All Mankind, Calvin Klein, Hugo Boss, Tommy Hilfiger and the Dutch well-known men's clothier Oger. Another upscale shopping venue is a flagship store of department store De Bijenkorf. Located a little more to the east is the Markthal, with lots of small retailers inside. This hall is also one of Rotterdam's famous architectural landmarks. The main shopping venue in the south of Rotterdam is Zuidplein, which lies close to Rotterdam Ahoy, an accommodation centre for shows, exhibitions, sporting events, concerts and congresses. Another prominent shopping centre called Alexandrium lies in the east of Rotterdam. It includes a large kitchen and furniture centre.\nEducation.\nRotterdam has one major university, the Erasmus University Rotterdam (EUR), named after one of the city's famous former inhabitants, Desiderius Erasmus. The Woudestein campus houses (among others) Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University. In Financial Times' 2005 rankings it placed 29th globally and 7th in Europe. In the 2009 rankings of Masters of Management, the school reached first place with the CEMS Master in Management and the tenth place with its RSM Master in Management. The university is also home to Europe's largest student association, STAR Study Association Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University and the world's largest student association, AIESEC, has its international office in the city.\nThe Hoboken campus of EUR houses the Dijkzigt (general) hospital, the Sophia Hospital (for children), (cancer institute) and the medical department of the university. They are known collectively as the Erasmus Medical Center. This center is ranked third in Europe by CSIC as a hospital, and is also ranked within top 50 universities of the world in the field of medicine (clinical, pre-clinical &amp; health, 2017).\nThe Willem de Kooning Academy is Rotterdam's main art school, which is part of the Hogeschool Rotterdam. It is regarded as one of the most prestigious art schools in the Netherlands and the number 1 in Advertising and Copywriting. Part of the Willem de Kooning Academy is the Piet Zwart Institute for postgraduate studies and research in Fine Art, Media Design and Retail Design. The Piet Zwart Institute boasts a selective roster of emerging international artists.\nThree \"Hogescholen\" (Universities of applied sciences) exist in Rotterdam. These schools award their students a professional Bachelor's degree and postgraduate or Master's degree. The three \"Hogescholen\" are Hogeschool Rotterdam, Hogeschool Inholland and Codarts University for the Arts (Codarts hogeschool voor de kunsten), a vocational university that teaches music, dance and circus.\nUnique to the city is the Shipping &amp; Transport College which offers masters, bachelors and vocational diplomas on all levels.\nCulture.\nOnce primarily a city of labour, for its harbour and related industries, Rotterdam has now developed into a city of culture too, with various museums, cultural centres and activities, offering a stage for architecture, music, visuals arts, poetry, cinema, theatre, and culture more generally, with a range of festivals and other events, and a buzzing nightlife. The city has its own orchestra, the Rotterdam Philharmonic Orchestra, with its well-regarded young music director Lahav Shani, which plays at the congress and concert building \"De Doelen\". The Ahoy complex in the south of the city is used for pop concerts, exhibitions, tennis tournaments and other activities. There are also several theatres and cinemas, including LantarenVenster and Cinerama.\nAlongside Porto, Rotterdam was European Capital of Culture in 2001.\nMuseums, libraries and archives.\nRotterdam has various cultural institutions. Well-known museums are the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen, Het Nieuwe Instituut, the Wereldmuseum, the Kunsthal, Kunstinstituut Melly and the Maritime Museum Rotterdam. The Historical Museum Rotterdam has changed into Museum Rotterdam, which aims to exhibit the development of Rotterdam as a contemporary transnational city, and not merely the city's past. Other museums include the , the Netherlands Marine Corps Museum, Rotterdam Public Transport Museum and the Natural History Museum. The FENIX Museum of Migration is scheduled to open in 2025.\nThe first municipal library of Rotterdam was founded in 1604. The current (Public library), was established in 1869, and is currently the largest cultural organization in Rotterdam, with fifteen branches across the city.\nThe Rotterdam City Archives (\"Stadsarchief Rotterdam\") was established in 1857. Here one can find administrative records and sources about the city's historical development. The archival holdings include, among other, general archives, notarial deeds, an audiovisual collection, and a library.\nPopular music, film, festivals.\nRotterdam has a long tradition of popular music, including the city's Jazz scene before and after WWII. A major historical moment in the city's music history is the legendary Kralingen Pop Festival, which took place in Rotterdam in 1970 (featuring, among other, Pink Floyd, Jefferson Airplane, The Byrds, Canned Heat, It's a Beautiful Day, and Santana). The festival was also made into a film, \"Stamping Ground\" (dir. George Sluizer). Alternative (music) culture became prominently present in the city in these days. From the 1960s until the 2000s, Rotterdam had a thriving squatters movement, which not only accommodated thousands of people, but also created social centres and cultural venues. From this movement came clubs like Boogjes, Eksit, Nighttown, Vlerk and Waterfront. A major reference is Poortgebouw, which was squatted in 1980 and quickly legalised.\nRotterdam also became the home of Gabber, a type of hardcore electronic music popular in the mid-1990s, with hard beats and samples. Groups like Neophyte and Rotterdam Terror Corps (RTC) started in Rotterdam, playing at clubs like Parkzicht. In the years 2005\u20132011, the city struggled with keeping venues for pop music; many of them suffered severe financial problems. This resulted in the disappearance of the major music venues Nighttown and WATT and smaller stages such as Waterfront, Exit, and Heidegger. The city today has a few stages for pop music, like Rotown, Poortgebouw and Annabel. Additionally, the venue WORM focuses on experimental music, as well as various other cultural activities.\nWORM also screens films and hosts a film lab, \"Filmwerkplaats\". In fact, Rotterdam has an extensive film history, ranging from avant-garde classics, such as The Bridge (Ivens, 1928), to internationally acclaimed documentaries from the post-war era, such as Steady! (Van der Horst, 1952), and all kinds of fiction films. Of major importance within this context has also been the International Film Festival Rotterdam (IFFR), an annual event that lasts more than ten days (end of January, beginning of February), which has been organized since 1972. Besides the IFFR, several smaller film festivals take place in Rotterdam too, such as the Architecture Film Festival Rotterdam (AFFR). \nThroughout the year, many different festivals take place in Rotterdam. There are the summer festivals celebrating the city's multicultural population and identity, such as the Caribbean-inspired \"Summer Carnival\", the Dance Parade, Rotterdam 666, and the Metropolis pop festival. There are also Poetry International (in June), the North Sea Jazz Festival (in July), the Valery Gergiev Festival (in September), and, also in September, the festival 'September in Rotterdam', the festival 'World of the Witte de With Quaret', and the World Port Days.\nEurovision Song Contest.\nOn 30 August 2019, it was announced by the European Broadcasting Union and Dutch television broadcasters AVROTROS, NOS and NPO, that Rotterdam would host the Eurovision Song Contest 2020, following the Dutch victory at the 2019 contest in Tel Aviv, Israel with the song \"Arcade\", performed by Duncan Laurence. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe, the 2020 contest was cancelled, and Rotterdam was later retained as host of the 2021 contest. The contest took place at Rotterdam Ahoy, with the semi-finals taking place on 18 and 20 May 2021, and the final taking place on 22 May 2021. This was the first time that Rotterdam hosted the contest, and the first time that the Netherlands hosted the contest since 1980, when it was held in The Hague.\nRivalry.\nThere is a healthy competition with Amsterdam, which is often viewed as the cultural capital of the Netherlands. This rivalry is most common amongst the city's football supporters, Feyenoord (Rotterdam) and Ajax (Amsterdam) and it is so severe, football games are only played with the home crowd present due to out-of-control riots in the past. There is a saying: \"Amsterdam to party, Den Haag (The Hague) to live, Rotterdam to work\". Another one, more popular by Rotterdammers, is \"Money is earned in Rotterdam, distributed in The Hague and spent in Amsterdam\". Another saying that reflects both the rivalry between Rotterdam and Amsterdam is \"Amsterdam has it, Rotterdam doesn't need it\". Bright magazine editor Erwin van der Zande notes that this phrase is on T-shirts in Rotterdam.\nArchitecture.\nRotterdam has become world famous because of its modern and groundbreaking architecture. Throughout the years the city has been nicknamed \"Manhattan at the Meuse\" and \"The architectural capital of the Netherlands\" both for its skyline and because it is home to internationally leading architectural firms involved in the design of famous buildings and bridges in other big cities. Examples include OMA (Rem Koolhaas), MVRDV, Neutelings &amp; Riedijk and Erick van Egeraat. It has the reputation in being a platform for architectural development and education through the NAi (Netherlands Architecture Institute), which is open to the public and has a variety of exhibitions on architecture and urban planning issues and prior the Berlage Institute, a postgraduate laboratory of architecture. The city has 38 skyscrapers and 352 high-rises and has many skyscrapers planned or under construction. The top 5 of highest buildings in the Netherlands consists entirely of buildings in Rotterdam. It is home to the two tallest buildings in the Netherlands, the Maastoren with a height of 165 meters and the Zalmhaven Tower (completed in 2021) with a height of 215 meters.\nHistory.\nIn 1898, the high-rise office building the White House (in Dutch Witte Huis) was completed, at that time the tallest office building in Europe.\nIn the first decades of the 20th century, some influential architecture in the modern style was built in Rotterdam. Notable are the Van Nelle fabriek (1929) a monument of modern factory design by Brinkman and Van der Vlugt, the Jugendstil clubhouse of the Royal Maas Yacht Club designed by Hooijkaas jr. en Brinkman (1909), and Feyenoord's football stadium De Kuip (1936) also by Brinkman and Van der Vlugt. The architect J. J. P. Oud was a famous Rotterdammer in those days. The Van Nelle Factory obtained the status of UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2014.\nDuring the early stages of World War II the centre of Rotterdam was bombed by the German Luftwaffe, destroying many of the older buildings in the centre of the city. After an initial crisis re-construction, the centre of Rotterdam has become the site of the ambitious new architecture.\nRotterdam is also famous for its Lijnbaan 1952 by architects Broek en Bakema, Peperklip by architect Carel Weeber, Kubuswoningen or cube houses designed by architect Piet Blom 1984.\nThe newest landmark in Rotterdam is the Markthal, designed by architect firm MVRDV. In addition to that, there are many international well-known architects based in Rotterdam like O.M.A (Rem Koolhaas), Neutelings &amp; Riedijk and Erick van Egeraat to name a few. Two architectural landmarks are located in the Lloydkwartier: the STC college building and the Schiecentrale 4b. The construction of the Depot of the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen was started in 2003 and was officially opened by king Willem-Alexander on 5 November 2021. It is the world's first fully accessible art depot.\nRotterdam also houses several of the tallest structures in the Netherlands.\nRotterdam has a reputation for being a platform for architectural development and education through the Berlage Institute, a postgraduate laboratory of architecture, and the NAi (Netherlands Architecture Institute), which is open to the public and has a variety of exhibitions on architecture and urban planning issues.\nOver 30 new highrise projects are being developed. A Guardian journalist wrote in 2013 that \"All this is the consequence of the city suffering a bombardment of two things: bombs and architects.\"\nParks.\nWithin Rotterdam's urban structure, parks and greenery play an important role. A number of well-known parks in Rotterdam are:\nGreen activities.\nSince 28 May 1994, Rotterdam has had the phenomenon \"Opzoomeren\". 15% of Rotterdam residents (about 100,000 residents) say they participate in this phenomenon. At the end of 2020, the city has a record number of 2,503 Opzoomer streets, which is mainly reflected in the construction of facade gardens.\nThe municipality of Rotterdam is encouraging the construction of green roofs. There is an attractive subsidy for roof owners and the city has now provided a number of municipal buildings with a green roof. As of 1 January 2020, the water storage capacity requirement has been increased to 30 liters of water storage capacity per square metre. This reduces the burden on the sewer system during heavy rainfall and reduces the risk of flooding on the street.\nSports.\nRotterdam calls itself \"Sportstad\" (City of Sports). The city annually organises several world-renowned sporting events. Some examples are the Rotterdam Marathon, the World Port Tournament, and the Rotterdam World Tennis Tournament. Rotterdam has also hosted a race of the Red Bull Air Race World Championship and the car racing event Monaco aan de Maas (Monaco at the Meuse).\nThe city is also the home of many sports clubs and some historic and iconic athletes.\nFootball.\nRotterdam is the home of three professional football clubs, being first tier clubs Feyenoord, Sparta, and Excelsior.\nFeyenoord, founded in 1908 and the dominant of the three professional clubs, has won sixteen national titles since the introduction of professional football in the Netherlands. It won the UEFA Champions League as the first Dutch club in 1970 and won the World Cup for club teams in the same year. In 1974, they were the first Dutch club to win the UEFA Cup and in 2002, Feyenoord won the UEFA Cup again. In 2008, the year of their 100-year-anniversary, Feyenoord won the KNVB Cup.\nSeating 51,480, its 1937 stadium, called \"Stadion Feijenoord\" but popularly known as De Kuip ('the Tub'), is the second-largest in the country, after the Amsterdam Arena. De Kuip, located in the southeast of the city, has hosted many international football games, including the final of Euro 2000 and has been awarded a FIFA 5 star ranking. There were concrete plans to build a new stadium with a capacity of at least 63,000 seats, these fell through after supporter backlash and lack of funds.\nSparta, founded in 1888 and situated in the northwest of Rotterdam, won the national title six times; Excelsior (founded 1902), in the northeast, has never won any.\nRotterdam also has three fourth tier clubs, SC Feijenoord (Feyenoord Amateurs), PVV DOTO and TOGR.\nRotterdam is and has been the home to many great football players and coaches, among whom:\nMarathon.\nRotterdam has its own annual international marathon, which offers one of the fastest courses in the world. From 1985 until 1998, the world record was set in Rotterdam, first by Carlos Lopes and later in 1988 by Belayneh Densamo.\nIn 1998, the world record for women was set by Tegla Loroupe, in a time of 2:20.47. Loroupe won the Rotterdam Marathon three consecutive times, from 1997 to 1999.\nThe track record for men is held by Bashir Abdi, who ran a time of 2:03.36 in 2021. The female record was set in 2012 when Tiki Gelana finished the race in 2:18.58. Gelana went on to become the 2012 Olympic champion in London, a few months later.\nThe marathon starts and ends on the \"Coolsingel\" in the heart of Rotterdam. It attracts a total of 900,000 visitors.\nTennis.\nSince 1972, Rotterdam hosts the indoor hard court ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament, part of the ATP Tour. The event was first organised in 1972 when it was won by Arthur Ashe. Ashe went on to win the tournament two more times, making him the singles title record holder.\nFormer Wimbledon winner Richard Krajicek became the tournament director after his retirement in 2000. The latest edition of the tournament attracted a total of 116,354 visitors.\nTour de France.\nIn November 2008 Rotterdam was chosen as the host of the Grand D\u00e9part of the 2010 Tour de France.\nRotterdam won the selection over the Dutch city of Utrecht. Germany's D\u00fcsseldorf had previously also expressed interest in hosting. The Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO), the organizer of the Tour de France, said in a statement on its web site that it chose Rotterdam because, in addition to it being another big city, like London, to showcase the use of bikes for urban transportation, it provided a location well-positioned considering the rest of the route envisioned for the 2010 event. The start in Rotterdam was the fifth to take place in the Netherlands. The prologue was a individual time trial crossing the centre of the city. The first regular stage left the Erasmusbrug and went south, towards Brussels.\nThe second stage of 2015 edition took the riders through Rotterdam on their way to Neeltje Jans in Zeeland.\nThe 2024 edition of the Tour de France Femmes began in Rotterdam, with three stages in the Netherlands.\nRowing.\nMembers of the student rowing club Skadi were part of the 'Holland Acht', winning a gold medal at the Olympics in 1996. Since the opening in April 2013, Rotterdam hosts the rowing venue Willem-Alexander Baan that hosted the 2016 World Rowing Championships for Seniors, U23 and Juniors.\nField hockey.\nIn field hockey, Rotterdam has the largest hockey club in the Netherlands, HC Rotterdam, with its own stadium in the north of the city and nearly 2,400 members. The first men's and women's teams both play on the highest level in the Dutch \"Hoofdklasse\".\nBaseball.\nRotterdam is home to the most successful European baseball team, Neptunus Rotterdam, winning the most European Cups.\nBoxing.\nRotterdam has a long boxing tradition starting with Bep van Klaveren (1907\u20131992), aka 'The Dutch Windmill', Gold medal winner of the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics, followed by professional boxers like Regilio Tuur and Don Diego Poeder.\nSwimming.\nRotterdam's swimming tradition started with Marie Braun aka Zus (sister) Braun, who was coached to a gold medal at the 1928 Amsterdam Olympics by her mother Ma Braun, and 3 European titles three years later in Paris. In her career as 14-time national champ, she broke 6 world records. Ma Braun later also coached the Rotterdam-born, three-times Olympic champion Rie Mastenbroek during the Berlin Olympics in 1936. In later years Inge de Bruijn became a Rotterdam sports icon as triple Olympic Gold medal winner in 2000 and triple European Gold medal winner in 2001.\nSailing.\nOlympic Gold medalist, in the O-Jolle during 1936 Olympics, Daan Kagchelland was born in Rotterdam and member of the . The Kralingse plas was and is still a source of Olympic sailors like Koos de Jong, Ben Verhagen, Henny Vegter, Serge Kats and Margriet Matthijsse.\nMotorcycle racing.\nMotorcycle speedway was staged in the Feyenoord Stadium after the second world war. The team which raced in a Dutch league was known as the Feyenoord Tigers. The team included Dutch riders and some English and Australian riders.\nSportsmen of the year election.\nSince 1986, the city has selected its best sportsman, woman and team at the Rotterdam Sports Awards Election, held in December.\nYearly events.\nRotterdam hosts several annual events unique to the city. It hosts the \"Zomercarnaval\" (Summer carnaval), the second-largest Caribbean carnival in Europe, originally called the Antillean carnival. Other events include: North Sea Jazz Festival, the largest Jazz festival in Europe, and a three-day long maritime extravaganza called the World Port Days celebrating the Port of Rotterdam.\nTransportation.\nRotterdam offers connections by international, national, regional and local public transport systems, as well as by the Dutch motorway network.\nMotorways.\nThere are several motorways to/from Rotterdam. The following four are part of its 'Ring' (ring road):\nThe following two other motorways also serve Rotterdam:\nAirport.\nMuch smaller than the international hub Schiphol Airport, Rotterdam The Hague Airport (formerly known as \"Zestienhoven\") is the third-largest airport in the country, behind Schiphol Airport and Eindhoven Airport. Located north of the city, it has shown solid growth over the past five years, mostly caused by the growth of the low-cost carrier market. For business travellers, Rotterdam The Hague Airport offers advantages in terms of rapid handling of passengers and baggage. Environmental regulations make further growth uncertain.\nTrain.\nRotterdam is well connected to the Dutch railway network, and has several international connections:\nRailway stations.\nThe main connections:\nIn Rotterdam, public transport services are provided by the following companies:\nMetro.\nIn 1968, Rotterdam was the first Dutch city to open a metro system. The metro system consists of three main lines, each of which has its own variants. The metro network has of rail tracks, and there are 70 stations, which makes it the biggest of the Benelux. 5 lines operate the system; 3 lines (A, B and C) on the east\u2013west line, and two (D and E) on the north\u2013south line. Line E (Randstadrail) connects Rotterdam with The Hague as of December 2011.\nTram.\nThe Rotterdam tramway network offers 9 regular tram lines and 4 special tram lines with a total length of . Service\nTramlines in Rotterdam as of 2016[ [update]]:\nSpecial tram lines:\nBus.\nRotterdam offers 55 city bus lines with a total length of .\nRET runs buses in the city of Rotterdam and surrounding places like Barendrecht, Ridderkerk, Rhoon, Poortugaal, Schiedam, Vlaardingen, Delft and Capelle aan den IJssel.\nArriva Netherlands, Connexxion, Qbuzz and Veolia run buses from other cities to Rotterdam.\nAn automated bus service, ParkShuttle, runs between Kralingse Zoom metro station and the Rivium Business Park in Capelle aan den IJssel.\nThe RoMeO Foundation.\nThe Foundation RoMeO (Rotterdam Public Transport Museum and Exploitation of Oldtimers) was founded in 1997 to bring together various historical transport collections into one collection. Currently, the joint collection consists of more than sixty trams, twenty buses and an underground metro dating from 1967. Since 2010 the Rotterdam Public Transport Museum is housed in the monumental tram depot Hillegersberg from 1923.\nWaterbus.\nThe Waterbus network consists of seven lines. The mainline (Line 20) stretches from Rotterdam to Dordrecht. The ferry carries about 130 passengers, and there is space for 60 bicycles. The stops between Rotterdam and Dordrecht are:\nFerry.\nP&amp;O Ferries have daily sailings from Europoort to Kingston upon Hull in the UK.\nInternational relations.\nRotterdam has city and port connections throughout the world. In 2008, the city had 13 sister cities, 12 partner cities, and 4 sister ports. Since 2008, the City of Rotterdam does not forge new sister or partner connections. Sister and partner cities are not a priority in international relations.\nOn 15 March 2017, the Turkish president expressed his wish that Istanbul should no longer be the twin town of Rotterdam. A speaker of the Rotterdam municipality then explained that the two cities have no official partnership. Both authorities do cooperate often.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nRotterdam is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPartner cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlaces named after Rotterdam.\nThe town of Rotterdam, located in the U.S. state of New York, was founded in 1661 by Dutch settlers, who named it after the city of Rotterdam in the Netherlands, where many immigrants last touched European grounds. The town borders the city of Schenectady. Founded as a 'first class town' in 1942, Rotterdam has since adopted the Old World Rotterdam coat of arms along with the motto \"Sterker door Strijd\" (Stronger through Effort).\nNotable people.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nRotterdam features in Edgar Allan Poe's short story \"The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall\" (1835).\nRotterdam features in J.T. Sheridan Le Fanu's \"Strange Event in the Life of Schalken the Painter\" (1839).\nIn episode 2 of the first series of \"Survivors\" Greg Preston says \"Rotterdam was burning, just miles and miles of fire. Oil tanks going off like bombs.\"\nIn season 1, episode 2 of \"The Golden Girls\" (\"Guess Who's Coming to the Wedding?\"), Dorothy reminisces how her ex-husband, Stan, would buy her tulips after they fought. \"Towards the end, our house looked like Easter in Rotterdam.\"\nIn 1996, the British band the Beautiful South recorded a song named after this region titled \"Rotterdam (or Anywhere)\".\nPart of Jackie Chan's 1998 film \"Who Am I?\" is set in Rotterdam.\n\"Ender's Shadow\", part of the series \"Ender's Game\" is partially set in Rotterdam.\nIn the 2004 video game \"\", the missions \"Rendezvous in Rotterdam\" and \"Deadly Cargo\" are both set in Rotterdam.\nThe 2017 Laurence Olivier Award-winning play \"Rotterdam\", written by Jon Brittain, is set in the city.\nIn \"Battlefield V\", this city is used as a map released on its two of its maps on launch, which are Rotterdam and Devastation, and featured the British Army fighting against the Wehrmacht and according to its history, the white building was almost left untouched by the bombing during WWII and that building can be seen on both in-game and real world.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26050", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26050", "title": "Rowley Burkin QC", "text": ""}
{"id": "26052", "revid": "47905414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26052", "title": "Ringworld", "text": "1970 science fiction novel by Larry Niven\nRingworld is a 1970 science fiction novel by Larry Niven, set in his Known Space universe and considered a classic of science fiction literature. \"Ringworld\" tells the story of Louis Wu and his companions on a mission to the Ringworld, an enormous rotating ring, an alien construct in space in diameter. Niven later wrote three sequel novels and then cowrote, with Edward M. Lerner, four prequels and a final sequel; the five latter novels constitute the \"Fleet of Worlds\" series. All the novels in the \"Ringworld\" series tie into numerous other books set in Known Space. \"Ringworld\" won the Nebula Award in 1970, as well as both the Hugo Award and Locus Award in 1971.\nPlot summary.\nOn Earth in 2850 AD, a bored Louis Wu is celebrating his 200th birthday. Despite his age, Louis is in perfect physical condition due to the longevity drug boosterspice. Nessus, a Pierson's puppeteer, offers him a mysterious job. Intrigued, Louis accepts. Nessus also recruits the Kzin Speaker-to-Animals and Teela Brown, a young human woman who becomes Louis's lover, for the rest of the ship's crew.\nOn the puppeteer home world (which is fleeing deadly radiation that will arrive in 20,000 years), they are told that their goal is to determine if the Ringworld, a gigantic artificial ring near the puppeteers' path, poses any threat to their migration. The Ringworld is about one million miles (1.6 million km) wide and approximately the diameter of Earth's orbit, encircling a sunlike star. It rotates to provide artificial gravity 99% as strong as Earth's from centrifugal force. It has a habitable inner surface (equivalent in area to approximately three million Earths), a breathable atmosphere, and a temperature optimal for humans. Night is provided by an inner ring of shadow squares which are connected to each other by thin, ultra-strong wire. When the crew completes their mission, as payment they will be given the starship they used to travel to the puppeteer world; it is about 1000 times faster than any human or Kzinti ship.\nWhen they reach the vicinity of the Ringworld, they are unable to contact anyone. Their ship, the \"Lying Bastard\", is disabled by an automated meteoroid-defense system. The vessel collides with a strand of shadow-square wire and crash-lands near a huge mountain, which is called \"Fist-of-God\" by the first natives they speak with. The fusion drive is destroyed, so they set out to find a way to get the \"Lying Bastard\" off the Ringworld and use the undamaged hyperdrive to return home.\nUsing their flycycles, they set out for the rim of the ring, searching for technology to help them get home. They encounter primitive human natives who live in the ruins of a once-advanced city. The natives think that Louis is one of the engineers who created the ring, whom they revere as gods. The crew is attacked when Louis accidentally commits what the natives consider a blasphemy, but extricate themselves.\nDuring their journey, Nessus reveals several puppeteer secrets. They initiated research into rendering the Kzinti extinct, considering them dangerous and useless, but found that the numerous Man-Kzin wars\u2014which the Kzinti always lost\u2014had greatly reduced their aggression: a very high percentage of Kzinti males were killed in each conflict, leaving more prudent and cautious survivors to breed. The puppeteers had also used Birthright Lotteries to try to breed humans for luck: all of Teela's ancestors for six generations are lottery winners. Speaker's outrage at learning the former forces Nessus to flee from the group and then follow from a safe distance.\nWhile flying through a giant storm, Teela becomes separated from the others. When Louis and Speaker search for her, their flycycles are caught by an automated trap designed to catch speeders. They are brought to a floating police station. There, they meet Halrloprillalar Hotrufan (\"Prill\"), a former crew member of a ship that had brought back goods from worlds abandoned by the Ringworld builders. Nessus, using a tasp (a remote pleasure-giving device), conditions Prill into helping and joining them. When her ship returned to the Ringworld the last time, they discovered that civilization had collapsed. Louis surmises that a mold inadvertently brought back by a ship like Prill's mutated and broke down the superconductors vital to the Ringworld civilization, causing its fall.\nTeela rejoins them, accompanied by her new lover, a traveling warrior named Seeker who protected her. Based on an insight gained from studying a Ringworld map, Louis comes up with a plan to get home. Teela chooses to remain on the Ringworld with Seeker. Louis, formerly skeptical about breeding for luck, now wonders if the entire mission was caused by Teela's luck, to unite her with her true love and help her mature.\nThe party collects one end of the shadow-square wire that snapped after the collision with their ship and fell near their path, and drag it behind them. Louis threads it through the \"Lying Bastard\" to tether it to the floating police station. \"Fist-of-God\", the enormous mountain near their crash site, was not on the Ringworld map, leading Louis to guess that it is the result of a meteoroid striking the underside of the ring, pushing the ring's floor up and finally breaking through. The top of the mountain, above the atmosphere, is therefore just a hole. Louis uses the police station to drag the \"Lying Bastard\" up and into the hole. Once the ship falls through and clears the ring, they can use its hyperdrive to get home. The book concludes with Louis and Speaker discussing returning to the Ringworld.\nReception.\n\"Ringworld\" was met with immediate critical acclaim and received the \"triple crown\" of science fiction awards. It won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1970, the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1971, and the Locus Award for Best Novel in 1971.\nReviewers lauded the novel's grand scale and inventiveness. Algis Budrys found \"Ringworld\" to be \"excellent and entertaining ... woven together very skillfully and proceed[ing] at a pretty smooth pace., Charles N. Brown called it \"a first rate adventure story\" and remarked that the central megastructure was \"so gigantic that it is hard to visualize.\" The book is frequently identified as a definitive example of the \"Big Dumb Object\" concept in science fiction.\n\"Ringworld\" is recognized for its enduring influence. Writing for \"The Guardian\" in 2010, Sam Jordison described it as \"arguably one of the most influential science fiction novels of the past 50 years. The concept of a habitable, ring-shaped megastructure has been cited as an inspiration for other works, most notably the \"Halo\" video game series, which features similar structures known as Halo Rings.\nConcepts reused.\nIn addition to the two aliens, Niven includes a number of concepts from his other Known Space stories:\nErrors.\nThe opening chapter of the original paperback edition of \"Ringworld\" featured Louis Wu teleporting eastward around the Earth in order to extend his birthday. Moving in this direction would, in fact, make local time later rather than earlier, so that Wu would soon arrive in the early morning of the next calendar day. Niven was \"endlessly teased\" about this error, which he corrected in subsequent printings to show Wu teleporting westward. In his dedication to \"The Ringworld Engineers\", Niven wrote, \"If you own a first paperback edition of \"Ringworld\", it's the one with the mistakes in it. It's worth money.\"\nAfter the publication of \"Ringworld\", many fans identified numerous engineering problems in the Ringworld as described in the novel. One major one was that the Ringworld, being a rigid structure, was not actually in orbit around the star it encircled and would eventually drift, ultimately colliding with its sun and disintegrating. This led MIT students attending the 1971 Worldcon to chant, \"The Ringworld is unstable!\" Niven wrote the 1980 sequel \"The Ringworld Engineers\" in part to address these engineering issues.\nThe second chapter refers to standard Earth gravity as (or even gives the unit as m/s [\"sic\"]), while standard Earth gravity is . \nThe fifth chapter refers to Nereid as Neptune's largest moon; the planet's largest moon is Triton.\nInfluence.\n\"Ringworld\" has become a generic term for such a structure, which is an example of what science fiction fans call a \"Big Dumb Object\", or more formally a megastructure. Other science fiction authors have devised their own variants of Niven's Ringworld, notably Iain M. Banks' Culture Orbitals, best described as miniature Ringworlds, and the titular ring-shaped Halo structures of the video game series \"Halo\". Such a mini-Ringworld appears in \"Star Wars: The Book of Boba Fett\", season 1, episode 5. In the Paramount+ series season 4, episode 3, \"In the Cradle of Vexilon\", a Ringworld-like world is prominently featured.\nAdaptations.\nGames.\nIn 1984, a role-playing game based on this setting was produced by Chaosium named \"The Ringworld Roleplaying Game\". Information from the RPG, along with notes composed by RPG author John Hewitt with Niven, was later used to form the \"Bible\" given to authors writing in the \"Man-Kzin Wars\" series. Niven himself recommended that Hewitt write one of the stories for the original two MKW books, although this never came to pass.\nTsunami Games released two adventure games based on \"Ringworld\". \"\" was released in 1992 and \"Return to Ringworld\" in 1994. A third game, \"Ringworld: Within ARM's Reach\", was also planned, but never completed.\nThe video game franchise \"Halo\", created by Bungie, took inspiration from the book in the creation and development of its story around the eponymous rings, called Halos. These are physically similar to the Ringworld, however they are much smaller and do not encircle the star, instead orbiting stars or planets.\nThe open source video game \"Endless Sky\" features an alien species that creates ringworlds.\nIn 2017, Paradox Interactive added a DLC called \"Utopia\" to their game \"Stellaris\", allowing the player to restore or build ringworlds.\nIn 2021, Mobius Digital added a DLC called \"Echoes of the Eye\" to their game \"Outer Wilds\", which allows the player to explore a hidden, abandoned ringworld and determine what happened to its inhabitants.\nOn screen.\nThere have been many aborted attempts to adapt the novel to the screen.\nIn 2001, Larry Niven reported that a movie deal had been signed and was in the early planning stages.\nIn 2004, the Sci-Fi Channel reported that it was developing a \"Ringworld\" miniseries. The series never came to fruition.\nIn 2013, it was again announced by the channel, now rebranded as Syfy, that a miniseries of the novel was in development. This proposed four-hour miniseries was being written by Michael R. Perry and would have been a co-production between MGM Television and Universal Cable Productions.\nIn 2017, Amazon announced that \"Ringworld\" was one of three science fiction series it was developing for its streaming service. MGM were again listed as a co-producer.\nOEL manga.\nTor/Seven Seas (same joint venture of Macmillan's Tor Books and Seven Seas Entertainment who also published the English-language translation of \"Afro Samurai\") published a two-part original English-language manga adaptation of \"Ringworld\", with the script written by Robert Mandell and the artwork by Sean Lam. \"Ringworld: The Graphic Novel, Part One\", covering the events of the novel up to the sunflower attack on Speaker, was released on July 8, 2014. \"Part Two\" was released on November 10, 2015.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26054", "revid": "50534610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26054", "title": "Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor", "text": "Holy Roman Emperor from 1576 to 1612\nRudolf II (18 July 1552 \u2013 20 January 1612) was Holy Roman Emperor (1576\u20131612), King of Hungary and Croatia (as Rudolf I, 1572\u20131608), King of Bohemia (1575\u20131608/1611) and Archduke of Austria (1576\u20131608). He was a member of the House of Habsburg.\nRudolf's legacy has traditionally been viewed in three ways: an ineffectual ruler whose mistakes led directly to the Thirty Years' War; a great and influential patron of Northern Mannerist art; and an intellectual devotee of occult arts and learning which helped seed what would be called the Scientific Revolution. Determined to unify Christendom, he initiated the Long Turkish War (1593\u20131606) with the Ottoman Empire. Exhausted by war, his citizens in Hungary revolted in the Bocskai Uprising, which led to more authority being given to his brother Matthias. Under his reign, there was a policy of toleration towards Judaism.\nEarly life.\nRudolf was born in Vienna on 18 July 1552. He was the eldest son and successor of Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor, King of Bohemia, and King of Hungary and Croatia; his mother was the Spanish Princess Maria, a daughter of Charles V and Isabella of Portugal. He was the elder brother of Matthias who was to succeed him as King of Bohemia and Holy Roman Emperor.\nRudolf spent eight formative years, from age 11 to 19 (1563\u20131571), in Spain, at the court of his maternal uncle Philip II, together with his younger brother Ernest, future governor of the Low Countries. \nAfter his return to Vienna, his father was concerned about Rudolf's aloof and stiff manner, typical of the more conservative Spanish court, rather than the more relaxed and open Austrian court; but his Spanish mother saw in him courtliness and refinement. In the years following his return to Vienna, Rudolf was crowned King of Hungary (1572), King of Bohemia and King of the Romans (1575) when his father was still alive.\nFor the rest of his life, Rudolf would remain reserved, secretive, and largely a recluse who did not like to travel or even partake in the daily affairs of the state. \nHe was more intrigued by occult learning such as astrology and alchemy, which was mainstream in the Renaissance period, and had a wide variety of personal hobbies such as horses, clocks, collecting rarities, and being a patron of the arts. He suffered from periodic bouts of \"melancholy\" (depression), which was common in the Habsburg line. These became worse with age and were manifested by a withdrawal from the world and its affairs into his private interests.\nPersonal life.\nLike Elizabeth I of England, whose birth was 19 years before his, Rudolf dangled himself as a prize in a string of diplomatic negotiations for marriages but never in fact married. Rudolf was known to have had a succession of affairs with women, some of whom claimed to have been impregnated by him. He had several illegitimate children by his mistress Catherina Strada. Their eldest son, Don Julius Caesar d'Austria, was likely born between 1584 and 1586 and received an education and opportunities for political and social prominence from his father. Another famous child was Karolina (1591\u20131662), Princess of Cantecroix, mother-in-law of Beatrice de Cusance, later Duchess of Lorraine as the second wife of Charles IV of Lorraine.\nDuring his periods of self-imposed isolation, Rudolf reportedly had affairs with his Obersthofmeister, Wolfgang Siegmund Rumpf vom Wullro\u00df (1536\u20131606), and a series of valets. One of them, Philipp Lang von Langenfels (1560\u20131609), influenced him for years and was hated by those seeking favours with the emperor.\nRudolf succeeded his father, Maximilian II, on 12 October 1576. In 1583, he moved the court to Prague.\nIn 1607, Rudolf sent Julius to live in \u010cesk\u00fd Krumlov Castle, in Bohemia, in what is now the Czech Republic, a castle that Rudolf had acquired from Peter Vok of Rosenberg, the last member of the House of Rosenberg, who had fallen into financial ruin. Julius lived at \u010cesk\u00fd Krumlov in 1608, when he reportedly abused and murdered the daughter of a local barber, who had been living in the castle, and then disfigured her body. Rudolf condemned his son's act and suggested that he should be imprisoned for the rest of his life.\nHowever, Julius died in 1609 after he had shown signs of schizophrenia, refused to bathe and lived in squalor. His death was apparently caused by an ulcer that ruptured.\nMany artworks commissioned by Rudolf are unusually erotic. The emperor was the subject of a whispering campaign by his enemies in his family and the Catholic Church in the years before he was deposed. Sexual allegations might well have formed a part of the campaign against him.\nReign.\nHistorians have traditionally blamed Rudolf's preoccupation with the arts, occult sciences, and other personal interests for the political disasters of his reign. More recently historians have re-evaluated that view and see his patronage of the arts and occult sciences as a triumph and key part of the Renaissance, and his political failures are seen as a legitimate attempt to create a unified Christian empire that was undermined by the realities of religious, political and intellectual disintegrations of the time.\nAlthough raised in his uncle's Catholic court in Spain, Rudolf was tolerant of Protestantism and other religions including Judaism. The tolerant policy by the empire towards the Jews would see Jewish cultural life flourishing, and their population increased under Rudolf's reign.\nHe largely withdrew from Catholic observances and even in death refused the last sacramental rites. He had little attachment to Protestants either, except as a counter-weight to papal policies. He put his primary support behind conciliarists, irenicists and humanists. When the papacy instigated the Counter-Reformation by using agents sent to his court, Rudolf backed those whom he thought were the most neutral in the debate, either by not taking a side or by trying to promote restraint. This led to political chaos and threatened to provoke civil war.\nHis conflict with the Ottoman Empire was the final cause of his undoing. Unwilling to compromise with the Ottomans and stubbornly determined that he could unify all of Christendom with a new crusade, he started a long and indecisive war against the Ottomans in 1593. The war lasted until 1606 and is known as the \"Long Turkish War\". \nBy 1604, his Hungarian subjects were exhausted by the war and revolted, led by Stephen Bocskai (Bocskai uprising). In 1605, Rudolf was forced by his other family members to cede control of Hungarian affairs to his younger brother Archduke Matthias. By 1606, Matthias had forged a difficult peace with the Hungarian rebels (Peace of Vienna) and the Ottomans (Peace of Zsitvatorok). \nRudolf was angry with Matthias's concessions and saw them as giving away too much to further his hold on power. That made Rudolf prepare to start a new war against the Ottomans, but Matthias rallied support from the disaffected Hungarians and forced Rudolf to cede the crowns of Hungary, Austria and Moravia to him. Meanwhile, the Bohemian Protestants demanded greater religious liberty, which Rudolf granted in the \"Letter of Majesty\" in 1609. Bohemians continued to press for further freedoms, and Rudolf used his army to repress them.\nBohemian Protestants then appealed to Matthias for help. His army held Rudolf prisoner in his castle in Prague until 1611, when Rudolf ceded the crown of Bohemia, as well, to his brother.\nDeath.\nRudolf died in 1612, nine months after he had been stripped of all effective power by his younger brother, except the empty title of Holy Roman Emperor, to which Matthias was elected five months later. In May 1618 with the event known as the Defenestration of Prague, the Protestant Bohemians, in defence of the rights granted them in the \"Letter of Majesty\", threw imperial officials out of the window and thus the Thirty Years' War (1618\u20131648) started.\nArt collecting and patronage.\nRudolf moved the Habsburg capital from Vienna to Prague in 1583. Rudolf loved collecting paintings and was often reported to sit and stare in rapture at a new work for hours on end. He spared no expense in acquiring great past masterworks, such as those of D\u00fcrer and Brueghel. He was also patron to some of the best contemporary artists, who mainly produced new works in the Northern Mannerist style, such as Bartholomeus Spranger, Hans von Aachen, Giambologna, Giuseppe Arcimboldo, Aegidius Sadeler, Roelant Savery, Joris Hoefnagel and Adrian de Vries, as well as commissioning works from Italians like Paolo Veronese.\nRudolf's collections were the most impressive in the Europe of his day and the greatest collection of Northern Mannerist art ever to be assembled. The adjective Rudolfine, as in \"Rudolfine Mannerism\" is often used in art history to describe the style of the art that he patronised.\nHis love of collecting went far beyond paintings and sculptures. He commissioned decorative objects of all kinds and in particular mechanical moving devices. Ceremonial swords and musical instruments, clocks, waterworks, astrolabes, compasses, telescopes and other scientific instruments were all produced for him by some of the best craftsmen in Europe.\nHe patronized the astronomers Tycho Brahe and Johannes Kepler, who both attended his court. Tycho, who had spent much of his life making observations of stars and planets that were more accurate than any previous observations, directed Kepler to work on the planet Mars. In doing so, Kepler found that in order to fit the observations to the required accuracy, it was necessary to assume that each planet orbits the sun in an ellipse with the sun at one focus, sweeping out equal areas in equal times. Thus were born two of Kepler's laws of planetary motion. It was Rudolf's patronage of the two astronomers that made this possible, as Kepler recognized when he eventually published the Rudolphine Tables. As mentioned earlier, Rudolf also attracted some of the best scientific instrument makers of the time, such as Jost B\u00fcrgi, Erasmus Habermel and Hans Christoph Schissler. They had direct contact with the court astronomers and through the financial support of the court were economically independent to develop scientific instruments and manufacturing techniques.\nThe poet Elizabeth Jane Weston, a writer of Renaissance Latin poetry, was also part of his court and wrote numerous odes to him.\nRudolf kept a menagerie of exotic animals, botanical gardens, and Europe's most extensive \"cabinet of curiosities\" (\"Kunstkammer\") incorporating \"the three kingdoms of nature and the works of man\". It was housed at Prague Castle, where between 1587 and 1605 he built the northern wing to house his growing collections. A lion and a tiger were allowed to roam the castle, as is documented by the account books, which record compensation paid to survivors of attacks or to family members of victims.\nThe \"Codex Gigas\" was one of Rudolf's possessions. He was also alleged, by a single piece of hearsay, to have owned the Voynich manuscript, a codex whose author, purpose, language and script, and posited cipher remain unidentified to this day. In a letter written in 1665, Johannes Marcus Marci claims to have heard that Rudolf acquired the manuscript for 600 gold ducats at some unspecified time. No evidence in support of this assertion has ever been discovered.\nAs was typical of the time, Rudolf II had a portrait painted in the studio of the renowned Alonso S\u00e1nchez Coello. Completed in 1567, the portrait depicted Rudolf II at the age of 15. This painting can be seen at the Lobkowicz Palace in the Rozmberk room.\nBy 1597, the collection occupied three rooms of the incomplete northern wing. When building was completed in 1605, the collection was moved to the dedicated \"Kunstkammer\". \"Naturalia\" (minerals and gemstones) were arranged in a 37-cabinet display that had three vaulted chambers in front, each about 5.5 m wide by 3 m high and 60 m long, connected to a main chamber 33 m long. Large uncut gemstones were held in strong boxes.\nApart from the fantastic nature of the objects, it is also the aesthetics of their arrangement and presentation which attracts the visitor's attention. Without, however, there being a desire for purely scientific systematization on the part of the sovereign, it is necessary to detect the harmonious expression of the order of God and discern in the micro-macrocosm the analogy of a mimetic dependence on human arts towards nature and the world.\nRudolf's \"Kunstkammer\" was not a typical \"cabinet of curiosities\", a haphazard collection of unrelated specimens. Rather, the Rudolfine \"Kunstkammer\" was systematically arranged in an encyclopaedic fashion. In addition, Rudolf employed his court gemologist and physician Anselmus Boetius de Boodt (1550\u20131632), to curate the collection. Anselmus was an avid mineral collector and travelled widely on collecting trips to the mining regions of Germany, Bohemia and Silesia, often accompanied by his Bohemian naturalist friend, Thaddaeus Hagecius. Between 1607 and 1611, Anselmus catalogued the \"Kunstkammer\" and in 1609 published \"Gemmarum et Lapidum\", the finest gemological treatise and encyclopedia ever written for this time.\nAs was customary at the time, the collection was private, but friends of the emperor, artists and professional scholars were allowed to study it. The collection became an invaluable research tool during the flowering of 17th-century European philosophy. \nRudolf's successors did not appreciate the collection, and the \"Kunstkammer\" gradually fell into disarray. Some 50 years after its establishment, most of the collection was packed into wooden crates and moved to Vienna. Most of the paintings that reached Vienna remain there, in the Kunsthistorisches Museum, with other pieces in the Secular Treasury and other museums. The collection remaining at Prague was looted during the last year of the Thirty Years' War by Swedish troops who sacked Prague Castle on 26 July 1648 and took the best of the paintings, many of which later passed to the Orl\u00e9ans Collection after the death of Christina of Sweden. In 1782, the remainder of the collection was sold piecemeal to private parties by Joseph II. One of the surviving items from the \"Kunstkammer\" is a \"fine chair\" that was looted by the Swedes in 1648 and now owned by the Earl of Radnor at Longford Castle in Britain, and others survive in museums.\nOccult sciences.\nAstrology and alchemy were regarded as mainstream scientific fields in Renaissance Prague, and Rudolf was a firm devotee of both. His lifelong quest was to find the philosopher's stone, and Rudolf spared no expense in bringing Europe's best alchemists to court, such as Edward Kelley and John Dee. Rudolf even performed his own experiments in a private alchemy laboratory. When Rudolf was a prince, Nostradamus prepared a horoscope, which was dedicated to him as 'Prince and King'. In the 1590s, Michael Sendivogius was active at Rudolph's court.\nRudolf gave Prague a mystical reputation that persists in part to this day, with Alchemists' Alley l, on the grounds of Prague Castle, being a popular visiting place and tourist attraction.\nRudolf was a patron of the occult sciences. That and his practice of tolerance towards Jews caused during his reign the legend of the Golem of Prague to be established.\nIssue.\nRudolf had a relationship with the Royal mistress Kate\u0159ina Stradov\u00e1 (also known as Anna Marie Stradov\u00e1, or Catherina Strada, c. 1568-1629), with whom he had six children:\nTitles.\nThe full titulature of Rudolf after he inherited the Holy Roman Empire and the vast realms of Central and Eastern Europe went as following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"His Imperial and Royal Majesty, Rudolf II, by the Grace of God elected Holy Roman Emperor, forever Augustus, King of Germany, King of Hungary, of Bohemia, of Dalmatia, of Croatia, of Slavonia, of Galicia, of Lodomeria, of Italy, of Cumania, of Bulgaria, of Serbia, of Rama, of Romania, etc. etc.; Archduke of Austria; Duke of Burgundy, of Styria, of Carinthia and of Carniola; Grand Prince of Transylvania; Margrave of Moravia; Duke of Brabant, of Limburg, of Luxemburg, of Guelders, of W\u00fcrttemberg, of Upper and Lower Silesia, of Milan, of Mantua, of Parma, of Piacenza, of Guastalla, of Auschwitz, of Zator and of Teck; Prince of Swabia; Princely Count of Habsburg, of Flanders, of Tyrol, of Hainault, of Kyburg, of Gorizia, of Gradisca, of Namur; Lord of the Wendish Mark and of Mechlin; Landgrave of Alsace; Duke of Lorraine and Bar, Grand Duke of Tuscany; Marquess of the Holy Roman Empire, Burgovia, the Enns, the Upper and Lower Lusatia, Lord of the Marquisate of Slavonia, of Port Naon and Salines, etc. etc.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26055", "revid": "6729166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26055", "title": "Radical Dreamers", "text": "1996 video game\nRadical Dreamers is a 1996 text-based visual novel adventure video game developed and published by Square for the Satellaview, a satellite peripheral for the Super Famicom. It forms part of the \"Chrono\" series, acting as a side story to the 1995 game \"Chrono Trigger\". A version of the game is included with \"Chrono Cross: The Radical Dreamers Edition\", which was released worldwide on April 7, 2022, for Windows, the Nintendo Switch, the PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One.\nThe game centers around an infiltration carried out by the titular thief gang led by Kid; aided by Serge and Magil, she seeks an artifact called the Frozen Flame and revenge on its keeper Lord Lynx. Players navigate the mansion's environments and impact the story's progression through text choices. \"Chrono Trigger\" writer Masato Kato both directed and wrote the main scenario. Due to his attitude at the time, the plot and tone were considerably darker than \"Chrono Trigger\", though the additional scenarists wrote alternate scenarios with comedic tones. The music was scored by Yasunori Mitsuda, who had worked on \"Chrono Trigger\". Production was completed in three months, and Kato was left unsatisfied with its quality.\nAs with most Satellaview titles, \"Radical Dreamers\" did not receive a lasting commercial release at the time, and was exclusive to Japan. Attempts to bundle the game with the PlayStation port of \"Chrono Trigger\" were stopped by Kato due to quality concerns. The ROM for the game was released onto the web, allowing for the production of an English fan translation. While limited, the original's coverage in news and fan sites have praised its narrative and tone. Kato would use plot elements from \"Radical Dreamers\" in his next game \"Chrono Cross\".\nGameplay.\nGameplay consists of word-based scenarios presented to the player through the narration of the main character, Serge. As the narrative progresses, the game presents a list of possible actions and the player chooses from them. Depending on the choices made, the player may enter a new area, be presented with a new situation or character, or have to choose again if the previous selection was incorrect. In combat with enemies, the player must select from options such as \"Fight\", \"Magic\", \"Run\", and often more complex situational commands like \"Run my knife into the goblin's chest!\" or \"Quickly slash at its hand!\". Some decisions must be made before an invisible timer runs out; in combat, hesitation results in injury or death. Serge's health is tracked by an invisible point count, restored by various events (such as finding a potion). The game also tracks Kid's affection for Serge, influenced by battles and scripted events. Her feelings determine whether Serge survives the story's climactic fight.\n\"Radical Dreamers\" features minimal graphics and animation; most areas are rendered with dim, static backgrounds. The game also uses atmospheric music and sounds. Like other \"Chrono\" games, \"Radical Dreamers\" contains a variant of New Game + mode. Only one scenario is available on the first play-through; after finishing it and obtaining one of three possible endings, players can explore six others. These later stories often feature comical situations or allusions to \"Chrono Trigger\".\nCharacters and story.\n\"Radical Dreamers\" features three protagonists\u2014Serge, Kid, and Magil\u2014who seek out treasure as venturesome, reputable thieves. The young adult narrator, Serge, is a drifting musician who met Kid by chance three years ago in a remote town. Serge enjoys adventure with a carefree attitude. Kid, only sixteen years old, is a renowned professional thief with a reputation for boisterous behavior. Possessing a turbulent history, Kid dubiously fancies herself as a kind of Robin Hood. Magil is an enigmatic, handsome masked man skilled in magic who rarely speaks and can fade into shadow at will. Crowned by flowing, blue hair, Magil accompanied Kid well before Serge joined the group. They seek the Frozen Flame, a mythic artifact capable of granting any wish. It is hidden in Viper Manor\u2014the home of a terrible and powerful aristocrat named Lynx, who gained control of the estate after usurping power from and killing the Acacia Dragoons, a familial unit of warriors.\nFollowing Kid, the group infiltrates Viper Manor on the night of a full moon. While sneaking through the corridors, they battle goblins and other creatures of legend while unraveling the history of the manor and its occupants. Magil explains that the Frozen Flame is a fragment of the massive, extraterrestrial creature known as Lavos, splintered off when Lavos impacted the planet in prehistory and burrowed to its core. The thieves locate Lynx and the Frozen Flame deep within an underground ruin of the Kingdom of Zeal\u2014an ancient, airborne civilization destroyed after it awakened Lavos in search of immortality. Serge discovers that Kid is an orphan, hoping to exact revenge upon Lynx for killing her caretaker, Lucca. Kid attempted to find Lynx in her childhood after Lucca's death, but was stopped and saved from certain defeat by Magil, who accompanied her thereafter.\nThe trio battle Lynx for the Frozen Flame, and Lynx gains the upper hand after trapping Magil with a powerful spell. He plans to acquire Kid's special gift from Lucca\u2014a Time Egg, or Chrono Trigger. With a Time Egg and the Frozen Flame, Lynx boasts that he shall achieve control over time. Kid lunges at him, but Lynx easily parries her attack and wounds her. She desperately removes the Chrono Trigger from her back pocket. The Trigger shatters and causes a localized temporal distortion, leading Serge to see various scenes in history. Kid learns of her heritage as princess Schala of Zeal, a meek girl who was coerced to help awaken Lavos with her magical power. As Zeal collapsed, Schala was wracked with anguish and guilt for her role in the incident. Nearby in the Ocean Palace, the Frozen Flame felt her grief and changed her to a baby, sending her to the modern era where Lucca found her. It is also circumstantially revealed that Magil is in fact Magus, Schala's wayward brother who searched for her after battling Lavos in \"Chrono Trigger\". Once the distortion subsides, an army from Porre\u2014a large nation in search of the Frozen Flame\u2014storms the mansion. Lynx withdraws as Kid, Serge, and Magil flee. Kid tells Serge that she is aware of her true origin, and knowing that is a treasure which cannot be stolen. She bids him goodbye before disappearing into the darkness with Magil.\nOther scenarios are available after players complete the first. These include both humorous and serious variations of the main plot.\nDevelopment.\n\"Radical Dreamers\" was developed by Square, the company which had previously developed \"Chrono Trigger\". Masato Kato wrote \"Radical Dreamers\" after \"Chrono Trigger\"'s release, feeling that \"Trigger\" concluded with \"unfinished business\". He composed the main story and drafted the concepts for the sub-scenarios, leaving them to be completed by his peers. He allowed Makoto Shimamoto to write the entire \"Kid and the Sunflower\" segment, later joking that he \"avoided having any part in that episode,\" while Miwa Shoda was in charge of the \"Shadow Realm and the Goddess of Death\" segment. According to scenario writer Daisuke Fukugawa (responsible for the game's \"The Enigmatic Gigaweapon: Paradise X\" subplot), the game's graphical content pushed the Satellaview's technical limits, requiring developers to redraw prerendered models until functional gameplay could be ensured. Compared to \"Chrono Trigger\", the plot of \"Radical Dreamers\" had a bleak tone which Kato ascribed to his deep frustration and anger about coming to work every day following \"Chrono Trigger\"'s hectic development. Specifically, Kid's \"nihilistic\" feelings were Kato's own expressions at the time. Kato intended both \"Dreamers\" and its eventual successor \"Chrono Cross\" to prompt players to pursue their personal dreams in life.\nDue to being a small side project, there was a general sense of freedom compared to other Square titles. The decision to make it a text-based adventure helped push the game into its darker direction. Kato intended for it to be a survival adventure title, but abandoned this specific approach after the release of \"Resident Evil\". The more comedic additional scenarios helped balance out the sombre elements in the main narrative. Reflecting on his work, Kato felt his work on \"Radical Dreamers\" helped solidify his style. Kato's team completed \"Radical Dreamers\" in only three months under a rushed production schedule, prompting him to label the game \"unfinished\" in an interview for the \"Ultimania\" \"Chrono Cross\" guide. Square had initially requested it be finished in two months. Kato regretted that the schedule hampered the quality of his work, and explained that the connections to \"Chrono Trigger\" were evoked towards the end of the project. The finished ROM totaled 8 megabits; the developers later reflected that the scenario was changed three times to work within this limited capacity.\nMusic.\nThe music of \"Radical Dreamers\" was written by composer Yasunori Mitsuda, who scored \"Chrono Trigger\" and later \"Chrono Cross\". During this time, Mitsuda was listening to Russian folk music, and used this style in the music for \"Radical Dreamers\". He wrote the score in a very relaxed style, which he felt produced his best work at that time. Mitsuda wrote the music in around three months, and in retrospect thought it turned out well. Several themes and musical patterns were later adapted for \"Chrono Cross\" at Kato's suggestion; many appear unchanged except for new instrumentation. Mitsuda estimated that about half the music for \"Radical Dreamers\" was reused in \"Chrono Cross\".\nRelease.\n\"Radical Dreamers\" was announced in early 1996 as part of a collection of four titles produced by Square for the Satellaview platform. It was first released for broadcast starting February 3 that year. Subsequent broadcast periods were held through until March 8, with Square commenting that there were no plans to release the game in cartridge form. Famitsu promoted the game without any clear connections or references to \"Chrono Trigger\". Owing to the eventual shutdown of the service, \"Radical Dreamers\" became impossible to play except on end users' cartridges that had the game installed during its broadcast period. It also received no English release due to the Satellaview's Japanese exclusivity. Square originally wanted to include the game as part of the PlayStation port of \"Chrono Trigger\", but Kato stopped them due to his dissatisfaction with the final product. While he had the option of incorporating it into the Nintendo DS remake of \"Chrono Trigger\", he did not due to its very different tone and questionable market demand. While uncertain about its quality in the gaming market at the time, at the time Kato was open to the possibility of releasing a version of \"Radical Dreamers\".\nIn April 2003, the ROM hacking group Demiforce released a fan translation rendering \"Radical Dreamers\" in English. The patch works by modifying the ROM image of \"Dreamers\" used for playing console-based video games on personal computers through emulation. The ability to save games was not enabled with the first patch, and some minor typos were left in, later remedied by successive releases. On Christmas Day 2005, Demiforce and Radical R released the final version (1.4) of the translation, which fixed remaining minor bugs. The French team Terminus Traduction made a French translation patch soon after. Masato Kato did not perceive significant demand to include \"Radical Dreamers\" as a bonus with the release of \"Chrono Trigger DS\", and omitted it to preserve continuity between \"Trigger\" and \"Cross\". He expressed concern in 2009 over re-releasing \"Radical Dreamers\" \"as-is\", citing a need to revise the work.\nOn February 9, 2022, Square Enix announced that \"Radical Dreamers\" would receive a re-release as part of \"Chrono Cross: The Radical Dreamers Edition\", as well as an official translation. It was released worldwide on April 7, 2022, for Windows, the Nintendo Switch, the PlayStation 4 and the Xbox One with English, French, Italian, Spanish and German translations.\nReception.\nWebsite \"Cubed3\" gave the game a score of 8/10, praising its excellent use of atmosphere and music despite the difficulties for potential players to access it. A reviewer for \"Home of the Underdogs\" lauded the game's excellent writing and the \"superb\" English translation patch, noting that the \"interesting plot\" would appeal to fantasy fans if they could stomach the limited interactivity. Having never played a \"Chrono\" game prior, the reviewer stated, \"I was still able to follow the story and be drawn into the world of colorful characters.\" While praising the replay value afforded by the extra scenarios, the critic derided the random battles of \"Radical Dreamers\", writing that \"RPG-style random combat doesn't translate well to [a] text-only medium.\" The website awarded \"Dreamers\" \"Top Dog\" status, and the game maintains a voter score of 8.95 out of 10. Chris Kohler, in his 2004 book \"Power-Up: How Japanese Video Games Gave the World an Extra Life\", cited \"Radical Dreamers\"' soundtrack as a precursor to Mitsuda's explicitly Celtic musical style in \"Xenogears\".\nLegacy.\n\"Radical Dreamers\" preceded \"Chrono Cross\", a full role-playing video game sequel to \"Chrono Trigger\". Masato Kato cited the desire to \"redo \"Radical Dreamers\" properly\" as the genesis of \"Cross\", attributing the latter's serious atmosphere to the former. Kato's desire to finish the story of the characters Kid and Serge principally shaped the plot of \"Cross\". Several events in \"Chrono Cross\", such as the infiltration of Viper Manor, were also a direct reference to events in \"Radical Dreamers\". He also incorporated \"Radical Dreamers\" into the plot of \"Chrono Cross\" as an alternate timeline. The character Gil, confirmed by Kato to be Magus, was going to be featured in \"Chrono Cross\". This idea was scrapped due to difficulties in representing the story of Magus among the game's numerous other characters; the unrelated, enigmatic magician Guile was created instead.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26056", "revid": "44719641", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26056", "title": "Robert Anton Wilson", "text": "American writer and futurist (1932\u20132007)\nRobert Anton Wilson (born Robert Edward Wilson; January 18, 1932 \u2013 January 11, 2007) was an American writer, futurist, psychologist, and self-described agnostic mystic. Recognized within Discordianism as an Episkopos, pope and saint, Wilson helped publicize Discordianism through his writings and interviews. In 1999 he described his work as an \"attempt to break down conditioned associations, to look at the world in a new way, with many models recognized as models or maps, and no one model elevated to the truth\". Wilson's goal was \"to try to get people into a state of generalized agnosticism, not agnosticism about God alone but agnosticism about everything.\"\nIn addition to writing several science-fiction novels, Wilson also wrote non-fiction books on extrasensory perception, mental telepathy, metaphysics, paranormal experiences, conspiracy theory, sex, drugs, and what Wilson called \"quantum psychology\".\nFollowing a career in journalism and as an editor, notably for \"Playboy\", Wilson emerged as a major countercultural figure in the mid-1970s, comparable to one of his coauthors, Timothy Leary, as well as Terence McKenna.\nEarly life.\nBorn Robert Edward Wilson in Methodist Hospital, in Brooklyn, New York, he spent his first years in Flatbush, and moved with his family to Gerritsen Beach, in a lower middle class area, around the age of four or five, where they stayed until relocating to the then-socioeconomically analogous South Slope section (in part to facilitate an easier high school commute for Wilson) when he was thirteen. He had polio as a child, and found generally effective treatment with the Kenny Method (created by Elizabeth Kenny) which the American Medical Association repudiated at that time. Polio's effects remained with Wilson throughout his life, usually manifesting as minor muscle spasms causing him to occasionally use a cane, until 2000, when he experienced a major bout with post-polio syndrome that would continue until his death.\nHe attended Catholic grammar schools before securing admission to the selective Brooklyn Technical High School. Removed from the Catholic influence at \"Brooklyn Tech\", Wilson became enamored of literary modernism (particularly Ezra Pound and James Joyce), the Western philosophical tradition, then-innovative historians such as Charles A. Beard, science fiction (including the works of Olaf Stapledon, Robert A. Heinlein and Theodore Sturgeon) and Alfred Korzybski's interdisciplinary theory of general semantics. He would later recall that the family was \"living so well ... compared to the Depression\" during this period \"that I imagined we were lace-curtain Irish at last.\"\nFollowing his graduation in 1950, Wilson was employed in a succession of jobs (including ambulance driver, engineering aide, salesman and medical orderly) and absorbed various philosophers and cultural practices (including bebop, psychoanalysis, Friedrich Nietzsche, Alfred Korzybski, James Joyce, Bertrand Russell, Carl Jung, Wilhelm Reich, Leon Trotsky, and Ayn Rand, whom he later repudiated) while writing in his spare time. He studied electrical engineering and mathematics intermittently at the Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute from 1952 to 1957 before enrolling in an English education undergraduate program at New York University from 1957 to 1958 but did not complete a degree at either institution.\nAfter having smoked cannabis for nearly a decade, Wilson first experimented with mescaline in Yellow Springs, Ohio, on December 28, 1961. Wilson began to work as a freelance journalist and advertising copywriter in the late 1950s. He adopted his maternal grandfather's name, Anton, for his writings and told himself that he would save the \"Edward\" for when he wrote the Great American Novel. He later found that \"Robert Anton Wilson\" had become an established identity.\nHe assumed co-editorship of the School for Living's Brookville, Ohio-based \"Balanced Living\" magazine in 1962 and briefly returned to New York as associate editor of Ralph Ginzburg's quarterly magazine, called \"fact:\", before leaving for \"Playboy\", where he served as an associate editor from 1965 to 1971. According to Wilson, \"Playboy\" \"paid me a higher salary than any other magazine at which I had worked and never expected me to become a conformist or sell my soul in return. I enjoyed my years in the Bunny Empire. I only resigned when I reached 40 and felt I could not live with myself if I didn't make an effort to write full-time at last.\" Along with frequent collaborator Robert Shea, Wilson edited the magazine's \"Playboy\" Forum, a letters section consisting of responses to the \"Playboy\" Philosophy editorial column. During this period, he covered Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert's Millbrook, New York-based Castalia Foundation at the instigation of Alan Watts in \"The Realist\", cultivated important friendships with William S. Burroughs and Allen Ginsberg, and lectured at the Free University of New York on 'Anarchist and Synergetic Politics' in 1965.\nHe received a BA, MA (1978) and PhD (1981) in psychology from Paideia University, which was an accredited university in California at the time he graduated in 1981 but later on became unaccredited and then closed. Wilson reworked his dissertation, and it found publication in 1983 as \"Prometheus Rising\".\nWilson married freelance writer and poet Arlen Riley in 1958. They had four children, including Christina Wilson Pearson and Patricia Luna Wilson. Luna was beaten to death in an apparent robbery in the store where she worked in 1976 at the age of 15, and became the first person to have her brain preserved by the American Cryonics Society (which was called the Bay Area Cryonics Society at the time). Arlen Riley Wilson died on May 22, 1999, following a series of strokes.\nThe \"Illuminatus!\" Trilogy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nRichard Metzger: You have studied the Illuminati for years. Have you come to any conclusion about their aims?\nRobert Anton Wilson: Usually when people ask me that question, I give them some kind of a put-on, but I can't think of a good and original put-on that I haven't done several times before.\nSo I'll tell you the truth, for once. After investigating the Illuminati and their critics for the last 30 years, I think the Illuminati was a short lived society of free thinkers and democratic reformers that formed a secret society within Freemasonry, using Freemasonry as a cover so they could plot to overthrow all the kings in Europe and the Pope. I'm very happy that they succeeded in overthrowing all the kings, I just wish that they had completed the job and gotten rid of the Royal family in England too, but they did pretty well on the continent. I'm sorry they haven't finished off the Pope yet, either, but I think they're still working on the project and I wish them luck.\n\"Disinformation: The Interviews\", by Richard Metzger\nAmong Wilson's 35 books and many other works, perhaps his best-known volumes remain the cult classic series \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\" (1975), co-authored with Shea. Advertised as \"a fairy tale for paranoids\", the three books\u2014\"The Eye in the Pyramid\", \"The Golden Apple\", and \"Leviathan\", soon offered as a single volume\u2014philosophically and humorously examined, among many other themes, occult and magical symbolism and history, the counterculture of the 1960s, secret societies, data concerning author H. P. Lovecraft and author and occultist Aleister Crowley, and American paranoia about conspiracies and conspiracy theories. The book was intended to poke fun at the conspiratorial frame of mind.\nWilson and Shea derived much of the odder material from letters sent to \"Playboy\" magazine while they worked as the editors of its Forum. The books mixed true information with imaginative fiction to engage the reader in what Wilson called \"guerrilla ontology\", which he apparently referred to as \"Operation Mindfuck\" in \"Illuminatus!\" The trilogy also outlined a set of libertarian and anarchist axioms known as Celine's laws (named after Hagbard Celine, a character in \"Illuminatus!\"), concepts Wilson revisited several times in other writings.\nAmong the many subplots of \"Illuminatus!\" one addresses biological warfare and the overriding of the United States Bill of Rights, another gives a detailed account of the John F. Kennedy assassination (in which no fewer than five snipers, all working for different causes, prepare to shoot Kennedy), and the book's climax occurs at a rock concert where the audience collectively face the danger of becoming a mass human sacrifice.\n\"Illuminatus!\" popularized Discordianism and the use of the term \"fnord\". It incorporates experimental prose styles influenced by writers such as William S. Burroughs, James Joyce, and Ezra Pound. Although Shea and Wilson never co-operated on such a scale again, Wilson continued to expand upon the themes of the \"Illuminatus!\" books throughout his writing career. Most of his later fiction contains cross-over characters from \"The Sex Magicians\" (Wilson's first novel, written before the release of \"Illuminatus!\", which includes many of his same characters) and \"The Illuminatus! Trilogy\".\n\"Illuminatus!\" won the Prometheus Hall of Fame award for Best Classic Fiction, voted by the Libertarian Futurist Society for science fiction in 1986, has many international editions, and found adaptation for the stage when Ken Campbell produced it as a ten-hour drama. It also appeared as two card based games from Steve Jackson Games, one a trading-card game (). Eye N Apple Productions and Rip Off Press produced a comic book version of the trilogy.\n\"Schr\u00f6dinger's Cat\" Trilogy, \"The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles\", and \"Masks of the Illuminati\".\nWilson wrote two more popular fiction series. The first, a trilogy later published as a single volume, was \"Schr\u00f6dinger's Cat\". The second, \"The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles\", appeared as three books. In between publishing the two trilogies Wilson released a stand-alone novel, \"Masks of the Illuminati\" (1981), which, due to the main character's ancestry, fits into the timeline of \"The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles\" and, while published earlier, may qualify as the fourth volume in that series.\n\"Schr\u00f6dinger's Cat\" consists of three volumes: \"The Universe Next Door\", \"The Trick Top Hat\", and \"The Homing Pigeons\". Wilson set the three books in differing alternative universes, in which the cast of characters remains almost the same aside from variations in names, careers and background stories. The books cover the fields of quantum mechanics and the varied philosophies and explanations that exist within the science. The single volume describes itself as a magical textbook and a type of initiation. The single-volume edition omits many entire pages and has many other omissions when compared with the original separate books.\n\"The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles\", composed of \"The Earth Will Shake\" (1982), \"The Widow's Son\" (1985), and \"Nature's God\" (1991), follows the timelines of several characters through different generations, time periods, and countries. The books cover a range of topics, including (but not limited to) the history, legacy, and rituals of the Illuminati and related groups.\n\"Masks of the Illuminati\" features historical characters in a fictionalized setting, and contains a blend of occult history. Intermixing Albert Einstein, James Joyce, Aleister Crowley, Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, and others, the book focuses on Pan as well as other occult icons, ideas, and practices. It also includes homages, parodies and pastiches from both the lives and works of Crowley and Joyce.\nPlays and screenplays.\nWilson's play, \"Wilhelm Reich in Hell\", was published as a book in 1987 and first performed at the Edmund Burke Theatre in Dublin, in San Francisco, and in Los Angeles. It features many factual and fictional characters, including Marilyn Monroe, Uncle Sam, and Wilhelm Reich himself. Wilson also wrote and published as books two screenplays, not yet produced: \"Reality Is What You Can Get Away With: an Illustrated Screenplay\" (1992) and \"The Walls Came Tumbling Down\" (1997).\nWilson's book \"\" has been adapted as a theatrical stage play by Daisy Eris Campbell, daughter of Ken Campbell the British theatre maverick who staged \"Illuminatus!\" at the Royal National Theatre in 1977. The play opened on November 23, 2014, in Liverpool before transferring to London and Brighton. Some of the costs were met through crowdfunding. Wilson's book is itself dedicated to \"Ken Campbell and the Science-Fiction Theatre Of Liverpool, England.\"\nThe \"Cosmic Trigger\" series and other books.\nIn his nonfiction and partly autobiographical \"\" (1977) and its two sequels, as well as in many other works, Wilson examined Freemasons, Discordianism, Sufism, the Illuminati, Futurology, Zen Buddhism, Dennis and Terence McKenna, Jack Parsons, the occult practices of Aleister Crowley and G.I. Gurdjieff, Yoga, and many other esoteric or counterculture philosophies, personalities, and occurrences.\nWilson advocated Timothy Leary's 8-Circuit Model of Consciousness and neurosomatic/linguistic engineering, which he wrote about in many books including \"Prometheus Rising\" (1983, revised 1997) and \"Quantum Psychology\" (1990), which contain practical techniques intended to help the reader break free of one's reality tunnels. With Leary, he helped promote the futurist ideas of space migration, intelligence increase, and life extension, which they combined to form the word symbol SMI\u00b2LE.\nWilson's 1986 book, \"The New Inquisition\", argues that whatever reality consists of it actually would seem much weirder than we commonly imagine. It cites, among other sources, Bell's theorem and Alain Aspect's experimental proof of Bell's to suggest that mainstream science has a strong materialist bias, and that in fact modern physics may have already disproved materialist metaphysics.\nWilson also supported the work and utopian theories of Buckminster Fuller and examined the theories of Charles Fort. He and Loren Coleman became friends, as he did with media theorist Marshall McLuhan and Neuro Linguistic Programming co-founder Richard Bandler, with whom he taught workshops. He also admired James Joyce, and wrote extensive commentaries on the author and on two of Joyce's novels, \"Finnegans Wake\" and \"Ulysses\", in his 1988 book \"\".\nAlthough Wilson often lampooned and criticized some New Age beliefs, bookstores specializing in New Age material often sell his books. Wilson, a well-known author in occult and Neo-Pagan circles, used Aleister Crowley as a main character in his 1981 novel \"Masks of the Illuminati\", also included some elements of H. P. Lovecraft's work in his novels, and at times claimed to have perceived encounters with magical \"entities\" (when asked whether these entities seemed \"real\", he answered they seemed \"real enough\", although \"not as real as the IRS\" but \"easier to get rid of\", and later decided that his experiences may have emerged from \"just my right brain hemisphere talking to my left\"). He warned against beginners using occult practice, since to rush into such practices and the resulting \"energies\" they unleash could lead people to \"go totally nuts\".\nWilson also criticized scientific types with overly rigid belief systems, equating them with religious fundamentalists in their fanaticism. In a 1988 interview, when asked about his newly published book \"The New Inquisition: Irrational Rationalism and the Citadel of Science\", Wilson commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I coined the term irrational rationalism because those people claim to be rationalists, but they're governed by such a heavy body of taboos. They're so fearful, and so hostile, and so narrow, and frightened, and uptight and dogmatic ... I wrote this book because I got tired satirizing fundamentalist Christianity ... I decided to satirize fundamentalist materialism for a change, because the two are equally comical ... The materialist fundamentalists are funnier than the Christian fundamentalists, because they think they're rational! ... They're never skeptical about anything except the things they have a prejudice against. None of them ever says anything skeptical about the AMA, or about anything in establishment science or any entrenched dogma. They're only skeptical about new ideas that frighten them. They're actually dogmatically committed to what they were taught when they were in college.\nModel-agnostic.\nIn a 2003 interview with \"High Times\" magazine, Wilson described himself as \"model-agnostic\" which he said\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;consists of never regarding any model or map of the universe with total 100% belief or total 100% denial. Following Korzybski, I put things in probabilities, not absolutes ... My only originality lies in applying this zetetic attitude outside the hardest of the hard sciences, physics, to softer sciences and then to non-sciences like politics, ideology, jury verdicts and, of course, conspiracy theory.\nEconomic thought.\nWilson favored a form of basic income guarantee; synthesizing several ideas under the acronym RICH. His ideas are set forth in the essay \"The RICH Economy\", found in \"The Illuminati Papers\". In an article critical of capitalism, Wilson self-identified as a \"libertarian socialist\", saying that \"I ask only one thing of skeptics: don't bring up Soviet Russia, please. That horrible example of State Capitalism has nothing to do with what I, and other libertarian socialists, would offer as an alternative to the present system.\" By the 1980s he was less enthusiastic about the socialist label, writing in \"Prometheus Rising\" that he \"does not like\" the spread of socialism. In his book \"Right Where You Are Sitting Now\", he praises the georgist economist Silvio Gesell. In the essay \"Left and Right: A Non-Euclidean Perspective\", Wilson speaks favorably of several \"excluded middles\" that \"transcend the hackneyed debate between monopoly Capitalism and totalitarian Socialism\"; he says his favorite is the mutualist anarchism of Benjamin Tucker and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, but he also offers kind words for the ideas of Gesell, Henry George, C. H. Douglas, and Buckminster Fuller. Wilson also identified as an anarchist and described his belief system as \"a blend of Tucker, Spooner, Fuller, Pound, Henry George, Rothbard, Douglas, Korzybski, Proudhon and Marx.\" Wilson spoke several times at conventions of the American Libertarian Party. He included Benjamin Tucker's \"Instead of a Book\", Henry George's \"Progress and Poverty\", and Gesell's \"The Natural Economic Order\" in a list of 20 book recommendations, \"the bare minimum of what everybody really needs to chew and digest before they can converse intelligently about the 21st Century.\"\nOther activities.\nRobert Anton Wilson and his wife Arlen Riley Wilson founded the Institute for the Study of the Human Future in 1975.\nFrom 1982 until his death, Wilson had a business relationship with the Association for Consciousness Exploration, which hosted his first on-stage dialogue with his long-time friend Timothy Leary entitled \"The Inner Frontier\". Wilson dedicated his book \"The New Inquisition\" to A.C.E.'s co-directors, Jeff Rosenbaum and Joseph Rothenberg.\nWilson also joined the Church of the SubGenius, who referred to him as \"Pope Bob\". He contributed to their literature, including the book \"Three-Fisted Tales of \"Bob\"\", and shared a stage with their founder, Rev. Ivan Stang, on several occasions. Wilson also founded the Guns and Dope Party.\nAs a member of the Board of Advisors of the Fully Informed Jury Association, Wilson worked to inform the public about jury nullification, the right of jurors to nullify a law they deem unjust.\nWilson advocated for and wrote about E-Prime, a form of English lacking all forms of the verb \"to be\" (such as \"is\", \"are\", \"was\", \"were\" etc.).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Is\", \"is.\" \"is\"\u2014the idiocy of the word haunts me. If it were abolished, human thought might begin to make sense. I don't know what anything \"is\"; I only know how it seems to me at this moment.\u2014\u200a\nA decades-long researcher into drugs and a strong opponent of what he called \"the war on some drugs\", Wilson participated as a Special Guest in the week-long 1999 Annual Cannabis Cup in Amsterdam, and used and often promoted the use of medical marijuana. He participated in a protest organized by the Wo/Men's Alliance for Medical Marijuana in Santa Cruz in 2002.\nDeath.\nOn June 22, 2006, Paul Krassner reported on \"The Huffington Post\" that Wilson was under hospice care at home with friends and family. On October 2, Douglas Rushkoff reported that Wilson was in severe financial trouble. Slashdot, Boing Boing, and the Church of the SubGenius also picked up on the story, linking to Rushkoff's appeal. As his webpage reported on October 10, these efforts succeeded beyond expectation and raised a sum that would have supported him for at least six months. On October 5, 2006, Wilson responded to the support by posting the following comment on his personal website, expressing his gratitude:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Dear Friends, my God, what can I say. I am dumbfounded, flabbergasted, and totally stunned by the charity and compassion that has poured in here the last three days.\nTo steal from Jack Benny, \"I do not deserve this, but I also have severe leg problems and I don't deserve them either.\"\nBecause he was a kind man as well as a funny one, Benny was beloved. I find it hard to believe that I am equally beloved and especially that I deserve such love.\nWhoever you are, wherever you are, know that my love is with you.\nYou have all reminded me that despite George W. Bush and all his cohorts, there is still a lot of beautiful kindness in the world.\nBlessings,\nRobert Anton Wilson\nOn January 6, 2007, Wilson wrote on his blog that according to several medical authorities, he would likely only have between two days and two months left to live. He closed this message with \"I look forward without dogmatic optimism but without dread. I love you all and I deeply implore you to keep the lasagna flying. Please pardon my levity, I don't see how to take death seriously. It seems absurd.\"\nWilson died five days later, on January 11 at 4:50\u00a0am, just a week short of his 75th birthday. After his cremation on January 18 (also his 75th birthday), his family held a memorial service on February 18 and then scattered most of his ashes at the same spot as his wife's\u2014off the Santa Cruz Beach Boardwalk in Santa Cruz, California.\nA tribute show to Wilson, organized by Coldcut and Mixmaster Morris and performed in London as a part of the \"Ether 07 Festival\" held at the Queen Elizabeth Hall on March 18, 2007, also included Ken Campbell, Bill Drummond and Alan Moore.\nCultural references.\nWilson appears as a fictional version of himself in Timothy Leary's 1979 book, \"The Intelligence Agents\". It features a full facsimile reproduction of an article ostensibly authored by Wilson, titled Marilyn's Input System, from \"Peeple Magazine\" of March 1986.\nFilmography.\nActor.\nWilson appeared in the 1998 German film \"23 Nichts ist so wie es scheint\". He has approximately two minutes featured as himself, with the main actor, portraying hacker Karl Koch, meeting Wilson at the annual German Computer Hackers Convention in 1985. The film is a biographical piece about Germany's infamous computer hackers, and the 1985 meeting in Germany between Wilson and Koch is authentic. Wilson spoke at the 1985 German Computer Hackers Convention, warning of a future in which governments would have total digital control over the citizen. He signed one of his books for Koch. These events are depicted in the film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26059", "revid": "50123798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26059", "title": "Roller hockey", "text": "Sport discipline\nRoller hockey is a form of hockey played on a dry surface using wheeled skates. It can be played with traditional roller skates (quad skates) or with inline skates and use either a ball or puck. Combined, roller hockey is played in nearly 60 countries worldwide.\nThere are three major variants of organized roller hockey. Traditional \"roller hockey\" (also called rink hockey, quad hockey, and hardball hockey) is played using quad skates, curved/'cane' sticks, and a ball; it is a limited-contact sport. \"Inline hockey\" is played using inline skates, ice hockey sticks, and a puck; it is a full-contact sport though body checks are not allowed. Most professional hockey games take place on an indoor or outdoor sport court (a type of plastic interlinking tiles used to create a skating surface). Otherwise, any dry surface can be used to host a game, typically a roller rink, macadam (asphalt), or cement.\nVariants.\nRoller hockey is played on both quad skates and inline skates, have different rules and equipment, and involve different types of skating but share the category and name of roller hockey. Roller hockey (quad) is played using traditional quad roller skates, affording greater maneuverability to the player - this results in games filled with fancy footwork, tight maneuvering, and is more similar to football or basketball. The stick is more or less the same as in bandy and shinty. Roller hockey (inline) bears close resemblance to ice hockey and is played on inline skates, uses an ice hockey stick and includes a lot of fast \"racing back and forth\" action. Inline hockey goalies use a glove called a catcher to catch shots made on goal, and a flat, usually square, mitt called a blocker which is used to deflect shots on goal. The Quad hockey goalie uses a flat batting glove that provides rebound characteristics when blocking a shot on goal.\nInline hockey.\nInline hockey is a variation of roller hockey very similar to ice hockey, from which it is derived. It is referred to by many names worldwide, including Inline hockey, Roller hockey, Longstick hockey, Deck hockey, Road hockey, and Street hockey depending on which region of the world in which it is played.\nLike ice hockey, inline hockey is considered a \"contact sport\", however body checking is prohibited. It is similar to ice hockey in that teamwork, skill and aggressiveness are needed. Excepting the use of inline roller skates instead of ice skates, the equipment of inline roller hockey is similar to that of ice hockey.\nThe game is played by two teams, consisting of four skaters and one goalie, on a dry rink divided into two halves by a center line, with one net at each end of the rink. When played more informally, the game often takes place on a smooth, asphalt surface outdoors. The game is played in three 15-minute periods or if it is higher standard it's played 20-minutes in each of the three periods, plus 10- to 15-minute intermission breaks. The game rules differ from ice hockey in a few simple ways: there is no icing and it is played in a 4 on 4 player format instead of 5 on 5. The overtime method used here is golden goal (a.k.a. \"sudden death\") in which whoever scores first is the winner; 5 minutes is the duration per period.\nGenerally speaking, only competitive-level inline hockey is strictly bound by the governing body's rules. Recreational hockey leagues may make modifications to certain aspects of the rules to suit local requirements (size of rink, length of periods and penalties). Roller hockey is a growing sport with teams cropping up all over the country. The fact that it can be played on any dry surface means that it can be played in almost any leisure center.\nRink hockey.\nRink hockey is a variation of roller hockey. Rink hockey is the overarching name for a rollersport that has existed long before inline skates were \"re-invented\" in the '70s (They were actually invented before quads, in the 1760s). Rink hockey has been played on quad skates, in sixty countries worldwide and so has many names worldwide. Sometimes the sport is called quad hockey, international style ball hockey, Rink hockey, roller hockey and hardball hockey, depending on which region of the world it is played. Roller hockey was a demonstration rollersport in the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona. Since 2017, the World Championships have been held every two years at the World Roller Games organised by World Skate. In England, 9 teams currently play in the Roller Hockey Premier League, which is governed by the NRHA.\nTournaments.\nMost competitive youth hockey teams play in tournaments. The tournaments vary depending on location, but a typical bracket system is usually used.\nWorld Skate is the international association that organize the biggest roller hockey world championship for rink hockey and inline hockey. The championships are part of the biennial World Roller Games and over twenty national teams participate in these events.\nFor inline hockey in the U.S., teams travel to different locations around their state, sometimes even going out of state. There are intrastate tournaments and out-of-state tournaments. There are even national tournaments competitive teams compete for. There are other tournaments located in the U.S but played by players all around the world. Narch and Statewars are two Nationwide tournaments of every skill level and age group.\nIn Europe, rink hockey is governed by World Skate Europe - Rink Hockey (CERH).\nRoller hockey brands.\nMany of the same brands that make ice hockey equipment also make roller hockey skates including Bauer, Easton, Mission, Tron and many more. There are also some brands that specialize in roller hockey like el Leon de Oro (Spain), Tour, Alkali, Revision and Mission (but they make some ice hockey equipment also). Other rink hockey brands include Reno, TVD, Meneghini, Proskate and Azemad.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26060", "revid": "16752040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26060", "title": "Rowley Birkin", "text": ""}
{"id": "26061", "revid": "45402633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26061", "title": "Royal Navy", "text": "Naval warfare force of the United Kingdom\nMilitary unit\nThe Royal Navy (RN) is the naval warfare force of the United Kingdom, responsible for defending the UK, the Crown Dependencies, and the Overseas Territories from naval attack or invasion. It is a component of His Majesty's Naval Service, and its officers hold their commissions from the King. Although warships were used by English and Scottish kings from the early medieval period, the first major maritime engagements were fought in the Hundred Years' War against France. The modern Royal Navy traces its origins to the English Navy of the early 16th century; the oldest of the UK's armed services, it is consequently known as the Senior Service.\nFrom the early 18th century until the Second World War, it was the world's most powerful navy. The Royal Navy played a key part in establishing and defending the British Empire, and four Imperial fortress colonies and a string of imperial bases and coaling stations secured the Royal Navy's ability to assert naval superiority. Following World War I, it was significantly reduced in size. During the Cold War, the Royal Navy transformed into a primarily anti-submarine force, hunting for Soviet submarines and mostly active in the GIUK gap. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, its focus returned to expeditionary operations.\nThe Royal Navy maintains a fleet of technologically sophisticated ships, submarines, and aircraft, including two aircraft carriers, four ballistic missile submarines (which maintain the nuclear deterrent), six nuclear fleet submarines, six guided missile destroyers, eight frigates, eight mine-countermeasure vessels and twenty-six patrol vessels. As of September 2025, there are 64 active and commissioned ships (including submarines as well as one historic ship, ) in the Royal Navy, plus 10 ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA). There are also four Point-class sealift ships from the Merchant Navy available to the RFA under a private finance initiative, while the civilian Marine Services operate auxiliary vessels which further support the Royal Navy in various capacities. The RFA replenishes Royal Navy warships at sea and, as of 2024\u201325, provides the lead elements of the Royal Navy's amphibious warfare capabilities through its three vessels. It also works as a force multiplier for the Royal Navy, often doing patrols that frigates used to do.\nThe Royal Navy is part of His Majesty's Naval Service, which also includes the Royal Marines and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary. The professional head of the Naval Service is the First Sea Lord who is an admiral and member of the Defence Council of the United Kingdom. The Defence Council delegates management of the Naval Service to the Admiralty Board, chaired by the secretary of state for defence. The Royal Navy operates from three bases in Britain where commissioned ships and submarines are based: Portsmouth, Clyde and Devonport, the last being the largest operational naval base in Western Europe, as well as two naval air stations, RNAS Yeovilton and RNAS Culdrose where maritime aircraft are based.\nRole.\nThe Royal Navy stated its six major roles in umbrella terms in 2017 as:\nThe Royal Navy protects British interests at home and abroad, executing the foreign and defence policies of His Majesty's Government through the exercise of military effect, diplomatic activities and other activities in support of these objectives. It is also a key element of the British contribution to NATO, with a number of ships or aircraft allocated to NATO tasks at any time. In 2007 core capabilities were described as:\nHistory.\nThe English Royal Navy was formally founded in 1546 by Henry VIII, though the Kingdom of England had possessed less-organised naval forces for centuries prior to this.\nThe Royal Scots Navy (or Old Scots Navy) had its origins in the Middle Ages until its merger with the English Royal Navy per the Acts of Union 1707.\nEarlier fleets.\nDuring much of the medieval period, fleets or \"king's ships\" were often established or gathered for specific campaigns or actions, and these would disperse afterwards. These were generally merchant ships enlisted into service. Unlike some European states, England did not maintain a small permanent core of warships in peacetime. England's naval organisation was haphazard and the mobilisation of fleets when war broke out was slow. Control of the sea only became critical to Anglo-Saxon kings in the 10th century. In the 11th century, Aethelred II had a large fleet built by a national levy. During the period of Danish rule in the 11th century, authorities maintained a standing fleet by taxation, and this continued for a time under Edward the Confessor, who frequently commanded fleets in person. After the Norman Conquest, English naval power waned and England suffered large naval raids from the Vikings. In 1069, this allowed for the invasion and ravaging of England by Jarl Osborn, brother of King Svein Estridsson, and his sons.\nThe lack of an organised navy came to a head during the First Barons' War, in which Prince Louis of France invaded England in support of northern barons. With King John unable to organise a navy, this meant the French landed at Sandwich unopposed in April 1216. John's flight to Winchester and his death later that year left the Earl of Pembroke as regent, and he was able to marshal ships to fight the French in the Battle of Sandwich in 1217 \u2013 one of the first major English battles at sea. The outbreak of the Hundred Years War emphasised the need for an English fleet. French plans for an invasion of England failed when Edward III of England destroyed the French fleet in the Battle of Sluys in 1340. England's naval forces could not prevent frequent raids on the south-coast ports by the French and their allies. Such raids halted only with the occupation of northern France by Henry V.\nA Scottish fleet existed by the reign of William the Lion in the late 12th century. In the early 13th century there was a resurgence of Viking naval power in the region. The Vikings clashed with Scotland over control of the isles though Alexander III was ultimately successful in asserting Scottish control. The Scottish fleet was of particular import in repulsing English forces in the early 14th century.\nAge of Sail.\nA standing \"Navy Royal\", with its own secretariat, dockyards and a permanent core of purpose-built warships, emerged during the reign of Henry VIII. Under Elizabeth I, England became involved in a war with Spain, which saw privately owned vessels combining with the Queen's ships in highly profitable raids against Spanish commerce and colonies. The Royal Navy was then used in 1588 to repulse the Spanish Armada, but the English Armada was lost the next year. In 1603, the Union of the Crowns created a personal union between England and Scotland. While the two remained distinct sovereign states for a further century, the two navies increasingly fought as a single force. During the early 17th century, England's relative naval power deteriorated until Charles I undertook a major programme of shipbuilding. His methods of financing the fleet contributed to the outbreak of the English Civil War, and the abolition of the monarchy.\nThe Commonwealth of England replaced many names and symbols in the new Commonwealth Navy, associated with royalty and the high church, and expanded it to become the most powerful in the world. The fleet was quickly tested in the First Anglo-Dutch War (1652\u20131654) and the Anglo-Spanish War (1654\u20131660), which saw the British conquest of Jamaica and successful attacks on Spanish treasure fleets. The 1660 Restoration saw Charles II rename the Royal Navy again, and started use of the prefix HMS. The Navy remained a national institution and not a possession of the Crown as it had been before. Following the Glorious Revolution of 1688, England joined the War of the Grand Alliance which marked the end of France's brief pre-eminence at sea and the beginning of an enduring British supremacy which would help with the creation of the British Empire.\nIn 1707, the Scottish navy was united with the English Royal Navy. On Scottish men-of-war, the cross of St Andrew was replaced with the Union Jack. On English ships, the red, white, or blue ensigns had the St George's Cross of England removed from the canton, and the combined crosses of the Union flag put in its place. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, the Royal Navy was the largest maritime force in the world, maintaining superiority in financing, tactics, training, organisation, social cohesion, hygiene, logistical support and warship design. The peace settlement following the War of the Spanish Succession (1702\u20131714) granted Britain Gibraltar and Menorca, providing the Navy with Mediterranean bases. The expansion of the Royal Navy would encourage the British colonisation of the Americas, with British (North) America becoming a vital source of timber for the Royal Navy. There was a defeat during the frustrated siege of Cartagena de Indias in 1741. A new French attempt to invade Britain was thwarted by the defeat of their escort fleet in the extraordinary Battle of Quiberon Bay in 1759, fought in dangerous conditions. In 1762, the resumption of hostilities with Spain led to the British capture of Manila and of Havana, along with a Spanish fleet sheltering there. British naval supremacy could however be challenged still in this period by coalitions of other nations, as seen in the American War of Independence. The United States was allied to France, and the Netherlands and Spain were also at war with Britain. In the Battle of the Chesapeake, the British fleet failed to lift the French blockade, resulting in the surrender of an entire British army at Yorktown.\nThe French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1793\u20131801, 1803\u20131814 &amp; 1815) saw the Royal Navy reach a peak of efficiency, dominating the navies of all Britain's adversaries, which spent most of the war blockaded in port. Although the largest and potentially most dangerous mutinies in the history of the Royal Navy took place at Spithead and the Nore in spring 1797, British domination at sea was not threatened. Under Lord Nelson, the navy defeated the combined Franco-Spanish fleet at Trafalgar (1805). Ships of the line and even frigates, as well as manpower, were prioritised for the naval war in Europe, however, leaving only smaller vessels on the North America Station and other less active stations, and a heavy reliance upon impressed labour. This would result in problems countering large, well-armed United States Navy frigates which outgunned Royal Naval vessels in single-opponent actions, as well as United States privateers, when the American War of 1812 broke out concurrent with the war against Napoleonic France and its allies. The Royal Navy still enjoyed a numerical advantage over the former colonists on the Atlantic, and from its base in Bermuda it blockaded the Atlantic seaboard of the United States throughout the war and carried out (with Royal Marines, Colonial Marines, British Army, and Board of Ordnance military corps units) various amphibious operations, most notably the Chesapeake campaign. On the Great Lakes, however, the United States Navy established an advantage.\nSplendid isolation.\nIn 1860, Albert, Prince Consort, wrote to the Foreign Secretary John Russell, 1st Earl Russell with his concern about \"a perfect disgrace to our country, and particularly to the Admiralty\". The stated shipbuilding policy of the British monarchy was to take advantage of technological change and so be able to deploy a new weapons system that could defend British interests before other national and imperial resources are reasonably mobilized. Nevertheless, British taxpayers scrutinized progress in modernizing the Royal Navy so as to ensure, that taxpayers' money is not wasted.\nBetween 1815 and 1914, the Royal Navy saw little serious action, owing to the absence of any opponent strong enough to challenge its dominance. It did not suffer the drastic cutbacks the various military forces underwent in the period of economic austerity that followed the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the American War of 1812 (when the British Army and the Board of Ordnance military corps were cut back, weakening garrisons around the Empire, the Militia became a paper tiger, and the Volunteer Force and Fencible units disbanded, though the Yeomanry was maintained as a back-up to the police). Britain relied, throughout the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, on imperial fortress colonies (originally Bermuda, Gibraltar, Halifax (Nova Scotia), and Malta). These areas permitted Britain to control the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. Control of military forces in Nova Scotia passed to the new Government of Canada after the 1867 Confederation of Canada and control of the naval dockyard in Halifax, Nova Scotia was transferred to the Government of Canada in 1905, five years prior to the establishment of the Royal Canadian Navy. Prior to the 1920s, it was presumed that the only navies that could challenge the Royal Navy belonged to nations on the Atlantic Ocean or its connected seas, despite the growth of the Imperial Russian and United States Pacific fleets during the latter half of the 19th Century. \nBritain relied on Malta, in the Mediterranean Sea, to project power to the Indian Ocean and western Pacific Ocean via the Suez Canal after its completion in 1869. It relied on friendship and common interests between Britain and the United States (which controlled transit through the Panama Canal, completed in 1914) during and after the First World War, and on Bermuda, to project power the length of the western Atlantic, including the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The area controlled from Bermuda (and Halifax until 1905) had been part of the North America Station, until the 1820s, which then absorbed the Jamaica Station to become the North America and West Indies Station. After the First World War, this formation assumed responsibility for the eastern Pacific Ocean and the western South Atlantic and was known as the \"America and West Indies Station\" until 1956. In 1921, due to the ambitions of Imperial Japan and the threat of the Imperial Japanese Navy, it was decided to construct the Singapore Naval Base.\nDuring this period, naval warfare underwent a comprehensive transformation, brought about by steam propulsion, metal ship construction, and explosive munitions. Despite having to completely replace its war fleet, the Navy managed to maintain its overwhelming advantage over all potential rivals. Owing to British leadership in the Industrial Revolution, the country enjoyed unparalleled shipbuilding capacity and financial resources, which ensured that no rival could take advantage of these revolutionary changes to negate the British advantage in ship numbers.\nIn 1889, Parliament passed the Naval Defence Act, which formally adopted the 'two-power standard', which stipulated that the Royal Navy should maintain a number of battleships at least equal to the combined strength of the next two largest navies. The end of the 19th century saw structural changes and older vessels were scrapped or placed into reserve, making funds and manpower available for newer ships. The launch of in 1906 rendered all existing battleships obsolete. The transition at this time from coal to fuel-oil for boiler firing would encourage Britain to expand their foothold in former Ottoman territories in the Middle East, especially Iraq.\nExploration.\nThe Royal Navy played an historic role in several great global explorations of science and discovery. Beginning in the 18th century many great voyages were commissioned often in co-operation with the Royal Society, such as the Northwest Passage expedition of 1741. James Cook led three great voyages, with goals such as discovering Terra Australis, observing the Transit of Venus and searching for the elusive North-West Passage, these voyages are considered to have contributed to world knowledge and science. In the late 18th century, during a four year voyage Captain George Vancouver made detailed maps of the western coastline of North America.\nIn the 19th century, Charles Darwin made further contributions to science during the second voyage of HMS Beagle. The Ross expedition to the Antarctic made several important discoveries in biology and zoology. Several of the Royal Navy's voyages ended in disaster such as those of Franklin and Scott. Between 1872 and 1876 undertook the first global marine research expedition, the \"Challenger\" expedition.\nWorld War I.\nDuring World War I, the Royal Navy's strength was mostly deployed at home in the Grand Fleet, confronting the German High Seas Fleet across the North Sea. Several inconclusive clashes took place between them, chiefly the Battle of Jutland in 1916. The British fighting advantage proved insurmountable, leading the High Seas Fleet to abandon any attempt to challenge British dominance. The Royal Navy under John Jellicoe also tried to avoid combat and remained in port at Scapa Flow for much of the war. This was contrary to widespread prewar expectations that in the event of a Continental conflict Britain would primarily provide naval support to the Entente Powers while sending at most only a small ground army. Nevertheless, the Royal Navy played an important role in securing the British Isles and the English Channel, notably ferrying the entire British Expeditionary Force to the Western Front at the beginning of the war without the loss of a single life.\nThe Royal Navy nevertheless remained active in other theatres, most notably in the Mediterranean Sea, where they waged the Dardanelles and Gallipoli campaigns in 1914 and 1915. British cruisers hunted down German commerce raiders across the world's oceans in 1914 and 1915, including the battles of Coronel, Falklands Islands, Cocos, and Rufiji Delta, among others.\nInterwar period.\nAt the end of World War I, the Royal Navy remained by far the world's most powerful navy, larger than the U.S. Navy and French Navy combined, and over twice as large as the Imperial Japanese Navy and Royal Italian Navy combined. Its former primary competitor, the Imperial German Navy, was destroyed at the end of the war. In the inter-war period, the Royal Navy was stripped of much of its power. The Washington and London Naval Treaties imposed the scrapping of some capital ships and limitations on new construction.\nThe lack of an imperial fortress in the region of Asia, the Indian Ocean, and the Pacific Ocean was always to be a weakness throughout the 19th century as the former North American colonies that had become the United States of America had multiplied towards the Pacific Coast of North America, and the Russian Empire and Japanese Empire both had ports on the Pacific and had begun building large, modern fleets which went to war with each other in 1904. Britain's reliance on Malta, via the Suez Canal, as the nearest Imperial fortress was improved, relying on amity and common interests that developed between Britain and the United States during and after World War I, by the completion of the Panama Canal in 1914, allowing the cruisers based in Bermuda to more easily and rapidly reach the eastern Pacific Ocean (after the war, the Royal Navy's Bermuda-based \"North America and West Indies Station\" was consequently re-designated the \"America and West Indies station\", including a South American division. The rising power and increasing belligerence of the Japanese Empire after World War I, however, resulted in the construction of the Singapore Naval Base, which was completed in 1938, less than four years before hostilities with Japan did commence during World War II.\nIn 1931, the Invergordon Mutiny took place in the Atlantic Fleet over the National Government's proposed 25% pay cut, which was eventually reduced to 10%. International tensions increased in the mid-1930s and the re-armament of the Royal Navy was well under way by 1938. In addition to new construction, several existing old battleships, battlecruisers and heavy cruisers were reconstructed, and anti-aircraft weaponry reinforced, while new technologies, such as ASDIC, Huff-Duff and hydrophones, were developed.\nWorld War II.\nAt the start of World War II in 1939, the Royal Navy was still the largest in the world, with over 1,400 vessels. The Royal Navy provided critical cover during Operation Dynamo, the British evacuations from Dunkirk, and as the ultimate deterrent to a German invasion of Britain during the following four months. The Luftwaffe under Hermann G\u00f6ring attempted to gain air supremacy over southern England in the Battle of Britain in order to neutralise the Home Fleet, but faced stiff resistance from the Royal Air Force. The Royal Navy's Fleet Air Arm assisted the Royal Air Force, which was suffering from personnel shortages, during the battle. The Luftwaffe bombing offensive during the Kanalkampf phase of the battle targeted naval convoys and bases in order to lure large concentrations of RAF fighters into attrition warfare. At Taranto, Admiral Cunningham commanded a fleet that launched the first all-aircraft naval attack in history. The Royal Navy suffered heavy losses in the first two years of the war. Over 3,000 people were lost when the converted troopship \"Lancastria\" was sunk in June 1940, the greatest maritime disaster in Britain's history. The Navy's most critical struggle was the Battle of the Atlantic defending Britain's vital North American commercial supply lines against U-boat attack. A traditional convoy system was instituted from the start of the war, but German submarine tactics, based on group attacks by \"wolf-packs\", were much more effective than in the previous war, and the threat remained serious for well over three years.\nCold War.\nAfter World War II, the decline of the British Empire and the economic hardships in Britain forced the reduction in the size and capability of the Royal Navy. The United States Navy instead took on the role of global naval power. Governments since have faced increasing budgetary pressures, partly due to the increasing cost of weapons systems.\nIn 1981, Defence Secretary John Nott had advocated and initiated a series of cutbacks to the Navy. The Falklands War however proved a need for the Royal Navy to regain an expeditionary and littoral capability which, with its resources and structure at the time, would prove difficult. At the beginning of the 1980s, the Royal Navy was a force focused on blue-water anti-submarine warfare. Its purpose was to search for and destroy Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic, and to operate the nuclear deterrent submarine force. The navy received its first nuclear weapons with the introduction of the first of the s armed with the Polaris missile.\nPost-Cold War.\nFollowing the conclusion of the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War in 1991, the Royal Navy began to experience a gradual decline in its fleet size in accordance with the changed strategic environment it operated in. While new and more capable ships are continually brought into service, such as the s, s, and Type 45 destroyers, the total number of ships and submarines operated has continued to steadily reduce. This has caused considerable debate about the size of the Royal Navy. A 2013 report found that the Royal Navy was already too small, and that Britain would have to depend on her allies if her territories were attacked.\nThe Royal Navy was responsible for training the fledgling Iraqi Navy and securing Iraq's oil terminals following the cessation of hostilities in the country. The Iraqi Training and Advisory Mission (Navy) (Umm Qasr), headed by a Royal Navy captain, has been responsible for the former duty whilst Commander Task Force Iraqi Maritime, a Royal Navy commodore, was responsible for the latter. The mission ended in May 2011.\nThe financial costs attached to nuclear deterrence, including Trident missile upgrades and replacements, have become an increasingly significant issue for the navy.\nAssets and resources.\nPersonnel.\n at Torpoint, Cornwall, is the basic training facility for newly enlisted ratings. Britannia Royal Naval College in Dartmouth, Devon is the initial officer training establishment for the Royal Navy. Personnel are divided into a warfare branch, which includes Warfare Officers (previously named seamen officers) and Naval Aviators, as well other branches including the Royal Naval Engineers, Royal Navy Medical Branch, and Logistics Officers (previously named Supply Officers). Present-day officers and ratings have several different uniforms; some are designed to be worn aboard ship, others ashore or in ceremonial duties. Women began to join the Royal Navy in 1917 with the formation of the Women's Royal Naval Service (WRNS), which was disbanded after the end of the First World War in 1919. It was revived in 1939, and the WRNS continued until disbandment in 1993, as a result of the decision to fully integrate women into the structures of the Royal Navy. Women now serve in all sections of the Royal Navy including the Royal Marines.\nIn August 2019, the Ministry of Defence published figures showing that the Royal Navy and Royal Marines had 29,090 full-time trained personnel compared with a target of 30,600. In 2023, it was reported that the Royal Navy was experiencing significant recruiting challenges with a net drop of some 1,600 personnel (4 percent of the force) from mid-2022 to mid-2023. This was posing a significant problem in the ability of the navy to meet its commitments.\nIn December 2019 the First Sea Lord, Admiral Tony Radakin, outlined a proposal to reduce the number of Rear-Admirals at Navy Command by five. The fighting arms (excluding Commandant General Royal Marines) would be reduced to commodore (1-star) rank and the surface flotillas would be combined. Training would be concentrated under the Fleet Commander.\nIn 1952, Royal Navy ratings belonged to one of eleven branches: Seaman (may specialise as Boom Defence Rating; Gunnery Rating; Physical and Recreational Training Instructor; Quartermaster; Radar Plotter; Sailmaker; Surveying Recorder; Torpedo and Submarine Detection Rating); Naval Aviation (Aircraft Artificer; Aircraft Handler; Aircraft Mechanic (Airframes); Aircraft Mechanic (Engines); Aircraft Mechanic (Ordnance); Meteorological Observer; Photographer; Safety Equipment Rating); Communications (Signalman; Telegraphist); Shipwright (Shipwright Artificer); Electrical (Electrician; Electrician (Air); Electrical Artificer; Electrical Artificer (Air); Radio Electrical Artificer; Radio Electrical Artificer (Air); Radio Electrician; Radio Electrician (Air)); Engineering (Engine Room Artificer; Stoker Mechanic); Ordnance (Ordnance Artificer); Regulating (Master-at-Arms; Patrol Rating); Supply and Secretarial (Cook; Steward; Stores Rating; Writer); Medical (Laboratory Assistant; Operating Room Assistant; Physiotherapist (Masseur); Radiographer; Sanitary Inspector; Sick Berth Attendant); and Dental (Dental Surgery Attendant).\nSurface fleet.\nAircraft carriers.\nThe Royal Navy has two \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carriers. Each carrier cost \u00a33.2 billion and has an empty load displacement of , rising up to an estimated full load displacement. Both are intended to operate the STOVL variant of the F-35 Lightning II. The first, , commenced flight trials in 2018. \"Queen Elizabeth\" began sea trials in June 2017, was commissioned later that year, and entered service in 2020, while the second, , began sea trials on 22 September 2019, was commissioned in December 2019 and was declared operational as of October 2021. The aircraft carriers form a central part of the UK Carrier Strike Group alongside escorts and support ships.\nAmphibious warfare.\nUntil 2024/25, the Royal Navy's amphibious capability consisted of two landing platform docks ( and ). While their primary role was to conduct amphibious warfare, they were also deployed for humanitarian aid missions. Both vessels were in reserve as of 2024 and in November 2024, the newly elected Labour government indicated that they would in fact be retired from service completely by March 2025. While second-line amphibious capabilities remained within the Royal Fleet Auxiliary, the future of the navy's amphibious capability was now in question.\nClearance diving.\nThe Royal Navy clearance diving unit, the Fleet Diving Squadron, was reorganised and renamed the Diving and Threat Exploitation Group in 2022. The group consists of five squadrons: Alpha, Bravo, Charlie, Delta, and Echo. The Royal Navy has a separate unit with divers the special forces unit the Special Boat Service.\nEscort fleet.\nThe escort fleet comprises guided missile destroyers and frigates and is the traditional workhorse of the Navy. As of December 2024[ [update]] there are six Type 45 destroyers and eight Type 23 frigates in commission. Among their primary roles is to provide escort for the larger capital ships\u2014protecting them from air, surface and subsurface threats. Other duties include undertaking the Royal Navy's standing deployments across the globe, which often consists of: counter-narcotics, anti-piracy missions and providing humanitarian aid.\nThe Type 45 is primarily designed for anti-aircraft and anti-missile warfare and the Royal Navy describe the destroyer's mission as \"to shield the Fleet from air attack\". They are equipped with the PAAMS (also known as Sea Viper) integrated anti-aircraft warfare system which incorporates the sophisticated SAMPSON and S1850M long range radars and the Aster 15 and 30 missiles.\nSixteen Type 23 frigates were delivered to the Royal Navy, with the final vessel, , commissioned in June 2002. However, the 2004 Delivering Security in a Changing World review announced that three frigates would be paid off as part of a cost-cutting exercise, and these were subsequently sold to the Chilean Navy. The 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review announced that the remaining 13 Type 23 frigates would eventually be replaced by the Type 26 Frigate, with the incremental retirement of the remaining Type 23s commencing in 2021. The Strategic Defence and Security Review 2015 reduced the procurement of Type 26 to eight with five Type 31e frigates also to be procured.\nAs part of the Maritime Electronic Warfare System Integrated Capability (MEWSIC) programme, the Ministry of Defence awarded a \u00a3100 million contract in 2022 to a consortium led by Babcock International, with QinetiQ and Elbit Systems UK, a subsidiary of the Israel-based defence technology company Elbit Systems. The 13-year programme is intended to upgrade the Royal Navy's electronic warfare capabilities, particularly against threats such as anti-ship missiles. By 2025, testing of the new systems was underway, with full integration planned for platforms including the Type 45, Type 26, and Type 31 frigates.\nMine countermeasure vessels (MCMV).\nThere are two classes of traditional MCMVs in the Royal Navy: one and six s. Crewed mine countermeasures vessels are in the process of being incrementally replaced by autonomous systems, such as the Arcims-class and vessels being procured from Thales defence systems. It is planned that these systems may operate from a range of vessels, including so-called \"motherships\". The first of these 'motherships', HMS Stirling Castle, was transferred to the Royal Navy from the Royal Fleet Auxiliary in 2025. The Hunt-class vessels combine the separate roles of the traditional minesweeper and the active minehunter in one hull. If required, crewed MCMVs can also take on the role of offshore patrol vessels.\nOffshore patrol vessels (OPV).\nA fleet of eight River-class offshore patrol vessels are in service with the Royal Navy. The three Batch 1 ships of the class serve in U.K. waters in a sovereignty and fisheries protection role while the five Batch 2 ships are forward-deployed on a long-term basis to Gibraltar, the Caribbean, the Falkland Islands and the Indo-Pacific region. The vessel MV \"Grampian Frontier\" is leased from Scottish-based company North Star Shipping for patrol duties around the British Indian Ocean Territory. However, she is not in commission with the Royal Navy.\nIn December 2019, the modified Batch 1 River-class vessel, , was decommissioned, with the Batch 2 taking over duties as the Falkland Islands patrol ship.\nSurvey ships.\n is a dedicated Antarctica patrol ship that fulfils the nation's mandate to provide support to the British Antarctic Survey (BAS). is an ocean survey vessel and at 13,500 tonnes is one of the largest ships in the Navy. As of 2018, the newly commissioned also undertakes survey duties at sea. The Royal Fleet Auxiliary plans to introduce two new Multi-Role Ocean Surveillance Ships, in part to protect undersea cables and gas pipelines and partly to compensate for the withdrawal of all ocean-going survey vessels from Royal Navy service. The first of these vessels, RFA \"Proteus\", entered service in October 2023.\nRoyal Fleet Auxiliary.\nThe Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) provides support to the Royal Navy at sea in several capacities. For fleet replenishment, it deploys one Fleet Solid Support Ship (in reserve as of late 2024) and four fleet tankers. The RFA also has one aviation training and casualty reception vessel, RFA \"Argus\", which has operated as a Littoral Strike Ship, though she was laid-up due to her age and unsafe condition as of 2025.\nThree amphibious transport docks are also incorporated within its fleet. These are known as the landing ships, of which four were introduced in 2006\u20132007, but one was sold to the Royal Australian Navy in 2011. In November 2006, the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir Jonathon Band described the Royal Fleet Auxiliary vessels as \"a major uplift in the Royal Navy's war fighting capability\".\nIn February 2023, a commercial vessel was also acquired to act as a Multi-Role Ocean Surveillance (MROS) Ship for the protection of critical seabed infrastructure and other tasks. She entered service as RFA \"Proteus\". An additional vessel, , was acquired in 2023 to act as a mothership for autonomous minehunting systems. This ship was transferred from the RFA to the Royal Navy in 2025.\nOther ships.\nThe Royal Navy also includes a number of smaller non-commissioned assets such as the Sea-class workboats. The Fleet Experimentation Squadron, within the Disruptive Capabilities and Technologies Office, operates a number of vessels and systems to trial high technology military capabilities. These include vessels such as XV \"Excalibur\", an Extra Large Uncrewed Submarine christened in 2025. On 29 July 2022, the Royal Navy christened a new experimental ship, XV \"Patrick Blackett\", which it aims to use as a testbed for autonomous systems. Whilst the ship flies the Blue Ensign, it is crewed by Royal Navy personnel and will participate in Royal Navy and NATO exercises.\nSubmarine Service.\nThe Submarine Service is the submarine based element of the Royal Navy. It is sometimes referred to as the \"Silent Service\", as the submarines are generally required to operate undetected. Founded in 1901, the service made history in 1982 when, during the Falklands War, became the first nuclear-powered submarine to sink a surface ship, . Today, all of the Royal Navy's submarines are nuclear-powered.\nBallistic missile submarines (SSBN).\nThe Royal Navy operates four ballistic missile submarines displacing nearly 16,000 tonnes and equipped with Trident II missiles (armed with nuclear weapons) and heavyweight Spearfish torpedoes, to carry out Operation Relentless, the United Kingdom's Continuous At Sea Deterrent (CASD). The UK government has committed to replace these submarines with four new s, which will enter service in the \"early 2030s\" to maintain this capability.\nFleet submarines (SSN).\nAs of September 2025, six fleet submarines of the \"Astute-\"class are in commission with the previous Trafalgar class submarines having been withdrawn from service. Another \"Astute-\"class fleet submarine is scheduled to enter service by the late-2020s.\nThe \"Astute-\"class, at 7,400 tonnes, carry both Tomahawk land-attack missiles and Spearfish torpedoes. In 2025, was the most recent \"Astute\"-class boat to be commissioned, though it will be at least another 12 to 18 months before she is fully operational.\nFleet Air Arm.\nThe Fleet Air Arm (FAA) is recognised as one of the five fighting arms of the Royal Navy and oversees the operations of naval aircraft.\nEstablished officially within the Royal Navy in 1939, the Fleet Air Arm has been instrumental in naval combat, offering aerial support for fleet missions, performing reconnaissance tasks, and executing offensive operations against both maritime and land-based objectives.\nThe contemporary Fleet Air Arm functions as an essential element of the Royal Navy\u2019s combat capabilities. Its main responsibilities encompass:\nPilots designated for rotary wing service train under No. 1 Flying Training School (1 FTS) at RAF Shawbury.\nRoyal Marines.\nThe Royal Marines are an amphibious, specialised light infantry force of commandos, capable of deploying at short notice in support of His Majesty's Government's military and diplomatic objectives overseas. The Royal Marines are organised into a highly mobile light infantry brigade (UK Commando Force) and 7 commando units including 47 Commando (Raiding Group) Royal Marines, 43 Commando Fleet Protection Group Royal Marines and a company strength commitment to the Special Forces Support Group. The Corps operates in all environments and climates, though particular expertise and training is spent on amphibious warfare, Arctic warfare, mountain warfare, expeditionary warfare and commitment to the UK's Rapid Reaction Force. The Royal Marines are also the primary source of personnel for the Royal Navy's special forces unit the Special Boat Service (SBS).\nThe Corps operates its own fleet of landing and other craft, and also incorporates the Royal Marines Band Service, the musical wing of the Royal Navy.\nThe Royal Marines have seen constant action since they were formed, often fighting beside the British Army; including in the Seven Years' War, the Napoleonic Wars, the Crimean War, World War I and World War II. Most has been offshore away from the United Kingdom. In recent times, the Corps has been deployed in the Falklands War, the Gulf War, the Bosnian War, the Kosovo War, the Sierra Leone Civil War, the Iraq War and the War in Afghanistan (2001\u20132021). The Royal Marines have international ties with allied marine forces, particularly the United States Marine Corps and the Netherlands Marine Corps/Korps Mariniers.\nCommand, control and organisation.\nThe Sovereign is the Commander-in-chief of the British Armed Forces. The titular head of the Royal Navy is the Lord High Admiral of the United Kingdom, a position which was held by Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh from 2011 until his death in 2021 and which remains in the reigning monarch's gift. The position had been held by Queen Elizabeth II from 1964 to 2011. The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom is \"de facto\" commander-in-chief of the armed forces, with the Secretary of State for Defence the minister permanently responsible. The professional head of the Naval Service is the First Sea Lord and Chief of Naval Staff (1SL/CNS), a member of the Defence Council of the United Kingdom. The Defence Council delegates management of the Naval Service to the Admiralty Board, chaired by the Secretary of State for Defence, which directs the Navy Board, a sub-committee of the Admiralty Board comprising only naval officers and Ministry of Defence (MOD) civil servants. These are all based in the Ministry of Defence Main Building in London, where the First Sea Lord &amp; CNS is supported by the Naval Staff.\nOrganisation.\nThe Fleet Commander has responsibility for the provision of ships, submarines and aircraft ready for any operations that the Government requires. Fleet Commander exercises his authority through the Navy Command Headquarters, based at in Portsmouth. Day-to-day operational command of ships, aircraft and Royal Marines is split: large deployed operations such as United Kingdom Carrier Strike Group 21 (Operation Fortis) often fall under the Permanent Joint Headquarters of the United Kingdom's armed forces, at Northwood in the northwest suburbs of London; while across the same site at the Northwood Headquarters, Commander Operations (Royal Navy) supervises individual ships on independent activities and the patrolling Vanguard-class submarine. The UK retains control of the NATO functional Allied Maritime Command, also on the same site.\nThe Royal Navy was the first of the three armed forces to combine the personnel and training command, under the Principal Personnel Officer, with the last remaining operational command, combining the Headquarters of the Commander-in-Chief, Fleet and Naval Home Command into a single organisation, Fleet Command, in 2005 and becoming Navy Command in 2008. The Second Sea Lord acts as the Principal Personnel Officer. Previously, Flag Officer Sea Training was part of the list of top senior appointments in Navy Command, however, as part of the Navy Command Transformation Programme, the post has reduced from Rear-Admiral to Commodore, renamed as Commander Fleet Operational Sea Training.\nThe Naval Command senior appointments are:\nThe Commandant General Royal Marines was previously a major-general's post and charged with leading amphibious warfare operations. Since Lieutenant General Robert Magowan was appointed for the second time the post is an additional responsibility for a senior Royal Marine holding other duties. The current CG RM is General Sir Gwyn Jenkins, the First Sea Lord.\nIntelligence support to fleet operations is provided by intelligence sections at the various headquarters and from MOD Defence Intelligence, renamed from the Defence Intelligence Staff in early 2010.\nCurrent deployments.\nThe Royal Navy is currently deployed in different areas of the world, including some standing Royal Navy deployments. These include several home tasks as well as overseas deployments. The Navy is deployed in the Mediterranean as part of standing NATO deployments including mine countermeasures and NATO Maritime Group 2. In both the North and South Atlantic, RN vessels are patrolling. There is always a Falkland Islands patrol vessel on deployment, currently HMS \"Forth\".\nThe Royal Navy operates a Response Force Task Group (a product of the 2010 Strategic Defence and Security Review), which is poised to respond globally to short-notice tasking across a range of defence activities, such as non-combatant evacuation operations, disaster relief, humanitarian aid or amphibious operations. In 2011, the first deployment of the task group occurred under the name 'COUGAR 11' which saw them transit through the Mediterranean where they took part in multinational amphibious exercises before moving further east through the Suez Canal for further exercises in the Indian Ocean.\nIn the Persian Gulf, and until 2025/26, the RN has sustained commitments in support of both national and coalition efforts to stabilise the region. Operation Kipion had been the navy's primary activity in the Gulf region. The Royal Navy has also contributed to the US-led Combined Maritime Forces in the Gulf in partnership with the United States. The UK Maritime Component Commander, overseer of all of His Majesty's warships in the Persian Gulf and surrounding waters, is also deputy commander of the Combined Maritime Forces. However, as of 2025/26, these forces were being withdrawn and it was unclear how or whether they would be replaced. \nThe Royal Navy contributes to standing NATO formations and maintains forces as part of the NATO Response Force. The RN also has a long-standing commitment to supporting the Five Powers Defence Arrangements countries and occasionally deploys to the Far East as a result. This deployment typically consists of a frigate and a survey vessel, operating separately. Operation Atalanta, the European Union's anti-piracy operation in the Indian Ocean, is permanently commanded by a senior Royal Navy or Royal Marines officer at Northwood Headquarters and the navy contributes ships to the operation.\nFrom 2015, the Royal Navy also re-formed its UK Carrier Strike Group (UKCSG) after it was disbanded in 2011 due to the retirement of HMS \"Ark Royal\" and Harrier GR9s. The \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carriers form the central part of this formation, supported by various escorts and support ships, with the aim to facilitate carrier-enabled power projection. The UKCSG first assembled at sea in October 2020 as part of a rehearsal for its first operational deployment in 2021.\nIn 2019, the Royal Navy announced the formation of two Littoral Response Groups as part of a transformation of its amphibious forces. These forward-based special operations-capable task groups were to be rapidly-deployable and able to carry out a range of tasks within the littoral, including raids and precision strikes. The first one, based in Europe, became operational in 2021, whilst the second was to be ready for deployment in the Indo-Pacific from 2023. They centred around the two navy amphibious assault ships, amphibious auxiliary ships from the Royal Fleet Auxiliary, elements from the Royal Marines and supporting units. However, in November 2024, with the government's decision to retire the \"Albion\"-class assault ships, the viability of these plans were brought into question.\nLocations.\nHistorically the Navy had a number of geographical commands, each under a Commander-in-Chief, and often informally referred to as \"stations\". Over 300 years to 1971 these commands were repeatedly reduced in number, until they were merged into a single entity. The former stations of the Royal Navy included the East Indies Station (1744\u20131831); East Indies and China Station (1832\u20131865); East Indies Station (1865\u20131913); Egypt and East Indies Station (1913\u20131918); East Indies Station (1918\u20131941). Later the Eastern Fleet became the East Indies Fleet. In 1952, after the Second World War ended, the East Indies Fleet became the Far East Fleet. In 1971 the final merger into a single fleet took place with Far East Fleet merged into the larger single formation under the orders of the Commander-in-Chief Fleet (CINCFLEET).\nThe Royal Navy currently operates from three bases in the United Kingdom where commissioned ships are based; Portsmouth, Clyde and Devonport, Plymouth\u2014Devonport is the largest operational naval base in the UK and Western Europe. Each base hosts a flotilla command under a commodore, responsible for the provision of operational capability using the ships and submarines within the flotilla. UK Commando Force is similarly commanded by a brigadier and based in Plymouth.\nThe Royal Navy has historically maintained Royal Navy Dockyards around the world. Dockyards of the Royal Navy are harbours where ships are overhauled and refitted. Only four are operating today; at Devonport, Faslane, Rosyth and at Portsmouth. A Naval Base Review was undertaken in 2006 and early 2007, the outcome being announced by Secretary of State for Defence, Des Browne, confirming that all would remain however some reductions in manpower were anticipated.\nThe academy where initial training for future Royal Navy officers takes place is Britannia Royal Naval College, located on a hill overlooking Dartmouth, Devon. Basic training for future ratings takes place at HMS \"Raleigh\" at Torpoint, Cornwall, close to HMNB Devonport.\nSignificant numbers of naval personnel are employed within the Ministry of Defence, Defence Equipment and Support and on exchange with the Army and Royal Air Force. Small numbers are also on exchange within other government departments and with allied fleets, such as the United States Navy. The navy also posts personnel in small units around the world to support ongoing operations and maintain standing commitments. Nineteen personnel are stationed in Gibraltar to support the small Gibraltar Squadron, the RN's only permanent overseas squadron. Some personnel are also based at East Cove Military Port and RAF Mount Pleasant in the Falkland Islands to support APT(S). Small numbers of personnel are based in Diego Garcia (Naval Party 1002), Miami (NP 1011 \u2013 AUTEC), Singapore (NP 1022), Dubai (NP 1023) and elsewhere.\nOn 6 December 2014, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office announced it would expand the UK's naval facilities in Bahrain to support larger Royal Navy ships deployed to the Persian Gulf. Once completed, it became the UK's first permanent military base located East of Suez since it withdrew from the region in 1971. The base is reportedly large enough to accommodate Type 45 destroyers and \"Queen Elizabeth\"-class aircraft carriers.\nTitles and naming.\nOf the Navy.\nThe navy was referred to as the \"Navy Royal\" at the time of its founding in 1546, and this title remained in use into the Stuart period. During the interregnum, the commonwealth under Oliver Cromwell replaced many historical names and titles, with the fleet then referred to as the \"Commonwealth Navy\". The navy was renamed once again after the restoration in 1660 to the present title.\nToday, the navy of the United Kingdom is commonly referred to as the \"Royal Navy\" both in the United Kingdom and other countries. Navies of other Commonwealth countries where the British monarch is also head of state include their national name, e.g. Royal Australian Navy. Some navies of other monarchies, such as the \"Koninklijke Marine\" (Royal Netherlands Navy) and \"Kungliga Flottan\" (Royal Swedish Navy), are also called \"Royal Navy\" in their own language. The Danish Navy uses the term \"Royal\" incorporated in its official name (Royal Danish Navy), but only \"Fl\u00e5den\" (Navy) in everyday speech. The French Navy, despite France being a republic since 1870, is often nicknamed \"La Royale\" (literally: The Royal).\nOf ships.\nRoyal Navy ships in commission are prefixed since 1789 with His Majesty's Ship (or \"Her Majesty's Ship\", when the monarch is a queen), abbreviated to \"HMS\"; for example, . Submarines are styled HM Submarine, also abbreviated \"HMS\". Names are allocated to ships and submarines by a naming committee within the MOD and given by class, with the names of ships within a class often being thematic (for example, the Type 23s are named after British dukes) or traditional (for example, the s all carry the names of famous historic ships). The monarch formally approves all ship names, with King George V vetoing naming a ship after Oliver Cromwell in 1911. Names are frequently re-used, offering a new ship the rich heritage, battle honours and traditions of her predecessors. Often, a particular vessel class will be named after the first ship of that type to be built. As well as a name, each ship and submarine of the Royal Navy and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary is given a pennant number which in part denotes its role. For example, the destroyer displays the pennant number 'D32'.\nRanks, rates and insignia.\nThe Royal Navy ranks, rates and insignia form part of the uniform of the Royal Navy. The Royal Navy uniform is the pattern on which many of the uniforms of the other national navies of the world are based (e.g. Ranks and insignia of NATO navies officers, Uniforms of the United States Navy, Uniforms of the Royal Canadian Navy, French Naval Uniforms).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nCustoms and traditions.\nTraditions.\nThe Royal Navy has several formal customs and traditions including the use of ensigns and ships badges. Royal Navy ships have several ensigns used when under way and when in port. Commissioned ships and submarines wear the White Ensign at the stern whilst alongside during daylight hours and at the main-mast whilst under way. When alongside, the \"Union Jack\" is flown from the jackstaff at the bow, and can only be flown under way either to signal a court-martial is in progress or to indicate the presence of an admiral of the fleet on-board (including the Lord High Admiral or the monarch).\nThe Fleet Review is an irregular tradition of assembling the fleet before the monarch. The first review on record was held in 1400, and the most recent review as of 2022[ [update]] was held on 28 June 2005 to mark the bi-centenary of the Battle of Trafalgar; 167 ships from many different nations attended with the Royal Navy supplying 67.\n\"Jackspeak\".\nThere are several less formal traditions including service nicknames and Naval slang, known as \"Jackspeak\". The nicknames include \"The Andrew\" (of uncertain origin, possibly after a zealous press ganger) and \"The Senior Service\". British sailors are referred to as \"Jack\" (or \"Jenny\"), or more widely as \"Matelots\". Royal Marines are fondly known as \"Bootnecks\" or often just as \"Royals\". A compendium of Naval slang was brought together by Commander A.T.L. Covey-Crump and his name has in itself become the subject of Naval slang; \"Covey-Crump\". A game traditionally played by the Navy is the four-player board game known as \"Uckers\". This is similar to Ludo and it is regarded as easy to learn, but difficult to play well.\nNavy cadets.\nThe Royal Navy sponsors or supports three youth organisations:\nThe above organisations are the responsibility of the CUY branch of Commander Core Training and Recruiting (COMCORE) who reports to Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST).\nIn popular culture.\nThe Royal Navy of the 18th century is depicted in many novels and several films dramatising the voyage and mutiny on the \"Bounty\". The Royal Navy's Napoleonic campaigns of the early 19th century are also a popular subject of historical novels. Some of the best-known are Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey-Maturin series and C. S. Forester's Horatio Hornblower chronicles.\nThe Navy can also be seen in numerous films. The fictional spy James Bond is a sometimes commander in the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve (RNVR). The Royal Navy is featured in \"The Spy Who Loved Me\", when a nuclear ballistic-missile submarine is stolen, and in \"Tomorrow Never Dies\" when the media mogul Elliot Carver sinks a Royal Navy warship in an attempt to trigger a war between the UK and People's Republic of China. \"\" was based on Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey-Maturin series. The \"Pirates of the Caribbean\" series of films also includes the Navy as the force pursuing the eponymous pirates. No\u00ebl Coward directed and starred in his own film \"In Which We Serve\", which tells the story of the crew of the fictional HMS \"Torrin\" during the Second World War. It was intended as a propaganda film and was released in 1942. Coward starred as the ship's captain, with supporting roles from John Mills and Richard Attenborough. The Navy can also be seen in another James Bond film, The Man with the Golden Gun; here they are inside the wreck of the RMS Queen Elizabeth.\nC. S. Forester's Hornblower novels have been adapted for television. The Royal Navy was the subject of the 1970s BBC television drama series, \"Warship\", and of a five-part documentary, \"Shipmates\", that followed the workings of the Royal Navy day to day.\nTelevision documentaries about the Royal Navy include: \"Empire of the Seas: How the Navy Forged the Modern World\", a four-part documentary depicting Britain's rise as a naval superpower, up until the First World War; \"Sailor\", about life on the aircraft carrier ; and \"Submarine\", about the submarine captains' training course, 'The Perisher'. There have also been Channel 5 documentaries such as \"Royal Navy Submarine Mission\", following a nuclear-powered fleet submarine.\nThe BBC Light Programme radio comedy series \"The Navy Lark\" featured a fictitious warship (\"HMS \"Troutbridge\"\") and ran from 1959 to 1977.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26062", "revid": "37507540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26062", "title": "RN", "text": "RN or Rn may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26064", "revid": "1115773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26064", "title": "Rossums Universal Robots", "text": ""}
{"id": "26067", "revid": "50357050", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26067", "title": "Rotary", "text": "Rotary may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26068", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26068", "title": "List of Russian-language poets", "text": "This is a list of authors who have written poetry in the Russian language.\nAlphabetical list.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n \nA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nE.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nF.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nG.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nI.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nK.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nL.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nN.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nO.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nR.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nT.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nV.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nY.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nZ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26070", "revid": "826936954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26070", "title": "Rocket propulsion", "text": ""}
{"id": "26071", "revid": "50857646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26071", "title": "Robert M. Pirsig", "text": "American writer and philosopher (1928\u20132017)\nRobert Maynard Pirsig (; September 6, 1928\u00a0\u2013 April 24, 2017) was an American writer and philosopher. He is the author of the philosophical books \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An Inquiry into Values\" (1974) and \"\" (1991), and he co-authored \"On Quality: An Inquiry Into Excellence: Selected and Unpublished Writings\" (2022) along with his wife and editor, Wendy Pirsig.\nEarly life.\nPirsig was born on September 6, 1928, in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the son of Harriet Marie Sjobeck and Maynard Pirsig. He was of German and Swedish descent. His father was a graduate of the University of Minnesota Law School, taught in that school from 1934, served as its dean from 1948 to 1955, and retired from teaching there in 1970. Pirsig senior subsequently taught at the William Mitchell College of Law until his retirement in 1993.\nA precocious child with an alleged IQ of 170 at the age of nine, Pirsig skipped several grades at the Blake School in Minneapolis. In May 1943, he was awarded a high school diploma at the age of 14 by the University High School (later renamed Marshall-University High School), where he had edited the school yearbook, the Bisbilla. Pirsig then studied biochemistry at the University of Minnesota. In \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", he describes the central character, thought to represent himself, as being an atypical student, interested in science in itself rather than as a professional career path.\nIn the course of his studies, Pirsig became intrigued by the multiplicity of putative causes for a given phenomenon, and increasingly focused on the role played by hypotheses in the scientific method and sources from which they originate. His preoccupation with these matters led to a decline in his grades and expulsion from the university.\nIn 1946, Pirsig enlisted in the United States Army and was stationed in South Korea until 1948. Upon his discharge from the Army, he lived for several months in Seattle, Washington, and then returned to the University of Minnesota, from which he received a bachelor's degree in 1950. He and his wife worked at the Nevada Club in Reno, Nevada and saved enough to move to Acayucan, Mexico with the intent to write a great book. He subsequently studied philosophy at Banaras Hindu University in India and the Committee on the Analysis of Ideas and Study of Methods at the University of Chicago. In 1958 he earned a master's degree in journalism from the University of Minnesota.\nCareer.\nIn 1958, he became a professor at Montana State University in Bozeman, and taught creative writing courses for two years. He was friends with Bob DeWeese and Gennie DeWeese there. Shortly thereafter he taught at the University of Illinois at Chicago.\nPirsig's major published work consists of two books: the better known \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\" (1974) and its follow up \"\" (1991).\nIn the mid to late 1960's, Pirsig was working as a technical writer for Northern Pump (which became Northern Ordinance). In 1968, he had the idea to write an essay about how he went about fixing motorcycles and how it related to what he knew about Zen religious ideas. This grew into a synopsis for the novel. Pirsig had difficulty finding a publisher at this stage, pitching the idea for his book to 121 different publishers. He sent them a cover letter along with two sample pages; twenty two of which responded favourably. William Morrow and Company gave Pirsig a US $3000 advance for the project. In July 1968, he went on the road trip, with his son Chris, that greatly informed the book.\nPirsig took nearly four years to complete \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", writing most of the book while living above a shoe store in south Minneapolis, while working as a tech writer for Honeywell.\nUltimately, an editor at William Morrow accepted the finished manuscript; \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\" was published in 1974. Pirsig's publisher's internal recommendation stated, \"This book is brilliant beyond belief, it is probably a work of genius, and will, I'll wager, attain classic stature.\"\nThe book is an exploration of Pirsig's particular concept of \"quality,\" and how it relates to reality. Ostensibly a first-person narrative based on a motorcycle trip he and his young son Chris had taken from Minneapolis to San Francisco, it is an exploration of the underlying metaphysics of Western culture. He also gives the reader a short summary of the history of philosophy, including his interpretation of the philosophy of Aristotle as part of an ongoing dispute between \"universalists\", admitting the existence of \"universals\", and the Sophists, opposed by Socrates and his student Plato. Pirsig finds in \"quality\" a special significance and common ground between Western and Eastern world views. Pirsig described the development of his ideas and writing his book in a lecture at the Minneapolis College of Art and Design on May 20, 1974 (archived on YouTube).\nIn his book review, George Steiner compared Pirsig's writing to Dostoevsky, Broch, Proust, and Bergson, stating that \"the assertion itself is valid\u00a0... the analogies with \"Moby-Dick\" are patent\".\nPirsig was vice-president of the Minnesota Zen Meditation Center from 1973 to 1975 and also served on the board of directors.\nIn 1974, Pirsig was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship. This allowed him to work on a follow-up. For this book he developed a value-based metaphysics, Metaphysics of Quality, that challenges our subject\u2013object view of reality.\nIn 1991, the book, \"Lila: An Inquiry into Morals,\" was published Bantam Books. This time the narrator is 'the captain' of a sailboat, following on from where \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\" left off. \"Lila\" was not as commercially successful as his first book, but Pirsig felt it was the more important. He remained frustrated by what he saw as a lack of engagement in the philosophical ideas he put forward, including ideas from William James Sidis and James Verne Dusenberry.\nPersonal life.\nRobert Pirsig married Nancy Ann James on May 10, 1954. They had two sons: Chris, born in 1956, and Theodore (Ted), born in 1958.\nPirsig had a mental breakdown and spent time in and out of psychiatric hospitals between 1961 and 1963. He was diagnosed with schizophrenia and treated with electroconvulsive therapy on numerous occasions, a treatment he discusses in \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\". Nancy sought a divorce during this time; they formally separated in 1976 and divorced in 1978. On December 28, 1978, Pirsig married Wendy Kimball in Tremont, Maine.\nIn 1979, his son Chris, who figured prominently in \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", was fatally stabbed in a mugging outside the San Francisco Zen Center at the age of 22. Pirsig discusses this tragedy in an afterword to subsequent editions of \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", writing that he and his second wife Wendy Kimball decided not to abort the child they conceived in 1980 because he believed that this unborn child\u00a0\u2013 later their daughter Nell\u00a0\u2013 was a continuation of the \"life pattern\" that Chris had occupied.\nDeath.\nPirsig died aged 88, at his home in South Berwick, Maine, on April 24, 2017, after a period of failing health.\nLegacy and recognition.\nPirsig received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1974 for General Nonfiction, which later allowed him to complete his second book. The University of Minnesota conferred an Outstanding Achievement Award in 1975. He won an award for literature from the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters in 1979.\nOn December 15, 2012, Montana State University bestowed upon Pirsig an honorary doctorate in philosophy during the university's fall commencement. Pirsig was also honored in a commencement speech by MSU Regent Professor Michael Sexson. Pirsig had been an instructor in writing at what was then Montana State College from 1958 to 1960.\nPirsig did not travel to Bozeman in December 2012 to accept the accolade, allegedly due to frailty of health. However, in \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", Pirsig writes about his time at Montana State College as a less than pleasurable experience, and that this limited his ability to teach writing effectively and to develop his own philosophy and writing.\nIn December 2019, the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History, Washington DC, acquired Pirsig's 1966 Honda CB77 Super Hawk on which the 1968 ride with his son Chris was taken. The donation included a manuscript of \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\", a signed first edition of the book, and tools and clothing from the ride. In 2020, the museum acquired additional material from the Pirsig family relating to his maritime interests and background. In April 2024 Pirsig's bike went on public display for the first time ever, marking the fiftieth anniversary of \"Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance\". The exhibition, \"America on the Move\", also displayed the book's original manuscript, Pirsig's manual typewriter and an Apple II computer. As materials were gathered for the exhibition a graphic novel by Pirsig was found. Entitled \"Doctor Schnabel\" it is about the bubonic plague pandemic that struck in European in the 1300's.\nIn 2020, the Robert M. Pirsig archive was collected by the Houghton Library at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts; an additional collection resides at the Montana State University Library.\nA 2021 article in the \"International Journal of Motorcycle Studies\" details the writer's close historic relationship with motorcycles from the age of four to shortly before his death.\nHis use of an Apple II and relationship with the company led to him being honored by 'the Pirsig Meeting Room', at one of Apple's Cupertino offices, being named after him.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26072", "revid": "63286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26072", "title": "Red Hat Linux", "text": "Linux distribution\nRed Hat Linux was a widely used commercial open-source Linux distribution created by Red Hat until its discontinuation in 2004.\nEarly releases of Red Hat Linux were called Red Hat Commercial Linux. Red Hat published the first non-beta release in May 1995. It included the Red Hat Package Manager as its packaging format, and over time RPM has served as the starting point for several other distributions, such as Mandriva Linux and Yellow Dog Linux.\nIn 2003, Red Hat discontinued the Red Hat Linux line in favor of Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) for enterprise environments. Fedora Linux, developed by the community-supported Fedora Project and sponsored by Red Hat, is a free-of-cost alternative intended for home use. Red Hat Linux 9, the final release, hit its official end-of-life on April 30, 2004, although updates were published for it through 2006 by the Fedora Legacy project until the updates were discontinued in early 2007.\nFeatures.\nVersion 3.0.3 was one of the first Linux distributions to support ELF (Executable and Linkable Format) binaries instead of the older a.out format.\nRed Hat Linux introduced a graphical installer called Anaconda developed by Ketan Bagal, intended to be easy to use for novices, and which has since been adopted by some other Linux distributions. It also introduced a built-in tool called \"Lokkit\" for configuring the firewall capabilities.\nIn version 6 Red Hat moved to glibc 2.1, egcs-1.2, and to the 2.2 kernel. It was the first version to use the GNOME as its default graphical environment. It also introduced Kudzu, a software library for automatic discovery and configuration of hardware.\nVersion 7 was released in preparation for the 2.4 kernel, although the first release still used the stable 2.2 kernel. Glibc was updated to version 2.1.92, which was a beta of the upcoming version 2.2 and Red Hat used a patched version of GCC from CVS that they called \"2.96\". The decision to ship an unstable GCC version was due to GCC 2.95's bad performance on non-i386 platforms, especially DEC Alpha. Newer GCCs had also improved support for the C++ standard, which caused much of the existing code not to compile.\nIn particular, the use of a non-released version of GCC caused some criticism, e.g. from Linus Torvalds and the GCC Steering Committee; Red Hat was forced to defend this decision.\nGCC 2.96 failed to compile the Linux kernel, and some other software used in Red Hat, due to stricter checks. It also had an incompatible C++ ABI with other compilers. The distribution included a previous version of GCC for compiling the kernel, called \"kgcc\".\nAs of Red Hat Linux 8.0, UTF-8 was enabled as the default character encoding for the system. This had little effect on English-speaking users, but enabled much easier internationalisation and seamless support for multiple languages, including ideographic, bi-directional and complex script languages along with European languages. However, this did cause some negative reactions among existing Western European users, whose legacy ISO-8859\u2013based setups were broken by the change.\nVersion 8.0 was also the second to include the Bluecurve desktop theme. It used a common theme for GNOME-2 and KDE 3.0.2 desktops, as well as OpenOffice-1.0. KDE members did not appreciate the change, claiming that it was not in the best interests of KDE.\nVersion 9 supported the Native POSIX Thread Library, which was ported to the 2.4 series kernels by Red Hat.\nRed Hat Linux lacked many features due to possible copyright and patent problems. For example, MP3 support was disabled in both Rhythmbox and XMMS; instead, Red Hat recommended using Ogg Vorbis, which has no patents. MP3 support, however, could be installed afterwards, through the use of packages. Support for Microsoft's NTFS file system was also missing, but could be freely installed as well.\nFedora Linux.\nRed Hat Linux was originally developed exclusively inside Red Hat, with the only feedback from users coming through bug reports and contributions to the included software packages \u2013 not contributions to the distribution as such. This was changed in late 2003 when Red Hat Linux merged with the community-based Fedora Project. The new plan was to draw most of the codebase from Fedora Linux when creating new Red Hat Enterprise Linux distributions. Fedora Linux replaced the original Red Hat Linux download and retail version. The model is similar to the relationship between Netscape Communicator and Mozilla, or StarOffice and OpenOffice.org, although in this case the resulting commercial product was also fully free software.\nVersion history.\nRelease dates were drawn from announcements on \"comp.os.linux.announce\". Version names are chosen as to be cognitively related to the prior release, yet not related in the same way as the release before that.\nThe Fedora and Red Hat Projects were merged on September 22, 2003.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26073", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26073", "title": "Right ascension", "text": "Astronomical equivalent of longitude\nRight ascension (abbreviated RA; symbol \u03b1) is the angular distance of a particular point measured eastward along the celestial equator from the Sun at the March equinox to the (hour circle of the) point in question above the Earth. \nWhen paired with declination, these astronomical coordinates specify the location of a point on the celestial sphere in the equatorial coordinate system.\nAn old term, \"right ascension\" () refers to the \"ascension\", or the point on the celestial equator that rises with any celestial object as seen from Earth's equator, where the celestial equator intersects the horizon at a right angle. It contrasts with \"oblique ascension\", the point on the celestial equator that rises with any celestial object as seen from most latitudes on Earth, where the celestial equator intersects the horizon at an oblique angle.\nExplanation.\nRight ascension is the celestial equivalent of terrestrial longitude. Both right ascension and longitude measure an angle from a primary direction (a zero point) on an equator. Right ascension is measured from the Sun at the March equinox i.e. the First Point of Aries, which is the place on the celestial sphere where the Sun crosses the celestial equator from south to north at the March equinox and is currently located in the constellation Pisces. Right ascension is measured continuously in a full circle from that alignment of Earth and Sun in space, that equinox, the measurement increasing towards the east.\nAs seen from Earth (except at the poles), objects noted to have 12h RA are longest visible (appear throughout the night) at the March equinox; those with 0h RA (apart from the sun) do so at the September equinox. On those dates at midnight, such objects will reach (\"culminate\" at) their highest point (their meridian). How high depends on their declination; if 0\u00b0 declination (i.e. on the celestial equator) then at Earth's equator they are directly overhead (at zenith).\nAny angular unit could have been chosen for right ascension, but it is customarily measured in hours (h), minutes (m), and seconds (s), with 24h being equivalent to a full circle. Astronomers have chosen this unit to measure right ascension because they measure a star's location by timing its passage through the highest point in the sky as the Earth rotates. The line which passes through the highest point in the sky, called the meridian, is the projection of a longitude line onto the celestial sphere. Since a complete circle contains 24h of right ascension or 360\u00b0 (degrees of arc), of a circle is measured as 1h of right ascension, or 15\u00b0; of a circle is measured as 1m of right ascension, or 15 minutes of arc (also written as 15\u2032); and of a circle contains 1s of right ascension, or 15 seconds of arc (also written as 15\u2033). A full circle, measured in right-ascension units, contains 24\u2009\u00d7\u200960\u2009\u00d7\u200960 \n s, or 24\u2009\u00d7\u200960 \n m, or 24h.\nBecause right ascensions are measured in hours (of rotation of the Earth), they can be used\nto time the positions of objects in the sky. For example, if a star with RA\u00a0= 1h 30m 00s is at its meridian, then a star with RA\u00a0= 20h 00m 00s will be on the/at its meridian (at its apparent highest point) 18.5 sidereal hours later.\nSidereal hour angle, used in celestial navigation, is similar to right ascension but increases westward rather than eastward. Usually measured in degrees (\u00b0), it is the complement of right ascension with respect to 24h. It is important not to confuse sidereal hour angle with the astronomical concept of hour angle, which measures the angular distance of an object westward from the local meridian.\nEffects of precession.\nThe Earth's axis traces a small circle (relative to its celestial equator) slowly westward about the celestial poles, completing one cycle in about 26,000 years. This movement, known as precession, causes the coordinates of stationary celestial objects to change continuously, if rather slowly. Therefore, equatorial coordinates (including right ascension) are inherently relative to the year of their observation, and astronomers specify them with reference to a particular year, known as an epoch. Coordinates from different epochs must be mathematically rotated to match each other, or to match a standard epoch. Right ascension for \"fixed stars\" on the equator increases by about 3.1 seconds per year or 5.1 minutes per century, but for fixed stars away from the equator the rate of change can be anything from negative infinity to positive infinity. (To this must be added the proper motion of a star.) Over a precession cycle of 26,000 years, \"fixed stars\" that are far from the ecliptic poles increase in right ascension by 24h, or about 5.6' per century, whereas stars within 23.5\u00b0 of an ecliptic pole undergo a net change of0h. The right ascension of Polaris is increasing quickly\u2014in AD 2000 it was 2.5h, but when it gets closest to the north celestial pole in 2100 its right ascension will be 6h. The North Ecliptic Pole in Draco and the South Ecliptic Pole in Dorado are always at right ascension 18h and 6h respectively.\nThe currently used standard epoch is J2000.0, which is January 1, 2000 at 12:00 TT. The prefix \"J\" indicates that it is a Julian epoch. Prior to J2000.0, astronomers used the successive Besselian epochs B1875.0, B1900.0, and B1950.0.\nHistory.\nThe concept of right ascension has been known at least as far back as Hipparchus who measured stars in equatorial coordinates in the 2nd century BC. But Hipparchus and his successors made their star catalogs in ecliptic coordinates, and the use of RA was limited to special cases.\nWith the invention of the telescope, it became possible for astronomers to observe celestial objects in greater detail, provided that the telescope could be kept pointed at the object for a period of time. The easiest way to do that is to use an equatorial mount, which allows the telescope to be aligned with one of its two pivots parallel to the Earth's axis. A motorized clock drive often is used with an equatorial mount to cancel out the Earth's rotation. As the equatorial mount became widely adopted for observation, the equatorial coordinate system, which includes right ascension, was adopted at the same time for simplicity. Equatorial mounts could then be accurately pointed at objects with known right ascension and declination by the use of setting circles. The first star catalog to use right ascension and declination was John Flamsteed's \"Historia Coelestis Britannica\" (1712, 1725).\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26074", "revid": "1261736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26074", "title": "Roger Clemens", "text": "American baseball player (born 1962)\nWilliam Roger Clemens (born August 4, 1962), nicknamed \"Rocket\", is an American former professional baseball pitcher who played 24 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB), most notably with the Boston Red Sox and New York Yankees and also played for the Toronto Blue Jays and Houston Astros. He was one of the most dominant pitchers in major league history, tallying 354 wins, a 3.12 earned run average (ERA), and 4,672 strikeouts, the third-most all time. An 11-time MLB All-Star and two-time World Series champion, Clemens won seven Cy Young Awards, more than any other pitcher in history. Clemens was known for his fierce competitive nature and hard-throwing pitching style, which he used to intimidate batters.\nClemens debuted in the MLB in 1984 with the Red Sox, whose pitching staff he anchored for 12 years. In 1986, he won the American League (AL) Cy Young Award, the AL Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award, and the All-Star Game MVP Award, and he struck out an MLB-record 20\u00a0batters in a single game. After the 1996 season, in which he achieved his second 20-strikeout performance, Clemens left Boston via free agency and joined the Toronto Blue Jays. In each of his two seasons with Toronto, Clemens won a Cy Young Award, as well as the pitching triple crown by leading the league in wins, ERA, and strikeouts. Before the 1999 season, Clemens was traded to the Yankees where he won his two World Series titles. In 2001, Clemens became the first pitcher in major league history to start a season with a win\u2013loss record of 20\u20131. In 2003, he reached his 300th win and 4,000th strikeout in the same game. Clemens left for the Houston Astros in 2004, where he spent three seasons and won his seventh Cy Young Award. He rejoined the Yankees in 2007 for one last season before retiring. He is the only pitcher in Major League history to record more than 350 wins and strike out more than 4,500 batters.\nClemens was alleged by the Mitchell Report to have used anabolic steroids during his late career, mainly based on testimony given by his former trainer, Brian McNamee. Clemens denied these allegations under oath before the United States Congress, leading congressional leaders to refer his case to the Justice Department on suspicions of perjury. On August 19, 2010, a federal grand jury at the U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., indicted Clemens on six felony counts involving perjury, false statements, and contempt of Congress. Clemens pleaded not guilty, but proceedings were complicated by prosecutorial misconduct, leading to a mistrial. In June 2012, Clemens was found not guilty on all six counts of lying to Congress. These controversies hurt his chances for election to the Baseball Hall of Fame. He never received the 75% of votes required in his ten years of eligibility, ending with 65.2% in 2022. However, despite the steroid controversies, Clemens is still considered by many as one of the greatest pitchers in baseball history.\nEarly life.\nClemens was born in Dayton, Ohio, the fifth child of Bill and Bess (Lee) Clemens. He is of German descent, his great-grandfather Joseph Clemens having immigrated in the 1880s. Clemens\u2019 parents separated when he was an infant. His mother soon married Woody Booher, whom Clemens considers his father. Booher died when Clemens was nine years old, and Clemens has said that the only time he ever felt envious of other players was when he saw them in the clubhouse with their fathers. Clemens lived in Vandalia, Ohio, until 1977, and then spent most of his high school years in Houston, Texas. At Spring Woods High School, Clemens played baseball for longtime head coach Charles Maiorana and also played football and basketball. He was scouted by the Philadelphia Phillies and Minnesota Twins during his senior year, but opted to go to college.\nCollege career.\nHe began his college career pitching for San Jacinto College North in 1981, where he posted a 9\u20132 win\u2013loss record. He then attended the University of Texas at Austin, compiling a 25\u20137 record in two All-American seasons, and was on the mound when the Longhorns won the 1983 College World Series. He became the first player to have his baseball uniform number retired at the University of Texas. In 2004, the Rotary Smith Award, given to America's best college baseball player, was changed to the Roger Clemens Award, honoring the best pitcher. At Texas, Clemens pitched 35 consecutive scoreless innings, an NCAA record that stood until Justin Pope broke it in 2001.\nProfessional career.\nDrafts and minor leagues.\nThe New York Mets selected Clemens in the 12th round of the 1981 Major League Baseball draft, however, he did not sign. Clemens was selected in the first round (19th overall) of the 1983 MLB draft by the Boston Red Sox and quickly rose through the minor league system. In 1983, Clemens pitched for two different teams in two different leagues and at two different levels. He pitched for the A-ball Winter Haven Red Sox of the Florida State League and the AA New Britain Red Sox of the Eastern League. Clemens started all four games he played with Winter Haven, pitched three complete games with one shutout and allowed no home runs. He posted a 3\u20131 win\u2013loss record, a 1.24 earned run average, struck out 36 batters in 29 innings pitched and his walks plus hits per inning pitched was 0.759. Clemens started all seven games he played with New Britain and pitched one complete game shutout and allowed one home run. He posted a 4\u20131 win\u2013loss record, a 1.38 earned run average, struck out 59 batters in 52 innings pitched and his walks and hits per innings pitched was 0.827. His combined minor league totals in 1983 included starting all 11 games he played and pitched four complete games with two shutouts and only one home run allowed. He posted a 7\u20132 win\u2013loss record, a 1.33 earned run average, struck out 95 batters in 81 innings pitched and his walks and hits per innings pitched was 0.802.\nClemens started the 1984 season with AAA Pawtucket Red Sox of the International League. In seven games, he started six of them, pitching three complete games with one shutout. Despite posting a 2\u20133 win\u2013loss record and walks and hits per innings pitched of 1.136, his earned run average was 1.93, and he struck out 50 batters in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;46+2\u20443 innings pitched.\nBoston Red Sox (1984\u20131996).\nOn May 15, 1984 at Cleveland Stadium, Clemens made his Major League debut. An undiagnosed torn labrum threatened to end his career early; he underwent successful arthroscopic surgery by Dr. James Andrews.\nOn April 29, 1986 at Fenway Park, in a 3\u20131 win over the Seattle Mariners, Clemens struck out a career-high 20 batters, becoming the first pitcher in MLB history to strike out 20 batters in a nine-inning game. Following his performance, Clemens made the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\", which carried the headline \"Lord of the K's [strikeouts].\" Other than Clemens, only Kerry Wood, Randy Johnson and Max Scherzer have matched the total. (Johnson fanned 20 batters in nine innings on May 8, 2001. However, the game went into extra innings but Johnson got credit for it as he only pitched 9 innings. Tom Cheney holds the record for any game: 21 strikeouts in 16 innings.)\nClemens started the 1986 All-Star Game (played in his hometown of Houston) in the Astrodome and was named the Most Valuable Player of the contest by throwing three perfect innings and striking out two. He also won the first of his seven Cy Young Awards. In 1986, Clemens won the American League MVP award, finishing with a 24\u20134 record, 2.48 ERA, and 238 strikeouts. When Hank Aaron said that pitchers should not be eligible for the MVP, Clemens responded: \"I wish he was still playing. I'd probably crack his head open to show him how valuable I was.\" Clemens was the only starting pitcher since Vida Blue in 1971 to win a league MVP award until Justin Verlander won the award in 2011. Clemens attributes his switch from what he calls a \"thrower\" to a \"pitcher\" to the partial season Hall of Fame pitcher Tom Seaver spent with the Red Sox in 1986.\nFacing the California Angels in the 1986 ALCS, Clemens pitched poorly in the opening game, watched the Boston bullpen blow his 3\u20131 lead in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 4, and then pitched a strong Game 7 to wrap up the series for Boston. The League Championship Series clincher was Clemens's first postseason career victory. He did not win his second until 13 years later. After a victory in game five, Boston led 3 games to 2 over the New York Mets in the 1986 World Series with Clemens set to start game six at Shea Stadium. Clemens who was pitching on five days rest started strong by striking out eight while throwing a no-hitter through four innings. In the top of eighth and with Boston ahead 3\u20132, manager John McNamara sent rookie Mike Greenwell to pinch hit for Roger Clemens. It was initially said that Clemens was removed from the game due to a blister forming on one of his fingers, but both he and McNamara dispute this. Clemens said to Bob Costas on an MLB Network program concerning the 1986 postseason that McNamara decided to pull him despite Clemens wanting to pitch. McNamara said to Costas that Clemens \"begged out\" of the game. The Mets rallied and took both game six and seven to win the World Series.\nThe Red Sox had a miserable 1987 season, finishing at 78\u201384, though Clemens won his second consecutive Cy Young Award with a 20\u20139 record, 2.97 ERA, 256 strikeouts, and seven shutouts. He was the first AL pitcher with back-to-back 20-win seasons since Tommy John won 20 with the Yankees in 1979 and '80. Boston rebounded with success in 1988 and 1990, clinching the AL East Division each year, but were swept by the Oakland Athletics in each ALCS matchup. His greatest postseason failure came in the second inning of the final game of the 1990 ALCS, when he was ejected for arguing balls and strikes with umpire Terry Cooney, accentuating the A's four-game sweep of the Red Sox. He was suspended for the first five games of the 1991 season and fined $10,000.\nClemens led the American League in 1988 with 291 strikeouts and a career-high 8 shutouts. On September 10, 1988, Clemens threw a one-hitter against the Cleveland Indians at Fenway Park. Dave Clark's one-out single in the eighth inning was the only hit Clemens allowed in the game. In a 9\u20131 victory over Cleveland on April 13, 1989, Clemens recorded his 1,000 career strikeout by fanning Brook Jacoby with the bases loaded in the second inning. Clemens finished second to Oakland's Bob Welch for the 1990 AL Cy Young Award, despite the fact that Clemens crushed Welch in ERA (1.93 to 2.95), strikeouts (209 to 127), walks (54 to 77), home runs allowed (7 to 26), and WAR (10.4 to 2.9). Clemens did, however, capture his third Cy Young Award in 1991 with an 18\u201310 record, 2.62 ERA, and 241 strikeouts. On June 21, 1989, Clemens surrendered the first of Sammy Sosa's 609 home runs. On September 18, 1996 at Tiger Stadium, in a 4\u20130 win over the Detroit Tigers, Clemens had a second 20-strikeout game. This second 20-K day occurred in his third-to-last game as a member of the Boston Red Sox. Later, the Tigers presented him with a baseball containing the autographs of each batter who had struck out (those with multiple strikeouts signed the appropriate number of times).\nThe Red Sox did not re-sign Clemens following the 1996 season, despite leading the A.L. with 257 strikeouts and offering him \"by far the most money ever offered to a player in the history of the Red Sox franchise.\" General Manager Dan Duquette remarked that he \"hoped to keep him in Boston during the twilight of his career\", but Clemens left and signed with the Toronto Blue Jays.\nThe emphasis on the misquoted 1996 \"twilight\" comment took on a life of its own following Clemens's post-Boston successes, and Duquette was vilified for letting the star pitcher go. Ultimately, Clemens would go on to have a record of 162\u201373 for the rest of his career after leaving the Red Sox. Clemens recorded 192 wins and 38 shutouts for the Red Sox, both tied with Cy Young for the franchise record and is their all-time strikeout leader with 2,590. Clemens's overall postseason record with Boston was 1\u20132 with a 3.88 ERA, and 45 strikeouts, and 19 walks in 56 innings. No Red Sox player has worn his uniform #21 since Clemens left the team in the 1996\u201397 offseason.\nToronto Blue Jays (1997\u20131998).\nClemens signed a four-year, $40\u00a0million deal with the Toronto Blue Jays after the 1996 season. In his first start in Fenway Park as a member of the Blue Jays, he pitched eight innings allowing only 4 hits and 1 earned run. 16 of his 24 outs were strikeouts, and every batter who faced him struck out at least once. As he left the field following his last inning of work, he stared up angrily towards the owner's box.\nClemens was dominant in his two seasons with the Blue Jays, winning the pitching Triple Crown and the Cy Young Award in both seasons (1997: 21\u20137 record, 2.05 ERA, and 292 strikeouts; 1998: 20\u20136 record, 2.65 ERA, and 271 strikeouts). After the 1998 season, Clemens asked to be traded, indicating that he did not believe the Blue Jays would be competitive enough the following year and that he was dedicated to winning a championship.\nNew York Yankees (1999\u20132003).\nOn the first day of 1999 Spring Training, the Blue Jays traded Clemens to the New York Yankees for David Wells, Homer Bush, and Graeme Lloyd. Since his longtime uniform number #21 was in use by teammate Paul O'Neill, Clemens initially wore #12, before switching mid-season to #22.\nDuring the 1999 regular season, Clemens posted a 14\u201310 record with a 4.60 ERA. He logged a pair of wins in the postseason, though he lost Game 3 of the 1999 ALCS in a matchup against Red Sox ace Pedro Mart\u00ednez, which was the Yankees' only loss in the 1999 playoffs. Clemens won the Yankees' Game 4 clincher over the Atlanta Braves, giving up only one run in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7+2\u20443 innings.\nClemens followed up with a strong 2000 season, in which he finished with a 13\u20138 record with a 3.70 ERA for the regular season. Though Clemens lost two games in the ALDS against Oakland, the Yankees won the other three and thus advanced. In Game 4 of the ALCS against Seattle, Clemens set the ALCS record for strikeouts in a game when he fanned 15 batters in a one-hit shutout. In Game 2 of the 2000 World Series, Clemens pitched eight scoreless innings against the New York Mets.\nIn 2001, Clemens became the first pitcher in MLB history to start a season 20\u20131 (finishing 20\u20133), and won his sixth Cy Young Award. Clemens started for the Yankees in Game 7 of the 2001 World Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks, where he dueled Curt Schilling to a standstill after 6 innings, yielding only one run. The Diamondbacks went on to win the game in the 9th.\nEarly in 2003, Clemens announced his retirement, effective at the end of that season. On June 13, 2003, pitching against the St. Louis Cardinals in Yankee Stadium, Clemens recorded his 300th career win and 4,000th career strikeout, the only player in history to record both milestones in the same game. The 300th win came on his fourth try; the Yankee bullpen had blown his chance of a win in his previous two attempts. He became the 21st pitcher ever to record 300 wins and the third ever to record 4,000 strikeouts. His career record upon reaching the milestones was 300\u2013155. Clemens finished the season with a 17\u20139 record and a 3.91 ERA.\nThe end of Clemens's 2003 season became a series of public farewells met with appreciative cheering. His last games in each AL park were given extra attention, particularly his final regular-season appearance in Fenway Park, when despite wearing the uniform of the hated arch-rival, he was afforded a standing ovation by Red Sox fans as he left the field. (This spectacle was repeated when the Yankees ended up playing the Red Sox in the 2003 ALCS and Clemens got a second \"final start\" in his original stadium.) As part of a tradition of manager Joe Torre, Clemens was chosen to manage the Yankees' last game of the regular season. Clemens made one start in the World Series against the Florida Marlins; when he left trailing 3\u20131 after seven innings, the Marlins left their dugout to give him a standing ovation.\nHouston Astros (2004\u20132006).\nClemens came out of retirement, signing a one-year deal with his adopted hometown Houston Astros on January 12, 2004, joining close friend and former Yankees teammate Andy Pettitte. On May 5, 2004, Clemens recorded his 4,137th career strikeout to place him second on the all-time list behind Nolan Ryan. He was named the starter for the National League All-Star team but ultimately was the losing pitcher in that game after allowing six runs on five hits, including a three-run home run to Alfonso Soriano. Clemens finished the season with an 18\u20134 record, and was awarded his seventh Cy Young Award, becoming the oldest player ever to win the Cy Young at age 42. This made him one of seven pitchers to win the award in both leagues, joining Gaylord Perry, Pedro Mart\u00ednez, and Randy Johnson and later joined by Roy Halladay, Max Scherzer, and Blake Snell. Clemens was the losing pitcher for the Astros in Game Seven of the 2004 NLCS against the St. Louis Cardinals, allowing four runs in six innings. Although he pitched well, he tired in the sixth inning, surrendering all four runs.\nClemens again decided to put off retirement before the 2005 season after the Astros offered salary arbitration. The Astros submitted an offer of $13.5\u00a0million, and Clemens countered with a record $22\u00a0million demand. On January 21, 2005, both sides agreed on a one-year, $18,000,022 contract, thus avoiding arbitration. The deal gave Clemens the highest yearly salary earned by a pitcher in MLB history.\nClemens's 2005 season ended as one of the finest he had ever posted. His 1.87 ERA was the lowest in the major leagues, the lowest of his 22-season career, and the lowest by any National Leaguer since Greg Maddux in 1995. He finished with a 13\u20138 record, with his lower win total primarily due to the fact that he ranked near the bottom of the major leagues in run support. The Astros scored an average of only 3.5 runs per game in games in which he was the pitcher of record. The Astros were shut out nine times in Clemens's 32 starts, and failed to score in a 10th until after Clemens was out of the game. The Astros lost five of Clemens's starts by scores of 1\u20130. In April, Clemens did not allow a run in three consecutive starts. However, the Astros lost all three of those starts by a 1\u20130\u00a0score in extra innings.\nClemens won an emotional start on September 15, following his mother's death that morning. In his final start of the 2005 season, Clemens got his 4,500th strikeout. On October 9, 2005, Clemens made his first relief appearance since 1984, entering as a pinch hitter in the 15th, then pitching three innings to get the win as the Astros defeated the Atlanta Braves in Game 4 of the NLDS. It is the longest postseason game in MLB history at 18 innings. Clemens lasted only two innings in Game 1 of the 2005 World Series, and the Astros went on to be swept by the Chicago White Sox. It was the Astros' first World Series appearance. Clemens had aggravated a hamstring pull that had limited his performance since at least September.\nClemens said that he would retire again after the World Series but he wanted to represent the United States in the inaugural World Baseball Classic, which would be played in March 2006. He went 1\u20131 in the tournament, with a 2.08 ERA, striking out 10 batters in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;8+2\u20443 innings. After pitching in a second-round loss to Mexico that eliminated the United States, Clemens began considering a return to the major leagues. On May 31, 2006, following another extended period of speculation, it was announced that Clemens was coming out of retirement for the third time to pitch for the Astros for the remainder of the 2006 season. Clemens signed a contract worth $22,000,022 (his uniform number #22). Since Clemens did not play a full season, he received a prorated percentage of that: approximately $12.25\u00a0million. Clemens made his return on June 22, 2006, against the Minnesota Twins, losing to their rookie phenom, Francisco Liriano, 4\u20132. For the second year in a row, his win total did not match his performance, as he finished the season with a 7\u20136 record, a 2.30 ERA, and a 1.04 WHIP. However, Clemens averaged just under 6 innings in his starts and never pitched into the eighth.\nReturn to the Yankees (2007).\nClemens unexpectedly appeared in the owner's box at Yankee Stadium on May 6, 2007, during the seventh-inning stretch of a game against the Seattle Mariners, and made a brief statement: \"Thank y'all. Well they came and got me out of Texas, and uhh, I can tell you it's a privilege to be back. I'll be talkin' to y'all soon.\" It was simultaneously announced that Clemens had rejoined the Yankees roster, agreeing to a pro-rated one-year deal worth $28,000,022, or about $4.7\u00a0million per month. Over the contract life, he would make $18.7\u00a0million. This equated to just over $1\u00a0million per start that season.\nClemens made his 2007 return on June 9, defeating the Pittsburgh Pirates by pitching six innings with seven strikeouts and three runs allowed. On June 21, with a single in the 5th inning against the Colorado Rockies, Clemens became the oldest New York Yankee to record a hit (44 years, 321 days). On June 24, Clemens pitched an inning in relief against the San Francisco Giants. It had been 22 years and 341 days since his previous regular-season relief appearance, the longest such gap in major league history. On July 2, Clemens collected his 350th win against the Minnesota Twins at Yankee Stadium, giving up just two hits and one run over eight innings. Clemens is one of only three pitchers to pitch his entire career in the live-ball era and reach 350 wins. The other two are Warren Spahn (whose catcher for his 350th win was Joe Torre, Clemens's manager for his 350th), and Greg Maddux, who earned his 350th win in 2008. His final regular-season appearance was a start against the Red Sox at Fenway Park, in which he allowed two hits and one unearned run in six innings, and received a no-decision. Clemens finished the 2007 regular season with a record of 6\u20136 and a 4.18 ERA.\nClemens was forced to leave Game 3 of the 2007 ALDS in the third inning after aggravating a hamstring injury. He struck out Victor Martinez of the Cleveland Indians with his final pitch, and was replaced by right-hander Phil Hughes. Yankees manager Joe Torre removed Clemens from the roster due to his injury, and replaced him with left-hander Ron Villone. Clemens's overall postseason record with the Yankees was 7\u20134 with a 2.97 ERA, 98 strikeouts and 35 walks in 102 innings.\nPitching appearances after retirement.\nOn August 20, 2012, Clemens signed with the Sugar Land Skeeters of the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball. He made his debut for the Skeeters against the Bridgeport Bluefish on August 25, 2012, in front of a crowd of 7,724. It was the first time the 50-year-old had taken the mound in almost five years. Clemens pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3+1\u20443 scoreless innings and struck out two: former major leaguers Joey Gathright and Prentice Redman. He also retired Luis Figueroa, who played briefly with the Pirates, Blue Jays and the Giants. Clemens allowed only one hit and no walks on 37 pitches in the Skeeters' 1\u20130 victory. Clemens made his second start for the Skeeters on September 7 against the Long Island Ducks. He pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;4+2\u20443 scoreless innings, with his son, Koby, as his catcher. He retired former New York Met outfielder Timo Perez for the final out in the fourth inning, and was named the winning pitcher by the official scorer. Clemens's fastball was clocked as high as 88\u00a0mph, and the Astros sent scouts to both of his outings with the Skeeters in consideration of a possible return to the team that season.\nRoger Clemens joined the Kansas Stars, a group of 24 retired major leaguers and his son Koby, to compete in the 2016 National Baseball Congress World Series. The team was put together by Kansas natives Adam LaRoche and Nate Robertson, and featured eleven former All-Stars, including Tim Hudson, Roy Oswalt, and J. D. Drew as well as Clemens. Pitching just six days after his 54th birthday, Clemens started for the Kansas Stars in a game against the NJCAA National Team on August 10, 2016. He pitched &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+2\u20443 innings, allowing 3 runs with one strikeout in an 11\u201310 loss. On August 22, 2019, Clemens wore his Red Sox uniform and pitched in the Abbot Financial Management Oldtime Baseball Game, an annual charity event held at St. Peter's Field in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The 2019 game benefitted Compassionate Care ALS, in memory of longtime Fenway Park supervisor John Welch, who died from Lou Gehrig's Disease in December 2018. Facing mostly young college players, Clemens pitched two shutout innings in the game, then moved to first base.\nNational Baseball Hall of Fame consideration.\nIn 2013 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting, his first year of eligibility, Clemens received 37.6% of the votes cast by the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA), falling well short of the 75% required for induction into the Hall of Fame. He has garnered more votes in subsequent elections without reaching the 75% threshold: he received 59.5% in 2019, 61.0% in 2020, and 61.6% in 2021. With the inductions of Greg Maddux and Tom Glavine in 2014 and Randy Johnson in 2015, Clemens is currently the only eligible member of the 300-win club not to be inducted into the Hall. He received 65.2% of the votes in his final year of eligibility, 2022.\nDespite falling off the ballot, Clemens is still eligible for induction through the Hall of Fame's Today's Game Committee. The committee is composed of 16 members of the National Baseball Hall of Fame, executives, and veteran media members. (hence the nickname of \"veterans committee\") who consider retired players who lost ballot eligibility while still having made notable contributions to baseball from 1986-2016. The most recent voting by the committee was held in December 2022, and 12 votes were required for induction. Clemens received fewer than four votes out of sixteen cast and as a result was not selected for induction.\nPitching style.\nClemens was a prototypical power pitcher with an aggressive edge, especially early in his career. Clemens was said to throw \"two pitches: a 98-mph fastball and a hard breaking ball. At 23, Clemens simply reared back and threw the ball past batters.\" Later in his career, Clemens developed a split-finger fastball. Clemens has jocularly referred to this pitch as \"Mr. Splitty\".\nBy the time Clemens retired from Major League Baseball in 2007, his four-seam fastball had settled in the 91\u201394\u00a0mph range. He also threw a two-seam fastball, a slider in the mid 80s, a splitter, and an occasional curveball. Clemens was a durable pitcher, leading the American League in complete games three times and innings pitched twice. Clemens threw 18 complete games in 1987 which no pitcher has since matched. Clemens was also known as a strikeout pitcher, leading the AL in Ks five times and strikeouts per nine innings three times. He is currently the only pitcher in Major League history to have thrown two 20-strikeout games.\nControversies.\nClemens has the reputation of a pitcher unafraid to throw close to batters. Clemens led his league in hit batsmen only once, in 1995, but he was among the leaders in several other seasons. This tendency was more pronounced during his earlier career and subsequently tapered off. After the 2000 ALCS game against the Mariners where he knocked down future teammate Alex Rodriguez and then argued with him, Seattle Mariners manager Lou Piniella, a former Yankee, called Clemens a \"headhunter.\" His beaning earlier that year of Mike Piazza, followed by throwing a broken bat in Piazza's direction in the 2000 World Series, cemented Clemens's surly, unapologetic image in the minds of many. In 2009, former manager Cito Gaston publicly denounced Clemens as a \"double-talker\" and \"a complete asshole\". Clemens was ranked 14th all-time in hit batsmen after the 2020 season, although not far off from other pitchers of his era at 1 hit batsmen per 125 batters faced. He had a similar rate of hit batsmen to pitchers such as Nolan Ryan, Justin Verlander, and Greg Maddux.\nClemens has attracted controversy over the years for his outspoken comments, such as his complaints about having to carry his own luggage through an airport and his criticism of Fenway Park for being a subpar facility. On April 4, 2006, Clemens made an insulting remark when asked about the devotion of Japanese and South Korean fans during the World Baseball Classic: \"None of the dry cleaners were open, they were all at the game, Japan and Korea\". Toward the end of his career, his annual on-and-off \"retirements\" revived a reputation for diva-like behavior.\nClemens has received criticism for getting special treatment from the teams that sign him. While playing for Houston, Clemens was not obliged to travel with the team on road trips if he was not pitching. His 2007 contract with the New York Yankees had a \"family plan\" clause that stipulated that he not be required to go on road trips in which he was not scheduled to pitch and allowed him to leave the team between starts to be with his family. These perks were publicly criticized by Yankee reliever Kyle Farnsworth. Most of Clemens's teammates, however, did not complain of such perks because of Clemens's success on the mound and valuable presence in the clubhouse. Yankee teammate Jason Giambi spoke for such players when he said, \"I'd carry his bags for him, just as long as he is on the mound.\"\nSteroid use accusations.\nIn Jos\u00e9 Canseco's book, \"\", Canseco suggested that Clemens had expert knowledge about steroids and suggested that he used them, based on the improvement in his performance after leaving the Red Sox. While not addressing the allegations directly, Clemens stated: \"I could care less about the rules [sic]\" and \"I've talked to some friends of his and I've teased them that when you're under house arrest and have ankle bracelets on, you have a lot of time to write a book.\"\nJason Grimsley named Clemens, as well as Andy Pettitte, as a user of performance-enhancing drugs. According to a 20-page search warrant affidavit signed by IRS Special Agent Jeff Novitzky, Grimsley told investigators he obtained amphetamines, anabolic steroids and human growth hormone from someone recommended to him by former Yankees trainer Brian McNamee. McNamee was a personal strength coach for Clemens and Pettitte, hired by Clemens in 1998. At the time of the Grimsley revelations, McNamee denied knowledge of steroid use by Clemens and Pettitte. Despite initial media reports, the affidavit made no mention of Clemens or Pettitte.\nHowever, Clemens's name was mentioned 82 times in the Mitchell Report on steroid use in baseball. In the report, McNamee stated that during the 1998, 2000, and 2001 baseball seasons, he injected Clemens with Winstrol. Clemens's attorney Rusty Hardin denied the claims, calling McNamee \"a troubled and unreliable witness\" who has changed his story five times in an attempt to avoid criminal prosecution. He noted that Clemens has never tested positive in a steroid test. Former U.S. Senator George Mitchell, who prepared the report, stated that he relayed the allegations to each athlete implicated in the report and gave them a chance to respond before his findings were published.\nOn January 6, 2008, Clemens went on \"60 Minutes\" to address the allegations. He told Mike Wallace that his longevity in baseball was due to \"hard work\" rather than illegal substances and denied all of McNamee's assertions that he injected Clemens with steroids, saying it \"never happened\". On January 7, Clemens filed a defamation lawsuit against McNamee, claiming that the former trainer lied after being threatened with prosecution. McNamee's attorneys argued that he was compelled to cooperate by federal officials and so his statements were protected. A federal judge agreed, throwing out all claims related to McNamee's statements to investigators on February 13, 2009, but allowing the case to proceed on statements McNamee made about Clemens to Pettitte.\nOn February 13, 2008, Clemens appeared before a Congressional committee, along with Brian McNamee and swore under oath that he did not take steroids, that he did not discuss HGH with McNamee, that he did not attend a party at Jos\u00e9 Canseco's where steroids were the topic of conversation, that he was only injected with B-12 and lidocaine and that he never told Pettitte he had taken HGH. This last point was in contradiction to testimony Pettitte had given under oath on February 4, 2008, wherein Pettitte said he repeated to McNamee a conversation Pettitte had with Clemens. During this conversation, Pettitte said Clemens had told him that McNamee had injected Clemens with human growth hormone. Pettitte said McNamee reacted angrily, saying that Clemens \"shouldn't have done that.\"\nThe bipartisan House committee in front of which Clemens appeared, citing seven apparent inconsistencies in Clemens's testimony, recommended that the Justice Department investigate whether Clemens lied under oath about using performance-enhancing drugs. In a letter sent February 27 to Attorney General Michael Mukasey, House Oversight and Government Reform Committee chairman Henry Waxman and ranking Republican Tom Davis said Clemens's testimony that he \"never used anabolic steroids or human growth hormone warrants further investigation\".\nAs a result of the Mitchell Report, Clemens was asked to end his involvement with the Giff Nielsen Day of Golf for Kids charity tournament in Houston that he has hosted for four years. As well, his name has been removed from the Houston-based Roger Clemens Institute for Sports Medicine and will be renamed the Memorial Hermann Sports Medicine Institute.\nAfter Washington prosecutors showed \"a renewed interest in the case in the final months of 2008\", a federal grand jury was convened in January 2009 to hear evidence of Clemens's possible perjury before Congress. The grand jury indicted Clemens on August 19, 2010, on charges of making false statements to Congress about his use of performance-enhancing drugs. The indictment charges Clemens with one count of obstruction of Congress, three counts of making false statements and two counts of perjury in connection with his February 2008 testimony.\nHis first trial began on July 13, 2011, but on the second day of testimony the judge in the case declared a mistrial over prosecutorial misconduct after prosecutors showed the jury prejudicial evidence they were not allowed to. Clemens was subsequently retried. The verdict from his second trial came in on June 18, 2012. Clemens was found not guilty on all six counts of lying to Congress in 2008, when he testified that he never took performance-enhancing drugs.\nIn January 2016, after Clemens once again fell short of the votes required for election into the Hall of Fame, former major-league star Roy Halladay tweeted \"No Clemens no Bonds\" as part of a message indicating no performance-enhancing substance users should be voted into the Hall. Clemens countered by accusing Halladay of using amphetamines during his playing career.\nFilmography.\nClemens has appeared as himself in several movies and television episodes and has also occasionally acted in films. Perhaps best known was his appearance in the season three episode of \"The Simpsons\" (\"Homer at the Bat\"), in which he is recruited to the Springfield nuclear plant's softball team but is accidentally hypnotized into thinking he is a chicken; in addition to his lines, Clemens voiced his own clucking. Clemens has also made guest appearances as himself on the TV shows \"Hope &amp; Faith\", \"Spin City\", \"Arli$$\", and \"Saturday Night Live\" as well as the movie \"Anger Management\", and makes a brief appearance in the movie \"Kingpin\" as the character Skidmark. He also is shown playing an actual game with the Houston Astros in the film \"Boyhood\".\nHe appeared in the 1994 movie \"Cobb\" as an unidentified pitcher for the Philadelphia A's. In 2003, he was part of an advertising campaign for Armour hot dogs with MLB players Ken Griffey Jr., Derek Jeter, and Sammy Sosa. Since 2005, Clemens has also appeared in many commercials for Texas-based supermarket chain H-E-B. In 2007, he appeared on a baseball-themed episode of \"MythBusters\" (\"Baseball Myths\"). He has also starred in a commercial for Cingular parodying his return from retirement. He was calling his wife, Debra Godfrey, and a dropped call resulted in his return to the Yankees.\nHe released an early autobiography, \"Rocket Man: The Roger Clemens Story\" (written with Peter Gammons), in 1987. Clemens is also the spokesperson for Champion car dealerships in South Texas. In April 2009, Clemens was the subject of an unauthorized biography by Jeff Pearlman, titled \"The Rocket that Fell to Earth-Roger Clemens and the Rage for Baseball Immortality\", that focused on his childhood and early career and accused Mike Piazza of using steroids. On May 12, Clemens broke a long silence to denounce a heavily researched expos\u00e9 by four investigative reporters from the New York \"Daily News\" called \"\". Clemens went on ESPN's \"Mike and Mike\" show to call the book \"garbage\", but a review by Michiko Kakutani of \"The New York Times\" called the book \"gripping\" and compared it to the work of Bob Woodward.\nAwards and recognition.\nIn 1999, while many of his performances and milestones were yet to come, he ranked number 53 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was elected by the fans to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2005, the updated \"Sporting News\" list moved Clemens up to #15.\nBy the end of the 2005 season, Clemens had won seven Cy Young Awards (he won the AL award in 1986, 1987, 1991, 1997, 1998, and 2001, and the National League award in 2004), an MVP and two pitching triple crowns. With his 2004 win, he joined Gaylord Perry, Randy Johnson, and Pedro Mart\u00ednez as the only pitchers to win it in both leagues and became the oldest pitcher to ever win the Cy Young. He has also won the Sporting News Pitcher of the Year Award five times, was named an All-Star 11 times, and won the All-Star MVP in 1986. Clemens is the only pitcher in history to win a Cy Young Award with four different teams.\nIn October 2006, Clemens was named to \"Sports Illustrated\"'s \"all-time\" team.\nOn August 18, 2007, Clemens got his 1,000th strikeout as a Yankee. He is only the ninth player in major league history to record 1,000 or more strikeouts with two different teams. Clemens has recorded a total of 2,590 strikeouts as a member of the Red Sox and 1,014 strikeouts as a Yankee. He also had 563 strikeouts for Toronto, and 505 strikeouts for Houston.\nClemens was inducted into the Boston Red Sox Hall of Fame in 2014, and was inducted into the Pawtucket Red Sox Hall of Fame on June 21, 2019.\nPersonal life.\nClemens married Debra Lynn Godfrey (born May 27, 1963) on November 24, 1984. The couple has four sons: Koby Aaron, Kory Allen, Kacy Austin, and Kody Alec\u2014all given \"K\" names to honor Clemens's strikeouts (\"K\"s). Koby was at one time a minor league prospect for some MLB clubs. Kacy played college baseball for the Texas Longhorns. Kody also played college baseball for the Texas Longhorns and made his major league debut with the Detroit Tigers on May 31, 2022.\nDebra once left a Red Sox game, when Clemens pitched for another team, in tears from the heckling she received. This is documented in an updated edition of Dan Shaughnessy's best-selling book \"Curse of the Bambino\". Debra was quoted in the book as saying that it was the poor attitude of Red Sox fans that prevented the team from winning the World Series (this was quoted prior to the team's 2004 World Series victory).\nClemens is a member of the Republican Party and donated money to Texas congressman Ted Poe during his 2006 campaign.\nDebra posed in a bikini with her husband for a \"Sports Illustrated\" pictorial regarding athletes and their wives. This appeared in the annual \"Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Edition\" for 2003. Roger wore his Yankees uniform, with the jersey open.\nOn February 27, 2006, to train for the World Baseball Classic, Roger pitched in an exhibition game between the Astros and his son's minor league team. In his first at-bat, Koby hit a home run off his father. In his next at-bat, Roger threw an inside pitch that almost hit Koby. Koby laughed in an interview after the game about the incident.\nAdultery accusations.\nIn April 2008, the \"New York Daily News\" reported on a possible long-term relationship between Clemens and country music singer Mindy McCready that began when she was 15 years old. Clemens's attorney Rusty Hardin denied the affair and also stated that Clemens would be bringing a defamation suit regarding this allegation. Clemens's attorney admitted that a relationship existed but described McCready as a \"close family friend\". He also stated that McCready had traveled on Clemens's personal jet and that Clemens's wife was aware of the relationship. However, when contacted by the \"Daily News\", McCready said, \"I cannot refute anything in the story.\"\nOn November 17, 2008, McCready spoke in more detail to \"Inside Edition\" about her affair with Clemens, saying their relationship lasted for more than a decade and that it ended when Clemens refused to leave his wife to marry her. However, she denied that she was 15 years old when it began, saying that they met when she was 16 and the affair only became sexual \"several years later\". In another soon-to-be-released sex tape by Vivid Entertainment, she claimed that the first time she had sex with him was when she was 21. A few days after the \"Daily News\" broke the story about the McCready relationship, they reported on another Clemens extramarital relationship, this time with Paulette Dean Daly, the now ex-wife of pro golfer John Daly. Daly declined to elaborate on the nature of her relationship with the pitcher but did not deny that it was romantic and included financial support.\nThere have been reports of Clemens having at least three other affairs with women. On April 29, 2008, the \"New York Post\" reported that Clemens had relationships with two or more women. One, a former bartender in Manhattan, refused comment on the story, while another, a woman from Tampa, could not be located. On May 2 of the same year, the \"Daily News\" reported a stripper in Detroit called a local radio station and said she had an affair with Clemens. He also gave tickets to baseball games, jewelry, and trips to women he was wooing.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26076", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26076", "title": "Root node", "text": ""}
{"id": "26078", "revid": "51011881", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26078", "title": "Robert E. Howard", "text": "American author (1906\u20131936)\nRobert Ervin Howard (January 22, 1906 \u2013 June 11, 1936) was an American writer who wrote pulp fiction in a diverse range of genres. He created the character Conan the Barbarian and is regarded as the father of the sword and sorcery subgenre.\nHoward was born and raised in Texas. He spent most of his life in the town of Cross Plains, with some time spent in nearby Brownwood. A bookish and intellectual child, he was also a fan of boxing, eventually taking up amateur boxing; he also spent some time in his late teens bodybuilding. From the age of nine, he longed to become a writer of adventure fiction but did not have real success until he was 23. Thereafter, until his death by suicide at age 30, Howard's writings were published in a wide selection of magazines, journals, and newspapers, and he became proficient in several subgenres. His greatest success occurred after his death.\nAlthough a Conan novel was nearly published in 1934, Howard's stories were never collected during his lifetime. The main outlet for his stories was \"Weird Tales\", where Howard created Conan the Barbarian. With Conan and his other heroes, Howard helped fashion the genre now known as sword and sorcery, spawning many imitators and giving him a large influence in the fantasy field. Howard remains a highly read author, with his best works still reprinted.\nHoward's suicide and the circumstances surrounding it have led to speculation about his mental health. His mother had been ill with tuberculosis her entire life; upon learning she had entered a coma from which she was not expected to wake, he walked out to his car parked outside his kitchen window and shot himself in the head while sitting in the driver's seat. He died eight hours later.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nHoward was born January 22, 1906, in Peaster, Texas, the only son of a traveling country physician, Dr. Isaac Mordecai Howard, and his wife, Hester Jane Ervin Howard. His early life was spent wandering through a variety of Texas cowtowns and boomtowns: Dark Valley (1906), Seminole (1908), Bronte (1909), Poteet (1910), Oran (1912), Wichita Falls (1913), Bagwell (1913), Cross Cut (1915), and Burkett (1917).\nDuring Howard's youth his parents' relationship began to break down. The Howard family had problems with money, which might have been exacerbated by Isaac Howard investing in get-rich-quick schemes. Hester Howard, meanwhile, came to believe that she had married below herself. Soon the pair were actively fighting. Hester did not want Isaac to have anything to do with their son. She had a particularly strong influence on her son's intellectual growth. She had spent her early years helping a variety of sick relatives, contracting tuberculosis in the process. She instilled in her son a deep love of poetry and literature, recited verse daily and supported him unceasingly in his efforts to write.\nOther experiences would later seep into his prose. Although he loved reading and learning, he found school to be confining and began to hate having anyone in authority over him. Experiences watching and confronting bullies revealed the omnipresence of evil and enemies in the world, and taught him the value of physical strength and violence. As the son of the local doctor, Howard had frequent exposure to the effects of injury and violence, due to accidents on farms and oil fields combined with the massive increase in crime that came with the oil boom. Firsthand tales of gunfights, lynchings, feuds, and Indian raids developed his distinctly Texan, hardboiled outlook on the world. Sports, especially boxing, became a passionate preoccupation. At the time, boxing was the most popular sport in the country, with a cultural influence far in excess of what it is today. James J. Jeffries, Jack Johnson, Bob Fitzsimmons, and later Jack Dempsey were the names that inspired during those years, and he grew up a lover of all contests of violent, masculine struggle.\nFirst writings.\nVoracious reading, along with a natural talent for prose writing and the encouragement of teachers, created in Howard an interest in becoming a professional writer. From the age of nine he began writing stories, mostly tales of historical fiction centering on Vikings, Arabs, battles, and bloodshed. One by one he discovered the authors who would influence his later work: Jack London and his stories of reincarnation and past lives, most notably \"The Star Rover\" (1915); Rudyard Kipling's tales of subcontinent adventures; the classic mythological tales collected by Thomas Bulfinch. Howard was considered by friends to be eidetic, and astounded them with his ability to memorize lengthy reams of poetry with ease after one or two readings.\nIn 1919, when Howard was thirteen, Dr. Howard moved his family to the Central Texas hamlet of Cross Plains, and there the family would stay for the rest of Howard's life. Howard's father bought a house in the town with a cash down payment and made extensive renovations. That same year, sitting in a library in New Orleans while his father took medical courses at a nearby college, Howard discovered a book concerned with the scant fact and abundant legends surrounding an indigenous culture in ancient Scotland called the Picts.\nIn 1920, the Vestal Well within the limits of Cross Plains struck oil and Cross Plains became an oil boomtown. Thousands of people arrived in the town looking for oil wealth. New businesses sprang up from scratch and the crime rate increased to match. Cross Plains' population quickly grew from 1,500 to 10,000, it suffered overcrowding, the traffic ruined its unpaved roads and vice crime exploded but it also used its new wealth on civic improvements, including a new school, an ice manufacturing plant, and new hotels. Howard hated the boom and despised the people who came with it. He was already poorly disposed towards oil booms as they were the cause of the constant traveling in his early years but this was aggravated by what he perceived to be the effect oil booms had on towns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;;\n\"I'll say one thing about an oil boom; it will teach a kid that Life's a pretty rotten thing as quick as anything I can think of.\"\n\u2014Robert E. Howard in a letter to \"Weird Tales\" editor Farnsworth Wright, Summer 1931.\nAt fifteen Howard first sampled pulp magazines, especially \"Adventure\" and its star authors Talbot Mundy and Harold Lamb. The next few years saw him creating a variety of series characters. Soon he was submitting stories to magazines such as \"Adventure\" and \"Argosy\". Rejections piled up, and with no mentors or instructions of any kind to aid him, Howard became a writing autodidact, methodically studying the markets and tailoring his stories and style to each.\nIn the fall of 1922, when Howard was sixteen, he temporarily moved to a boarding house in the nearby city of Brownwood to complete his senior year of high school, accompanied by his mother. It was in Brownwood that he first met friends his own age who shared his interest not only for sports and history but also writing and poetry. The two most important of these, Tevis Clyde Smith and Truett Vinson, shared his Bohemian and literary outlook on life, and together they wrote amateur papers and magazines, exchanged long letters filled with poetry and existential thoughts on life and philosophy, and encouraged each other's writing endeavors. Through Vinson, Howard was introduced to \"The Tattler\", the newspaper of the Brownwood High School. It was in this publication that Howard's stories were first printed. The December 1922 issue featured two stories, \"'Golden Hope Christmas\" and \"West is West\", which won gold and silver prizes respectively.\nHoward graduated from high school in May 1923 and moved back to Cross Plains. On his return to his home town he engaged in a self-created regimen of exercise, including cutting down oak trees and chopping them into firewood every day, lifting weights, punching a bag and springing exercises, eventually building himself from a skinny teenager into a more muscled, burly form.\nProfessional writer.\nHoward spent his late teens working odd jobs around Cross Plains, all of which he hated. In 1924, Howard returned to Brownwood to take a stenography course at Howard Payne College, this time boarding with his friend Lindsey Tyson instead of his mother. Howard would have preferred a literary course but was not allowed to take one. The reason for this is undocumented; however, biographer Mark Finn suggests that his father refused to pay for such a non-vocational education. In the week of Thanksgiving that year, and after years of rejection slips and near acceptances, he finally sold a short caveman tale titled \"Spear and Fang\", which netted him the sum of $16 () and introduced him to the readers of a struggling pulp called \"Weird Tales\".\nNow that his career in fiction had begun, Howard dropped out of Howard Payne College at the end of the semester and returned to Cross Plains. Shortly afterwards, he received notice that another story, \"The Hyena\", had been accepted by \"Weird Tales\". During the same period, Howard made his first attempt to write a novel, a loosely autobiographical book modeled on Jack London's \"Martin Eden\" and titled \"Post Oaks &amp; Sand Roughs\". The book was otherwise of middling quality and was never published in the author's lifetime, but it is of interest to Howard scholars for the personal information it contains. Howard's alter ego in this novel is Steve Costigan, a name he would use more than once in the future. The novel was finished in 1928, but not published until long after his death.\n\"Weird Tales\" paid on publication, meaning that Howard had no money of his own at this time. To remedy this, he took a job writing oil news for the local newspaper \"Cross Plains Review\" at $5 () per column. It was not until July 1925 that Howard received payment for his first printed story. Howard lost his job at the newspaper in the same year and spent one month working in a post office before quitting over the low wages. His next job, at the Cross Plains Natural Gas Company, did not last long due to his refusal to be subservient to his boss. He did manual labor for a surveyor for a time before beginning a job as a stenographer for an oil company.\nIn conjunction with his friend Tevis Clyde Smith, he dabbled heavily in verse, writing hundreds of poems and getting dozens published in \"Weird Tales\" and assorted poetry journals. With poor sales, and many publishers recoiling from his subject matter, Howard ultimately judged poetry writing a luxury he could not afford, and after 1930 he wrote little verse, instead dedicating his time to short stories and higher-paying markets. Nevertheless, as a result of this apprenticeship, his stories increasingly took on the aura of \"prose-poems\" filled with hypnotic, dreamy imagery and a power lacking in most other pulp efforts of the time.\nFurther story sales to \"Weird Tales\" were sporadic but encouraging, and soon Howard was a regular in the magazine. His first cover story was for \"Wolfshead\", a werewolf story published when he was only twenty. On reading \"Wolfshead\" in \"Weird Tales\" Howard became dismayed with his writing. He quit his stenographer's job to work at Robertson's Drug Store, where he rose to become head soda jerk on $80 () per week. However, he resented the job itself and worked such long hours every day of the week that he became ill. He relaxed by visiting the Neeb Ice House, to which he was introduced by an oil field worker befriended at the drug store, to drink and began to take part in boxing matches. These matches became an important part of his life; the combination of boxing and writing provided an outlet for his frustrations and anger.\nSword and sorcery.\nIn August 1926, Howard quit his exhausting job at the drug store and, in September, returned to Brownwood to complete his bookkeeping course. It was during this August that he began working on the story that would become \"The Shadow Kingdom\", one of the most important works of his career. While at college, Howard wrote for their newspaper, \"The Yellow Jacket\". One of the short stories printed in this newspaper was a comedy called \"Cupid vs. Pollux\". This story is Howard's earliest surviving boxing story known to exist; it is told in the first person, uses elements of a traditional tall-tale and is a fictionalized account of Howard (as \"Steve\") and his friend Lindsey Tyson (as \"Spike\") training for a fight. This story and the elements it uses would also be important in Howard's literary future.\nIn May 1927, after having to return home due to contracting measles and then being forced to retake the course, Howard passed his exams. While waiting for the official graduation in August, he returned to writing, including a re-write of \"The Shadow Kingdom\". He rewrote it again in August and submitted it to \"Weird Tales\" in September. This story was an experiment with the entire concept of the \"weird tale\" horror fiction as defined by practitioners such as Edgar Allan Poe, A. Merritt, and H. P. Lovecraft, mixing elements of fantasy, horror and mythology with historical romance, action and swordplay into thematic vehicles never before seen, a new style of tale that ultimately became known as \"sword and sorcery\". Featuring Kull, a barbarian precursor to later Howard heroes such as Conan, the tale hit \"Weird Tales\" in August 1929 and received fanfare from readers. \"Weird Tales\" editor Farnsworth Wright bought the story for $100, the most Howard had earned for a story at this time, and several more Kull stories followed. However, all but two were rejected, convincing Howard not to continue the series.\nIn March 1928, Howard salvaged and re-submitted to \"Weird Tales\" a story rejected by the more popular pulp \"Argosy\", and the result was \"Red Shadows\", the first of many stories featuring the vengeful Puritan swashbuckler Solomon Kane. Appearing in the August 1928 issue of \"Weird Tales\", the character was a big hit with readers and this was the first of Howard's characters to sustain a series in print beyond just two stories, with seven Kane stories printed from 1928 to 1932. As the magazine published the Solomon Kane tale before Kull, this can be considered the first published example of sword and sorcery.\n1929 was the year Howard broke out into other pulp markets, rather than just \"Weird Tales\". The first story he sold to another magazine was \"The Apparition in the Prize Ring\", a boxing-related ghost story published in the magazine \"Ghost Stories\". In July of the same year, \"Argosy\" finally published one of Howard's stories, \"Crowd-Horror\", which was also a boxing story. Neither developed into ongoing series, however.\nAfter several minor successes and false starts, he struck gold again with a new series based on one of his favorite passions: boxing. July 1929 saw the debut of Sailor Steve Costigan in the pages of \"Fight Stories\". A tough-as-nails, two-fisted mariner with a head of rocks and occasionally a heart of gold, Costigan began boxing his way through a variety of exotic seaports and adventure locales, becoming so popular in \"Fight Stories\" that the same editors began using additional Costigan episodes in their sister magazine \"Action Stories\". The series saw a return to Howard's use of humor and (unreliable) first-person narration, with the combination of a traditional tall tale and slapstick comedy. Stories sold to \"Fight Stories\" provided Howard with a market just as stable as \"Weird Tales\".\nDue to his success in \"Fight Stories\", Howard was contacted by the publisher Street &amp; Smith in February 1931 with a request to move the Steve Costigan stories to their own pulp \"Sport Story Magazine\". Howard refused but created a new, similar series just for them based on a boxer called Kid Allison. Howard wrote ten stories for this series but \"Sport Story\" only published three of them.\nWith solid markets now all buying up his stories regularly, Howard quit taking college classes, and indeed would never again work a regular job. At twenty-three years of age, from the middle of nowhere in Texas, he had become a full-time writer; he was making good money and his father began bragging about his success, not to mention buying multiple copies of his work in the pulps.\nHoward's \"Celtic phase\" began in 1930, during which he became fascinated by Celtic themes and his own Irish ancestry. He shared this enthusiasm with Harold Preece, a friend made in Austin in the summer of 1927; Howard's letters to both Preece and Clyde Smith contain much Irish-related material and discussion. Howard taught himself a little Gaelic, examined the Irish parts of his family history and began writing about Irish characters. Turlogh Dubh O'Brien and Cormac Mac Art were created at this time, although he was not able to sell the latter's stories.\nWhen Farnsworth Wright started a new pulp in 1930 called \"Oriental Stories\", Howard was overjoyed\u2014here was a venue where he could run riot through favorite themes of history and battle and exotic mysticism. During the four years of the magazine's existence, he crafted some of his very best tales, gloomy vignettes of war and rapine in the Middle and Far East during the Middle Ages and the early Renaissance, tales that rival even his best Conan stories for their historical sweep and splendor. In addition to series characters such as Turlogh Dubh O'Brien and Cormac Fitzgeoffrey, Howard sold a variety of tales depicting various times and periods from the fall of Rome to the fifteenth century. The magazine eventually ceased publication in 1934 due to the Depression, leaving several of Howard's stories aimed at this market unsold.\nLovecraft Circle.\nIn August 1930 Howard wrote a letter to \"Weird Tales\" praising a recent reprint of H. P. Lovecraft's \"The Rats in the Walls\" and discussing some of the obscure Gaelic references used within. Editor Farnsworth Wright forwarded the letter to Lovecraft, who responded warmly to Howard, and soon the two \"Weird Tales\" veterans were engaged in a vigorous correspondence that would last for the rest of Howard's life. By virtue of this, Howard quickly became a member of the \"Lovecraft Circle\", a group of writers and friends all linked via the immense correspondence of H. P. Lovecraft (who wrote over 100,000 letters in his lifetime), who made it a point to introduce his many like-minded friends to one another and encourage them to share stories, utilize each other's invented fictional trappings, and help each other succeed in the pulp field. In time this circle of correspondents has developed a legendary patina about it rivaling similar literary conclaves such as The Inklings, the Bloomsbury Group, and the Beats.\nHoward was given the affectionate nickname \"Two-Gun Bob\" by virtue of his long explications to Lovecraft about the history of his beloved Southwest, and during the ensuing years he contributed several notable elements to Lovecraft's Cthulhu Mythos of horror stories (beginning with \"The Black Stone\". His Mythos stories also included \"The Cairn on the Headland\", \"The Children of the Night\" and \"The Fire of Asshurbanipal\"). He also corresponded with other \"Weird Tale\" writers such as Clark Ashton Smith, August Derleth, and E.\u00a0Hoffmann Price.\nThe correspondence between Howard and Lovecraft contained a lengthy discussion on a frequent element in Howard's fiction, barbarism versus civilization. Howard held that civilization was inherently corrupt and fragile. This attitude is summed up in his famous line from \"Beyond the Black River\": \"Barbarism is the natural state of mankind. Civilization is unnatural. It is a whim of circumstance. And barbarism must always ultimately triumph.\" Lovecraft held the opposite viewpoint, that civilization was the peak of human achievement and the only way forward. Howard countered by listing many historic abuses of the citizenry by so-called 'civilized' leaders. Howard initially deferred to Lovecraft but gradually asserted his own views, even coming to deride Lovecraft's opinions.\nIn 1930, with his interest in Solomon Kane dwindling and his Kull stories not catching on, Howard applied his new sword-and-sorcery and horror experience to one of his first loves: the Picts. His story \"Kings of the Night\" depicted King Kull conjured into pre-Christian Britain to aid the Picts in their struggle against the invading Romans, and introduced readers to Howard's king of the Picts, Bran Mak Morn. Howard followed up this tale with the now-classic revenge nightmare \"Worms of the Earth\" and several other tales, creating horrific adventures tinged with a Cthulhu-esque gloss and notable for their use of metaphor and symbolism.\nWith the onset of the Great Depression, many pulp markets reduced their schedules or went out of business entirely. Howard saw market after market falter and vanish. \"Weird Tales\" became a bimonthly publication and pulps such as \"Fight Stories\", \"Action Stories\", and \"Strange Tales\" all folded. Howard was further hit when his savings were wiped out in 1931 when the Farmer's National Bank failed, and again, after transferring to another bank, when that one failed as well.\nConan.\nEarly 1932 saw Howard taking one of his frequent trips around Texas. He traveled through the southern part of the state with his main occupation being, in his own words, \"the wholesale consumption of tortillas, enchiladas and cheap Spanish wine.\" In Fredericksburg, while overlooking sullen hills through a misty rain, he conceived of the fantasy land of Cimmeria, a bitter hard northern region home to fearsome barbarians. In February, while in Mission, he wrote the poem \"Cimmeria\".\nIt was also during this trip that Howard first conceived of the character of Conan. Later, in 1935, Howard claimed in a letter to Clark Ashton Smith that Conan \"simply grew up in my mind a few years ago when I was stopping in a little border town on the lower Rio Grande.\" However, the character actually took nine months to develop.\nHoward had originally used the name \"Conan\" for a Gael reaver in a past-life-themed story he completed in October 1931, which was published in the magazine \"Strange Tales\" in June 1932. Although the character swears by the god \"Crom\", that is his only link to the more famous successor character.\nGoing back home he developed the idea, fleshing out a new invented world\u2014his Hyborian Age\u2014and populating it with all manner of countries, peoples, monsters, and magic. Howard loved history and enjoyed writing historical stories. However, the research necessary for a purely historical setting was too time-consuming for him to engage in on a regular basis and still earn a living. The Hyborian Age, with its varied settings similar to real places and eras of history, allowed him to write fantastical historical fiction without such problems. He may have been inspired in the creation of his setting by Thomas Bulfinch's 1913 edition of his \"Bulfinch's Mythology\" called \"The Outline of Mythology\", which contained stories from history and legend, including many that were direct influences on Howard's work. Another potential inspiration is G. K. Chesterton's \"The Ballad of the White Horse\" and Chesterton's concept that \"it is the chief value of legend to mix up the centuries while preserving the sentiment.\"\nBy March, Howard had recycled an unpublished Kull story called \"By This Axe I Rule!\" into his first Conan story. The central plot remains that of a barbarian having become king of a civilized country and a conspiracy to assassinate him. However, he removed an entire subplot concerning a couple's romance and created a new one with a supernatural element; the story was re-titled \"The Phoenix on the Sword\", an element from this new subplot. Howard immediately went on to write two more Conan stories. The first of these was \"The Frost-Giant's Daughter\", an inversion of the Greek myth surrounding Apollo and Daphne, set much earlier in Conan's life. The last of the initial trio was \"The God in the Bowl\", which went through three drafts and has a slower pace than most Conan stories. This one is a murder mystery filled with corrupt officials and serves as Conan's introduction into civilization, while showing that he is a more decent person than the civilized characters. Before the end of the month, he sent the first two stories to \"Weird Tales\" in the same package, with the third following a few days later.\nWith these three completed he created an essay called \"The Hyborian Age\" in order to flesh out his setting in more detail. There were four drafts of this essay, starting with a two-page outline and finishing as an 8,000-word essay. Howard supplemented this with two sketched maps and an additional short piece entitled \"Notes on Various Peoples of the Hyborian Age.\"\nIn a letter dated March 10, 1932, Farnsworth Wright rejected \"The Frost-Giant's Daughter\" but noted that \"The Phoenix on the Sword\" had \"points of real excellence\" and suggested changes. \"The God in the Bowl\" would also be rejected and so a potential fourth Conan story concerning Conan as a thief was abandoned at the synopsis stage. Instead of abandoning the entire Conan concept, as had happened with previous failed characters, Howard rewrote \"The Phoenix on the Sword\" based on Wright's feedback and including material from his essay. Both this revision and the next Conan story, \"The Tower of the Elephant\", sold with no problems. Howard had written nine Conan stories before the first saw print.\nConan first appeared to the public in \"Weird Tales\" in December 1932 and was such a hit that Howard was eventually able to place seventeen Conan stories in the magazine between 1933 and 1936. Howard then took a short break from Conan after his initial burst of stories, returning to the character in mid-1933. These stories, his \"middle period\", are routine and considered the weakest of the series. Stories, such as \"Iron Shadows in the Moon\", were often simply Conan rescuing a damsel in distress from a monster in some ruins. While earlier Conan stories had three or four drafts, some in this period had only two including the final version. \"Rogues in the House\" is the only Conan story to be completed in a single draft. These stories sold easily and they include the first and second Conan stories to feature on the cover of \"Weird Tales\", \"Black Colossus\" and \"Xuthal of the Dusk\". Howard's motivation for quick and easy sales at this time was influenced by the collapse of some other markets, such as \"Fight Stories\", in the Depression.\nAlso in this period, Howard wrote the first of the James Allison stories, \"Marchers of Valhalla\". Allison is a disabled Texan who begins to recall his past lives, the first of which is in the later part of Howard's new Hyborian age. In a letter to Clark Ashton Smith in October 1933, he wrote that its sequel \"The Garden of Fear\" was \"dealing with one of my various conceptions of the Hyborian and post-Hyborian world.\"\nIn May 1933, a British publisher, Denis Archer, contacted Howard about publishing a book in the United Kingdom. Howard submitted a batch of his best available stories, including \"The Tower of the Elephant\" and \"The Scarlet Citadel\", on June 15. In January 1934, the publisher rejected the collection but suggested a novel instead. Though the publisher was \"exceedingly interested\" in the stories, the rejection letter explained that there was a \"prejudice that is very strong over here just now against collections of short stories.\" The suggested novel, however, could be published by Pawling and Ness Ltd in a first edition of 5,000 copies for lending libraries.\nIn late 1933, Howard returned to Conan, starting again slightly awkwardly with \"The Devil in Iron\". However, this was followed with the beginning of the latter group of Conan stories that \"carry the most intellectual punch,\" starting with \"The People of the Black Circle\".\nHoward probably began to work on the novel in February 1934, starting to write \"Almuric\" (a non-Conan, sword and planet science fiction novel) but abandoned it half way. This was followed by another abortive attempt at a novel, this time a Conan novel that later became \"Drums of Tombalku\". The third attempt at writing the novel was more successful, resulting in Howard's only Conan novel \"The Hour of the Dragon\", which was probably started on or around March 17, 1934. This novel combines elements of two previous Conan stories, \"Black Colossus\" and \"The Scarlet Citadel\", with Arthurian myth and provides an overview of Conan and the Hyborian age for the new British audience. Howard sent his final draft to Denis Archer on May 20, 1934. He had worked exclusively on the novel for two months, writing approximately 5,000 words per day, seven days a week. Although he told acquaintances that he had little hope for this novel, he had put a lot of effort into it. However, the publisher went into receivership in late 1934, before it could print the novel. The story was briefly held as part of the company's assets before being returned to Howard. It was later printed in \"Weird Tales\" as a serial over five months, beginning with the December 1935 issue.\nHoward may have begun losing interest in Conan in late 1934, with a growing desire to write westerns. He began to write, although never finished, a Conan story called \"Wolves Beyond the Border\". This was the first Conan tale to have an explicit (Robert W. Chambers-influenced) American setting, although American themes had appeared earlier, and the only one in which Conan himself does not appear. His next story was based on his unfinished material and became \"Beyond the Black River\", which not only used the different American-frontier setting but was also, in Howard's own words, a \"Conan yarn without sex interest.\" In another novel twist, Conan and the other protagonists have, at best, a pyrrhic victory; this was rare for pulp magazines. This was followed by another experimental Conan story, \"The Black Stranger\", with a similar setting. The story was, however, rejected by \"Weird Tales\", which was rare for later Conan stories. Howard's next piece, \"The Man-Eaters of Zamboula\", was more formulaic and was accepted by the magazine with no problems. Howard only wrote one more Conan story, \"Red Nails\", which was influenced both by his personal experiences at the time and an extrapolation of his views on civilization.\nThe character of Conan had a wide and enduring influence among other \"Weird Tales\" writers, including C. L. Moore and Fritz Leiber, and over the ensuing decades the genre of sword and sorcery grew up around Howard's masterwork, with dozens of practitioners evoking Howard's creation to one degree or another.\nNew markets.\nIn spring 1933, Howard started to place work with Otis Adelbert Kline, a former pulp writer, as his agent. Kline encouraged him to try writing in other genres in order to expand into different markets. Kline's agency was successful in finding outlets for more of Howard's stories and even placed works that had been rejected when Howard was marketing himself alone. Howard continued to sell directly to \"Weird Tales\", however.\nHoward wrote one of the first \"Weird Western\" stories ever created, \"The Horror from the Mound\", published in the May 1932 issue of \"Weird Tales\". This genre acted as a bridge between his early \"weird\" stories (a contemporary term for horror and fantasy) and his later straight western tales.\nHe tried writing detective fiction but hated reading mystery stories and disliked writing them; he was not successful in this genre. More successfully, in late 1933 Howard took a character conceived in his youth, El Borak, and began using him in mature, professional tales of World War I-era Middle Eastern adventure that landed in \"Top Notch\", \"Complete Stories\", and \"Thrilling Adventures\". The 1920s version was a treasure-hunting adventurer but the 1930s version, first seen in \"The Daughter of Erlik Khan\" in the December 1934 issue of \"Top-Notch\", was a grim gun-fighter keeping the peace after having gone native in Afghanistan. The stories have a lot in common with those of Talbot Mundy, Harold Lamb and T. E. Lawrence, with Western themes and Howard's hardboiled style of writing. As with his other series, he created another character in the same vein, Kirby O'Donnell, but this character lacked the grim, western elements and was not as successful.\nIn the years since Conan had been created, Howard found himself increasingly fascinated with the history and lore of Texas and the American Southwest. Many of his letters to H. P. Lovecraft ran for a dozen pages or more, filled with stories he had picked up from elderly Civil War veterans, Texas Rangers, and pioneers. His Conan stories began featuring western elements, most notably in \"Beyond the Black River\", \"The Black Stranger\", and the unfinished \"Wolves Beyond the Border\". By 1934 some of the markets killed off by the Depression had come back, and \"Weird Tales\" was over $1500 behind on payments to Howard. The author therefore stopped writing weird fiction and turned his attentions to this steadily growing passion.\nThe first of Howard's most commercially successful series (within his own lifetime) was started in July 1933. \"Mountain Man\" was the first of the Breckinridge Elkins stories, humorous westerns in a similar style to his earlier Sailor Steve Costigan stories and again featuring an exaggerated, cartoonish version of Howard himself as the main character. Written as tall tales in the vein of Texas \"Tall Lying\" stories, the story first appeared in the March\u2013April 1934 issue of \"Action Stories\" and was so successful that other magazines asked Howard for similar characters. Howard created Pike Bearfield for \"Argosy\" and Buckner J. Grimes for \"Cowboy Stories\". \"Action Stories\" published a new Elkins story every issue without fail until well after Howard's death. At Kline's suggestion, he also created \"A Gent from Bear Creek\", a Breckinridge Elkins novel comprising existing short stories and new material.\nConan remained the only character that Howard ever spoke of with his friends in Texas and the only one in whom they seemed interested. It is possible that Breckinridge Elkins and the other characters in his stories were too close to home for Howard to be entirely comfortable discussing them.\nIn the spring of 1936, Howard sold a series of \"spicy\" stories to \"Spicy-Adventure Stories\". The \"spicy\" series of pulp magazines dealt in stories that were considered borderline softcore pornography at the time but are now similar to romance novels. These stories, which Howard referred to as \"bubby-twisters\", featured the character Wild Bill Clanton and were published under the pseudonym Sam Walser.\nNovalyne Price.\nHoward is known to have had only one girlfriend in his life, Novalyne Price. Price was an ex-girlfriend of Tevis Clyde Smith, one of Howard's best friends, whom she had known since high school; Smith and Price had remained friends after their relationship ended. In the spring of 1933, Howard was visiting Smith after driving his mother to a Brownwood clinic. Howard and Smith drove to the Price farm and Smith introduced his friends to each other. Price was an aspiring writer, had heard of Howard from Smith in the past, and was enthusiastic to meet him in person. However, he was not what she expected. She wrote in her diary about this first meeting: \"This man was a writer! Him? It was unbelievable. He was not dressed as I thought a writer should dress.\" They parted after a drive and would not see each other again for over a year.\nIn late 1934, Price got a job as a schoolteacher in Cross Plains High School through her cousin, who was the head of the English department. When Howard came up in conversation with her new colleagues, she defended him from accusations of being a \"freak\" and \"crazy\", then phoned his house and left a message. When the call was not returned, she tried a few more times. Price finally visited the Howard house in person after having her telephone calls blocked by Hester Howard. After a drive through town, Howard and Price arranged their first date.\nOver much of the next two years, they dated on and off, spending much time discussing writing, philosophy, history, religion, reincarnation, and much else. Both considered marriage but never at the same time. Price became ill from overwork in mid-1935. Her doctor, a friend of Howard's father, advised her to end the relationship and get a job in a different state. Despite agreeing to this, she met with Howard soon after being discharged. Howard, however, was too preoccupied with the state of his mother's health to give her the attention she wanted. Their relationship did not last much longer.\nNot considering herself to be in an exclusive relationship, Price began dating one of Howard's best friends, Truett Vinson. Howard discovered his friends' relationship while he and Truett were on a week's trip together to New Mexico (the same trip that inspired a lot of the final Conan story \"Red Nails\"). The relationship between Howard and Price was irrevocably scarred, but they continued visiting with each other as friends until May 1936, when Price left Cross Plains for to pursue a graduate degree at Louisiana State University. The two never spoke or wrote to each other again.\nIn an effort to improve her memory and writing, Price had begun recording all her daily conversations into a journal, in the process preserving an intimate record of her time with Howard. This was useful years later when she wrote of their relationship in her book \"One Who Walked Alone\". This book became the basis for the 1996 film \"The Whole Wide World\" starring Vincent D'Onofrio as Howard and Ren\u00e9e Zellweger as Price.\nDeath.\nBy 1936, almost all of Howard's fiction writing was being devoted to westerns. The novel \"A Gent from Bear Creek\" was due to be published by Herbert Jenkins in England, and by all accounts it looked as if he was finally breaking out of the pulps and into the more prestigious book market. However, life was becoming especially difficult for Howard. All of his close friends had married and were immersed in their careers, Novalyne Price had left Cross Plains for graduate school, and his most reliable market, \"Weird Tales\", had grown far behind on its payments. His home life was also falling apart. Having suffered from tuberculosis for decades, his mother was finally nearing death. The constant interruptions of care workers at home, combined with frequent trips to various sanatoriums for her care, made it nearly impossible for Howard to write.\nIn hindsight, there were hints about Howard's plans. Several times in 1935\u201336, whenever his mother's health had declined, he made veiled allusions to his father about planning suicide, which his father did not understand at the time. He had made references when speaking to Novalyne Price about being in his \"sere and yellow leaf\". The words sounded familiar to her, but it was only in early June 1936 that she found the source in \"Macbeth\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have liv'd long enough: my way of lifeIs fall'n into the sere, the yellow leaf;And that which should accompany old age,As honour, love, obedience, troops of friends,I must not look to have; but, in their stead,Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour, breath,Which the poor heart would fain deny, and dare not.\u2014\u200a\nIn the weeks before his suicide, Howard wrote to Kline giving his agent instructions of what to do in case of his death, he wrote his last will and testament, and he borrowed a .380 Colt Automatic from his friend Lindsey Tyson. On June 10, he drove to Brownwood and bought a burial plot for the whole family. On the night before his suicide, when his father confirmed that his mother was finally dying, he asked where his father would go afterwards. Isaac Howard replied that he would go wherever his son went, thinking he meant to leave Cross Plains. It is possible that Howard thought his father would join him in ending their lives together as a family.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;;\n\"All fled, all done, so lift me on the pyre;The feast is over and the lamps expire.\"\n\u2014Howard's suicide note, found in his typewriter after the event or found in his wallet, as different sources state. The lines were taken from the poem \"The House of C\u00e6sar\" by Viola Garvin.\nIn June 1936, as Hester Howard slipped into her final coma, her son maintained a death vigil with his father and friends of the family, getting little sleep, drinking huge amounts of coffee, and growing more despondent. On the morning of June 11, 1936, Howard asked one of his mother's nurses, a Mrs. Green, if his mother would ever regain consciousness. When she told him no, he walked out to his car in the driveway, took the pistol from the glove box, and shot himself in the head. He died eight hours later, and his mother died the following day. The story occupied the entirety of that week's edition of the \"Cross Plains Review\", along with the publication of Howard's \"A Man-Eating Jeopard\". On June 14, 1936, a double funeral service was held at Cross Plains First Baptist Church, and both were buried in Greenleaf Cemetery in Brownwood, Texas.\nHealth.\nRobert E. Howard's health, especially his mental health, has been the focus of the biographical and critical analysis of his life. In terms of physical health, Howard had a weak heart, which he treated by taking Digoxin. The precise nature of Howard's mental health has been much debated, both during his life and following his suicide. Three main points of view exist: some have declared that Howard suffered from an Oedipal complex or similar; another viewpoint is that Howard suffered from major depressive disorder; the third view is that Howard had no disorders and his suicide was a common reaction to stress.\nCharacter sketch.\nAttitudes.\nHoward's attitude towards race and racism is debated. Howard used race as shorthand for physical characteristics and motivation. He would also employ some racial stereotypes, possibly for the sake of simplification. He was also of the belief that, no matter who won the subsequent conflicts, it would only ever be a temporary victory. In \"Wings in the Night\", for instance, Howard writes that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The ancient empires fall, the dark-skinned peoples fade and even the demons of antiquity gasp their last, but over all stands the Aryan barbarian, white-skinned, cold-eyed, dominant, the supreme fighting man of the earth.\nHoward became less racist as he grew older, due to several influences. Later works include more sympathetic black characters, as well as other minority groups, such as Jews. Significant works in terms of Howard's views on race are \"Black Canaan\" and \"The Last White Man\", which depict white protagonists at war with black characters defined by barbarity.\nHoward had feminist views, despite his era and location, which he espoused in both personal and professional life. Howard wrote to his friends and associates defending the achievements and capabilities of women. Strong female characters in Howard's works of fiction include the protofeminist Dark Agnes de Chastillon (first appearing in \"Sword Woman\", circa 1932\u20131934); the early modern pirate Helen Tavrel (\"The Isle of Pirates' Doom\", 1928), two pirates and Conan supporting characters, B\u00ealit (\"Queen of the Black Coast\", 1934) and Valeria of the Red Brotherhood (\"Red Nails\", 1936); as well as the Ukrainian mercenary Red Sonya of Rogatino (\"The Shadow of the Vulture\", 1934).\nPhysical.\nPhysically, Howard was tall and heavily built. He had a gentle, round face with a soft, deep voice. E. Hoffmann Price wrote that when he first met Howard in 1934 he \"was busy trying to combine two images, that of the actual man, and that of the man who loomed up in those stirring yarns. The synthesis was never effected. He was packed with the whimsy and poetry which rang out in his letters, and blazed up in much of his published fiction, but, as is usually the case with writers, his appearance belied him. His face was boyish, not yet having squared off into angles; his blue eyes slightly prominent, had a wide-openness which did not suggest anything of the man's keen wit and agile fancy. That first picture persists\u2014a powerful, solid, round-faced fellow, kindly and somewhat stolid seeming.\"\nLeisure activities.\nHoward enjoyed listening to other people's stories. He listened to tales told by family members growing up and, as an adult, collected stories from any older people willing to tell them. Howard's parents were both natural storytellers of different kinds and he grew up in early 20th century Texas, an environment in which the telling of tall tales was a standard form of entertainment. He himself was a natural storyteller and later a professional storyteller. Combined, this often led to his embellishing facts in his communication, not with an intention to deceive but just to make a better story. This can be a problem for biographers reading his works and letters with an aim to understand Howard himself.\nHoward had an almost photographic memory and could memorize long poems after only a few readings. He also enjoyed listening to music and drama on the radio. However his main interests were sports and politics, and he would listen to match reports and election results as they came in.\nAfter Howard bought a car in 1932, he and his friends took regular excursions across Texas and nearby states. His letters to Lovecraft also contain information about the history and geography he encountered on his journeys. He was also a practitioner and fan of boxing, and an avid weightlifter.\nWriting.\nHoward's first published poem was \"\", in an early 1923 issue of local newspaper \"The Baylor United Statement\". His first published story was \"Spear and Fang\", sold in late November 1924 and published in the July 1925 issue of the pulp magazine \"Weird Tales\". However, Howard's first real success was the Sailor Steve Costigan series of humorous boxing stories, beginning with \"The Pit of the Serpent\" published in the July 1929 issue of the pulp magazine \"Fight Stories\".\nStyles and themes.\nHoward's distinctive literary style relies on a combination of existentialism, poetic lyricism, violence, grimness, humour, burlesque, and a degree of hardboiled realism. Howard's background in Texan tall tales is the source of the rhythm, drive and authenticity of his work. Howard used an economy of words to sketch out scenes in his stories; his ability to do so has been attributed to his skill with, and experience of, both tall tales and poetry. The tone of Howard's works, especially in the Conan stories, is hardboiled and dark. This is contrasted with the fantastic elements contained within the stories. Direct experience of the oil booms in early 20th century Texas influenced Howard's view of civilization. The benefits of progress came with lawlessness and corruption. One of the most common themes in Howard's writing is based on his view of history, a repeating pattern of civilizations reaching their peak, becoming decadent, decaying and then being conquered by another people. Many of his works are set in the period of decay or among the ruins the dead civilization leaves behind.\nInfluence and influences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;;\n I have carefully gone over, in my mind, the most powerful men\u2014that is, in my opinion\u2014in all of the world's literature and here is my list: Jack London, Leonid Andreyev, Omar Khayyam, Eugene O'Neill, William Shakespeare. All these men, and especially London and Khayyam, to my mind stand out so far above the rest of the world that comparison is futile, a waste of time. Reading these men and appreciating them makes a man feel life is not altogether useless.\n\u2014Robert E. Howard, letter to Tevis Clyde Smith, February 20, 1928\nThe oil boom in Texas was \"one of the most powerful influences on [Howard's] life and art\", albeit one that he hated. Howard grew to despise the oil industry along with everyone and everything associated with it. The oil boom heavily influenced Howard's view of civilization as a constant cycle of boom and bust in the same manner as the oil industry in contemporary Texas. A town such as Cross Plains was built by pioneers. The boom brought civilization in the form of people and investment but also social breakdown. The oil people contributed little or nothing to the town in the long term and eventually left for the next oil field. This led Howard to see civilization as corrupting and society as a whole in decay.\nHoward first bought a pulp magazine, a copy of \"Adventure\", when he was fifteen. The stories and writers featured in this magazine were a strong influence on him. In the same year, he sent his first story, \"Bill Smalley and the Power of the Human Eye\", to the magazine, although it was rejected. Despite repeated attempts during his life, Howard never sold a story to \"Adventure\".\nHoward was both influenced by and an influence on his friend H. P. Lovecraft. Many ideas that he discussed in his letters to Lovecraft were repeated in his fiction and the discussion with a fellow professional writer was useful to him. For his part, Lovecraft began to include Howardian action sequences in his own work, for example in \"The Shadow over Innsmouth\". Much of 1931 was spent by Howard attempting to mimic Lovecraft's style. After that year, he had absorbed the parts of it that worked best for him and made them his own.\nAnother inspiration for Howard was Theosophy and the theories of Helena Blavatsky and William Scott-Elliot, who described lost civilizations, ancient wisdom, races, magic and sunken continents and the lands of Lemuria, Atlantis and Hyperborea, and also influenced other writers of weird fiction.\nHoward influenced and inspired later writers including Samuel R. Delany, David Gemmell, Michael Moorcock, Matthew Woodring Stover, Charles R. Saunders, Karl Edward Wagner, Paul Kearney, Steven Erikson, Joe R. Lansdale, and William King. He also has an influence on the field of fantasy fiction rivaled only by J. R. R. Tolkien and Tolkien's similarly inspired creation of the modern genre of high fantasy.\nCriticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;;\nAlthough he had his faults as a writer, Howard was a natural storyteller, whose narratives are unmatched for vivid, gripping, headlong action\u00a0... In fiction, the difference between a writer who is a natural storyteller and one who is not is like the difference between a boat that will float and one that will not. If the writer has this quality, we can forgive many other faults; if not, no other virtue can make up for the lack, any more than gleaming paint and sparkling brass on a boat make up for the fact that it will not float.\n\u2014L. Sprague de Camp, \"Conan of the Isles\", \"Introduction\", 1968\nCriticism of Robert E. Howard and his work often turns towards biographical details and \"backhanded compliment[s].\" Some imply that Howard was an uneducated idiot savant and that his success was due more to luck than skill.\nThe first professional critic to comment on Howard's work was Hoffman Reynolds Hays, reviewing the Arkham House collection \"Skull-Face and Others\" in \"The New York Times Book Review\". Under the title \"Superman on a Psychotic Bender\", Hays wrote, \"Howard used a good deal of the Lovecraft cosmogony and demonology, but his own contribution was a sadistic conqueror who, when cracking heads did not solve his difficulties, had recourse to magic and the aid of Lovecraft's Elder Gods. The stories are written on a competent pulp level (a higher level, by the way, than that of some best sellers) and are allied to the Superman genre which pours forth in countless comic books and radio serials.\" Hays then moved on to Howard himself and the genre in which he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A sensitive boy, he was apparently bullied by his schoolmates. ... Howard's heroes were consequently wish-projections of himself. All of the frustrations of his own life were conquered in a dream world of magic and heroic carnage. In exactly the same way Superman compensates for all the bewilderment and frustration in which the semi-literate product of the Industrial age finds himself enmeshed. The problem of evil is solved by an impossibly omnipotent hero. ... Thus the hero-literature of the pulps and the comics is symptomatic of a profound contradiction. On the one hand it is testimony to insecurity and apprehension, and on the other it is a degraded echo of the epic. But the ancient hero story was a glorification of significant elements in the culture that produced it. Mr. Howard's heroes project the immature fantasy of a split mind and logically pave the way to schizophrenia.\nIn a review of Michel Houellebecq's essay \"H. P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life\" published in the \"Los Angeles Times\", April 17, 2005, Stephen King implies that Howard did not work at his craft and was merely pastiching Lovecraft. King described his disapproval of the sword and sorcery genre, and superheroes, in his book on writing \"Danse Macabre\": \"[It] is not fantasy at its lowest, but it still has a pretty tacky feel. ... Sword and sorcery novels and stories are tales of power for the powerless. The fellow who is afraid of being rousted by those young punks who hang around his bus stop can go home at night and imagine himself wielding a sword, his potbelly miraculously gone, his slack muscles magically transmuted into those \"iron thews\" which have been sung and storied in the pulps for the last fifty years.\" On Howard in particular, he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Howard overcame the limitations of his puerile material by the force and fury of his writing and by his imagination, which was powerful beyond his hero Conan's wildest dreams of power. In his best work, Howard's writing seems so highly charged with energy that it nearly gives off sparks. Stories such as \"The People of the Black Circle\" glow with the fierce and eldritch light of his frenzied intensity. At his best, Howard was the Thomas Wolfe of fantasy, and most of his Conan tales seem to almost fall over themselves in their need to get out. Yet his other work was either unremarkable or just abysmal.\nAn exception to this, in King's opinion (again from \"Danse Macabre\"), was the author's Southern Gothic horror story \"Pigeons From Hell\". King referred to this work as \"one of the finest horror stories of our century.\"\nIn the foreword to \"Two-Gun Bob\", a collection of essays on the subject of Howard, fellow fantasy fiction writer, Michael Moorcock, wrote: \"The ability to paint a complex scene with a few expert brushstrokes remains Howard's greatest talent, and such talent can't, of course, ever be taught.\" Howard scholar Rob Roehm considers the use of the phrase \"can't ever be taught\" to be a variation on the recurrent theme of Howard's lack of skill or training. Moorcock's foreword goes on \"[Howard's] greatest hero, Conan the Barbarian, is his best, created from whole cloth, with a nod to Natty Bumppo and Tarzan of the Apes, and most closely representing the kind of person Howard, home-bound, mother-worshipping, suspicious of big cities, would in his dreams most like to be.\" Roehm counters that none of the assertions made about Howard in that comment are true, although none of them are unique to Moorcock either. In \"Wizardry &amp; Wild Romance\", Moorcock has also written both that Howard \"brought a brash, tough element to the epic fantasy that did as much to change the course of the American school away from previous writing and static imagery as Hammett, Chandler and the \"Black Mask\" pulp writers were to change the course of the American detective fiction\" and that he \"was never a commercially successful writer in his lifetime. His brash, hasty, careless style did not lend itself to the classier pulps. Most of his work appeared in the cheapest of them.\"\nEarnings.\nThe following table shows Howard's earnings from writing throughout his career, with appropriate milestones and events noted by each year. During the Depression, Howard earned more than anyone else in Cross Plains. When Howard died, \"Weird Tales\" still owed him between $800 and $1,300. (Adjusted for inflation, this amount would be equivalent to between $ and $.)\nLetters.\nThree publishing houses have put out collections of Howard's letters. In 1989 and 1991, Necronomicon Press published \"Robert E. Howard: Selected Letters\" in two volumes (1923\u20131930 and 1931\u20131936) edited by Glenn Lord with Rusty Burke, S. T. Joshi, and Steve Behrends. In 2007 and 2008, The Robert E. Howard Foundation Press published a three volume set (1923\u20131929, 1930\u20131932, and 1933\u20131936) titled \"The Collected Letters of Robert E. Howard\", edited by Rob Roehm. Additionally, in 2009, Hippocampus Press published two volumes (1930\u20131932 and 1933\u20131936) of Howard's correspondence with H. P. Lovecraft as \"A Means to Freedom: The Letters of H.P. Lovecraft &amp; Robert E. Howard\", edited by S. T. Joshi, David Schultz, and Rusty Burke.\nLegacy.\nRobert E. Howard's legacy extended after his death in 1936. Howard's most famous character, Conan the Barbarian, has a pop-culture imprint that has been compared to such icons as Tarzan of the Apes, Count Dracula, Sherlock Holmes, and James Bond. Howard's critical reputation suffered at first but, over the decades, works of Howard scholarship have been published. The first professionally published example of this was L. Sprague de Camp's \"Dark Valley Destiny\" (1983), which was followed by other works including Don Herron's \"The Dark Barbarian\" (1984) and Mark Finn's \"\" (2006). Also in 2006, a charity, Robert E. Howard Foundation, was created to promote further scholarship.\nFollowing Robert E. Howard's death, the courts granted his estate to his father, who continued to work with Howard's literary agent Otis Adelbert Kline. Dr. Isaac Howard passed the rights on to his friend Dr. Pere Kuykendall, who passed them to his wife, Alla Ray Kuykendall, and daughter, Alla Ray Morris. Morris left the rights to the widow of her cousin, Zora Mae Bryant, who gave control to her children, Jack Baum and Terry Baum Rogers. The Baums eventually sold their rights to the Swedish (now US) company Paradox Entertainment.\nHoward's first published book, \"A Gent from Bear Creek\", was printed in Britain one year after his death. This was followed in the United States by a collection of Howard's stories, \"Skull-Face and Others\" (1946) and then the novel \"Conan the Conqueror\" (1950). The success of \"Conan the Conqueror\" led to a series of Conan books from publisher Gnome Press, the later editor of which was L. Sprague de Camp. The series led to the first Conan pastiche, the novel \"The Return of Conan\" by de Camp and Swedish Howard fan Bj\u00f6rn Nyberg. De Camp eventually achieved control over the Conan stories and Conan brand in general. Oscar Friend took over from Kline as literary agent and he was followed by his daughter Kittie West. When she closed the agency in 1965, a new agent was required. De Camp was offered the role but he recommended Glenn Lord instead. Lord began as a fan of Howard and had re-discovered many unpublished pieces that would otherwise have been lost, printing them in books such as \"Always Comes Evening\" (1957) and his own magazine \"The Howard Collector\" (1961\u20131973). He became responsible for the non-Conan works and later restored, textually-pure versions of the Conan stories themselves.\nIn 1966, de Camp made a deal with Lancer Books to republish the Conan series, which led to the \"First Howard Boom\" of the 1970s; their popularity was enhanced by the cover artwork of Frank Frazetta on most of the volumes. Many of his works were reprinted (some printed for the first time) and they expanded into other media such as comic books and films. The Conan stories were increasingly edited by de Camp and the series was extended by pastiches until they replaced the original stories. In response, a puristic movement grew up demanding Howard's original, un-edited stories. The first boom ended in the mid-1980s. In the late 1990s and early 21st century, the \"Second Howard Boom\" occurred. This saw the printing of new collections of Howard's work, with the restored texts desired by purists. As before, the boom led to new comic books, films and computer games. Howard's house in Cross Plains has been converted into the Robert E. Howard Museum, which has been added to the National Register of Historic Places.\nAdaptations.\nThe works of Robert E. Howard have been adapted into multiple media, such as the two Conan films released in the 1980s starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, and another in 2011 starring Jason Momoa. In addition to the Conan films, other adaptations have included \"Kull the Conqueror\" (1997) and \"Solomon Kane\" (2009). In television, the anthology series \"Thriller\" (1961) led the adaptations with an episode based on the short story \"Pigeons from Hell\". The bulk of the adaptations have, however, been based on Conan with two animated and one live action series. Multiple audio dramas have been adapted, from professional audio books and plays to LibriVox recordings of works in the public domain. Computer games have focussed on Conan, beginning with ' (1984) and continuing on to the MMO ' (2008). The first table-top roleplaying game based on Howard's works was TSR's \"Conan Unchained!\" (1984) for their game \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\". The first comic book adaptation was in the Mexican \"Cuentos de Abuelito \u2013 La Reina de la Costa Negra\" No. 17 (1952). Howard-related comic books continued to be published to the present day.\nHoward is an ongoing inspiration for and influence on heavy metal music. Several bands have adapted Howard's works to tracks or entire albums. The British metal band Bal-Sagoth is named after Howard's story \"The Gods of Bal-Sagoth\".\nNotes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26079", "revid": "20306027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26079", "title": "Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan", "text": "Afghan women's organization founded in 1977\nThe Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan (RAWA) (, \"Jam\u02bfiyat-e Inqil\u0101bi-ye Zan\u0101n-e Afgh\u0101nist\u0101n\", ) is a women's organization originally based in Kabul, Afghanistan, that promotes women's rights and secular democracy. It was founded in 1977 by Meena Keshwar Kamal, an Afghan student activist who was assassinated in February 1987 for her political activities. The group, which supports non-violent strategies, had its initial office in Kabul, Afghanistan, but then moved to Pakistan in the early 1980s.\nThe organization aims to involve women of Afghanistan in both political and social activities aimed at acquiring human rights for women and continuing the struggle against the government of Afghanistan based on democratic and secular, not fundamentalist principles, in which women can participate fully. RAWA also strives for multilateral disarmament. Since 1977, the group opposed all the Afghan government systems: the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, the Islamic State of Afghanistan, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (1996-2001), the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (2001-2021), and the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan (from 2021).\nBackground.\nThe RAWA was first initiated in Kabul in 1977 as an independent social and political organization of Afghan women fighting for human rights and social justice. The organization then moved parts of its work out of Afghanistan into Pakistan and established their main base there to work for Afghan women.\nFounder.\nRAWA was founded by a group of Afghan women led by Meena Keshwar Kamal. At age 21, she laid the foundations of RAWA through her work educating women. In 1979, Kamal began a campaign against the Soviet occupation and the Soviet-supported government of Afghanistan. In 1981, she launched a bilingual magazine \"Payam-e-Zan\" (\"Women's Message\"). In the same year, she visited France for the French Socialist Party Congress. She also established schools for Afghan refugee children, hospitals and handicraft centers for refugee women in Pakistan. Her activities and views, as well as her work against the government and religious fundamentalists led to her assassination on February 4, 1987.\nEarly activities.\nMuch of RAWA's efforts in the 1990s involved holding seminars and press conferences and other fund-raising activities in Pakistan. RAWA also created secret schools, orphanages, nursing courses, and handicraft centers for women and girls in Pakistan and Afghanistan. They secretly filmed women being beaten in the street in Afghanistan by the Mutaween religious police, and being executed. RAWA activities were forbidden by both the Taliban and the United Islamic Front (\"Northern Alliance\"), but they persisted, and even publicised their work in publications like \"Payam-e-Zan\".\nRAWA after the 2001 invasion.\nRAWA is highly critical of the NATO intervention that began in 2001, because of the high rate of casualties among the civilian population. The organization went so far as to threaten to sue United States government for unauthorized use of four photos from their website that were used in propaganda handbills dropped on various cities in Afghanistan during the 2001-2021 United States Military Presence in Afghanistan.\nAfter the defeat of the Taliban government, RAWA warned that the NATO-allied Afghan forces were just as fundamentalist and dangerous as the Taliban. They charge that the government led by President Hamid Karzai lacked support in most areas of Afghanistan, and that fundamentalists are enforcing laws unfairly treating women as they were under the Taliban. These claims are supported by media reports about the Herat government of Ismail Khan, who has created a Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice that forces women to obey strict dress and behavior codes, as well as many reports by Human Rights Watch. One report released by Human Rights Watch in 2012 describes a situation where women are punished by the judicial system for attempting to escape from domestic abuse and also occasionally for being victims of rape. It says that Karzai is \"[u]nwilling or unable to take a consistent line against conservative forces within the country,\" and that the lack of improvement in the plight of women in Afghanistan after ten years is \"shocking.\"\nRecent activities.\nRAWA collects funds to support hospitals, schools and orphanages and still run many projects in Pakistan and Afghanistan, including a project in conjunction with CharityHelp.org for orphan sponsorships. In 2020 RAWA restarted its mission inside Afghanistan and organized some of its events in Kabul. They have held events annually on International Women's Day since 2006.\nOn October 7, 2006, the Afghan Women's Mission (AWM) organized a fund-raising event for RAWA in Los Angeles, California. Eve Ensler was the chief guest and radio host Sonali Kolhatkar and Zoya, a member of RAWA, were among the speakers. \"Zoya\" is a pseudonym for an active member of RAWA's Foreign Committee who has traveled to many countries, including the United States, Spain and Germany. In 2003, she received international acclaim for her biography \"Zoya\u2019s Story - An Afghan Woman's Battle for Freedom\". In June 2008, Zoya testified to the Human Rights Commission of the German Parliament (Bundestag) to persuade the German government to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan.\nIn February 2012, the group commemorated the 25th anniversary of the death of RAWA founder Meena Keshwar Kamal with a gathering of women in Kabul.\nFollowing the American and coalition exit from Afghanistan in August 2021, the Taliban swiftly regained control of the country. The new regime reinstituted an old policy of denying women and girls access to schooling. RAWA has operated secret schools for women to subvert this policy.\nRecognition.\nRAWA has so far won 16 awards and certificates from around the world for its work for human rights and democracy. They include the sixth Asian Human Rights Award - 2001, the French Republic's Liberty, Equality, Fraternity Human Rights Prize, 2000, Emma Humphreys Memorial Prize 2001,\nGlamour Women of the Year 2001, 2001 SAIS-Novartis International Journalism Award from Johns Hopkins University, Certificate of Special Congressional Recognition from the U.S. Congress, 2004, Honorary Doctorate from University of Antwerp (Belgium) for outstanding non-academic achievements, and many other awards.\nPerspectives on RAWA.\nIn the book \"With All Our Strength: The Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan\"\nby Anne Brodsky, a number of world-known writers and human rights activists share their views of RAWA. They include Arundhati Roy who says \"Each of us needs a little RAWA\"; Eve Ensler, author of \"The Vagina Monologues\", who suggests that RAWA must stand as a model for every group working to end violence; Katha Pollitt, author of \"Subject to Debate: Sense and Dissents on Women, Politics, and Culture\"; Ahmed Rashid, author of \"Taliban\" and \"Jihad\"; and Asma Jahangir, Special Rapporteur of the United Nations and prominent Pakistani women's rights activist are two Pakistanis who write about RAWA and express their support.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "26080", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26080", "title": "Ruth", "text": "Ruth (or its variants) may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26081", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26081", "title": "Railtrack", "text": "British railway infrastructure owner and manager (1994\u20132002)\nRailtrack was a group of companies that owned the track, signalling, tunnels, bridges, level crossings and all but a handful of the stations of the British railway system from 1994 until 2002. It was created as part of the privatisation of British Rail, listed on the London Stock Exchange, and was a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index. In 2002, after experiencing major financial difficulty, most of Railtrack's operations were transferred to the state-controlled non-profit company Network Rail. The remainder of Railtrack was renamed RT Group plc and eventually dissolved on 22 June 2010.\nHistory.\nBackground and founding.\nDuring the early 1990s, the Conservative Party decided to pursue the privatisation of Britain's nationalised railway operator British Rail. A white paper released in July 1992 had called for a publicly owned company to be primarily responsible for the railway infrastructure, including the tracks, signalling, and stations, while train operations would be franchised out to various private companies. However, Robert Horton, who would become the first chairman of Railtrack and thus play a leading role through the early years of the organisation's existence, lobbied for the infrastructure-holding company to be privatised as well in order to maximise financial gains; this position was also supported by several figures within the Conservative government, such as the Chancellor of the Exchequer Kenneth Clarke and the Secretary of State for Transport Brian Mawhinney.\nOn 1 April 1994, in accordance with recently passed legislation, the newly established Railtrack took control of Britain's railway infrastructure from British Rail. Its primary revenue sources were the track access charges levied on train operators and the lease of stations and depots. Furthermore, the company routinely received funding from the British government; the resulting money was largely spent on the railway network in accordance with plans laid out by the rail regulator. Between its creation and late 1998, the company reportedly had a relatively calm relationship with its first economic regulator, John Swift QC, who exercised a strategy of encouraging Railtrack to make its own commitments towards improvement. According to the railway historian Christian Wolmar, the regulator had intentionally acted weak as to avoid complicating the creation and privatisation of Railtrack.\nIn January 1996, the British government confirmed its plans to privatise Railtrack for \u00a32 billion with a total asset value of \u00a34 billion. During May 1996, the company was floated on the London Stock Exchange, albeit at a lower than planned price, allegedly in response to a threatened intervention by the Labour Party. This action effectively privatised Railtrack, although the company remained closely intertwined with the British government from an operational standpoint.\nRailtrack's initial operations were disrupted by an industrial dispute that largely ran between June and September 1994; at one point, the company's management proposed dismissing all of its signallers, comprising roughly 4,600 staff. Railtrack's first chief executive, John Edmonds, pursued a strategy of disposing of engineers and outsourcing their work wherever possible with the goal of reducing costs. Within its first few years of operation, Railtrack appeared to perform well financially, annual profits were recorded while its share value quadrupled within a relatively short timeframe. Furthermore, during the mid-to-late 1990s, several high-profile investment projects in cooperation with train operators and other partners were announced by the company. However, as early as 1997, Railtrack was being criticised for paying little attention to infrastructure investment.\nIssues and controversies.\nThe Southall rail crash in 1997 and the Ladbroke Grove rail crash in 1999 called into question the negative consequences that the fragmentation of the railway network had introduced to both safety and maintenance procedures. Railtrack was severely criticised for both its performance in improving Britain's railway infrastructure and for its safety record. It was observed in Lord Cullen's inquiry into the Ladbroke Grove accident that trains would have been prevented from passing any signal at red had an Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system had been fitted and operational; however, ATP's national adoption, a recommendation made after the Clapham Junction rail crash in 1988, had been abandoned as the cost was considered to be excessive for the increase in safety.\nOne particular area of criticism was that the regulator was not tough enough on Railtrack and, as a result, the company had been able to abuse its monopoly position. In particular, Railtrack's customers, the passenger and freight train operators, were allegedly desperate for regulatory action to compel the company to improve its stewardship of the network and its performance. During 1993, Swift had been appointed rail regulator by the then Conservative transport secretary John MacGregor MP. When the Labour government took over after the general election in May 1997, the new transport secretary (and deputy prime minister) John Prescott took a much harder line. When Swift's five-year term of office expired on 30 November 1998, he was not reappointed.\nAfter an interim period, during which Chris Bolt, Swift's chief economic adviser and effective deputy, filled the regulator's position, in July 1999 a new rail regulator began a five-year term, starting a much tougher regulatory era. Tom Winsor, the new rail regulator, had been Swift's general counsel (1993\u201395), and adopted a more interventionist and aggressive regulatory approach. The relationship between the two parties was reportedly stormy at times; in April 2000, it was reported in \"The Guardian\" that \"Railtrack is adopting a deliberate 'culture of defiance' against the rail regulator\". Gerald Corbett, Railtrack's chief executive at the time, and Winsor did not share the same vision for the network. Railtrack resisted regulatory action to improve its performance, and as the regulator probed ever more deeply, serious shortcomings in the company's stewardship of the network were revealed. Winsor informed Railtrack that if it did not improve passenger train performance by 12.7 per cent by March 2000, the company would have to pay fines out of its profits.\nOn 17 October 2000, the Hatfield rail crash occurred; this would prove to be the defining moment in Railtrack's subsequent collapse. The cause of the fatal accident was quickly determined to be an infrastructure-related failure, and thus within Railtrack's remit. In Hatfield's aftermath, major repairs were undertaken across the whole British rail network which were estimated to have cost in the order of \u00a3580 million. Railtrack had no idea how many potential Hatfields were waiting to happen, nor did they have any way of assessing the consequence of the speed restrictions they were ordering, largely because the majority of the engineering skill of British Rail had been sold off into separate maintenance and renewal companies. These restrictions brought the railway network to an almost total standstill and drew significant public ire. According to Wolmar, the Railtrack board had panicked in the wake of Hatfield.\nAround this time, regulatory and customer pressure on Railtrack audibly increased while the company's share price fell sharply as it became apparent that there were serious shortcomings in the company's ability to tackle and solve fundamental problems with its core activities. During February 1999, a significant fall in Railtrack's share price occurred in response to the company's launch of a bond issue intended to finance the West Coast Main Line modernisation and Thameslink Programmes. The modernisation of the West Coast Main Line had suffered from spiralling costs, rising from an estimated \u00a32 billion to roughly \u00a310 billion. The modernisation programme had failures that were technical as well as managerial, such as the moving block signalling apparatus being immature for such a busy mixed-traffic mainline. In 2000, reports emerged that Railtrack might not be able to go through with its planned commitment to purchase section 2 of High Speed 1, resulting in disruption and uncertainty for that programme as well.\nIn February 2001, Steve Marshall, the company's chairman, stated that Railtrack could have a net debt of approximately \u00a38 billion by 2003. During May 2001, Railtrack announced that, despite making a pre-tax profits before exceptional expenses of \u00a3199m, the \u00a3733m of costs and compensation paid out over the Hatfield crash plunged Railtrack from profit to a loss of \u00a3534m. This loss compelled the organisation to approach the government for funding, which it controversially used to pay a \u00a3137m dividend to its shareholders in May 2001. Months later, Railtrack sought another bailout from the government.\nAdministration.\nOn 7 October 2001, Railtrack plc was placed into railway administration under the Railways Act 1993, following an application to the High Court by the then Transport Secretary, Stephen Byers. This was effectively a form of bankruptcy protection that allowed the railway network to continue operating despite the financial problems of the operator. The parent company, Railtrack Group plc, was not put into administration and continued operating its other subsidiaries, which included property and telecommunications interests. If this action had not been taken, rail services throughout Britain might have entirely stopped for a time.\nFor most of the year in administration, the government's position had been that the new company would have to live within the existing regulatory settlement (\u00a314.8\u00a0billion for the five years 2001\u20132006). However, it soon became obvious that that was impossible, and that the aftermath of the Hatfield crash had revealed that the network required significantly more money for its operation, maintenance and renewal. It was reported on 23 November 2001, that a further \u00a33.5\u00a0billion might be needed to keep the national railway network running, a sum disputed by Ernst &amp; Young, the administrators. During February 2002, the European Commission approved the provision of state aid to the ailing Railtrack in order to maintain operations. \nTo get Railtrack out of administration, the government had to go back to the High Court and present evidence that the company was no longer insolvent. The principal reason given by the government to the court for this assertion was the decision of the rail regulator \u2013 announced on 22 September 2002 \u2013 to carry out an interim review of the company's finances, with the potential to advance significant additional sums to the company. The High Court accepted that the company was not therefore insolvent, and the railway administration order was discharged on 2 October 2002.\nTransfer of assets to Network Rail.\nNetwork Rail was formed with the principal purpose of acquiring and owning Railtrack plc. Originally the Government allowed private companies to bid for Railtrack plc. However, with limited availability of financial data on Railtrack, the political implications of owning the company and the very obvious preference of the government that the national railway network should go to Network Rail, no bidders apart from Network Rail were forthcoming, and Network Rail bought Railtrack plc on 3 October 2002. Railtrack plc was subsequently renamed to \"Network Rail Infrastructure Limited\".\nNetwork Rail's acquisition of Railtrack plc was welcomed at the time by groups that represented British train passengers. The attitude of Railtrack's customers \u2013 the passenger- and freight-train operators \u2013 was much more cautious, especially as they were wary of a corporate structure under which shareholders' equity was not at risk if the company's new management mis-managed its affairs.\nLiquidation.\nOn 18 October 2002, Railtrack's parent company, Railtrack Group, was placed into members' voluntary liquidation as RT Group. The Railtrack business (and its \u00a37\u00a0billion debt) had been sold to Network Rail for \u00a3500 million, and the various diversified businesses it had created to seek to protect itself from the loss-making business of running a railway were disposed of to various buyers. \u00a3370\u00a0million held by Railtrack Group was frozen at the time the company went into administration and was earmarked to pay Railtrack shareholders an estimated 70p a share in compensation. The Group's interest in the partially built High Speed\u00a01 line was also sold for \u00a3295m. During December 2002, Railtrack Group was delisted from the London Stock Exchange; that same month, the company announced an agreement to sell its remaining property interests, RT Group Developments, to the property developer Hammerson in exchange for \u00a363 million.\nCompensation.\nLitigation.\nIn late 2001, Railtrack shareholders formed two groups to press for increased compensation. A lawyer speaking for one of those groups remarked on GMTV that his strategy was to sue the government for incorrect and misleading information given at the time Railtrack was created, when John Major was Conservative Prime Minister. An increased offer of up to 262p per share was enough to convince the larger shareholder group, the Railtrack Action Group, to abandon legal action. The Chairman, Usman Mahmud, believed that legal action would not be successful without the support of management and major shareholders.\nThe legality of the decision to put Railtrack into railway administration was challenged by the smaller Railtrack Private Shareholders Action Group. Their action against the government alleged that the Secretary of State for Transport at the time \u2013 Stephen Byers MP \u2013 had, by deciding to cut off funding for Railtrack and asking the High Court to put the company into railway administration, committed the common law tort of misfeasance in public office. It is believed that there was \u00a3532\u00a0million available to Railtrack comprising \u00a3370\u00a0million in the bank, along with \u00a3162\u00a0million of an existing Department of Transport loan facility still available to be drawn down, but Stephen Byers MP cancelled this facility, causing shareholders to believe that he had broken the loan agreement.\nThis was the largest class action ever conducted in the English courts \u2013 there were 49,500 claimants, all small shareholders in Railtrack. Keith Rowley, QC, the barrister for the shareholders, alleged Byers had \"devised a scheme by which he intended to injure the shareholders of Railtrack Group by impairing the value of their interests in that company without paying compensation and without the approval of Parliament\".\nThe case was heard in the High Court in London in July 2005; some embarrassment was caused to Byers when he admitted that an answer he had given to a House of Commons Select Committee was inaccurate, but on 14 October 2005 the judge found that there was no evidence that Byers had committed the tort of misfeasance in public office. The private shareholders decided not to appeal against the judgment because there were no legal grounds for doing so. For many of them \u2013 who had contributed around \u00a350 each, on average, to the fighting fund to bring the action \u2013 the case had served its purpose.\nThe circumstances in which Railtrack had been put into administration were highly controversial, with allegations in Parliament on 24 October 2005 that the company had not been insolvent at the time (7 October 2001) and therefore that the administration order had been wrongly obtained. This was because of the jurisdiction of the independent rail regulator \u2013 at the time Tom Winsor \u2013 to provide additional money to maintain the company's financial position. Sir Alan Duncan MP, then the shadow transport secretary, said in Parliament that this aspect of the affair \u2013 which was not dealt with in the shareholders' case in the High Court \u2013 was \"perhaps the most shameful scar on the Government's honesty\" and \"an absolute scandal\".\nByers apologised in the House of Commons on 17 October 2005 for having given a \"factually inaccurate\" reply to the Select Committee but said that he had not intended to mislead them. This personal statement to Parliament was not accepted by the MP who had asked the original question, and the matter was remitted to the House of Commons Standards and Privileges Committee for investigation. As a result of that committee's report, Mr Byers made another statement of apology to Parliament.\nPayments to shareholders.\nRT Group plc (in voluntary liquidation) made a number of payments to shareholders during the winding up of the company's affairs before finally being dissolved on 22 June 2010.\nManagement.\nRobert Horton was the first chairman of Railtrack; he resigned from this role in early 1999 amid reports of disagreements between Horton and the company's then-chief executive Gerald Corbett. Steve Marshall became the company's next chairman; following the company's entering into receivership, he announced his own resignation in October 2001 and actually stood down in March 2002. That same month, Geoffrey Howe was appointed chairman of Railtrack Group (the part of the business not in administration) and quickly pursued a strategy of seeking compensation from the British government.\nRailtrack's first Chief Executive, John Edmonds, was a keen proponent of outsourcing the company's engineering activities and driving down costs. During late 1997, Gerald Corbett succeeded Edmonds as chief executive. During his tenure, numerous accidents occurred; Corbett issued multiple apologies and issued recommendations for reforms of the rail industry. In November 2000, Corbett submitted his resignation, having been publicly called on to do so by multiple politicians and public figures. Corbett was Railtrack's chief executive as it went into receivership.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26082", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26082", "title": "Rock Bridge High School", "text": "Rock Bridge High School is a public high school located in southern Columbia, Missouri, United States. The school serves grades 9 through 12 and is one of four High Schools in Columbia Public Schools. It is located next to the Columbia Area Career Center. The mascot is the Bruin Bear.\nHistory.\nDue to the crowding of David H. Hickman High School towards the end of the 1960s and the increasing population of Columbia in the 1970s, the Columbia Board of Education decided to form a new high school. The board bought of land in the southern portion of the city and started the construction of the new high school. The name \"Rock Bridge\" was chosen because of the school's proximity to the natural rock bridge at Rock Bridge Memorial State Park.\nConstruction started in 1969 on the original portion of the building, which consisted of 18 classrooms and one office area in the present-day east wing of the building. The school was planned to open in 1971, but funding issues pushed back construction of the second phase of the building. As such, this original portion sat unused for a year or two while the second portion was not yet complete. Construction started on the second portion in early 1972, which added the \"Main Commons\", another office area, the library, the gymnasium, and a few specialty classrooms underneath that area. In September 1973, with the completion of the second portion, Rock Bridge was considered \"complete enough\" to open and had a class of 583 students, mostly sophomores and juniors. This high school was the second centrally air-conditioned school built in Columbia after Oakland Junior High School north of town. However, the air-conditioning system was prone to failure and the school was difficult to keep cool in warm weather due to the fact that the windows were not designed to be opened. Later additions to the building included some windows that were able to be opened.\nThe school had a Sonitrol security system which enabled remote 24/7 security monitoring.\nIn 1974, the planetarium was completed with a capacity of nearly 90 people, which features a state-of-the-art star ball. A full-dome projection system was later added with the advent of newer technology.\nIn 1979, the west wing opened, which adopts the same basic design of the original 1971 building but with a finished basement. This added about ten general-purpose classrooms, as well as science, art, and band rooms; in turn, this would provide the school a then-total of about 40 classrooms. A north wing similar in design to the east and west wings was also proposed as part of the original master plan but was never built. However, three new science classrooms and a performing arts center were added in 1992. Enrollment reached 1,000 in the 1995\u201396 school year.\nIn 1980, a Career Center was opened north of the school that taught computer programming in COBOL and RPG-II on an IBM System/34 computer. Courses in data entry were also available.\nIn the early 1990s, three science classrooms north of the west wing and the Performing Arts Center near the commons area were added.\nIn 2000, a large addition opened between and north of the east and west wings and portions of the existing building, especially the west wing, were renovated, effectively doubling the size of the building. This project added twenty-five general-purpose classrooms, seven science classrooms, expanded performing arts facilities, a new media center, three new computer labs (since converted to classrooms), and several new office spaces. In January 2013, a second gymnasium was added after the district added ninth-graders to the high schools. The area under the auxiliary gym added other athletic facilities, making room for four new classrooms elsewhere in the building.\nAcademics.\nThe school offers 18 Advanced Placement courses and a multitude of honors classes available to students. RBHS has weighted and unweighted grade point averages. Ranked #2,856 in the nation by US News, Rock Bridge has a very decent academic standings. According to Niche, 30% of students at Rock Bridge are enrolled in at least 1 AP Class, and roughly 73.5% of students planning on college at Rock Bridge plan to stay in the county. Niche also states that 93% of students graduate Rock Bridge.\nMascot.\nRock Bridge High's mascot is the bruin bear. The school's original band director, Phil Wood, wanted the mascot of the school to be a troll. He ordered custom marching band uniforms that were green with a large white bib with a troll on the front of them. His decision was overridden and the mascot was officially made the bruin bear. Unable to return the uniforms, the band used them for a number of years. The band members unofficially referred to themselves as the Marching Munchkins.\nAthletics.\nThe school offers a variety of sports. Fall sports include cross country, football, golf, soccer, softball, swimming and diving, tennis and volleyball. Rock Bridge has won Football State Championships with undefeated teams in 1975 and 1977. Winter sports include basketball and wrestling. Spring sports include baseball and track and field. Year-round sports include cheerleading and poms. They have won 47 state championships in baseball (1), boys (1) and girls (5) basketball, boys cross country (2), football (2), boys (5) and girls (2) golf, softball (1), boys (2) and girls (4) swimming and diving, boys (8) and girls (13) tennis, and boys track and field (1). They are most prolific in tennis, winning 8 boys championships and 13 girls championships. During the 2020/21 school year, they were state champions in boys cross country, softball, and boys track and field.\nJournalism.\nFrom the time the school opened journalism has been part of the course offerings for the school. There was a newspaper, \"The Rock\", as well as a yearbook, \"Flashback\". In 1995, the school created a prerequisite class called Journalistic Writing, and the paper became a monthly publication. The journalism department created a special edition magazine, \"Southpaw\", in 2005, and in 2011, an online news source, \"Bearing News\". \"The Rock\" began on letter-sized sheets that were published through a class. In 1994, it began its run as a monthly publication.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26085", "revid": "48804487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26085", "title": "Ringwood Brewery", "text": "Brewery in Ringwood, Hampshire, England\nRingwood Brewery was a brand of beer owned by Carlsberg Marston's Brewing Company, and was formerly a small brewery on the edge of the New Forest in Hampshire, England, near the Dorset border. It produced mainly cask ales and some bottled beers.\nThe emblem for the brewery is a boar.\nHistory.\nThere are records from the early 19th century of four breweries, one owned by a banker named Stephen Tunks, that stood on the site of the present day Ringwood Brewery. Of the four, none survive today. The last to close was Carters on West Street, in 1923.\nIn 1975 the former head brewery of Hull Brewery, Peter Austin retired to Hampshire to enjoy more time sailing after a career at Hull dating back to 1945, preceded by a pupillage at Friary, Holroyd and Healy in Guildford, and a brief spell at Morrell's Brewing Company in Oxford. However the retirement was not to last and Austin was keen to pursue new ventures. An invitation two years later by Terry Jones of Monty Python fame and journalist; Richard Boston to create a micro brewery in an ex-cattle byre at Penrhos Court, Penrhos, Herefordshire reignited Austin's interest in brewing.\nIn 1978, Peter Austin and Partners Limited established Ringwood Brewery and started brewing in an old bakery at Mintey's Yard, New Street, Ringwood in April of that year. Austin was an influence on Britain's craft brewery rebirth in much the same way that Fritz Maytag of San Francisco's Anchor Brewing Company and Pierre Celis of Belgium's Hoegaarden Brewery were to their countries. However, Austin had a much more direct role in brewery development through his consulting business and equipment sales. Several American craft brewers use his Original Peter Austin Brick Kettle Brewing System including Geary's Brewing, Shipyard and Middle Ages Brewing Company. The equipment sales part of the business was separated from the main Ringwood Brewery company in 1982.\nIn 1980, Austin became the first chairman of the Small Independent Brewers' Association.\nAustin later brought in two business partners: David and Nigel Welsh. The business continued to expand with the purchase of a number of pubs and in 1986, having outgrown their existing brewery, the company moved to the site on Christchurch Road, historically previously part of Stephen Tunk's Brewery.\nIn 1988, the brewery was awarded 'Champion Beer of Britain' by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA), for 'Old Thumper'. Peter Austin sold his shares in Ringwood to David Welsh in 1990, becoming a brewing consultant.\nIn 1989, an enquiry by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission into the brewing industry resulted in the Beer Orders requiring large brewers to restruct their number of tied pubs to 2,000 and to those tied pubs to stock at least one guest beer. This allowed tenants to buy an ale from a different brewer other than their landlord. This transformed Ringwood's output and between 1990 and 1994 production rose from 5,000 barrels per annum to 13,000 barrels per annum. The brewhouse was extended to accommodate this from 1994, with a further extension taking place in 1999 to allow more than one brew per day.\nBy the mid-1990s Ringwood had allowed Old Thumper to be brewed under license in the United States. Licensing was pursued in an effort to export their products to America, and was felt a more secure approach after two failed attempts in the mid and late 1980s. Alan Puglsey, a former Ringwood Brewery employee was the brewer for this through his brewery, Shipyard Brewery in Portland, Maine. Pugsley has called Austin a \"surrogate father in many, many ways\".\nRingwood branched out from brewing in 1997 with the purchase of the Ch\u00e2teau de Fayolle and its vineyard near Saussignac in the Dordogne region of France. The vineyard produced several varieties of wine including Semillon, Sauvignon Blanc, Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot and Cabernet Franc. Further diversification took place with the purchase of several local public houses, number 7 in total by 2007.\nIn 2007, Ringwood was purchased from David Welsh by Marston's plc for \u00a319.2 million. Marston's stated that they would keep the brewery in operation and continue producing the full range of Ringwood beers.\nMarston's sold Ch\u00e2teau de Fayolle and the vineyard in 2011.\nIn 2013, Ringwood underwent a full re-brand, and the ABV of Old Thumper was reduced from 5.6% to 5.1%.\nIn 2015, Ringwood Best Bitter was rebranded as Ringwood Razorback.\nIn May 2020, it was announced that subject to competition law and shareholder approval, Marston's would merge its brewing business, including Ringwood Brewery, with Carlsberg UK (the United Kingdom arm of Carlsberg Group), into a joint venture to be known as Carlsberg Marston's Brewing Company (CMBC), valued at \u00a3780m. Marston's took a 40% stake in the joint venture and received c.\u00a3273m in cash.\nIn June 2023 the brewery and its brands were put up for sale by CMBC, who announced the closure of their logistics base in Ringwood as part of the same announcement. The Campaign for Real Ale called it \"another example of a globally owned business wiping out UK brewing heritage\".\nOn 4 December 2023, CMBC announced they had failed to find a buyer for the brewery and Ringwood Brewery would close in January 2024. Production of the Ringwood Brewery beers was to be moved to other facilities owned by CMBC. Cask brewing of Razorback, Fortyniner and Boondoggle would be moved to The Park Brewery in Wolverhampton (Banks's), whilst cask brewing of Old Thumper cask brewing would go to The Marston's Brewery in Burton upon Trent. Razorback, Boondoggle and Fortyniner bottles were already brewed in Burton. The Ringwood CMBC logistic base had already been moved to CMBC's sites in Tiverton and Farnborough.\nControversy arose soon after however when The Salisbury Journal reported on 6 December 2023 that a potential purchaser condemned CMBC's decision to close the site. CMBC stated they had been \"unable to secure a credible offer which met our bidding threshold\"; however, the threshold was not disclosed. A follow up article in the Morning Advertiser quoted local businessman, Anthony Swift, as saying that CMBC had not engaged or even responded to an indicative offer he had put forward together with a consortium during the sale process.\nThe brewery shop closed on Christmas Eve 2023.\nMarston's sold their stake in CMBC for \u00a3206 million in July 2024, in order to reduce debts and to allow it to concentrate on running its pub estate across the country. The sale gave Carlsberg UK full control of CMBC and ended Marston's 150 year heritage in brewing. A review of brewing activities was undertaken as a result of the sale and in November 2024 CMBC announced it was to delist Boondoggle and Old Thumper as cask ales by the end of the year, although confirming that Boondoggle would remain available as a bottled beer.\nAs of March 2025, the former site of Ringwood Brewery in Hampshire was still lying empty. In October 2025, it was reported that Carlsberg Britvic, the successor to Carlsberg UK, had sold the site to Pennyfarthing Homes, a property developer, which would turn it into its new office headquarters.\nPubs.\nAll pubs were transferred to Marston's after the brewery was purchased in 2007.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26087", "revid": "47125377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26087", "title": "Rodentia", "text": ""}
{"id": "26088", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26088", "title": "Red wolf", "text": "Canid native to the southeastern United States\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe red wolf (Canis rufus) is a canine native to the southeastern United States. Its size is intermediate between the coyote (\"Canis latrans\") and gray wolf (\"Canis lupus\").\nThe red wolf's taxonomic classification as being a separate species has been contentious for nearly a century, being classified either as a subspecies of the gray wolf \"Canis lupus rufus\", or a coywolf (a genetic admixture of wolf and coyote). Because of this, it is sometimes excluded from endangered species lists, despite its critically low numbers. Under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recognizes the red wolf as an endangered species and grants it protected status. Since 1996, the IUCN has listed the red wolf as a Critically Endangered species; however, it is not listed in the CITES Appendices of endangered species.\nHistory.\nRed wolves were once distributed throughout the southeastern and south-central United States from the Atlantic Ocean to central Texas, southeastern Oklahoma and southwestern Illinois in the west, and in the north from the Ohio River Valley, northern Pennsylvania, southern New York, and extreme southern Ontario in Canada south to the Gulf of Mexico. The red wolf was nearly driven to extinction by the mid-1900s due to aggressive predator-control programs, habitat destruction, and extensive hybridization with coyotes. By the late 1960s, it occurred in small numbers in the Gulf Coast of western Louisiana and eastern Texas.\nFourteen of these survivors were selected to be the founders of a captive-bred population, which was established in the Point Defiance Zoo and Aquarium between 1974 and 1980. After a successful experimental relocation to Bulls Island off the coast of South Carolina in 1978, the red wolf was declared extinct in the wild in 1980 so that restoration efforts could proceed. In 1987, the captive animals were released into the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge (ARNWR) on the Albemarle Peninsula in North Carolina, with a second unsuccessful release taking place two years later in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Of 63\u00a0red wolves released from 1987 to 1994, the population rose to as many as 100\u2013120\u00a0individuals in 2012, but due to the lack of regulation enforcement by the US Fish and Wildlife Service, the population has declined to 40\u00a0individuals in 2018, about 14 in 2019 and 8 as of October 2021. No wild litters were born between 2019 and 2020.\nUnder pressure from conservation groups, the US Fish and Wildlife Service resumed reintroductions in 2021 and increased protection. In 2022, the first wild litter was born since 2018. As of 2023, there are between 15 and 17 wild red wolves in ARNWR.\nDescription and behavior.\nThe red wolf's appearance is typical of the genus \"Canis\", and is generally intermediate in size between the coyote and gray wolf, though some specimens may overlap in size with small gray wolves. A study of \"Canis\" morphometrics conducted in eastern North Carolina reported that red wolves are morphometrically distinct from coyotes and hybrids. Adults measure 136\u2013165\u00a0cm (53.5\u201365\u00a0in) in length, comprising a tail of about 37\u00a0cm (14.6\u00a0in). Their weight ranges from 20 to 39\u00a0kg (44\u201385\u00a0lbs) with males averaging 29\u00a0kg (64\u00a0lbs) and females 25\u00a0kg (55\u00a0lbs). Its pelage is typically more reddish and sparsely furred than the coyote's and gray wolf's, though melanistic individuals do occur. Its fur is generally tawny to grayish in color, with light markings around the lips and eyes. The red wolf has been compared by some authors to the greyhound in general form, owing to its relatively long and slender limbs. The ears are also proportionately larger than the coyote's and gray wolf's. The skull is typically narrow, with a long and slender rostrum, a small braincase and a well developed sagittal crest. Its cerebellum is unlike that of other \"Canis\" species, being closer in form to that of canids of the \"Vulpes\" and \"Urocyon\" genera, thus indicating that the red wolf is one of the more plesiomorphic members of its genus.\nThe red wolf is more sociable than the coyote, but less so than the gray wolf. It mates in January\u2013February, with an average of 6\u20137\u00a0pups being born in March, April, and May. It is monogamous, with both parents participating in the rearing of young. Denning sites include hollow tree trunks, along stream banks and the abandoned earths of other animals. By the age of six weeks, the pups distance themselves from the den, and reach full size at the age of one year, becoming sexually mature two years later.\nUsing long-term data on red wolf individuals of known pedigree, it was found that inbreeding among first-degree relatives was rare. A likely mechanism for avoidance of inbreeding is independent dispersal trajectories from the natal pack. Many of the young wolves spend time alone or in small non-breeding packs composed of unrelated individuals. The union of two unrelated individuals in a new home range is the predominant pattern of breeding pair formation. Inbreeding is avoided because it results in progeny with reduced fitness (inbreeding depression) that is predominantly caused by the homozygous expression of recessive deleterious alleles.\nPrior to its extinction in the wild, the red wolf's diet consisted of rabbits, rodents, and nutria (an introduced species). In contrast, the red wolves from the restored population rely on white-tailed deer, pig, raccoon, rice rats, muskrats, nutria, rabbits and carrion. White-tailed deer were largely absent from the last wild refuge of red wolves on the Gulf Coast between Texas and Louisiana (where specimens were trapped from the last wild population for captive breeding), which likely accounts for the discrepancy in their dietary habits listed here. Historical accounts of wolves in the southeast by early explorers such as William Hilton, who sailed along the Cape Fear River in what is now North Carolina in 1644, also note that they ate deer.\nPredation.\nIn Florida, red wolves may be eaten by some growth stage of invasive snakes like Burmese pythons, reticulated pythons, Southern African rock pythons, Central African rock pythons, boa constrictors, yellow anacondas, Bolivian anacondas, dark-spotted anacondas, and green anacondas.\nRange and habitat.\nThe originally recognized red wolf range extended throughout the southeastern United States from the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts, north to the Ohio River Valley and central Pennsylvania, and west to Central Texas and southeastern Missouri. Research into paleontological, archaeological and historical specimens of red wolves by Ronald Nowak expanded their known range to include land south of the Saint Lawrence River in Canada, along the eastern seaboard, and west to Missouri and mid-Illinois, terminating in the southern latitudes of Central Texas.\nGiven their wide historical distribution, red wolves probably used a large suite of habitat types at one time. The last naturally occurring population used coastal prairie marshes, swamps, and agricultural fields used to grow rice and cotton. However, this environment probably does not typify preferred red wolf habitat. Some evidence shows the species was found in highest numbers in the once extensive bottom-land river forests and swamps of the southeastern United States. Red wolves reintroduced into northeastern North Carolina have used habitat types ranging from agricultural lands to forest/wetland mosaics characterized by an overstory of pine and an understory of evergreen shrubs. This suggests that red wolves are habitat generalists and can thrive in most settings where prey populations are adequate and persecution by humans is slight.\nExtirpation in the wild.\nIn 1940, the biologist Stanley P. Young noted that the red wolf was still common in eastern Texas, where more than 800 had been caught in 1939 because of their attacks on livestock. He did not believe that they could be exterminated because of their habit of living concealed in thickets. In 1962 a study of skull morphology of wild \"Canis\" in the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas indicated that the red wolf existed in only a few populations due to hybridization with the coyote. The explanation was that either the red wolf could not adapt to changes to its environment due to human land-use along with its accompanying influx of competing coyotes from the west, or that the red wolf was being hybridized out of existence by the coyote.\nReintroduced habitat.\nSince 1987, red wolves have been released into northeastern North Carolina, where they roam 1.7\u00a0million acres. These lands span five counties (Dare, Hyde, Tyrrell, Washington, and Beaufort) and include three national wildlife refuges, a U.S. Air Force bombing range, and private land. The red wolf recovery program is unique for a large carnivore reintroduction in that more than half of the land used for reintroduction lies on private property. Approximately are federal and state lands, and are private lands.\nBeginning in 1991, red wolves were also released into the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in eastern Tennessee. However, due to exposure to environmental disease (parvovirus), parasites, and competition (with coyotes as well as intraspecific aggression), the red wolf was unable to successfully establish a wild population in the park. Low prey density was also a problem, forcing the wolves to leave the park boundaries in pursuit of food in lower elevations. In 1998, the FWS took away the remaining red wolves in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, relocating them to Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge in eastern North Carolina. Other red wolves have been released on the coastal islands in Florida, Mississippi, and South Carolina as part of the captive breeding management plan. St. Vincent Island in Florida is currently the only active island propagation site.\nCaptive breeding and reintroduction.\nAfter the passage of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, formal efforts backed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service began to save the red wolf from extinction, when a captive-breeding program was established at the Point Defiance Zoological Gardens, Tacoma, Washington. Four hundred animals were captured from southwestern Louisiana and southeastern Texas from 1973 to 1980 by the USFWS.\nMeasurements, vocalization analyses, and skull X-rays were used to distinguish red wolves from coyotes and red wolf \u00d7 coyote hybrids. Of the 400\u00a0canids captured, only 43 were believed to be red wolves and sent to the breeding facility. The first litters were produced in captivity in May\u00a01977. Some of the pups were determined to be hybrids, and they and their parents were removed from the program. Of the original 43\u00a0animals, only 17 were considered pure red wolves and since three were unable to breed, 14 became the breeding stock for the captive-breeding program. These 14 were so closely related that they had the genetic effect of being only eight individuals.\nIn 1996, the red wolf was listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as a critically endangered species.\nIn December 1976, two wolves were released onto Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge's Bulls Island in South Carolina with the intent of testing and honing reintroduction methods. They were not released with the intent of beginning a permanent population on the island. The first experimental translocation lasted for 11\u00a0days, during which a mated pair of red wolves was monitored day and night with remote telemetry. A second experimental translocation was tried in 1978 with a different mated pair, and they were allowed to remain on the island for close to nine months. After that, a larger project was executed in 1987 to reintroduce a permanent population of red wolves back to the wild in the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge (ARNWR) on the eastern coast of North Carolina. Also in 1987, Bulls Island became the first island breeding site. Pups were raised on the island and relocated to North Carolina until 2005.\nIn September\u00a01987, four male-female pairs of red wolves were released in the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge, in northeastern North Carolina, and designated as an experimental population. Since then, the experimental population has grown and the recovery area expanded to include four national wildlife refuges, a Department of Defense bombing range, state-owned lands, and private lands, encompassing about .\nIn 1989, the second island propagation project was initiated with release of a population on Horn Island off the Mississippi coast. This population was removed in 1998 because of a likelihood of encounters with humans. The third island propagation project introduced a population on St. Vincent Island, Florida, offshore between Cape San Blas and Apalachicola, Florida, in 1990, and in 1997, the fourth island propagation program introduced a population to Cape St. George Island, Florida, south of Apalachicola.\nIn 1991, two pairs were reintroduced into the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, where the last known red wolf was killed in 1905. Despite some early success, the wolves were relocated to eastern North Carolina in 1998, ending the effort to reintroduce the species to the park.\n21st century status.\nOver 30\u00a0facilities participate in the red wolf Species Survival Plan and oversee the breeding and reintroduction of over 150\u00a0wolves.\nIn 2007, the USFWS estimated that 300\u00a0red wolves remained in the world, with 207 of those in captivity. By late 2020, the number of wild individuals had shrunk to only about 7 radio-collared and a dozen uncollared individuals, with no wild pups born since 2018. This decline has been linked to shooting and poisoning of wolves by landowners, and suspended conservation efforts by the USFWS.\nA 2019 analysis by the Center for Biological Diversity of available habitat throughout the red wolf's former range found that over 20,000\u00a0square miles of public land across five sites had viable habitat for red wolves to be reintroduced to in the future. These sites were chosen based on prey levels, isolation from coyotes and human development, and connectivity with other sites. These sites include: the Apalachicola and Osceola National Forests along with the Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge and nearby protected lands; numerous national parks and national forests in the Appalachian Mountains including the Monongahela, George Washington &amp; Jefferson, Cherokee, Pisgah, Nantahala, Chattahoochee, and Talladega National Forests along with Shenandoah National Park and the lower elevations of Great Smoky Mountains National Park; Croatoan National Forest and Hofmann Forest on the North Carolina coast, and the Ozark, Ouatchita, and Mark Twain National Forests in the central United States.\nIn late 2018, two canids that are largely coyote were found on Galveston Island, Texas with red wolf alleles (gene expressions) left from a ghost population of red wolves. Since these alleles are from a different population from the red wolves in the North Carolina captive breeding program, there has been a proposal to selectively cross-breed the Galveston Island coyotes into the captive red wolf population. Another study published around the same time analyzing canid scat and hair samples in southwestern Louisiana found genetic evidence of red wolf ancestry in about 55% of sampled canids, with one such individual having between 78 and 100% red wolf ancestry, suggesting the possibility of more red wolf genes in the wild that may not be present in the captive population.\nFrom 2015 to 2019, there were no red wolves released into the wild. But in March 2020, the FWS released a new breeding pair of red wolves, including a young male red wolf from St. Vincent Island, Florida into the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge. The pair were unsuccessful at producing a litter of pups in the wild. On March 1, 2021, two male red wolves from Florida were paired with two female wild red wolves from eastern North Carolina and released into the wild. One of the male wolves was killed by a car shortly after being released into the wild. On April 30 and May 1, four adult red wolves were released into the wild and four red wolf pups were fostered by a wild female red wolf. In addition to the eight released wolves, the total number of red wolves living in the wild amount to nearly thirty wild individuals, including a dozen other wolves not wearing radio collars.\nA study published in 2020 reported camera traps recorded \"the presence of a large canid possessing wolf-like characters\" in northeast Texas and later hair samples and tracks from the area indicated the presence of red wolves.\nBy fall of 2021, a total of six red wolves had been killed, including the four adults that had been released in the spring. Three of the released adults had been killed in vehicle collisions, two had died from unknown cases, and the fourth released adult had been shot by a landowner who feared the wolf was attempting to get his chickens. These losses dropped the number of wolves in the wild down to about 20 wild individuals. In the winter of 2021\u20132022, the Fish and Wildlife Services selected nine captive adult red wolves to be released into the wild. A family of five red wolves were released into the Pocosin Lakes National Wildlife Refuge, while two new breeding pairs of adult wolves were released into the Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge. The release of these new wolves brought the number of wild red wolves in eastern North Carolina up to less than 30 wild individuals.\nOn April 22, 2022, one of the breeding pairs of adult red wolves produced a litter of six wolf pups, four females and two males. This new litter of red wolf pups became the first litter born in the wild since 2018. As of 2023, there are between 15 and 17 wild red wolves in Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge.\nExisting population.\nIn April and May 2023, two captive male red wolves were paired with two wild female wolves in acclimation pens and were later released into the wild. At the same time, the wild breeding pair that produced a litter of pups the previous year gave birth to a second litter of 5 pups, 2 males and 3 females. A male wolf pup from a captive litter was fostered into the pack, and with this new addition, the family of red wolves, which was named the Milltail pack by FWS, has grown to 13 wild individuals. These six new pups has brought the wild population of red wolves up to 23\u201325 wild individuals.\nIn May 2023, two families of red wolves were placed in acclimation pens to be released into the wild in the Pocosin Lakes National Wildlife Refuge in Tyrrell County. One family consisted of a breeding pair and three pups, while the other consisted of a breeding pair, a yearling female, and four young pups that were born in the acclamation pen. In early June 2023, the two families of red wolves were released into the wild to roam through PLNWR. With the addition of these two separate packs, the wild population of red wolves had increased to about 35 wild individuals. In addition to the wild population, there are approximately 270 red wolves in zoos and captive breeding programs across the U.S.\nCoyote \u00d7 re-introduced red wolf issues.\nInterbreeding with the coyote has been recognized as a threat affecting the restoration of red wolves. Adaptive management efforts are making progress in reducing the threat of coyotes to the red wolf population in northeastern North Carolina. Other threats, such as habitat fragmentation, disease, and human-caused mortality, are of concern in the restoration of red wolves. Efforts to reduce the threats are presently being explored.\nBy 1999, introgression of coyote genes was recognized as the single greatest threat to wild red wolf recovery and an adaptive management plan which included coyote sterilization has been successful, with coyote genes being reduced by 2015 to less than 4% of the wild red wolf population.\nSince the 2014 programmatic review, the USFWS ceased implementing the red wolf adaptive management plan that was responsible for preventing red wolf hybridization with coyotes and allowed the release of captive-born red wolves into the wild population. Since then, the wild population has decreased from 100\u2013115\u00a0red wolves to less than\u00a030. Despite the controversy over the red wolf's status as a unique taxon as well as the USFWS' apparent disinterest towards wolf conservation in the wild, the vast majority of public comments (including NC residents) submitted to the USFWS in 2017 over their new wolf management plan were in favor of the original wild conservation plan.\nA 2016 genetic study of canid scats found that despite high coyote density inside the Red Wolf Experimental Population Area (RWEPA), hybridization occurs rarely (4% are hybrids).\nContested killing of re-introduced red wolves.\nHigh wolf mortality related to anthropogenic causes appeared to be the main factor limiting wolf dispersal westward from the RWEPA. High anthropogenic wolf mortality similarly limits expansion of eastern wolves outside of protected areas in south-eastern Canada.\nIn 2012, the Southern Environmental Law Center filed a lawsuit against the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission for jeopardizing the existence of the wild red wolf population by allowing nighttime hunting of coyotes in the five-county restoration area in eastern North Carolina. A 2014 court-approved settlement agreement was reached that banned nighttime hunting of coyotes and requires permitting and reporting coyote hunting. In response to the settlement, the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission adopted a resolution requesting the USFWS to remove all wild red wolves from private lands, terminate recovery efforts, and declare red wolves extinct in the wild. This resolution came in the wake of a 2014 programmatic review of the red wolf conservation program conducted by The Wildlife Management Institute. The Wildlife Management Institute indicated the reintroduction of the red wolf was an incredible achievement. The report indicated that red wolves could be released and survive in the wild, but that illegal killing of red wolves threatens the long-term persistence of the population. The report stated that the USFWS needed to update its red wolf recovery plan, thoroughly evaluate its strategy for preventing coyote hybridization and increase its public outreach.\nIn 2014, the USFWS issued the first take permit for a red wolf to a private landowner. Since then, the USFWS issued several other take permits to landowners in the five-county restoration area. During June\u00a02015, a landowner shot and killed a female red wolf after being authorized a take permit, causing a public outcry. In response, the Southern Environmental Law Center filed a lawsuit against the USFWS for violating the Endangered Species Act.\nBy 2016, the red wolf population of North Carolina had declined to 45\u201360\u00a0wolves. The largest cause of this decline was gunshot.\nIn June 2018, the USFWS announced a proposal that would limit the wolves' safe range to only Alligator River National Wildlife Refuge, where only about 35\u00a0wolves remain, thus allowing hunting on private land. In November\u00a02018, Chief Judge Terrence W. Boyle found that the USFWS had violated its congressional mandate to protect the red wolf, and ruled that USFWS had no power to give landowners the right to shoot them.\nRelationship to humans.\nSince before European colonization of the Americas, the red wolf has featured prominently in Cherokee spiritual beliefs, where it is known as \"wa'ya\" (\u13e9\u13ef), and is said to be the companion of Kana'ti - the hunter and father of the \"Aniwaya\" or Wolf Clan. Traditionally, Cherokee people generally avoid killing red wolves, as such an act is believed to bring about the vengeance of the killed animals' pack-mates.\nTaxonomy.\nThe taxonomic status of the red wolf is debated. It has been described as either a species with a distinct lineage, a recent hybrid of the gray wolf and the coyote, an ancient hybrid of the gray wolf and the coyote which warrants species status, or a distinct species that has undergone recent hybridization with the coyote.\nThe naturalists John James Audubon and John Bachman were the first to suggest that the wolves of the southern United States were different from wolves in its other regions. In 1851, they recorded the \"Black American Wolf\" as \"C.\u00a0l.\" var. \"ater\" that existed in Florida, South Carolina, North Carolina, Kentucky, southern Indiana, southern Missouri, Louisiana, and northern Texas. They also recorded the \"Red Texan Wolf\" as \"C.\u00a0l.\" var. \"rufus\" that existed from northern Arkansas, through Texas, and into Mexico. In 1912, the zoologist Gerrit Smith Miller Jr. noted that the designation \"ater\" was unavailable and recorded these wolves as \"C.\u00a0l.\u00a0floridanus\".\nIn 1937, the zoologist Edward Alphonso Goldman proposed a new species of wolf \"Canis rufus\". Three subspecies of red wolf were originally recognized by Goldman, with two of these subspecies now being extinct. The Florida black wolf (\"Canis rufus floridanus\") (Maine to Florida) has been extinct since 1908 and the Texas red wolf (\"Canis rufus rufus\") (south-central United States) was declared extinct by 1970. By the 1970s, the Mississippi Valley red wolf (\"Canis rufus gregoryi\") existed only in the coastal prairies and marshes of extreme southeastern Texas and southwestern Louisiana. These were removed from the wild to form a captive breeding program and reintroduced into eastern North Carolina in 1987.\nIn 1967, the zoologists Barbara Lawrence and William H. Bossert believed that the case for classifying \"C.\u00a0rufus\" as a species was based too heavily on the small red wolves of central Texas, from where it was known that there existed hybridization with the coyote. They said that if an adequate number of specimens had been included from Florida, then the separation of \"C.\u00a0rufus\" from \"C.\u00a0lupus\" would have been unlikely. The taxonomic reference \"Catalogue of Life\" classifies the red wolf as a subspecies of \"Canis lupus\". The mammalogist W.\u00a0Christopher Wozencraft, writing in \"Mammal Species of the World\" (2005), regards the red wolf as a hybrid of the gray wolf and the coyote, but due to its uncertain status compromised by recognizing it as a subspecies of the gray wolf \"Canis lupus rufus\".\nIn 2021, the American Society of Mammalogists considered the red wolf as its own species (\"Canis rufus\").\nTaxonomic debate.\nWhen European settlers first arrived to North America, the coyote's range was limited to the western half of the continent. They existed in the arid areas and across the open plains, including the prairie regions of the midwestern states. Early explorers found some in Indiana and Wisconsin. From the mid-1800s onward, coyotes began expanding beyond their original range.\nThe taxonomic debate regarding North American wolves can be summarised as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are two prevailing evolutionary models for North American \"Canis\":\nand\nFossil evidence.\nThe paleontologist Ronald M. Nowak notes that the oldest fossil remains of the red wolf are 10,000\u00a0years old and were found in Florida near Melbourne, Brevard County, Withlacoochee River, Citrus County, and Devil's Den Cave, Levy County. He notes that there are only a few, but questionable, fossil remains of the gray wolf found in the southeastern states. He proposes that following the extinction of the dire wolf, the coyote appears to have been displaced from the southeastern US by the red wolf until the last century, when the extirpation of wolves allowed the coyote to expand its range. He also proposes that the ancestor of all North American and Eurasian wolves was \"C.\u00a0mosbachensis\", which lived in the Middle Pleistocene 700,000\u2013300,000\u00a0years ago.\n\"C.\u00a0mosbachensis\" was a wolf that once lived across Eurasia before going extinct. It was smaller than most North American wolf populations and smaller than \"C.\u00a0rufus\", and has been described as being similar in size to the small Indian wolf, \"Canis lupus pallipes\". He further proposes that \"C.\u00a0mosbachensis\" invaded North America where it became isolated by the later glaciation and there gave rise to \"C.\u00a0rufus\". In Eurasia, \"C.\u00a0mosbachensis\" evolved into \"C.\u00a0lupus\", which later invaded North America.\nThe paleontologist and expert on the genus \"Canis\"' natural history, Xiaoming Wang, looked at red wolf fossil material but could not state if it was, or was not, a separate species. He said that Nowak had put together more morphometric data on red wolves than anybody else, but Nowak's statistical analysis of the data revealed a red wolf that is difficult to deal with. Wang proposes that studies of ancient DNA taken from fossils might help settle the debate. In 2009, Tedford, Wang and Taylor reclassified the purported red wolf fossils as \"Canis armbrusteri\" and \"Canis edwardii\".\nMorphological evidence.\nIn 1771, the English naturalist Mark Catesby referred to Florida and the Carolinas when he wrote that \"The Wolves in America are like those of Europe, in shape and colour, but are somewhat smaller.\" They were described as being more timid and less voracious. In 1791, the American naturalist William Bartram wrote in his book \"Travels\" about a wolf which he had encountered in Florida that was larger than a dog, but was black in contrast to the larger yellow-brown wolves of Pennsylvania and Canada. In 1851, the naturalists John James Audubon and John Bachman described the \"Red Texan Wolf\" in detail. They noted that it could be found in Florida and other southeastern states, but it differed from other North American wolves and named it \"Canis lupus rufus\". It was described as being more fox-like than the gray wolf, but retaining the same \"sneaking, cowardly, yet ferocious disposition\".\nIn 1905, the mammalogist Vernon Bailey referred to the \"Texan Red Wolf\" with the first use of the name \"Canis rufus\". In 1937, the zoologist Edward Goldman undertook a morphological study of southeastern wolf specimens. He noted that their skulls and dentition differed from those of gray wolves and closely approached those of coyotes. He identified the specimens as all belonging to the one species which he referred to as \"Canis rufus\". Goldman then examined a large number of southeastern wolf specimens and identified three subspecies, noting that their colors ranged from black, gray, and cinnamon-buff.\nIt is difficult to distinguish the red wolf from a red wolf \u00d7 coyote hybrid. During the 1960s, two studies of the skull morphology of wild \"Canis\" in the southeastern states found them to belong to the red wolf, the coyote, or many variations in between. The conclusion was that there has been recent massive hybridization with the coyote. In contrast, another 1960s study of \"Canis\" morphology concluded that the red wolf, eastern wolf, and domestic dog were closer to the gray wolf than the coyote, while still remaining clearly distinctive from each other. The study regarded these 3\u00a0canines as subspecies of the gray wolf. However, the study noted that \"red wolf\" specimens taken from the edge of their range which they shared with the coyote could not be attributed to any one species because the cranial variation was very wide. The study proposed further research to ascertain if hybridization had occurred.\nIn 1971, a study of the skulls of \"C.\u00a0rufus\", \"C.\u00a0lupus\" and \"C.\u00a0latrans\" indicated that \"C.\u00a0rufus\" was distinguishable by being in size and shape midway between the gray wolf and the coyote. A re-examination of museum canine skulls collected from central Texas between 1915 and 1918 showed variations spanning from \"C.\u00a0rufus\" through to \"C.\u00a0latrans\". The study proposes that by 1930 due to human habitat modification, the red wolf had disappeared from this region and had been replaced by a hybrid swarm. By 1969, this hybrid swarm was moving eastwards into eastern Texas and Louisiana.\nIn the late 19th century, sheep farmers in Kerr County, Texas, stated that the coyotes in the region were larger than normal coyotes, and they believed that they were a gray wolf and coyote cross. In 1970, the wolf mammalogist L. David Mech proposed that the red wolf was a hybrid of the gray wolf and coyote. However, a 1971 study compared the cerebellum within the brain of six \"Canis\" species and found that the cerebellum of the red wolf indicated a distinct species, was closest to that of the gray wolf, but in contrast indicated some characteristics that were more primitive than those found in any of the other \"Canis\" species. In 2014, a three-dimensional morphometrics study of \"Canis\" species accepted only six red wolf specimens for analysis from those on offer, due to the impact of hybridization on the others.\nDNA studies.\nDifferent DNA studies may give conflicting results because of the specimens selected, the technology used, and the assumptions made by the researchers.\nPhylogenetic trees compiled using different genetic markers have given conflicting results on the relationship between the wolf, dog and coyote. One study based on SNPs (a single mutation), and another based on nuclear gene sequences (taken from the cell nucleus), showed dogs clustering with coyotes and separate from wolves. Another study based on SNPS showed wolves clustering with coyotes and separate from dogs. Other studies based on a number of markers show the more widely accepted result of wolves clustering with dogs separate from coyotes. These results demonstrate that caution is needed when interpreting the results provided by genetic markers.\nGenetic marker evidence.\nIn 1980, a study used gel electrophoresis to look at fragments of DNA taken from dogs, coyotes, and wolves from the red wolf's core range. The study found that a unique allele (expression of a gene) associated with Lactate dehydrogenase could be found in red wolves, but not dogs and coyotes. The study suggests that this allele survives in the red wolf. The study did not compare gray wolves for the existence of this allele.\nMitochondrial DNA (mDNA) passes along the maternal line and can date back thousands of years. In 1991, a study of red wolf mDNA indicates that red wolf genotypes match those known to belong to the gray wolf or the coyote. The study concluded that the red wolf is either a wolf \u00d7 coyote hybrid or a species that has hybridized with the wolf and coyote across its entire range. The study proposed that the red wolf is a southeastern occurring subspecies of the gray wolf that has undergone hybridization due to an expanding coyote population; however, being unique and threatened that it should remain protected. This conclusion led to debate for the remainder of the decade.\nIn 2000, a study looked at red wolves and eastern Canadian wolves. The study agreed that these two wolves readily hybridize with the coyote. The study used eight microsatellites (genetic markers taken from across the genome of a specimen). The phylogenetic tree produced from the genetic sequences showed red wolves and eastern Canadian wolves clustering together. These then clustered next closer with the coyote and away from the gray wolf. A further analysis using mDNA sequences indicated the presence of coyote in both of these two wolves, and that these two wolves had diverged from the coyote 150,000\u2013300,000\u00a0years ago. No gray wolf sequences were detected in the samples. The study proposes that these findings are inconsistent with the two wolves being subspecies of the gray wolf, that red wolves and eastern Canadian wolves evolved in North America after having diverged from the coyote, and therefore they are more likely to hybridize with coyotes.\nIn 2009, a study of eastern Canadian wolves using microsatellites, mDNA, and the paternally-inherited yDNA markers found that the eastern Canadian wolf was a unique ecotype of the gray wolf that had undergone recent hybridization with other gray wolves and coyotes. It could find no evidence to support the findings of the earlier 2000 study regarding the eastern Canadian wolf. The study did not include the red wolf.\nIn 2011, a study compared the genetic sequences of 48,000\u00a0single nucleotide polymorphisms (mutations) taken from the genomes of canids from around the world. The comparison indicated that the red wolf was about 76% coyote and 24% gray wolf with hybridization having occurred 287\u2013430\u00a0years ago. The eastern wolf was 58% gray wolf and 42% coyote with hybridization having occurred 546\u2013963\u00a0years ago. The study rejected the theory of a common ancestry for the red and eastern wolves. However the next year, a study reviewed a subset of the 2011 study's Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data and proposed that its methodology had skewed the results and that the red and eastern wolves are not hybrids but are in fact the same species separate from the gray wolf. The 2012 study proposed that there are three true \"Canis\" species in North America: The gray wolf, the western coyote, and the red wolf / eastern wolf. The eastern wolf was represented by the Algonquin wolf. The Great Lakes wolf was found to be a hybrid of the eastern wolf and the gray wolf. Finally, the study found the eastern coyote itself to be yet another a hybrid between the western coyote and the eastern (Algonquin) wolf (for more on eastern North American wolf-coyote hybrids, \"see\" coywolf).\nAlso in 2011, a scientific literature review was undertaken to help assess the taxonomy of North American wolves. One of the findings proposed was that the eastern wolf is supported as a separate species by morphological and genetic data. Genetic data supports a close relationship between the eastern and red wolves, but not close enough to support these as one species. It was \"likely\" that these were the separate descendants of a common ancestor shared with coyotes. This review was published in 2012. In 2014, the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis was invited by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to provide an independent review of its proposed rule relating to gray wolves. The center's panel findings were that the proposed rule depended heavily upon a single analysis contained in a scientific literature review by Chambers \"et al\". (2011 ), that that study was not universally accepted, that the issue was \"not settled\", and that the rule does not represent the \"best available science\".\nBrzeski \"et al\". (2016) conducted an mDNA analysis of three ancient (300\u20131,900\u00a0years old) wolf-like samples from the southeastern United States found that they grouped with the coyote clade, although their teeth were wolf-like. The study proposed that the specimens were either coyotes and this would mean that coyotes had occupied this region continuously rather than intermittently, a North American evolved red wolf lineage related to coyotes, or an ancient coyote\u2013wolf hybrid. Ancient hybridization between wolves and coyotes would likely have been due to natural events or early human activities, not landscape changes associated with European colonization because of the age of these samples. Coyote\u2013wolf hybrids may have occupied the southeastern United States for a long time, filling an important niche as a medium-large predator.\nWhole-genome evidence.\nIn July 2016, a whole-genome DNA study proposed, based on the assumptions made, that all of the North American wolves and coyotes diverged from a common ancestor less than 6,000\u2013117,000\u00a0years ago. The study also indicated that all North America wolves have a significant amount of coyote ancestry and all coyotes some degree of wolf ancestry, and that the red wolf and Great Lakes region wolf are highly admixed with different proportions of gray wolf and coyote ancestry. One test indicated a wolf/coyote divergence time of 51,000\u00a0years before present that matched other studies indicating that the extant wolf came into being around this time. Another test indicated that the red wolf diverged from the coyote between 55,000 and 117,000\u00a0years before present and the Great Lakes region wolf 32,000\u00a0years before present. Other tests and modelling showed various divergence ranges and the conclusion was a range of less than 6,000 and 117,000\u00a0years before present. The study found that coyote ancestry was highest in red wolves from the southeast of the United States and lowest among the Great Lakes region wolves.\nThe theory proposed was that this pattern matched the south-to-north disappearance of the wolf due to European colonization and its resulting loss of habitat. Bounties led to the extirpation of wolves initially in the southeast, and as the wolf population declined wolf-coyote admixture increased. Later, this process occurred in the Great Lakes region with the influx of coyotes replacing wolves, followed by the expansion of coyotes and their hybrids across the wider region. The red wolf may possess some genomic elements that were unique to gray wolf and coyote lineages from the American South. The proposed timing of the wolf/coyote divergence conflicts with the finding of a coyote-like specimen in strata dated to 1 million years before present, and red wolf fossil specimens dating back 10,000\u00a0years ago. The study concluded by stating that because of the extirpation of gray wolves in the American Southeast, \"the reintroduced population of red wolves in eastern North Carolina is doomed to genetic swamping by coyotes without the extensive management of hybrids, as is currently practiced by the USFWS.\"\nIn September\u00a02016, the USFWS announced a program of changes to the red wolf recovery program and \"will begin implementing a series of actions based on the best and latest scientific information\". The service will secure the captive population which is regarded as not sustainable, determine new sites for additional experimental wild populations, revise the application of the existing experimental population rule in North Carolina, and complete a comprehensive Species Status Assessment.\nIn 2017, a group of canid researchers challenged the recent finding that the red wolf and the eastern wolf were the result of recent coyote-wolf hybridization. The group highlight that no testing had been undertaken to ascertain the time period that hybridization had occurred and that, by the previous study's own figures, the hybridization could not have occurred recently but supports a much more ancient hybridization. The group found deficiencies in the previous study's selection of specimens and the findings drawn from the different techniques used. Therefore, the group argues that both the red wolf and the eastern wolf remain genetically distinct North American taxa. This was rebutted by the authors of the earlier study. Another study in late 2018 of wild canids in southwestern Louisiana also supported the red wolf as a separate species, citing distinct red wolf DNA within hybrid canids.\nIn 2019, a literature review of the previous studies was undertaken by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. The position of the National Academies is that the historical red wolf forms a valid taxonomic species, the modern red wolf is distinct from wolves and coyotes, and modern red wolves trace some of their ancestry to historic red wolves. The species \"Canis rufus\" is supported for the modern red wolf, unless genomic evidence from historical red wolf specimens changes this assessment, due to a lack of continuity between the historic and the modern red wolves.\nWolf genome.\nGenetic studies relating to wolves or dogs have inferred phylogenetic relationships based on the only reference genome available, that of the Boxer dog. In 2017, the first reference genome of the wolf \"Canis lupus lupus\" was mapped to aid future research. In 2018, a study looked at the genomic structure and admixture of North American wolves, wolf-like canids, and coyotes using specimens from across their entire range that mapped the largest dataset of nuclear genome sequences against the wolf reference genome. The study supports the findings of previous studies that North American gray wolves and wolf-like canids were the result of complex gray wolf and coyote mixing. A polar wolf from Greenland and a coyote from Mexico represented the purest specimens. The coyotes from Alaska, California, Alabama, and Quebec show almost no wolf ancestry. Coyotes from Missouri, Illinois, and Florida exhibit 5\u201310% wolf ancestry. There was 40%:60% wolf to coyote ancestry in red wolves, 60%:40% in Eastern timber wolves, and 75%:25% in the Great Lakes wolves. There was 10% coyote ancestry in Mexican wolves and Atlantic Coast wolves, 5% in Pacific Coast and Yellowstone wolves, and less than 3% in Canadian archipelago wolves.\nThe study shows that the genomic ancestry of red, eastern timber and Great Lakes wolves were the result of admixture between modern gray wolves and modern coyotes. This was then followed by development into local populations. Individuals within each group showed consistent levels of coyote to wolf inheritance, indicating that this was the result of relatively ancient admixture. The eastern timber wolf (Algonquin Provincial Park) is genetically closely related to the Great Lakes wolf (Minnesota, Isle Royale National Park). If a third canid had been involved in the admixture of the North American wolf-like canids, then its genetic signature would have been found in coyotes and wolves, which it has not.\nGray wolves suffered a species-wide population bottleneck (reduction) approximately 25,000 YBP during the Last Glacial Maximum. This was followed by a single population of modern wolves expanding out of a Beringia refuge to repopulate the wolf's former range, replacing the remaining Late Pleistocene wolf populations across Eurasia and North America as they did so. This implies that if the coyote and red wolf were derived from this invasion, their histories date only tens of thousands and not hundreds of thousands of years ago, which is consistent with other studies.\nThe Endangered Species Act provides protection to endangered species, but does not provide protection for endangered admixed individuals, even if these serve as reservoirs for extinct genetic variation. Researchers on both sides of the red wolf debate argue that admixed canids warrant full protection under this Act.\nSeparate species that can be strengthened from hybrids.\nIn 2020, a study conducted DNA sequencing of canines across southeastern US to detect those with any red wolf ancestry. The study found that red wolf ancestry exists in the coyote populations of southwestern Louisiana and southeastern Texas, but also newly detected in North Carolina. The red wolf ancestry of these populations possess unique red wolf alleles not found in the current captive red wolf population. The study proposes that the expanding coyotes admixed with red wolves to gain genetic material that was suited to the southeastern environment and would aid their adaptation to it, and that surviving red wolves admixed with coyotes because the red wolves were suffering from inbreeding.\nIn 2021, a study conducted DNA sequencing of canines across the remnant red wolf hybrid zone of southwestern Louisiana and southeastern Texas. The study found red wolf ancestry in the coyote genomes which increases up to 60% in a westward gradient. This was due to introgression from the remnant red wolf population over the past 100 years. The study proposes that coyotes expanded into the gulf region and admixed with red wolves prior to the red wolf going extinct in the wild due to loss of habitat and persecution. In the past two decades the hybrid region has expanded. The study presented the genetic evidence that the red wolf is a separate species, based on the structure of one of the loci of its X-chromosome which is accepted as a marker for distinct species. As such, the study suggested that the introgressed red wolf ancestry could be de-introgressed back as a basis for breeding further red wolves from the hybrids.\nPre-dates the coyote in North America.\nIn 2021, a study of mitochondrial genomes sourced from specimens dated before the 20th century revealed that red wolves could be found across North America. With the arrival of the gray wolf between 80,000 and 60,000 years ago, the red wolf's range shrank to the eastern forests and California, and the coyote replaced the red wolf mid-continent between 60,000 and 30,000 years ago. The coyote expanded into California at the beginning of the Holocene era 12,000\u201310,000 years ago and admixed with the red wolf, phenotypically replacing them. The study proposes that the red wolf may pre-date the coyote in North America.\nExplanatory footnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26089", "revid": "50675080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26089", "title": "Real ale", "text": "Traditionally made and served beer\nReal ale is the name coined by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) for ale that is \"brewed from traditional ingredients, matured by secondary fermentation in the container from which it is dispensed, and served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide\".\nCask and bottle-conditioned beers.\nCask and bottle-conditioned beers are referred to as real ale by CAMRA, as both fit its description of beers served from a container in which they have undergone secondary fermentation.\nDistinction from filtered beer.\nThe fundamental distinction between real and other ales is that real ale is unfiltered and unpasteurized, leaving its yeast alive and slowly fermenting in bottle or keg. This secondary fermentation continues until the ale is served, allowing it to retain its natural carbonation. In contrast, natural carbonation is removed from standard beer and ale during filtering, requiring them to be artificially re-carbonated (and often very 'gassy'). \nReal ales are served \"bottle conditioned\", gravity direct from the cask, or hand pumped. No external pressurization is used. Electric pumps are occasionally seen, especially in the Midlands and Scotland. powered by mains water pressure, were the traditional means of dispensing draught beer in Scotland but this method is discontinued.\nCask breather.\nA cask breather adds low pressure carbon dioxide into the cask to replace the beer as it is drawn off, preventing the admission of ambient air containing oxygen and nitrogen, forestalling spoilage, and thereby extending the beer's saleable life. It does not pressurize the beer like typical of keg beer.\nBefore 2018, CAMRA refused to regard a cask ale kept \"fresh\" by cask breather as real ale. In 2018, this policy was changed, allowing pubs using cask breathers to be listed in the \"Good Beer Guide\".\nCAMRA.\nThe term \"real ale\" was coined by CAMRA in the 1970s to attract media attention in the U.K. to naturally fermented and served ales at a time when there were very few independent breweries left and most production had gone over to filtered and pasteurised \"filtered ales\" - \"keg beer\" - served under carbon dioxide pressure.\nPopularity.\nCask conditioned ale remains popular within the UK, particularly in traditional pubs. In 2019, 420 million pints were sold in the UK, 13.5% of total pint sales. Described as 'Britain's National Drink', cask ale's 'Britishness' is an important factor in its promotion and consumption.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26090", "revid": "6326132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26090", "title": "Richard Myers", "text": "American Air Force general (born 1942)\nRichard Bowman \"Dick\" Myers (born 1 March 1942) is a retired United States Air Force general who served as the 15th chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. As chairman, Myers was the highest ranking uniformed officer of the United States military forces. He also served as the 14th president of Kansas State University from 2016 to 2022.\nMyers became the chairman of the Joint Chiefs on 1 October 2001. In this capacity, he served as the principal military advisor to the president, the secretary of defense, and the National Security Council during the earliest stages of the war on terror, including planning and execution of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. On 30 September 2005, he retired and was succeeded by General Peter Pace. His Air Force career included operational command and leadership positions in a variety of Air Force and Joint assignments.\nMyers began serving as the interim president of Kansas State University in late April 2016, and was announced as the permanent president on 15 November 2016. On 24 May 2021, Myers announced that we would be retiring from his duties as President of Kansas State University, and that his last day would be 11 February 2022. He was succeeded by President Richard Linton, the former dean of the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at North Carolina State University on 14 February 2022.\nEarly life.\nMyers was born in Kansas City, Missouri. His father owned a hardware store and his mother was a homemaker. He graduated from Shawnee Mission North High School in 1960. He graduated from Kansas State University (KSU) with a Bachelor of Science in mechanical engineering in 1965 where he was a member of Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. He was commissioned by Detachment 270 of the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps at KSU. He graduated from Auburn University at Montgomery with a Master of Business Administration in 1977. Myers has attended the Air Command and Staff College at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama; the U.S. Army War College at Carlisle Barracks, Pennsylvania; and the Program for Senior Executives in National and International Security at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of Government.\nMyers entered the United States Air Force in 1965 through the Reserve Officer Training Corps program. He received pilot training from 1965 to 1966 at Vance Air Force Base, Oklahoma. Myers is a command pilot with more than 4,100 flying hours in the T-33 Shooting Star, C-37, C-21, F-4 Phantom II, F-15 Eagle and F-16 Fighting Falcon, including 600 combat hours in the F-4. During his tenure as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Myers often flew official aircraft such as the Gulfstream C-37A and C-37B by himself during official trips. According to his 2009 autobiography (\"Eyes on The Horizon: Serving on the Front Lines of National Security)\", \"one of the pleasures he had as both Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was to be able to sometimes fly on his required travels and stay pilot-qualified.\"\nCommander and Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nFrom November 1993 to June 1996, Myers was Commander of United States Forces Japan and Fifth Air Force at Yokota Air Base, Japan and From July 1996 to July 1997 Myers served as assistant to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the Pentagon. Myers received his fourth-star in 1997 when he was appointed as commander in chief of Pacific Air Forces. He commanded the Pacific Air Forces at Hickam Air Force Base, Hawaii, from July 1997 to July 1998. From August 1998 to February 2000, Myers was commander in chief of the North American Aerospace Defense Command and United States Space Command; Commander of the Air Force Space Command; and Department of Defense manager of the space transportation system contingency support at Peterson Air Force Base, Colorado. As commander, Myers was responsible for defending America through space and intercontinental ballistic missile operations.\nFollowing the appointment of General Joseph Ralston as Supreme Allied Commander Europe (SACEUR), Myers was appointed by President Bill Clinton to succeed Ralston as Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in February 2000. He assumed his duties on 29 February 2000. As vice chairman, Myers served as the chairman of the Joint Requirements Oversight Council, vice chairman of the Defense Acquisition Board, and as a member of the National Security Council Deputies Committee and the Nuclear Weapons Council. In addition, he acted for the chairman in all aspects of the Planning, Programming and Budgeting System including participation in the Defense Resources Board.\nIn August 2001, a year after assuming the role of Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, President George W. Bush appointed Myers to be the next chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Myers was the first vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to be appointed chairman, since the role was established in 1987 after the enactment of Goldwater\u2013Nichols Act of 1986.\nSeptember 11 Attacks.\nOn the morning of 11 September 2001 Myers was on Capitol Hill to meet Georgia Senator Max Cleland for his scheduled courtesy calls before his Senate confirmation hearings to be the next chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. While waiting for the senator, Myers watched a television news network in the outer office of Senator Cleland that a plane had just hit the North Tower of the World Trade Center. A few minutes later Myers was informed by his military aide Captain Chris Donahue about the hijacked plane that just hit the second tower of the World Trade Center. Later on General Ralph Eberhart, the Commander-in-Chief of the North American Aerospace Defense Command, managed to contact Myers and inform him about the recent hijacking situation. Myers then immediately left Capitol Hill to proceed back to The Pentagon, where he was informed that this time another commercial airplane had just hit the western side of The Pentagon. During the crisis, Myers became the acting chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, since General Hugh Shelton was en route to Europe for a NATO Summit. Upon arriving at The Pentagon and after a rendezvous with Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Myers then conferred with Secretary Rumsfeld about the current situation and the next steps to be taken. Myers took command as the acting chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for half of the day during the attacks on 11 September, until General Shelton arrived back in Washington after he aborted his flight to Europe at 5:40\u00a0p.m. local time.\nChairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\nMyers was sworn in as the 15th chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on 1 October 2001. He served as the principal military advisor to the president, the Secretary of Defense, and the National Security Council during the earliest stages of the war on terror, including planning of the War in Afghanistan and planning and execution of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. A few days later, on 7 October 2001, Operation Enduring Freedom was initiated. Myers and General Tommy Franks, the commander of United States Central Command (CENTCOM), coordinated the early stage of Operation Enduring Freedom. Within three months, several radical terrorist groups had been toppled.\nMyers also supported the involvement of NATO and allied coalition forces during the war on terror. As a result of Operation Enduring Freedom, the political regime in Afghanistan was toppled and a new constitution was ratified in January 2004, which provided for direct presidential elections on 9 October 2004.\nOperation Iraqi Freedom.\nDuring his tenure as chairman, Myers also oversaw the early stage of the invasion of Iraq. Together with CENTCOM commander General Tommy Franks, Myers coordinated the plan for the Iraqi invasion and the reconstruction of the country, and also established a combined joint task force in order to focus on post-conflict issues in Iraq. Operation Iraqi Freedom was initiated on 20 March 2003, which was preceded by an airstrike on Saddam Hussein's Palace and followed by the Fall of Baghdad in April 2003. Operation Iraqi Freedom eventually led to the downfall of Saddam Hussein's 24-year regime and the captured of Hussein on 13 December 2003. Following Operation Iraqi Freedom, the Coalition Provisional Authority was established in Iraq and was succeeded by the Iraqi Interim Government, which presided over parliamentary elections in 2005.\nIn order to gain support on both the war on terror and the invasion of Iraq, Myers often travelled abroad in order to strengthen military relations with other allied nations, such as Mongolia. He was the first chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to visit Mongolia. Myers met with Mongolian President Natsagiin Bagabandi at Ulaanbaatar on 15 January 2004. As a result, the United States gained the support of the Mongolian government and Mongolia also deployed troops in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.\nMilitary transformation.\nIn February 2004 Haitian President Jean-Bertrand Aristide was overthrown in a coup d'\u00e9tat, leading to conflict within the country. The United States deployed Marines to Haiti as part of the multinational Operation Secure Tomorrow from February to July 2004. On March 13, Myers visited the United States troops deployed to Haiti.\nTogether with Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, Myers conducted weekly press briefings at The Pentagon on the war on terror.One of Myers' achievements as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was his pursuit of the transformation of the United States military. Myers orchestrated substantive changes to the nation's Unified Combatant Command's plan following the September 11 attacks, leading to the establishment of United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) as the new Unified Combatant Command to consolidate and coordinate domestic defense. It was also to support local, state and federal authorities in order to assist the newly created Department of Homeland Security, especially in responding to national emergencies. Following the establishment of USNORTHCOM, the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) was also merged into USNORTHCOM and the United States Space Command was merged in to the United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) in order to consolidate and strengthen the nation's nuclear deterrent and space missions. Like his predecessors, Myers also continued to promote a joint culture among the nation's military services in order to avoid interservice rivalry.\nIn order to emphasize the war on terror, Myers created what was known as \"National Military Strategic Plan for the War on Terrorism 2002-2005.\" The Strategic Plan provided a new guidance to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, regional commanders and Unified Combatant Command commanders for a multi-pronged strategy that aimed at targeting global terrorist networks.\nMyers' tenure as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ended in September 2005 and he was succeeded by General Peter Pace, who had served as Myers' Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs Staff. Myers retired from active duty on 30 September 2005, after more than forty years of active service. His retirement ceremony was held at Fort Myer, Virginia, with President George W. Bush delivering the retirement remarks.\nAwards and decorations.\nSince 1999, General Myers is an Air Force Gray Eagle. He also received the Badge of the Commander of the Military Forces (Paraguay).\nOther Recognition.\nIn 2001, General Myers received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement presented by Awards Council member and Supreme Allied Commander Europe General Joseph W. Ralston, USAF.\nRetirement and post-retirement.\nOn 27 September 2005, only three days before leaving his post as chairman, Myers said of the Iraq War that, \"the outcome and consequences of defeat are greater than World War II.\" His rise to and stint as chairman are chronicled in \"Washington Post\" reporter Bob Woodward's book, \"State of Denial\", as well as his own book \"Eyes on The Horizon: Serving on the Front Lines of National Security.\"\nOn 9 November 2005, Myers received the Presidential Medal of Freedom. His citation reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For four decades, General Richard Myers has served our Nation with honor and distinction. He flew some 600 combat hours in the Vietnam War. He later served as Commander in Chief of North American Aerospace Defense Command and U.S. Space Command. As Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Myers played a central role in our Nation's defense while devoting himself to the well-being of the men and women who wear the uniform of the United States Armed Forces. The United States honors General Richard Myers for his dedication to duty and country and for his contributions to the freedom and security of our Nation.\nIn 2006, Myers accepted a part-time appointment as a foundation professor of military history at Kansas State University. That same year, he was also elected to the board of directors of Northrop Grumman Corporation, the world's third largest defense contractor. On 13 September 2006, he also joined the board of directors of United Technologies Corporation. He also serves on the boards of Aon Corporation, John Deere, the United Service Organizations and holds the Colin L. Powell Chair for National Security, Leadership, Character and Ethics at the National Defense University. He also has advised the Defense Health Board and served on the Army War College Board of Visitors.\nOn 26 July 2011, Myers was inducted into the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps Distinguished Alumni in a ceremony at Maxwell AFB, Alabama, officiated by Lieutenant General Allen G. Peck, Commander, Air University.\nOn 14 April 2016, Myers was selected as the interim president of Kansas State University, which he began on 20 April. On 15 November 2016, the Board of Regents removed his interim title and announced Myers would become the university's 14th president.\nMyers currently serves as chairman of the Board of Trustees of Medisend College of Biomedical Engineering Technology and the General Richard B. Myers Veterans Program. https://.\nOn May 24, 2021, Myers announced he would retire from his role as president of Kansas State University as of 11 February 2022. He released the following statement as part of his announced retirement, \"Mary Jo and I truly loved our time at K-State and working with students, faculty and staff. Being president of my alma mater was one of the most fulfilling jobs I've ever had. It was an honor to help move K-State forward on many fronts. I'm grateful for the opportunity to work with the many talented and dedicated people who comprise the K-State family.\"\nPersonal life.\nMyers and his wife, the former Mary Jo Rupp, have three children: two daughters and a son. His son\u00b4s name is Richard Bowman Myers.\nNotes.\n\u00a0This article incorporates https:// from \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26091", "revid": "50110900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26091", "title": "Rupert Murdoch", "text": "Australian and American business magnate (born 1931)\nKeith Rupert Murdoch ( ; born 11 March 1931) is an Australian and American former business magnate, investor, and media mogul. Through his company News Corp, he is the owner of hundreds of local, national, and international publishing outlets around the world, including in the United Kingdom (\"The Sun\" and \"The Times\"), in Australia (\"The Daily Telegraph, Herald Sun\", and \"The Australian\"), in the United States (\"The Wall Street Journal\" and the \"New York Post\"), book publisher HarperCollins, and the television broadcasting channels Sky News Australia and Fox News (through Fox Corporation). He was also the owner of Sky (until 2018), 21st Century Fox (until 2019), and the now-defunct \"News of the World\". With a net worth of US$billion as of 2022,[ [update]] Murdoch is the 31st richest person in the United States and the 71st richest in the world according to \"Forbes\" magazine. Due to his extensive wealth and influence over media and politics, Murdoch has been described as an oligarch.\nAfter his father Keith Murdoch died in 1952, Murdoch took over the running of \"The News\", a small Adelaide newspaper owned by his father. In the 1950s and 1960s, Murdoch acquired a number of newspapers in Australia and New Zealand before expanding into the United Kingdom in 1969, taking over the \"News of the World\", followed closely by \"The Sun\". In 1974, Murdoch moved to New York City, to expand into the American market; however, he retained interests in Australia and the United Kingdom. In 1981, Murdoch bought \"The Times\", his first British broadsheet, and, in 1985, became a naturalized American citizen, giving up his Australian citizenship, to satisfy the legal requirement for American television network ownership. In 1986, keen to adopt newer electronic publishing technologies, Murdoch consolidated his British printing operations in London, causing bitter industrial disputes. His holding company News Corporation acquired Twentieth Century Fox (1985), HarperCollins (1989), and \"The Wall Street Journal\" (2007). Murdoch formed the British broadcaster BSkyB in 1990 and, during the 1990s, expanded into Asian networks and South American television. By 2000, Murdoch's News Corporation owned more than 800 companies in more than 50 countries, with a net worth of more than $5 billion.\nIn July 2011, Murdoch faced allegations that his companies, including the \"News of the World\", owned by News Corporation, had been regularly hacking the phones of celebrities, royalty, and public citizens. Murdoch faced police and government investigations into bribery and corruption by the British government and FBI investigations in the United States. On 21 July 2012, Murdoch resigned as a director of News International. In September 2023, Murdoch announced he would be stepping down as chairman of Fox Corp. and News Corp.\nMany of Murdoch's papers and television channels have been accused of right-wing bias and misleading coverage to support his business interests and political allies, and some have linked his influence with major political developments in the United Kingdom, United States and Australia.\nThe Murdoch family was involved in a U.S. court case in which his three children\u2014Elisabeth, Prudence, and James\u2014challenged his bid to amend the family trust to ensure that his eldest son, Lachlan, retains control of News Corp and Fox Corp, rather than the trust benefiting all of his six children, as is specified in its \"irrevocable\" terms. In September 2025, they reached a settlement, giving Lachlan ownership of Murdoch's media empire.\nEarly life and education.\nKeith Rupert Murdoch was born on 11 March 1931 in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, the second of four children of Sir Keith Arthur Murdoch (1885\u20131952) and Dame Elisabeth Joy (n\u00e9e\u00a0Greene; 1909\u20132012). He is of English, Irish and Scottish ancestry. His parents were also born in Melbourne. Murdoch's father was a war correspondent and later a regional newspaper magnate; he owned two newspapers in Adelaide, South Australia and a radio station in a remote mining town and was chairman of the Herald and Weekly Times publishing company. Murdoch has three sisters: Helen (1929\u20132004), Anne (born 1935) and Janet (born 1939). His paternal grandfather, Patrick John Murdoch, was a Scottish-born Presbyterian minister who emigrated to Australia in 1884.\nMurdoch attended Geelong Grammar School, where he was co-editor of the school's official journal \"The Corian\" and editor of the student journal \"If Revived\". He then studied philosophy, politics and economics in England at Worcester College, Oxford, where he kept a bust of Lenin in his rooms and came to be known as \"Red Rupert\". He was a member of the Oxford University Labour Party, stood for secretary of the Labour Club and managed Oxford Student Publications Limited, the publishing house of \"Cherwell\".\nAfter his father's death from cancer in 1952, Murdoch's mother did charity work as the life governor of the Royal Women's Hospital in Melbourne and established the Murdoch Children's Research Institute; at the age of 102 (in 2011), she had 74 descendants. While his father was alive, Murdoch worked part-time at the \"Melbourne Herald\" and was groomed by his father to take over the family business. After his father's death, he began working as a sub-editor with the \"Daily Express\" for two years.\nActivities in Australia and New Zealand.\nFollowing his father's death, when he was 21, Murdoch returned from Oxford to take charge of what was left of the family business. After liquidation of his father's \"Herald\" stake to pay taxes, what was left was News Limited, which had been established in 1923. Rupert Murdoch turned its Adelaide newspaper, \"The News\", its main asset, into a major success. He began to direct his attention to acquisition and expansion, buying the troubled \"Sunday Times\" in Perth, Western Australia (1956) and over the next few years acquiring suburban and provincial newspapers in New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria and the Northern Territory, including the Sydney afternoon tabloid \"The Daily Mirror\" (1960). \"The Economist\" describes Murdoch as \"inventing the modern tabloid\", as he developed a pattern for his newspapers, increasing sports and scandal coverage and adopting eye-catching headlines.\nMurdoch's first foray outside Australia involved the purchase of a controlling interest in the New Zealand daily \"The Dominion\". In January 1964, while touring New Zealand with friends in a rented Morris Minor after sailing across the Tasman, Murdoch read of a takeover bid for the Wellington paper by the British-based Canadian newspaper magnate Lord Thomson of Fleet. On the spur of the moment, he launched a counter-bid. A four-way battle for control ensued in which the 32-year-old Murdoch was ultimately successful. Later in 1964, Murdoch launched \"The Australian\", Australia's first national daily newspaper, which was based first in Canberra and later in Sydney. In 1972, Murdoch acquired the Sydney morning tabloid \"The Daily Telegraph\" from Australian media mogul Sir Frank Packer, who later regretted selling it to him. In 1984, Murdoch was appointed Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for services to publishing.\nAfter the Keating government relaxed media ownership laws, in 1986 Murdoch launched a takeover bid for The Herald and Weekly Times, which was the largest newspaper publisher in Australia. There was a three-way takeover battle between Murdoch, Fairfax and Robert Holmes \u00e0 Court, with Murdoch succeeding after agreeing to some divestments.\nIn 1999, Murdoch significantly expanded his music holdings in Australia by acquiring the controlling share in a leading Australian independent label, Michael Gudinski's Mushroom Records; he merged that with Festival Records, and the result was Festival Mushroom Records (FMR). Both Festival and FMR were managed by Murdoch's son James Murdoch for several years.\nPolitical activities in Australia.\nMurdoch found a political ally in Sir John McEwen, leader of the Australian Country Party (now known as the National Party of Australia), who was governing in coalition with the larger Menzies-Holt-Gorton Liberal Party. From the first issue of \"The Australian,\" Murdoch began taking McEwen's side in every issue that divided the long-serving coalition partners. (\"The Australian\", 15 July 1964, first edition, front page: \"Strain in Cabinet, Liberal-CP row flares.\") It was an issue that threatened to split the coalition government and open the way for the stronger Australian Labor Party to dominate Australian politics. It was the beginning of a long campaign that served McEwen well.\nAfter McEwen and Menzies retired, Murdoch threw his growing power behind the Australian Labor Party under the leadership of Gough Whitlam and duly saw it elected on a social platform that included universal free health care, free education for all Australians to tertiary level, recognition of the People's Republic of China, and public ownership of Australia's oil, gas and mineral resources. Rupert Murdoch's backing of Whitlam turned out to be brief. Murdoch had already started his short-lived \"National Star\" newspaper in America, and was seeking to strengthen his political contacts there.\nAsked about the 2007 Australian federal election at News Corporation's annual general meeting in New York on 19 October 2007, its chairman Rupert Murdoch said: \"I am not commenting on anything to do with Australian politics. I'm sorry. I always get into trouble when I do that.\" Pressed as to whether he believed Prime Minister John Howard should continue as prime minister, he said: \"I have nothing further to say. I'm sorry. Read our editorials in the papers. It'll be the journalists who decide that \u2013 the editors.\"\nMurdoch described Howard's successor, Labor Party Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, as \"more ambitious to lead the world [in tackling climate change] than to lead Australia\" and criticised Rudd's expansionary fiscal policies in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis as unnecessary. In 2009, in response to accusations by Rudd that News Limited was running vendettas against him and his government, Murdoch opined that Rudd was \"oversensitive\". Although News Limited's interests are extensive, also including the \"Daily Telegraph\", the \"Courier-Mail\" and the \"Adelaide Advertiser\", it was suggested by the commentator Mungo MacCallum in \"The Monthly\" that \"the anti-Rudd push, if coordinated at all, was almost certainly locally driven\" as opposed to being directed by Murdoch, who also took a different position from local editors on such matters as climate change and stimulus packages to mitigate the effects of the 2008 financial crisis.\nMurdoch is a supporter of the formation of an Australian republic, having campaigned for such a change during the 1999 referendum.\nActivities in the United Kingdom.\nBusiness activities in the United Kingdom.\nIn 1968, Murdoch entered the British newspaper market with his acquisition of the populist \"News of the World\", followed in 1969 with the purchase of the struggling daily \"The Sun\" from IPC. Murdoch turned \"The Sun\" into a tabloid format and reduced costs by using the same printing press for both newspapers. On acquiring it, he appointed Albert 'Larry' Lamb as editor and \u2013 Lamb recalled later \u2013 told him: \"I want a tearaway paper with lots of tits in it\". In 1997 \"The Sun\" attracted 10 million daily readers. In 1981, Murdoch acquired the struggling \"Times\" and \"Sunday Times\" from Canadian newspaper publisher Lord Thomson of Fleet. Ownership of \"The Times\" came to him through his relationship with Lord Thomson, who had grown tired of losing money on it as a result of an extended period of industrial action that stopped publication. In the light of success and expansion at \"The Sun\" the owners believed that Murdoch could turn the papers around. Harold Evans, editor of the \"Sunday Times\" from 1967, was switched to the daily \"Times\", though he stayed only a year amid editorial conflict with Murdoch.\nDuring the 1980s and early 1990s, Murdoch's publications were generally supportive of Britain's Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. At the end of the Thatcher/Major era, Murdoch switched his support to the Labour Party and its leader, Tony Blair. The closeness of his relationship with Blair and their secret meetings to discuss national policies was to become a political issue in Britain. This later changed, with \"The Sun\", in its English editions, publicly renouncing the ruling Labour government and lending its support to David Cameron's Conservative Party, which soon afterwards formed a coalition government. In Scotland, where the Conservatives had suffered a complete annihilation in 1997, the paper began to endorse the Scottish National Party (though not yet its flagship policy of independence), which soon after came to form the first-ever outright majority in the proportionally elected Scottish Parliament. Former Prime Minister Gordon Brown's official spokesman said in November 2009 that Brown and Murdoch \"were in regular communication\" and that \"there is nothing unusual in the prime minister talking to Rupert Murdoch\".\nIn 1986, Murdoch introduced electronic production processes to his newspapers in Australia, Britain and the United States. The greater degree of automation led to significant reductions in the number of employees involved in the printing process. In England, the move roused the anger of the print unions, resulting in a long and often violent dispute that played out in Wapping, one of London's docklands areas, where Murdoch had installed the very latest electronic newspaper purpose-built publishing facility in an old warehouse. The bitter Wapping dispute started with the dismissal of 6,000 employees who had gone on strike and resulted in street battles and demonstrations. Many on the political left in Britain alleged the collusion of Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government with Murdoch in the Wapping affair, as a way of damaging the British trade union movement. In 1987, the dismissed workers accepted a settlement of \u00a360 million.\nIn 1998, Murdoch made an attempt to buy the football club Manchester United F.C., with an offer of \u00a3625\u00a0million, but this failed. It was the largest amount ever offered for a sports club. It was blocked by the United Kingdom's Competition Commission, which stated that the acquisition would have \"hurt competition in the broadcast industry and the quality of British football\".\nMurdoch's British-based satellite network, Sky Television, incurred massive losses in its early years of operation. As with many of his other business interests, Sky was heavily subsidised by the profits generated by his other holdings, but convinced rival satellite operator British Satellite Broadcasting to accept a merger on his terms in 1990. The merged company, BSkyB, has dominated the British pay-TV market ever since, pursuing direct to home (DTH) satellite broadcasting. By 1996, BSkyB had more than 3.6 million subscribers, triple the number of cable customers in the UK.\nMurdoch has a seat on the Strategic Advisory Board of Genie Oil and Gas, having jointly invested with Lord Rothschild in a 5.5% stake in the company which conducted shale gas and oil exploration in Colorado, Mongolia, Israel, and the occupied Golan Heights.\nIn response to print media's decline and the increasing influence of online journalism during the 2000s, Murdoch proclaimed his support of the micropayments model for obtaining revenue from online news, although this has been criticised by some.\nIn January 2018, the CMA blocked Murdoch from taking over the remaining 61% of BSkyB he did not already own, over fear of market dominance that could potentialise censorship of the media. His bid for BSkyB was later approved by the CMA as long as he sold Sky News to the Walt Disney Company, which was already set to acquire 21st Century Fox. However, it was Comcast who won control of BSkyB in a blind auction ordered by the CMA. Murdoch ultimately sold his 39% of BSkyB to Comcast.\nNews Corporation has subsidiaries in the Bahamas, the Cayman Islands, the Channel Islands and the Virgin Islands. From 1986, News Corporation's annual tax bill averaged around seven percent of its profits.\nPolitical activities in the United Kingdom.\nIn Britain, in the 1980s, Murdoch formed a close alliance with Conservative prime minister Margaret Thatcher. In February 1981, when Murdoch, already owner of \"The Sun\" and \"The News of the World\", sought to buy \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\", Thatcher's government let his bid pass without referring it to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission, which was usual practice at the time. Although contact between the two before this point had been explicitly denied in an official history of \"The Times\", documents found in Thatcher's archives in 2012 revealed a secret meeting had taken place a month before in which Murdoch briefed Thatcher on his plans for the paper, such as taking on trade unions.\n\"The Sun\" credited itself with helping her successor John Major to win an unexpected election victory in the 1992 general election, which had been expected to end in a hung parliament or a narrow win for Labour, then led by Neil Kinnock. In the general elections of 1997, 2001 and 2005, Murdoch's papers were either neutral or supported Labour under Tony Blair.\nThe Labour Party, from when Blair became leader in 1994, had moved from the centre-left to a more centrist position on many economic issues before 1997. Murdoch identifies himself as a libertarian, saying \"What does libertarian mean? As much individual responsibility as possible, as little government as possible, as few rules as possible. But I'm not saying it should be taken to the absolute limit.\"\nIn a speech he delivered in New York in 2005, Murdoch claimed that Blair described the BBC coverage of the Hurricane Katrina disaster, which was critical of the Bush administration's response, as full of hatred of America.\nOn 28 June 2006, the BBC reported that Murdoch and News Corporation were considering backing new Conservative leader David Cameron at the next General Election \u2013 still up to four years away. In a later interview in July 2006, when he was asked what he thought of the Conservative leader, Murdoch replied \"Not much\". In a 2009 blog, it was suggested that in the aftermath of the \"News of the World\" phone hacking scandal, which might yet have transatlantic implications, Murdoch and News Corporation might have decided to back Cameron. Despite this, there had already been a convergence of interests between the two men over the muting of Britain's communications regulator Ofcom.\nIn August 2008, Cameron accepted free flights to hold private talks and attend private parties with Murdoch on his yacht, the \"Rosehearty\". Cameron declared in the Commons register of interests he accepted a private plane provided by Murdoch's son-in-law, public relations guru Matthew Freud; Cameron did not reveal his talks with Murdoch. The gift of travel in Freud's Gulfstream IV private jet was valued at around \u00a330,000. Other guests attending the \"social events\" included the then EU trade commissioner Peter Mandelson, the Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska and co-chairman of NBC Universal Ben Silverman. The Conservatives did not disclose what was discussed.\nIn July 2011, it emerged that Cameron had met key executives of Murdoch's News Corporation a total of 26 times during the 14 months that Cameron had served as prime minister up to that point. It was also reported that Murdoch had given Cameron a personal guarantee that there would be no risk attached to hiring Andy Coulson, the former editor of \"News of the World\", as the Conservative Party's communication director in 2007. This was in spite of Coulson having resigned as editor over phone hacking by a reporter. Cameron chose to take Murdoch's advice, despite warnings from the deputy prime minister, Nick Clegg, Lord Ashdown and \"The Guardian\". Coulson resigned his post in 2011 and was later arrested and questioned on allegations of further criminal activity at the \"News of the World\", specifically the phone hacking scandal. As a result of the subsequent trial, Coulson was sentenced to 18 months in jail.\nIn June 2016, \"The Sun\" supported Vote Leave in the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum. Murdoch called the Brexit result \"wonderful\", comparing the decision to withdraw from the EU to \"a prison break ... we're out\". Anthony Hilton, economics editor for the \"Evening Standard\" but describing a period when he interviewed Murdoch for \"The Guardian\", quoted Murdoch as justifying his Euroscepticism with the words \"When I go into Downing Street, they do what I say; when I go to Brussels, they take no notice.\" Murdoch denied saying this later in a letter to \"The Guardian\".\nWith some exceptions, \"The Sun\" had generally been supportive of the government of Conservative prime minister Boris Johnson. Murdoch and his employees were the media representatives ministers from the Cabinet and Treasury most frequently held meetings during the first two years of Johnson's government. However, newspaper circulation in general including among subsidiaries of News International fell sharply in the United Kingdom during the early 21st century, leading some commentators to suggest that Murdoch was not as influential in British political debate by the early 2020s as he had once been.\nNews International phone hacking scandal.\nIn July 2011, Murdoch, along with his youngest son James, provided testimony before a British parliamentary committee regarding phone hacking. In the UK, his media empire came under fire, as investigators probed reports of 2011 phone hacking.\nOn 14 July 2011 the Culture, Media and Sport Committee of the House of Commons served a summons on Murdoch, his son James, and his former CEO Rebekah Brooks to testify before a committee five days later. After an initial refusal, the Murdochs confirmed they would attend, after the committee issued them a summons to Parliament. The day before the committee, the website of the News Corporation publication \"The Sun\" was hacked, and a false story was posted on the front page claiming that Murdoch had died. Murdoch described the day of the committee \"the most humble day of my life\". He argued that since he ran a global business of 53,000 employees and that \"News of the World\" was \"just 1%\" of this, he was not ultimately responsible for what went on at the tabloid. He added that he had not considered resigning, and that he and the other top executives had been completely unaware of the hacking.\nOn 15 July, Murdoch attended a private meeting in London with the family of Milly Dowler, where he personally apologised for the hacking of their murdered daughter's voicemail by a company he owns. On 16 and 17 July, News International published two full-page apologies in many of Britain's national newspapers. The first apology took the form of a letter, signed by Murdoch, in which he said sorry for the \"serious wrongdoing\" that occurred. The second was titled \"Putting right what's gone wrong\", and gave more detail about the steps News International was taking to address the public's concerns. In the wake of the allegations, Murdoch accepted the resignations of Brooks and Les Hinton, head of Dow Jones who was chairman of Murdoch's British newspaper division when some of the abuses happened. They both deny any knowledge of any wrongdoing under their command.\nOn 27 February 2012, the day after the first issue of \"The Sun on Sunday\" was published, Deputy Assistant Commissioner Sue Akers informed the Leveson Inquiry that police are investigating a \"network of corrupt officials\" as part of their inquiries into phone hacking and police corruption. She said that evidence suggested a \"culture of illegal payments\" at \"The Sun\" and that these payments allegedly made by \"The Sun\" were authorised at a senior level.\nIn testimony on 25 April, Murdoch did not deny the quote attributed to him by his former editor of \"The Sunday Times\", Harold Evans: \"I give instructions to my editors all round the world, why shouldn't I in London?\" On 1 May 2012, the Culture, Media and Sport Committee issued a report stating that Murdoch was \"not a fit person to exercise the stewardship of a major international company\".\nOn 3 July 2013, the Exaro website and \"Channel 4 News\" broke the story of a secret recording. This was recorded by \"The Sun\" journalists, and in it Murdoch can be heard telling them that the whole investigation was one big fuss over nothing, and that he, or his successors, would take care of any journalists who went to prison. He said: \"Why are the police behaving in this way? It's the biggest inquiry ever, over next to nothing.\"\nActivities in the United States.\nMurdoch made his first acquisition in the United States in 1973, when he purchased the \"San Antonio Express-News\". In 1974, Murdoch moved to New York City, to expand into the American market; however, he retained interests in Australia and Britain. Soon afterwards, he founded \"Star\", a supermarket tabloid, and in 1976, he purchased the \"New York Post\". On 4 September 1985, Murdoch became a naturalized citizen to satisfy the legal requirement that only American citizens were permitted to own American television stations.\nIn March 1984, Marvin Davis sold Marc Rich's interest in 20th Century Fox to Murdoch for $250 million due to Rich's trade deals with Iran, which were sanctioned by the US at the time. Davis later backed out of a deal with Murdoch to purchase John Kluge's Metromedia television stations. Rupert Murdoch bought the stations by himself, without Marvin Davis, and later bought out Davis's remaining stake in Fox for $325 million. The six television stations owned by Metromedia formed the nucleus of the Fox Broadcasting Company, founded on 9 October 1986, which later had great success with programs including \"The Simpsons\" and \"The X-Files\".\nIn 1986, Murdoch bought Misty Mountain, a Wallace Neff designed house on Angelo Drive in Beverly Hills. The house was the former residence of Jules C. Stein. Murdoch sold the house to his son James in 2018.\nIn 1987, Murdoch created his global television special, the World Music Video Awards, a special music ceremony award where winners were chosen by viewers in eight countries. In Australia, during 1987, he bought The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd., the company that his father had once managed.\nRupert Murdoch's 20th Century Fox bought out the remaining assets of Four Star Television from Ronald Perelman's Compact Video in 1996. Most of Four Star Television's library of programs are controlled by 20th Century Fox Television today. After Murdoch's numerous buyouts during the buyout era of the eighties, News Corporation had built up financial debts of $7 billion (much from Sky TV in the UK), despite the many assets that were held by NewsCorp. The high levels of debt caused Murdoch to sell many of the American magazine interests he had acquired in the mid-1980s.\nIn 1993, Murdoch's Fox Network took exclusive coverage of the National Football Conference (NFC) of the National Football League (NFL) from CBS and increased programming to seven days a week. In 1995, Fox became the object of scrutiny from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), when it was alleged that News Ltd.'s Australian base made Murdoch's ownership of Fox illegal. However, the FCC ruled in Murdoch's favour, stating that his ownership of Fox was in the best interests of the public. That same year, Murdoch announced a deal with MCI Communications to develop a major news website and magazine, \"The Weekly Standard\". Also that year, News Corporation launched the Foxtel pay television network in Australia in partnership with Telstra. In 1996, Murdoch decided to enter the cable news market with the Fox News Channel, a 24-hour cable news station. Ratings studies released in 2009 showed that the network was responsible for nine of the top ten programs in the \"Cable News\" category at that time. Rupert Murdoch and Ted Turner (founder and former owner of CNN) are long-standing rivals. In late 2003, Murdoch acquired a 34% stake in Hughes Electronics, the operator of the largest American satellite TV system, DirecTV, from General Motors for $6\u00a0billion (USD). His Fox movie studio had global hits with \"Titanic\" and \"Avatar\".\nIn 2004, Murdoch announced that he was moving News Corporation headquarters from Adelaide, Australia to the United States. Choosing an American domicile was designed to ensure that American fund managers could purchase shares in the company, since many were deciding not to buy shares in non-American companies.\nOn 20 July 2005, News Corporation bought Intermix Media Inc., which held Myspace, Imagine Games Network and other social networking-themed websites, for US$580\u00a0million, making Murdoch a major player in online media concerns. In June 2011, it sold off Myspace for US$35 million. On 11 September 2005, News Corporation announced that it would buy IGN Entertainment for $650\u00a0million (USD).\nIn May 2007, Murdoch made a $5\u00a0billion offer to purchase Dow Jones &amp; Company. At the time, the Bancroft family, who had owned Dow Jones &amp; Company for 105 years and controlled 64% of the shares at the time, declined the offer. Later, the Bancroft family confirmed a willingness to consider a sale. Besides Murdoch, the Associated Press reported that supermarket magnate Ron Burkle and Internet entrepreneur Brad Greenspan were among the other interested parties. In 2007, Murdoch acquired Dow Jones &amp; Company, which gave him such publications as \"The Wall Street Journal\", \"Barron's Magazine\", the \"Far Eastern Economic Review\" (based in Hong Kong) and \"SmartMoney\".\nIn June 2014, Murdoch's 21st Century Fox made a bid for Time Warner at $85 per share in stock and cash ($80 billion total) which Time Warner's board of directors turned down in July. Warner's CNN unit would have been sold to ease antitrust issues of the purchase. On 5 August 2014 the company announced it had withdrawn its offer for Time Warner, and said it would spend $6 billion buying back its own shares over the following 12 months.\nMurdoch left his post as CEO of 21st Century Fox in 2015 but continued to own the company until it was purchased by Disney in 2019. A number of television broadcasting assets were spun off into the Fox Corporation before the acquisition and are still owned by Murdoch. This includes Fox News, of which Murdoch was acting CEO from 2016 until 2019, following the resignation of Roger Ailes due to accusations of sexual harassment.\nMurdoch considered merging News Corp and Fox Corporation, but in January 2023 announced to the board that he had withdrawn the idea, stating that he and his son Lachlan had \"determined that a combination [was] not optimal for shareholders of News Corp and FOX\" at that time. The Special Committee of the Board of Directors of News Corp that had been set up to investigate the matter was dissolved. In September 2023, Rupert Murdoch retired, and handed over the leadership of his businesses to his eldest son Lachlan.\nPolitical activities in the United States.\nMcKnight (2010) identifies four characteristics of his media operations: free market ideology; unified positions on matters of public policy; global editorial meetings; and opposition to liberal bias in other public media.\nIn \"The New Yorker\", Ken Auletta writes that Murdoch's support for Edward I. Koch while he was running for mayor of New York \"spilled over onto the news pages of the Post, with the paper regularly publishing glowing stories about Koch and sometimes savage accounts of his four primary opponents.\"\nAccording to \"The New York Times\", Ronald Reagan's campaign team credited Murdoch and the Post for his victory in New York in the 1980 United States presidential election. Reagan later \"waived a prohibition against owning a television station and a newspaper in the same market,\" allowing Murdoch to continue to control \"The New York Post\" and \"The Boston Herald\" while expanding into television.\nOn 8 May 2006, the \"Financial Times\" reported that Murdoch would be hosting a fund-raiser for Senator Hillary Clinton's (D-New York) Senate re-election campaign. In a 2008 interview with Walt Mossberg, Murdoch was asked whether he had \"anything to do with the \"New York Post\"'s endorsement of Barack Obama in the democratic primaries\". Without hesitating, Murdoch replied, \"Yeah. He is a rock star. It's fantastic. I love what he is saying about education. I don't think he will win Florida [...] but he will win in Ohio and the election. I am anxious to meet him. I want to see if he will walk the walk.\"\nIn 2010, News Corporation gave US$1 million to the Republican Governors Association and $1 million to the US Chamber of Commerce. Murdoch also served on the board of directors of the libertarian Cato Institute. Murdoch is also a supporter of the Stop Online Piracy Act and Protect Intellectual Property Act.\nMurdoch was reported in 2011 as advocating more open immigration policies in western nations generally. In the United States, Murdoch and chief executives from several major corporations, including Hewlett-Packard, Boeing and Disney joined New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg to form the Partnership for a New American Economy to advocate \"for immigration reform \u2013 including a path to legal status for all illegal aliens now in the United States\". The coalition, reflecting Murdoch and Bloomberg's own views, also advocates significant increases in legal immigration to the United States as a means of boosting America's sluggish economy and lowering unemployment. The Partnership's immigration policy prescriptions are notably similar to those of the Cato Institute and the US Chamber of Commerce \u2014 both of which Murdoch has supported in the past.\n\"The Wall Street Journal\" editorial page has similarly advocated for increased legal immigration, in contrast to the staunch anti-immigration stance of Murdoch's British newspaper, \"The Sun\". On 5 September 2010, Murdoch testified before the House Subcommittee on Immigration, Citizenship, Refugees, Border Security, and International Law Membership on the \"Role of Immigration in Strengthening America's Economy\". In his testimony, Murdoch called for ending mass deportations and endorsed a \"comprehensive immigration reform\" plan that would include a pathway to citizenship for all illegal immigrants.\nIn the 2012 United States presidential election, Murdoch was critical of the competence of Mitt Romney's team but was nonetheless strongly supportive of a Republican victory, tweeting: \"Of course I want him [Romney] to win, save us from socialism, etc.\"\nIn October 2015, Murdoch stirred controversy when he praised Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson and referenced President Barack Obama, tweeting, \"Ben and Candy Carson terrific. What about a real black President who can properly address the racial divide? And much else.\" After which he apologised, tweeting, \"Apologies! No offence meant. Personally find both men charming.\"\nDuring Donald Trump's term as US President Murdoch showed support for him through the news stories broadcast in his media empire, including on Fox News. In early 2018, Mohammad bin Salman, the crown prince of Saudi Arabia, had an intimate dinner at Murdoch's Bel Air estate in Los Angeles.\nMurdoch is a strong supporter of Israel and its domestic policies. In October 2010, the Anti-Defamation League in New York City presented Murdoch with its International Leadership Award \"for his stalwart support of Israel and his commitment to promoting respect and speaking out against antisemitism\". However, in April 2021, in a letter to Lachlan Murdoch, ADL director Jonathan Greenblatt wrote that it would no longer make such an award to his father. This was in the immediate context of accusations made by the ADL against Fox News presenter Tucker Carlson and his apparent espousal of the White replacement theory.\nIn 2023, during a defamation lawsuit by Dominion Voting Systems against Fox News, Murdoch acknowledged that some Fox News commentators were endorsing election fraud claims they knew were false.&lt;ref name=\"Matza_2/27/2023\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"Peters_Robertson_2/27/2023\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; On 18 April 2023, Fox and Dominion settled for $787.5 million.\nIn July 2025, Murdoch was sued by Trump for $10 billion along with The Wall Street Journal's parent company Dow Jones over an article claiming that a birthday greeting containing Trump's name was sent to Jeffrey Epstein in 2003.\nActivities in Europe.\nMurdoch owns a controlling interest in Sky Italia, a satellite television provider in Italy. Murdoch's business interests in Italy have been a source of contention since they began. In 2009 Murdoch won a media dispute with then Italian prime minister Silvio Berlusconi. A judge ruled the then prime minister's media arm Mediaset prevented News Corporation's Italian unit, Sky Italia, from buying advertisements on its television networks.\nActivities in Asia.\nIn November 1986, News Corporation purchased a 35% stake in the \"South China Morning Post\" group for about US$. At that time, SCMP group was a stock-listed company, and was owned by HSBC, Hutchison Whampoa and Dow Jones &amp; Company. In December 1986, Dow Jones &amp; Company offered News Corporation to sell about 19% of share it owned of SCMP for US$, and, by 1987, News Corporation completed the full takeover. In September 1993, News Corporation have agreed to sell a 34.9% share in SCMP to Robert Kuok's Kerry Media for US$. In 1994, News Corporation sold the remaining 15.1% share in SCMP to MUI Group, disposing the Hong Kong newspaper.\nIn June 1993, News Corporation attempted to acquire a 22% share in TVB, a terrestrial television broadcaster in Hong Kong, for about $237million, but Murdoch's company gave up, as the Hong Kong government would not relax the regulation regarding foreign ownership of broadcasting companies.\nIn 1993, News Corporation acquired Star TV (renamed as Star in 2001), a Hong Kong company headed by Richard Li, from Hutchison Whampoa for $1\u00a0billion (Souchou, 2000:28), and subsequently set up offices for it throughout Asia. The deal enabled News International to broadcast from Hong Kong to India, China, Japan, and over thirty other countries in Asia, becoming one of the biggest satellite television networks in the east; however, the deal did not work out as Murdoch had planned because the Chinese government placed restrictions on it that prevented it from reaching most of China.\nIn 2009, News Corporation reorganised Star; a few of these arrangements were that the original company's operations in East Asia, Southeast Asia and the Middle East were integrated into Fox International Channels, and Star India was spun-off (but still within News Corporation).\nSuccession court case (2024).\nAs of \u00a02024[ [update]], the whole Murdoch family is involved in a court case in Reno, Nevada, in which James, his sister Elisabeth and half-sister Prudence are challenging their father's bid to amend the family trust to ensure that his eldest son, Lachlan, retains control of News Corp and Fox Corp, rather than benefiting all of his six children, as is specified in the \"irrevocable\" terms of the trust. According to \"The New York Times\", Murdoch Senior wants his companies to remain politically conservative, and sees his other children as too politically liberal.\nThe irrevocable family trust was set up after Rupert and Anna Murdoch's divorce in 1999, to hold the family's 28.5% stake in News Corp. It relates only to the children born before then, giving them equal say in the fate of the business after Rupert's death. Chloe and Grace Murdoch, Rupert's children with third wife Wendi Deng, will have no say in the business, although will share the stock proceeds. The case follows Rupert's attempt to change the trust in 2023, and the Nevada probate commissioner's finding that he was allowed to amend the trust \"if he is able to show he is acting in good faith and for the sole benefit of his heirs\". Rupert Murdoch is arguing interference by the other siblings would cause a financial loss to Fox, and therefore \"in their own best interests if they have their votes taken away from them\". He argues that preserving the outlet's conservative editorial stance against interference by the more politically moderate siblings would better protect its commercial value.\nThe case has led to the three children becoming estranged from their father, with none of them attending his wedding to his fifth wife, Elena Zhukova, in June 2024.\nOn 9 September 2025, News Corp announced changes to the structure of the trust which controls the family's ownership of the company and Fox News. As part of the changes, a partial share sale by the family trust was agreed, reported to be worth $3.3 billion, for Prudence MacLeod, Elisabeth Murdoch and James Murdoch's shares in News Corp and Fox News. All three siblings will cease to be beneficiaries of any holdings in News Corp and Fox and will no longer have any voting rights. As part of the new structure, Murdoch's eldest son and chairman of News Corp, Lachlan Murdoch, will assume full control of the family trust which owns both companies, including full voting rights. It was announced that Murdoch's younger children, Grace Murdoch and Chloe Murdoch, will join as beneficiaries of the trust with no voting rights.\nPersonal life.\nResidence.\nIn 2003, Murdoch bought \"Rosehearty\", an 11 bedroom home on a 5-acre waterfront estate in Centre Island, New York. In May 2013, he purchased the Moraga Estate, an estate, vineyard and winery in Bel Air, Los Angeles, California. In 2019, Murdoch and his new wife Jerry Hall purchased Holmwood, an 18th-century house and estate in the English village of Binfield Heath, some north-east of Reading.\nIn late 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, it was reported that Murdoch and Hall had been isolating in their Binfield Heath home for much of the year. He received his first COVID-19 vaccine in nearby Henley-on-Thames on 16 December.\nMarriages.\nIn 1956, Murdoch married Patricia Booker, a former shop assistant and flight attendant from Melbourne; the couple had their only child, Prudence, in 1958. They divorced in 1967.\nIn 1967, Murdoch married Anna Torv, a Scottish-born cadet journalist working for his Sydney newspaper \"The Daily Mirror\". In January 1998, three months before the announcement of his separation from Anna, a Roman Catholic, Murdoch was made a Knight Commander of the Order of Saint Gregory the Great (KSG), a papal honour awarded by Pope John Paul II. While Murdoch would often attend Mass with Torv, he never converted to Catholicism. Torv and Murdoch had three children: Elisabeth Murdoch (born in Sydney, Australia on 22 August 1968), Lachlan Murdoch (born in London, UK on 8 September 1971), and James Murdoch, (born in London on 13 December 1972). Murdoch's companies published two novels by his wife: \"Family Business\" (1988) and \"Coming to Terms\" (1991). They divorced in June 1999. Anna Murdoch received a settlement of US$1.2\u00a0billion in assets.\nOn 25 June 1999, 17 days after divorcing his second wife, Murdoch, then aged 68, married Chinese-born Wendi Deng. She was 30, a recent Yale School of Management graduate, and a newly appointed vice-president of his STAR TV. Murdoch had two daughters with her: Grace (born 2001) and Chloe (born 2003). Near the end of his marriage to Wendi, hearsay concerning a link with Chinese intelligence (which was later proven to be unfounded) became problematic to their relationship. On 13 June 2013, a News Corporation spokesperson confirmed that Murdoch filed for divorce from Deng in New York City, US. According to the spokesman, the marriage had been irretrievably broken for more than six months. Murdoch also ended his long-standing friendship with Tony Blair after suspecting him of having an affair with Deng while they were still married.\nOn 11 January 2016, Murdoch announced his engagement to former model Jerry Hall in a notice in \"The Times\" newspaper. On 4 March 2016, Murdoch, a week short of his 85th birthday, and 59-year-old Hall were married in London, at St Bride's, Fleet Street with a reception at Spencer House; this was Murdoch's fourth marriage. In June 2022, \"The New York Times\" reported that Murdoch and Hall were set to divorce, citing two anonymous sources. Hall filed for divorce on 1 July 2022 citing irreconcilable differences; the divorce was finalised in August 2022.\nDuring Saint Patrick's Day celebrations in 2023, Murdoch, who is quarter Irish, proposed to his partner, Ann Lesley Smith. The engaged couple first met at an event in September 2022. In April 2023, two weeks after the couple were engaged, Murdoch suddenly called off the engagement. The split was said to be caused by Murdoch's discomfort with Smith's religious views and her infatuation with Fox News host Tucker Carlson, reportedly referring to him as \"a messenger from God\". Carlson was fired from Fox News three weeks later.\nMurdoch became engaged again in March 2024, to retired Russian molecular biologist Elena Zhukova, who is also the ex-wife of Russian businessman Alexander Zhukov. Their wedding was held in June 2024 at Murdoch's estate in California. Murdoch was 93 and Zhukova 67 years old. Through the marriage he became stepfather to Dasha Zhukova, ex-wife of Roman Abramovich.\nMurdoch has six children, and is grandfather to thirteen grandchildren.\nChildren.\nMurdoch has six children. His eldest child, Prudence MacLeod, was appointed on 28 January 2011 to the board of Times Newspapers Ltd, part of News International, which publishes \"The Times\" and \"The Sunday Times\". Murdoch's elder son Lachlan, formerly the Deputy Chief Operating Officer at the News Corporation and publisher of the \"New York Post\", was Murdoch's heir apparent before resigning from his executive posts at the global media company at the end of July 2005. Lachlan's departure left James Murdoch, Chief Executive of the satellite television service British Sky Broadcasting since November 2003 as the only Murdoch son still directly involved with the company's operations, though Lachlan has agreed to remain on the News Corporation's board.\nAfter graduating from Vassar College and marrying classmate Elkin Kwesi Pianim (the son of Ghanaian financial and political mogul Kwame Pianim) in 1993, Murdoch's daughter Elisabeth and her husband purchased a pair of NBC-affiliate television stations in California, KSBW and KSBY, with a $35\u00a0million loan provided by her father. By quickly re-organising and re-selling them at a $12\u00a0million profit in 1995, Elisabeth emerged as an unexpected rival to her brothers for the eventual leadership of the publishing dynasty. But, after divorcing Pianim in 1998 and quarrelling publicly with her assigned mentor Sam Chisholm at BSkyB, she struck out on her own as a television and film producer in London. She has since enjoyed independent success, in conjunction with her second husband, Matthew Freud, the great-grandson of Sigmund Freud, whom she met in 1997 and married in 2001.\nUntil September 2023, it was not known how long Murdoch would remain as News Corporation's CEO. For a while the American cable television entrepreneur John Malone was the second-largest voting shareholder in News Corporation after Murdoch himself, potentially undermining the family's control. In 2007, the company announced that it would sell certain assets and give cash to Malone's company in exchange for its stock. In 2007, the company issued Murdoch's older children voting stock.\nMurdoch has two children with Wendi Deng: Grace (b. New York, November 2001) and Chloe (b. New York, July 2003). It was revealed in September 2011 that Tony Blair is Grace's godfather. There is reported to be tension between Murdoch and his oldest children over the terms of a trust holding the family's 28.5% stake in News Corporation, estimated in 2005 to be worth about $6.1 billion. Under the trust, his children by Wendi Deng share in the proceeds of the stock but have no voting privileges or control of the stock. Voting rights in the stock are divided 50/50 between Murdoch on the one side and his children of his first two marriages. Murdoch's voting privileges are not transferable but will expire upon his death and the stock will then be controlled solely by his children from the prior marriages, although their half-siblings will continue to derive their share of income from it. It is Murdoch's stated desire to have his children by Deng given a measure of control over the stock proportional to their financial interest in it. It does not appear that he has any strong legal grounds to contest the present arrangement, and both ex-wife Anna and their three children are said to be strongly resistant to any such change.\nIn the arts and media.\nFilm and television.\nIn 1999, the Ted Turner-owned TBS channel aired an original sitcom, \"The Chimp Channel\". This featured an all-simian cast and the role of an Australian TV veteran named Harry Waller. The character is described as \"a self-made gazillionaire with business interests in all sorts of fields. He owns newspapers, hotel chains, sports franchises and genetic technologies, as well as everyone's favourite cable TV channel, The Chimp Channel\". Waller is thought to be a parody of Murdoch, a long-time rival of Turner.\nIn 2004, the movie \"\" included many interviews accusing Fox News of pressuring reporters to report only one side of news stories, in order to influence viewers' political opinions.\nIn 2012, the satirical telemovie \"Hacks\" broadcast on the UK's Channel 4, made obvious comparisons with Murdoch using the fictional character \"Stanhope Feast\", portrayed by Michael Kitchen, as well as other central figures in the phone hacking scandal.\nThe 2013 film \"\" features an Australian character inspired by Rupert Murdoch who owns a cable news television channel.\nMurdoch was part of the inspiration for Logan Roy, the protagonist of TV show \"Succession\" (2018\u20132023), who is portrayed by Brian Cox.\nMurdoch has also been played by the following people in films and TV series:\nBooks.\nMurdoch and rival newspaper and publishing magnate Robert Maxwell are thinly fictionalised as \"Keith Townsend\" and \"Richard Armstrong\" in \"The Fourth Estate\" (1996) by British novelist and former MP Jeffrey Archer.\nIn the novel \"Dunbar\" (2017) by Edward St Aubyn the eponymous lead character is at least partly inspired by Murdoch.\n\"Young Rupert: The Making of the Murdoch Empire\" (2023), by Walter Marsh, has been praised for the high quality of its research. It focuses on Murdoch as a child and young man, in particular his early career at \"The News\" in Adelaide and his relationship with the editor-in-chief Rohan Rivett. Several commenters on the book remarked on Murdoch's embrace of socialism in his early years.\nMusic.\nTowards the end of his touring career, Eagles drummer and lead singer Don Henley would often dedicate his 1982 hit \"Dirty Laundry\" to Murdoch and Bill O'Reilly.\nAustralian psychedelic rock band King Gizzard &amp; the Lizard Wizard wrote the track \"Evilest Man\" about Murdoch, for their 2022 album \"Omnium Gatherum\".\nInfluence, wealth, and reputation.\nForbes rankings.\nIn 2014, \"Forbes\" estimated Rupert Murdoch's wealth at US$13.7 billion.\nIn 2016, \"Forbes\" ranked \"Rupert Murdoch &amp; Family\" as the 35th most powerful person in the world.\nAccording to \"Forbes'\" 2017 real-time list of world's billionaires, Murdoch was the 34th richest person in the US and the 96th richest person in the world, with a net worth of US$13.1\u00a0billion as of \u00a02017.[ [update]]\nIn 2019, the Murdoch family were ranked 52nd in the \"Forbes\"' annual list of the world's billionaires.\nAs per Forbes list of The Richest People In The World, dated 8 March 2024, Murdoch and family were ranked #100 with a net worth of $19.5 Billion.\nOther assessments and investigations.\nIn August 2013, Terry Flew, Professor of Media and Communications at Queensland University of Technology, wrote an article for the \"Conversation\" publication in which he investigated a claim by former Australian prime minister Kevin Rudd that Murdoch owned 70% of Australian newspapers in 2011. Flew's article showed that News Corp Australia owned 23% of the nation's newspapers in 2011, according to the Finkelstein Review of Media and Media Regulation, but, at the time of the article, the corporation's titles accounted for 59% of the sales of all daily newspapers, with weekly sales of 17.3 million copies.\nIn connection with Murdoch's testimony to the Leveson Inquiry \"into the ethics of the British press\", editor of \"Newsweek International\", Tunku Varadarajan, referred to him as \"the man whose name is synonymous with unethical newspapers\".\nNews Corp papers were accused of supporting the campaign of the Australian Liberal government and influencing public opinion during the 2013 federal election. Following the announcement of the Liberal Party victory at the polls, Murdoch tweeted \"Aust. election public sick of public sector workers and phony welfare scroungers sucking life out of economy. Other nations to follow in time.\"\nIn November 2015, former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott said that Murdoch \"arguably has had more impact on the wider world than any other living Australian\".\nIn late 2015, \"The Wall Street Journal\" journalist John Carreyrou began a series of investigative articles on Theranos, the blood-testing start-up founded by Elizabeth Holmes, that questioned its claim to be able to run a wide range of lab tests from a tiny sample of blood from a finger prick. Holmes had turned to Murdoch, whose media empire includes Carreyrou's employer, \"The Wall Street Journal\", to kill the story. Murdoch, who became the biggest investor in Theranos in 2015 as a result of his $125 million injection, refused the request from Holmes saying that \"he trusted the paper's editors to handle the matter fairly.\"\nIn November 2021, Murdoch accused, without providing evidence, Google and Facebook of stifling conservative viewpoints on its platforms, and called for \"substantial reform\" and openness in the digital ad supply chain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26092", "revid": "27012908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26092", "title": "Historical negationism", "text": "Distortion of historical record\nHistorical negationism, also called historical denialism, is the falsification, trivialization, or distortion of the historical record. This is distinct from historical revisionism, a broader term encompassing academic reinterpretations of history driven by new evidence or reasoning. In attempting to revise and influence the past, historical negationism acts as illegitimate historical revisionism by using techniques inadmissible in proper historical discourse, such as presenting known forged documents as genuine, inventing ingenious but implausible reasons for distrusting genuine documents, attributing conclusions to books and sources that report the opposite, manipulating statistical series to support the given point of view, and deliberately mistranslating traditional or modern texts.\nSome countries, such as Germany, have criminalized the negationist revision of certain historical events, while others take a more cautious position for various reasons, such as protection of free speech. Others have in the past mandated negationist views, such as the US state of California, where it is claimed that some schoolchildren have been explicitly prevented from learning about the California genocide. Notable examples of negationism include the Lost Cause of the Confederacy, the clean \"Wehrmacht\" myth, and denials of the Holocaust, Nakba, Holodomor, the Armenian genocide and the Nanjing Massacre. In literature, it has been imaginatively depicted in some works of fiction, such as \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", by George Orwell. In modern times, negationism may spread via political, religious agendas through state media, mainstream media, and new media, such as the Internet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOrigin of the term.\nThe term \"negationism\" (\"n\u00e9gationnisme\") was first coined by the French historian Henry Rousso in his 1987 book \"The Vichy Syndrome\" which looked at the French popular memory of Vichy France and the French Resistance. Rousso posited that it was necessary to distinguish between legitimate historical revisionism in Holocaust studies and politically motivated denial of the Holocaust, which he termed negationism.\nPurposes.\nUsually, the purpose of historical negation is to align with tribal or ideological beliefs, demonize an enemy, maintain group identity, or preserve social bonds, often through motivated reasoning and denial of established facts.\nIdeological influence.\nThe principal functions of negationist history are the abilities to control ideological and political influence.\nHistory is a social resource that contributes to shaping national identity, culture, and the public memory. Through the study of history, people are imbued with a particular cultural identity; therefore, by negatively revising history, the negationist can craft a specific, ideological identity. Because historians are credited as people who single-mindedly pursue truth, by way of fact, negationist historians capitalize on the historian's professional credibility, and present their pseudohistory as true scholarship. By adding a measure of credibility to the work of revised history, the ideas of the negationist historian are more readily accepted in the public mind. As such, professional historians recognize the revisionist practice of historical negationism as the work of \"truth-seekers\" finding different truths in the historical record to fit their political, social, and ideological contexts.\nPolitical influence.\nHistory provides insight into past political policies and consequences, and thus assists people in extrapolating political implications for contemporary society. Historical negationism is applied to cultivate a specific political myth, sometimes with official consent from the government, whereby self-taught, amateur, and dissident academic historians either manipulate or misrepresent historical accounts to achieve political ends. For example, after the late 1930s in the Soviet Union, the ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and historiography in the Soviet Union treated reality and the party line as the same intellectual entity, especially in regards to the Russian Civil War and peasant rebellions; Soviet historical negationism advanced a specific, political, and ideological agenda about Russia and its place in world history.\nTechniques.\nHistorical negationism applies the techniques of research, quotation, and presentation for deception of the reader and denial of the historical record. In support of the \"revised history\" perspective, the negationist historian uses false documents as genuine sources, presents specious reasons to distrust genuine documents, exploits published opinions by quoting out of historical context, manipulates statistics, and mistranslates texts in other languages. The revision techniques of historical negationism operate in the intellectual space of public debate for the advancement of a given interpretation of history and the cultural perspective of the \"revised history\". As a document, the revised history is used to negate the validity of the factual, documentary record, and so reframe explanations and perceptions of the discussed historical event, to deceive the reader, the listener, and the viewer; therefore, historical negationism functions as a technique of propaganda. Rather than submit their works for peer review, negationist historians rewrite history and use logical fallacies to construct arguments that will obtain the desired results, a \"revised history\" that supports an agenda\u00a0\u2013 political, ideological, religious, etc.\nIn the practice of historiography, the British historian Richard J. Evans describes the technical differences, between professional historians and negationist historians, commenting: \"Reputable and professional historians do not suppress parts of quotations from documents that go against their own case, but take them into account, and, if necessary, amend their own case, accordingly. They do not present, as genuine, documents which they know to be forged, just because these forgeries happen to back up what they are saying. They do not invent ingenious, but implausible, and utterly unsupported reasons for distrusting genuine documents, because these documents run counter to their arguments; again, they amend their arguments, if this is the case, or, indeed, abandon them altogether. They do not consciously attribute their own conclusions to books and other sources, which, in fact, on closer inspection, actually say the opposite. They do not eagerly seek out the highest possible figures in a series of statistics, independently of their reliability, or otherwise, simply because they want, for whatever reason, to maximize the figure in question, but rather, they assess all the available figures, as impartially as possible, to arrive at a number that will withstand the critical scrutiny of others. They do not knowingly mistranslate sources in foreign languages to make them more serviceable to themselves. They do not willfully invent words, phrases, quotations, incidents and events, for which there is no historical evidence, to make their arguments more plausible.\"\nDeception.\nDeception includes falsifying information, obscuring the truth, and lying to manipulate public opinion about the historical event discussed in the revised history. The negationist historian applies the techniques of deception to achieve either a political or an ideological goal, or both. The field of history distinguishes among history books based upon credible, verifiable sources, which were peer-reviewed before publication; and deceptive history books, based upon unreliable sources, which were not submitted for peer review. The distinction among types of history books rests upon the research techniques used in writing a history. Verifiability, accuracy, and openness to criticism are central tenets of historical scholarship. When these techniques are sidestepped, the presented historical information might be deliberately deceptive, a \"revised history\".\nDenial.\nDenial is defensively protecting information from being shared with other historians, and claiming that facts are untrue, especially denial of the war crimes and crimes against humanity perpetrated in the course of World War\u00a0II (1939\u20131945) and the Holocaust (1933\u20131945). The negationist historian protects the historical-revisionism project by blame shifting, censorship, distraction, and media manipulation; occasionally, denial by protection includes risk management for the physical security of revisionist sources.\nRelativization and trivialization.\nComparing certain historical atrocities to other crimes is the practice of relativization, interpretation by moral judgements, to alter public perception of the first historical atrocity. Although such comparisons often occur in negationist history, their pronouncement is not usually part of revisionist intentions upon the historical facts, but an opinion of moral judgement.\nExamples.\nBook burning.\nRepositories of literature have been targeted throughout history (e.g., the Grand Library of Baghdad, the burning of liturgical and historical books of the St. Thomas Christians by the archbishop of Goa Aleixo de Menezes) including recently, such as the 1981 Burning of Jaffna library and the destruction of Iraqi libraries by ISIS during the fall of Mosul in 2014. Similarly, British officials destroyed documents in Operation Legacy to avoid records on colonial rule falling into the hands of countries declaring independence from Britain and any scrutiny of the British state.\nChinese book burning.\nThe \"Burning of books and burying of scholars\" (), or \"Fires of Qin\", refers to the burning of writings and slaughter of scholars during the Qin dynasty of ancient China, between the period of 213 and 210 BC. \"Books\" at this point refers to writings on bamboo strips, which were then bound together. The exact extent of the damage is hard to assess; technological books were to be spared and even the \"objectionable\" books, poetry and philosophy in particular, were preserved in imperial archives and allowed to be kept by the official scholar.\nUnited States history.\nExecutive order to negate American history.\nDuring the second presidency of Donald Trump (2025\u2013present), the National Park Service was ordered to police \"negative\" American history. In over 400 Federally managed properties, they displayed signs to encourage visitors to report information critical of American history. It was meant to counter what Trump considered \"revisionist\" history, such as at Indian massacre sites, Japanese internment sites, and particularly Civil Rights historical sites in the American South, which were all impacted by the order to police negative information.\nConfederate revisionism.\nThe historical negationism of American Civil War revisionists and Neo-Confederates claims that the Confederate States (1861\u20131865) were the defenders rather than the instigators of the American Civil War, and that the Confederacy's motivation for secession from the United States was the maintenance of the Southern states' rights and limited government, rather than the preservation and expansion of chattel slavery.\nRegarding Neo-Confederate revisionism of the U.S. Civil War, the historian Brooks D. Simpson says: \"This is an active attempt to reshape historical memory, an effort by white Southerners to find historical justifications for present-day actions. The neo\u2013Confederate movement's ideologues have grasped that if they control how people remember the past, they'll control how people approach the present and the future. Ultimately, this is a very conscious war for memory and heritage. It's a quest for legitimacy, the eternal quest for justification.\"\nIn the early 20th century, Mildred Rutherford, the historian general of the United Daughters of the Confederacy (UDC), led the attack against American history textbooks that did not present the \"Lost Cause of the Confederacy\" version of the history of the U.S. Civil War. To that pedagogical end, Rutherford assembled a \"massive collection\" of documents that included \"essay contests on the glory of the Ku Klux Klan and personal tributes to faithful slaves\". About the historical negationism of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, the historian David Blight says: \"All UDC members and leaders were not as virulently racist as Rutherford, but all, in the name of a reconciled nation, participated in an enterprise that deeply influenced the white supremacist vision of Civil War memory.\"\nCalifornia genocide.\nBetween 1846 and 1873, following the conquest of California by the United States, the region's Indigenous Californian population plummeted from around 150,000 to around 30,000 due to disease, famine, forced removals, slavery, and massacres. Many historians refer to the massacres as the California genocide. Between 9,500 and 16,000 California Natives were killed by both government forces and white settlers in massacres during this period. Despite the well documented evidence of the widespread massacres and atrocities, the public school curriculum and history textbooks approved by the California Department of Education ignore the history of this genocide.\nAccording to author Clifford Trafzer, although many historians have pushed for recognition of the genocide in public school curricula, government-approved textbooks omit mention of the genocide because of the dominance of conservative publishing companies with an ideological impetus to deny the genocide, the fear of publishing companies being branded as un-American for discussing it, and the unwillingness of state and federal government officials to acknowledge the genocide due to the possibility of having to pay reparations to indigenous communities affected by it.\nWar crimes.\nJapanese war crimes.\nThe post-war minimization of the war crimes of Japanese imperialism is an example of \"illegitimate\" historical revisionism; some contemporary Japanese revisionists, such as Y\u016bko Iwanami (granddaughter of General Hideki Tojo), propose that Japan's invasion of China, and World War II, itself, were justified reactions to the Western imperialism of the time. On 2 March 2007, Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe denied that the military had forced women into sexual slavery during the war, saying, \"The fact is, there is no evidence to prove there was coercion\". Before he spoke, some Liberal Democratic Party legislators also sought to revise Y\u014dhei K\u014dno's apology to former comfort women in 1993; likewise, there was the controversial negation of the six-week Nanking Massacre in 1937\u20131938.\nShinz\u014d Abe was general secretary of a group of parliament members concerned with history education () that is associated with the Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform, and was a special advisor to Nippon Kaigi, which are two openly revisionist groups denying, downplaying, or justifying various Japanese war crimes. Editor-in-chief of the conservative \"Yomiuri Shimbun\" Tsuneo Watanabe criticized the Yasukuni Shrine as a bastion of revisionism: \"The Yasukuni Shrine runs a museum where they show items in order to encourage and worship militarism. It's wrong for the prime minister to visit such a place\". Other critics note that men, who would contemporarily be perceived as \"Korean\" and \"Chinese\", are enshrined for the military actions they effected as Japanese Imperial subjects.\nHiroshima and Nagasaki bombings.\nThe \"Hibakusha\" (\"explosion-affected people\") of Hiroshima and Nagasaki seek compensation from their government and criticize it for failing to \"accept responsibility for having instigated and then prolonged an aggressive war long after Japan's defeat was apparent, resulting in a heavy toll in Japanese, Asian and American lives\". EB Sledge expressed concern that such revisionism, in his words \"mellowing\", would allow the harsh facts of the history that led to the bombings to be forgotten. Historians Hill and Koshiro have stated that attempts to minimize the importance of the bombings as \"righteous revenge and salvation\" would be revisionism, and that while the Japanese should recognize their atrocities led the bombing, Americans also have to accept the fact that their own actions \"caused massive destruction and suffering that has lasted for fifty years\".\nCroatian war crimes in World War II.\nSome Croats, including some high-ranked officials and political leaders during the 1990s and far-right organization members, have attempted to minimize the magnitude of the genocide perpetrated against Serbs and other ethnic minorities in the World War II puppet state of Nazi Germany, the Independent State of Croatia. By 1989, the future President of Croatia Franjo Tu\u0111man (who had been a Partisan during World War II), had embraced Croatian nationalism and published \"\", in which he questioned the official number of victims killed by the Usta\u0161e during World War II, particularly at the Jasenovac concentration camp. Yugoslav and Serbian historiography had long exaggerated the number of victims at the camp. Tu\u0111man criticized the long-standing figures, but also described the camp as a \"work camp\", giving an estimate of between 30,000 and 40,000 deaths. Tu\u0111man's government's toleration of Usta\u0161a symbols and their crimes often dismissed in public, frequently strained relations with Israel.\nCroatia's far-right often advocates the false theory that Jasenovac was a \"labour camp\" where mass murder did not take place. In 2017, two videos of former Croatian president Stjepan Mesi\u0107 from 1992 were made public in which he stated that Jasenovac was not a death camp. The far-right NGO \"The Society for Research of the Threefold Jasenovac Camp\" also advocates this disproven theory, in addition to claiming that the camp was used by the Yugoslav authorities following the war to imprison Ustasha members and regular Home Guard army troops until 1948, then alleged Stalinists until 1951. Its members include journalist Igor Vuki\u0107, who wrote his own book advocating the theory, Catholic priest Stjepan Razum and academic Josip Pe\u010dari\u0107. The ideas promoted by its members have been amplified by mainstream media interviews and book tours. The last book, \"The Jasenovac Lie Revealed\" written by Vuki\u0107, prompted the Simon Wiesenthal Center to urge Croatian authorities to ban such works, noting that they \"would immediately be banned in Germany and Austria and rightfully so\". In 2016, Croatian filmmaker Jakov Sedlar released a documentary \"Jasenovac \u2013 The Truth\" which advocated the same theories, labelling the camp as a \"collection and labour camp\". The film contained alleged falsifications and forgeries, in addition to denial of crimes and hate speech towards politicians and journalists.\nSerbian war crimes in World War II.\nAmong far-right and nationalist groups, denial and revisionism of Serbian war crimes are carried out through the downplaying of Milan Nedi\u0107 and Dimitrije Ljoti\u0107's roles in the extermination of Serbia's Jews in concentration camps, in the German-occupied Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia by a number of Serbian historians. Serbian collaborationist armed forces were involved, either directly or indirectly, in the mass killings of Jews as well as Roma and those Serbs who sided with any anti-German resistance and the killing of many Croats and Muslims. Since the end of the war, Serbian collaboration in the Holocaust has been the subject of historical revisionism by Serbian leaders. In 1993, the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts listed Nedi\u0107 among \"The 100 most prominent Serbs\". There is also the denial of Chetnik collaboration with Axis forces and crimes committed during World War II. Serbian historian Jelena Djureinovic states in her book \"The Politics of Memory of the Second World War in Contemporary Serbia: Collaboration, Resistance and Retribution\" that \"during those years, the WWII nationalist Chetniks have been recast as an anti-fascist movement equivalent to Tito's Partisans, and as victims of communism\". The glorification of the Chetnik movement has now become the central theme of Serbia's WWII memory politics. Chetnik leaders convicted under communist rule of collaboration with the Nazis have been rehabilitated by Serbian courts, and television programmes have contributed to spreading a positive image of the movement, \"distorting the real picture of what happened during WWII\".\nSerbian war crimes in the Yugoslav wars.\nThere have been a number of far-right and nationalist authors and political activists who have publicly disagreed with mainstream views of Serbian war crimes in the Yugoslav wars of 1991\u20131999. Some high-ranked Serbian officials and political leaders who categorically claimed that no genocide against Bosnian Muslims took place at all, include former president of Serbia Tomislav Nikoli\u0107, Bosnian Serb leader Milorad Dodik, Serbian Minister of Defence Aleksandar Vulin and Serbian far-right leader Vojislav \u0160e\u0161elj. Among the points of contention are whether the victims of massacres such as the Ra\u010dak massacre and Srebrenica massacre were unarmed civilians or armed resistance fighters, whether death and rape tolls were inflated, and whether prison camps such as Sremska Mitrovica camp were sites of mass war crimes. These authors are called \"revisionists\" by scholars and organizations, such as ICTY.\nThe \"Report about Case Srebrenica\" by Darko Trifunovic, commissioned by the government of the Republika Srpska, was described by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia as \"one of the worst examples of revisionism in relation to the mass executions of Bosnian Muslims committed in Srebrenica in July 1995\". Outrage and condemnation by a wide variety of Balkan and international figures eventually forced the Republika Srpska to disown the report. In 2017 legislation that banned the teaching of the Srebrenica genocide and Sarajevo siege in schools was introduced in Republika Srpska, initiated by President Milorad Dodik and his SNSD party, who stated that it was \"impossible to use here the textbooks ... which say the Serbs have committed genocide and kept Sarajevo under siege. This is not correct and this will not be taught here\". In 2019 Republika Srpska authorities appointed Israeli historian Gideon Greif \u2013 who has worked at Yad Vashem for more than three decades \u2013 to head its own revisionist commission to \"determine the truth\" about Srebrenica.\nMassacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia.\nThe issue of the Volyn massacres was largely non-existent in Ukrainian scholarly literature for many years, and until very recently, Ukrainian historiography did not undertake any objective research of the events in Volyn. Until 1991 any independent Ukrainian historic research was only possible abroad, mainly in the US and the Canadian diaspora. Despite publishing a number of works devoted to the history of UPA, the Ukrainian emigration researchers (with only few exceptions) remained completely mute about the Volyn events for many years. Until very recently much of the remaining documentation was closed in Ukrainian state archives, unavailable to researchers. As a result, Ukrainian historiography lacks broader reliable research of the events and the presence of the issue in Ukrainian publications is still very limited. The young generation of Ukrainian historians is often infected with Ukrainocentrism, and often borrows the stereotypes and myths about Poland and Poles from the biased publications of the Ukrainian diaspora.\nIn September 2016, after Poland's Sejm had passed a resolution declaring 11 July a National Day of Remembrance of the victims of the Genocide of the Citizens of the Polish Republic committed by Ukrainian Nationalists and formally called the Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia a genocide, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine passed a resolution condemning \"the one-sided political assessment of the historical events in Poland\", rejecting the term \"genocide\".\nIndonesian mass killings of 1965\u201366.\nDiscussion of the killings was taboo in Indonesia and, if mentioned at all, usually called \"peristiwa enam lima\", the \"incident of '65.\" Inside and outside Indonesia, public discussion of the killings increased during the 1990s and especially after 1998 when the New Order government collapsed. Jailed and exiled members of the Sukarno regime, as well as ordinary people, told their stories in increasing numbers. Foreign researchers began to publish increasingly more on the topic, with the end of the military regime and its doctrine of coercing such research attempts into futility.\nThe killings are skipped over in most Indonesian histories and have been scarcely examined by Indonesians, and has received comparatively little international attention. Indonesian textbooks typically depict the killings as a \"patriotic campaign\" that resulted in less than 80,000 deaths. In 2004, the textbooks were briefly changed to include the events, but this new curriculum discontinued in 2006 following protests from the military and Islamic groups. The textbooks which mentioned the mass killings were subsequently burnt by order of Indonesia's Attorney General. John Roosa's \"Pretext for Mass Murder\" (2006) was initially banned by the Attorney General's Office. The Indonesian parliament set up a truth and reconciliation commission to analyse the killings, but it was suspended by the Indonesian High Court. An academic conference regarding the killings was held in Singapore in 2009. A hesitant search for mass graves by survivors and family members began after 1998, although little has been found. Over three decades later, great enmity remains in Indonesian society over the events.\nTurkey and the Armenian genocide.\nTurkish laws such as Article 301, that state \"a person who publicly insults Turkishness, or the Republic or [the] Turkish Grand National Assembly of Turkey, shall be punishable by imprisonment\", were used to criminally charge the writer Orhan Pamuk with disrespecting Turkey, for saying that \"Thirty thousand Kurds, and a million Armenians, were killed in these lands, and nobody, but me, dares to talk about it\". The controversy occurred as Turkey was first vying for membership in the European Union (EU) where the suppression of dissenters is looked down upon. Article 301 originally was part of penal-law reforms meant to modernize Turkey to European Union standards, as part of negotiating Turkey's accession to the EU. In 2006, the charges were dropped due to pressure from the European Union and United States on the Turkish government.\nOn 7 February 2006, five journalists were tried for insulting the judicial institutions of the State, and for aiming to prejudice a court case (per Article 288 of the Turkish penal code). The reporters were on trial for criticizing the court-ordered closing of a conference in Istanbul regarding the Armenian genocide during the time of the Ottoman Empire. The conference continued elsewhere, transferring locations from a state to a private university. The trial continued until 11 April 2006, when four of the reporters were acquitted. The case against the fifth journalist, Murat Belge, proceeded until 8 June 2006, when he was also acquitted. The purpose of the conference was to critically analyse the official Turkish view of the Armenian genocide in 1915; a taboo subject in Turkey. The trial proved to be a test case between Turkey and the European Union; the EU insisted that Turkey should allow increased freedom of expression rights, as a condition to membership.\nSouth Korean war crimes in Vietnam.\nAt the request of the United States, South Korea under Park Chung Hee sent approximately 320,000 South Korean troops to fight alongside the United States and South Vietnam during the Vietnam War. Various civilian groups have accused the South Korean military of many \"My Lai-style massacres\", while the Korean Ministry of Defense has denied all such accusations. Korean forces are alleged to have perpetrated the Binh Tai, B\u00ecnh An/T\u00e2y Vinh, B\u00ecnh H\u00f2a, and H\u00e0 My massacres and several other massacres across Vietnam, killing as many as 9000 Vietnamese civilians.\nIn 2023, a South Korean court ruled in favour of a Vietnamese victim of South Korean atrocities during the war and ordered that the South Korean government compensate the surviving victim. In response, the South Korean government repeated its earlier denials of the atrocities, and later announced its appeal of the decision. This strained relations with Vietnam, as a spokesperson for Vietnam's fording ministry called the decision \"extremely regrettable\".\nIran.\nThe Islamic Republic of Iran uses historical negationism against religious minorities in order to maintain legitimacy and relevancy of the regime. One example is the regime's approach to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed community. In 2008, an erroneous and misleading biography of B\u00e1b was presented to all primary school children.\nIn his official 2013 Nowruz address, Supreme Leader of Iran Grand Ayatollah Ali Khamenei questioned the veracity of the Holocaust, remarking that \"The Holocaust is an event whose reality is uncertain and if it has happened, it's uncertain how it has happened.\" This was consistent with Khamenei's previous comments regarding the Holocaust.\nSoviet and Russian history.\nIn his book, \"The Stalin School of Falsification\", Leon Trotsky cited a range of historical documents such as private letters, telegrams, party speeches, meeting minutes, and suppressed texts such as Lenin's Testament, to argue that the Stalinist faction routinely distorted political events, forged a theoretical basis for irreconcilable concepts such as the notion of \"Socialism in One Country\" and misrepresented the views of opponents. He also argued that the Stalinist regime employed an array of professional historians as well as economists to justify policy manoeuvering and safeguarding its own set of material interests.\nDuring the existence of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (1917\u20131991) and the Soviet Union (1922\u20131991), the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) attempted to ideologically and politically control the writing of both academic and popular history. These attempts were most successful in the 1934\u20131952 period. According to Klaus Mehnert, writing in 1952, the Soviet government attempted to control academic historiography (the writing of history by academic historians) to promote ideological and ethno-racial imperialism by Russians. During the 1928\u20131956 period, modern and contemporary history was generally composed according to the wishes of the CPSU, not the requirements of accepted historiographic method.\nDuring and after the rule of Nikita Khrushchev (1956\u20131964), Soviet historiographic practice was more complicated. In this period, Soviet historiography was characterized by complex competition between Stalinist and anti-Stalinist Marxist historians. To avoid the professional hazard of politicized history, some historians chose pre-modern, medieval history or classical history, where ideological demands were relatively relaxed and conversation with other historians in the field could be fostered. Prescribed ideology could still introduce biases in historians' work, but not all of Soviet historiography was affected. Control over party history and the legal status of individual ex-party members played a large role in dictating the ideological diversity and thus the faction in power within the CPSU. The official \"History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks)\" was revised to delete references to leaders purged from the party, especially during the rule of Joseph Stalin (1922\u20131953).\nIn the historiography of the Cold War, a controversy over negationist historical revisionism exists, where numerous revisionist scholars in the West have been accused of whitewashing the crimes of Stalinism, overlooking the Katyn massacre in Poland, disregarding the validity of the Venona Project messages with regards to Soviet espionage in the United States, as well as the denial of the Holodomor of 1932\u20131933.\nIn 2009, Russia established the Presidential Commission of the Russian Federation to Counter Attempts to Falsify History to the Detriment of Russia's Interests to \"defend Russia against falsifiers of history\". Some critics, like Heorhiy Kasyanov from the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, said the Kremlin was trying to whitewash Soviet history in order to justify its denial of human rights: \"It's part of the Russian Federation's policy to create an ideological foundation for what is happening in Russia right now.\" Historian and author Orlando Figes, a professor at the University of London, who views the new commission is part of a clampdown on historical scholarship, stated: \"They're idiots if they think they can change the discussion of Soviet history internationally, but they can make it hard for Russian historians to teach and publish. It's like we're back to the old days.\" The commission was disestablished in 2012.\nAzerbaijan.\nIn relation to Armenia.\nMany scholars, among them Victor Schnirelmann, Willem Floor, Robert Hewsen, George Bournoutian and others state that in Soviet and post-Soviet Azerbaijan since the 1960s there is a practice of revising primary sources on the South Caucasus in which any mention about Armenians is removed. In the revised texts, \"Armenian\" is either simply removed or is replaced by \"Albanian\"; there are many other examples of such falsifications, all of which have the purpose of creating an impression that historically Armenians were not present in this territory. Willem M. Floor and Hasan Javadi in the English edition of \"The Heavenly Rose-Garden: A History of Shirvan &amp; Daghestan\" by Abbasgulu Bakikhanov specifically point out to the instances of distortions and falsifications made by Ziya Bunyadov in his Russian translation of this book. According to Bournoutian and Hewsen these distortions are widespread in these works; they thus advise the readers in general to avoid the books produced in Azerbaijan in Soviet and post-Soviet times if these books do not contain the facsimile copy of original sources. Shnirelman thinks that this practice is being realized in Azerbaijan according to state order. Philip L. Kohl brings an example of a theory advanced by Azerbaijani archaeologist Akhundov about Albanian origin of Khachkars as an example of patently false cultural origin myths.\nThe Armenian cemetery in Julfa, a cemetery near the town of Julfa, in the Nakhchivan exclave of Azerbaijan originally housed around 10,000 funerary monuments. The tombstones consisted mainly of thousands of \"khachkars\", uniquely decorated cross-stones characteristic of medieval Christian Armenian art. The cemetery was still standing in the late 1990s, when the government of Azerbaijan began a systematic campaign to destroy the monuments. After studying and comparing satellite photos of Julfa taken in 2003 and 2009, the American Association for the Advancement of Science came to the conclusion in December 2010 that the cemetery was demolished and levelled. After the director of the Hermitage Museum Mikhail Piotrovsky expressed his protest about the destruction of Armenian khachkars in Julfa, he was accused by Azerbaijanis of supporting the \"total falsification of the history and culture of Azerbaijan\". Several appeals were filed by both Armenian and international organizations, condemning the Azerbaijani government and calling on it to desist from such activity. In 2006, Azerbaijan barred European Parliament members from investigating the claims, charging them with a \"biased and hysterical approach\" to the issue and stating that it would only accept a delegation if it visited Armenian-occupied territory as well. In the spring of 2006, a journalist from the Institute for War and Peace Reporting who visited the area reported that no visible traces of the cemetery remained. In the same year, photographs taken from Iran showed that the cemetery site had been turned into a military shooting range. The destruction of the cemetery has been widely described by Armenian sources, and some non-Armenian sources, as an act of \"cultural genocide.\"\nIn Azerbaijan, the Armenian genocide is officially denied and is considered a hoax. According to the state ideology of Azerbaijan, a genocide of Azerbaijanis, carried out by Armenians and Russians, took place starting from 1813. Mahmudov has claimed that Armenians first appeared in Karabakh in 1828. Azerbaijani academics and politicians have claimed that foreign historians falsify the history of Azerbaijan and criticism was directed towards a Russian documentary about the regions of Karabakh and Nakhchivan and the historical Armenian presence in these areas. According to the institute director of the Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences Yagub Mahmudov, prior to 1918 \"there was never an Armenian state in the South Caucasus\". According to Mahmudov, Ilham Aliyev's statement in which he said that \"Irevan is our [Azerbaijan's] historic land, and we, Azerbaijanis must return to these historic lands\", was based \"historical facts\" and \"historical reality\". Mahmudov also stated that the claim that Armenians are the most ancient people in the region is based on propaganda, and said that Armenians are non-natives of the region, having only arrived in the area after Russian victories over Iran and the Ottoman Empire in the first half of the 19th century. The institute director also said: \"The Azerbaijani soldier should know that the land under the feet of provocative Armenians is Azerbaijani land. The enemy can never defeat Azerbaijanis on Azerbaijani soil. Those who rule the Armenian state today must fundamentally change their political course. The Armenians cannot defeat us by sitting in our historic city of Irevan.\"\nIn relation to Iran.\nHistoric falsifications in Azerbaijan, in relation to Iran and its history, are \"backed by state and state backed non-governmental organizational bodies\", ranging \"from elementary school all the way to the highest level of universities\". As a result of the two Russo-Iranian Wars of the 19th century, the border between what is present-day Iran and the Republic of Azerbaijan was formed. Although there had not been a historical Azerbaijani state to speak of in history, the demarcation, set at the Aras river, left significant numbers of what were later coined \"Azerbaijanis\" to the north of the Aras river. During the existence of the Azerbaijan SSR, as a result of Soviet-era historical revionism and myth-building, the notion of a \"northern\" and \"southern\" Azerbaijan was formulated and spread throughout the Soviet Union. During the Soviet nation building campaign, any event, both past and present, that had ever occurred in what is the present-day Azerbaijan Republic and Iranian Azerbaijan were rebranded as phenomenons of \"Azerbaijani culture\". Any Iranian ruler or poet that had lived in the area was assigned to the newly rebranded identity of the Transcaucasian Turkophones, in other words \"Azerbaijanis\".\nAccording to Michael P. Croissant: \"It was charged that the \"two Azerbaijans\", once united, were separated artificially by a conspiracy between imperial Russia and Iran\". This notion based on illegitimate historic revisionism suited Soviet political purposes well (based on \"anti-imperialism\"), and became the basis for irredentism among Azerbaijani nationalists in the last years of the Soviet Union, shortly prior to the establishment of the Azerbaijan Republic in 1991.\nIn Azerbaijan, periods and aspects of Iranian history are usually claimed as being an \"Azerbaijani\" product in a distortion of history, and historic Iranian figures, such as the Persian poet Nizami Ganjavi are called \"Azerbaijanis\", contrary to universally acknowledged fact. In the Azerbaijan SSR, forgeries such as an alleged \"Turkish \"divan\"\" and falsified verses were published in order to \"Turkify\" Nizami Ganjavi. Although this type of irredentism was initially the result of the nation building policy of the Soviets, it became an instrument for \"biased, pseudo-academic approaches and political speculations\" in the nationalistic aspirations of the young Azerbaijan Republic. In the modern Azerbaijan Republic, historiography is written with the aim of retroactively Turkifying many of the peoples and kingdoms that existed prior to the arrival of Turks in the region, including the Iranian Medes. According to professor of history George Bournoutian:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As noted, in order to construct an Azerbaijani national history and identity based on the territorial definition of a nation, as well as to reduce the influence of Islam and Iran, the Azeri nationalists, prompted by Moscow devised an \"Azeri\" alphabet, which replaced the Arabo-Persian script. In the 1930s a number of Soviet historians, including the prominent Russian Orientalist, Ilya Petrushevskii, were instructed by the Kremlin to accept the totally unsubstantiated notion that the territory of the former Iranian khanates (except Yerevan, which had become Soviet Armenia) was part of an Azerbaijani nation. Petrushevskii's two important studies dealing with the South Caucasus, therefore, use the term Azerbaijan and Azerbaijani in his works on the history of the region from the sixteenth to the nineteenth centuries. Other Russian academics went even further and claimed that an Azeri nation had existed from ancient times and had continued to the present. Since all the Russian surveys and almost all nineteenth-century Russian primary sources referred to the Muslims who resided in the South Caucasus as \"Tatars\" and not \"Azerbaijanis\", Soviet historians simply substituted Azerbaijani for Tatars. Azeri historians and writers, starting in 1937, followed suit and began to view the three-thousand-year history of the region as that of Azerbaijan. The pre-Iranian, Iranian, and Arab eras were expunged. Anyone who lived in the territory of Soviet Azerbaijan was classified as Azeri; hence the great Iranian poet Nezami, who had written only in Persian, became the national poet of Azerbaijan.\nBournoutian adds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although after Stalin's death arguments rose between Azerbaijani historians and Soviet Iranologists dealing with the history of the region in ancient times (specifically the era of the Medes), no Soviet historian dared to question the use of the term Azerbaijan or Azerbaijani in modern times. As late as 1991, the Institute of History of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, published a book by an Azeri historian, in which it not only equated the \"Tatars\" with the present-day Azeris, but the author, discussing the population numbers in 1842, also included Nakhichevan and Ordubad in \"Azerbaijan\". The author, just like Petrushevskii, totally ignored the fact that between 1828 and 1921, Nakhichivan and Ordubad were first part of the Armenian Province and then part of the Yerevan guberniia and had only become part of Soviet Azerbaijan, some eight decades later ... Although the overwhelming number of nineteenth-century Russian and Iranian, as well as present-day European historians view the Iranian province of Azarbayjan and the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan as two separate \"geographical\" and \"political\" entities, modern Azeri historians and geographers view it as a single state that has been separated into \"northern\" and \"southern\" sectors and which will be united in the future. ... Since the collapse of the Soviet Union the current Azeri historians have not only continued to use the terms \"northern\" and \"southern\" Azerbaijan, but also assert that the present-day Armenian Republic was a part of northern Azerbaijan. In their fury over what they view as the \"Armenian occupation\" of Nagorno-Karabakh [which incidentally was an autonomous Armenian region within Soviet Azerbaijan], Azeri politicians and historians deny any historic Armenian presence in the South Caucasus and add that all Armenian architectural monuments located in the present-day Republic of Azerbaijan are not Armenian but [Caucasian] Albanian.\nNorth Korea and the Korean War.\nSince the start of the Korean War (1950\u20131953), the government of North Korea has consistently denied that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) launched the attack with which it began the war for the Communist unification of Korea. The historiography of the DPRK maintains that the war was provoked by South Korea, at the instigation of the United States: \"On June 17, Juche 39 [1950] the then U.S. President [Harry S.] Truman sent [John Foster] Dulles as his special envoy to South Korea to examine the anti-North war scenario and give an order to start the attack. On June 18, Dulles inspected the 38th parallel and the war preparations of the 'ROK Army' units. That day he told Syngman Rhee to start the attack on North Korea with the counter-propaganda that North Korea first 'invaded' the south.\"\nFurther North Korean pronouncements included the claim that the U.S. needed the peninsula of Korea as \"a bridgehead, for invading the Asian continent, and as a strategic base, from which to fight against national-liberation movements and socialism, and, ultimately, to attain world supremacy.\" Likewise, the DPRK denied the war crimes committed by the Korean People's Army in the course of the war; nonetheless, in the 1951\u20131952 period, the Workers' Party of Korea (WPK) privately admitted to the \"excesses\" of their earlier campaign against North Korean citizens who had collaborated with the enemy\u00a0\u2013 either actually or allegedly\u00a0\u2013 during the US\u2013South Korean occupation of North Korea. Later, the WPK blamed every wartime atrocity upon the U.S. Armed Forces, e.g. the Sinchon Massacre (17 October \u2013 7 December 1950) occurred during the retreat of the DPRK government from Hwanghae Province, in the south-west of North Korea.\nThe campaign against \"collaborators\" was attributed to political and ideological manipulations by the U.S.; the high-ranking leader Pak Chang-ok said that the American enemy had \"started to use a new method, namely, it donned a leftist garb, which considerably influenced the inexperienced cadres of the Party and government organs.\" Kathryn Weathersby's \"Soviet Aims in Korea and the Origins of the Korean War, 1945\u20131950: New Evidence from Russian Archives\" (1993) confirmed that the Korean War was launched by order of Kim Il Sung (1912\u20131994); and also refuted the DPRK's allegations of biological warfare in the Korean War. The Korean Central News Agency dismissed the historical record of Soviet documents as \"sheer forgery\".\nHolocaust denial.\nHolocaust deniers usually reject the term \"Holocaust denier\" as an inaccurate description of their historical point of view, instead preferring the term \"Holocaust revisionist\"; nonetheless, scholars prefer \"Holocaust denier\" to differentiate deniers from legitimate historical revisionists, whose goal is to accurately analyse historical evidence with established methods. Historian Alan Berger reports that Holocaust deniers argue in support of a preconceived theory \u2013 that the Holocaust either did not occur or was mostly a hoax \u2013 by ignoring extensive historical evidence to the contrary.\nWhen the author David Irving lost his English libel case against Deborah Lipstadt, and her publisher, Penguin Books, and thus was publicly discredited and identified as a Holocaust denier, the trial judge, Justice Charles Gray, concluded that \"Irving has, for his own ideological reasons, persistently and deliberately misrepresented and manipulated historical evidence; that, for the same reasons, he has portrayed Hitler in an unwarrantedly favorable light, principally in relation to his attitude towards, and responsibility for, the treatment of the Jews; that he is an active Holocaust denier; that he is anti-semitic and racist, and that he associates with right-wing extremists who promote neo-Nazism.\"\nOn 20 February 2006, Irving was found guilty, and sentenced to three years imprisonment for Holocaust denial, under Austria's 1947 law banning Nazi revivalism and criminalizing the \"public denial, belittling or justification of National Socialist crimes\". Besides Austria, eleven other countries\u00a0\u2013 including Belgium, France, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, and Switzerland\u00a0\u2013 have criminalized Holocaust denial as punishable with imprisonment.\nNorth Macedonia.\nAccording to Eugene N. Borza, the Macedonians are in search of their past to legitimize their unsure present, in the disorder of the Balkan politics. Ivaylo Dichev claims that the Macedonian historiography has the impossible task of filling the huge gaps between the ancient kingdom of Macedon, that collapsed in 2nd century BC, the 10th\u201311th century state of the Cometopuls, and the Yugoslav Macedonia established in the middle of the 20th century.\nAccording to Ulf Brunnbauer, modern Macedonian historiography is highly politicized, because the Macedonian nation-building process is still in development. The recent nation-building project imposes the idea of a \"Macedonian nation\" with unbroken continuity from the antiquity (Ancient Macedonians) to the modern times, which has been criticized by some domestic and foreign scholars for ahistorically projecting modern ethnic distinctions into the past. In this way generations of students were educated in pseudohistory.\nHistoriography in Africa.\nRwandan genocide denial has proliferated in multiple contexts despite the fact that the mass killings took place amidst widespread news coverage and additionally later received detailed study during the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Perpetrators of violent attacks against civilians in Rwanda, known as the \"g\u00e9nocidaires\", have been an element of this controversy. Concentrated details involving the planning, financing, and progress of war crimes have gotten unearthed, yet campaigns of denial endure given the influences of extremist ideologies surrounding ethnicity and race.\nIn May 2020, the \"Los Angeles Review of Books\" interviewed legal advocate and writer Linda Melvern on the topic, with her having assisted with ICTR related prosecutions. She concluded that the \"pernicious influence\" of the Hutu Power faction that enacted the widespread murders \"lives on in rumor, stereotype, lies, and propaganda.\" She also remarked that said \"movement's campaign of genocide denial has confused many, recruited some, and shielded others\" such that with \"the use of seemingly sound research methods, the g\u00e9nocidaires pose a threat, especially to those who might not be aware of the historical facts.\"\nIn terms of the 21st Century, increased international debate and discussion have partially failed to prevent efforts obfuscating the facts surrounding the Sudanese genocide. In March 2010, Omer Ismail and John Prendergast wrote for the Christian Science Monitor warning of multiple distortions of reality with lasting implications given the actions of the then Khartoum-based government. Specifically, they alleged that the state had \"systematically denied access to the United Nations/African Union observer mission [personnel] to investigate attacks on civilians, so many of these attacks go unreported and the culpability remains mysterious.\"\nHistorical negationism within the territories of multiple African nations constitutes a crime from a de jure legal perspective. For example, denying the Rwandan genocide has led to prosecutions in that country. However, the negative social affects from disinformation and misinformation have expanded in some cases using modern media.\nIn textbooks.\nJapan.\nThe history textbook controversy centres upon the secondary school history textbook \"Atarashii Rekishi Ky\u014dkasho\" (\"New History Textbook\") said to minimize the nature of Japanese militarism in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894\u20131895), in annexing Korea in 1910, in the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937\u20131945), and in the Pacific Theater of World War II (1941\u20131945). The conservative Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform commissioned the \"Atarashii Rekishi Ky\u014dkasho\" textbook with the purpose of traditional national and international view of that Japanese historical period. The Ministry of Education vets all history textbooks, especially those containing references to imperialist atrocities due to a special provision in the textbook examination rules to avoid inflaming controversy with neighbouring countries; however, the \"Atarashii Rekishi Ky\u014dkasho\" de-emphasizes aggressive Japanese Imperial wartime behaviour and the matter of Chinese and Korean comfort women. When it comes to the Nanking massacre, the textbook only refers to it as the Nanking Incident, mentioning there were civilian casualties without delving into specifics, and mentioning it again in relation to the Tokyo tribunal, stating that there are multiple opinions about the topic with controversies continuing to this day (see Nanking massacre denial). In 2007, the Ministry of Education attempted to revise textbooks regarding the Battle of Okinawa, lessening the involvement of the Imperial Japanese Army in Okinawan civilian mass suicides.\nPakistan.\nAllegations of historical revisionism have been made regarding Pakistani textbooks in that they are laced with Indophobic, Hindu-hating and Islamist bias. Pakistan's use of officially published textbooks has been criticized for using schools to more subtly foster religious extremism, whitewashing Muslim conquests on the Indian subcontinent and promoting \"expansive pan-Islamic imaginings\" that \"detect the beginnings of Pakistan in the birth of Islam on the Arabian peninsula\". Since 2001, the Pakistani government has stated that curriculum reforms have been underway by the Ministry of Education.\nSouth Korea.\n12 October 2015, South Korea's government has announced controversial plans to control the history textbooks used in secondary schools despite oppositional concerns of people and academics that the decision is made to glorify the history of those who served the Imperial Japanese government (Chinilpa). Section and the authoritarian dictatorships in South Korea during 1960s\u20131980s.The Ministry of Education announced that it would put the secondary-school history textbook under state control; \"This was an inevitable choice in order to straighten out historical errors and end the social dispute caused by ideological bias in the textbooks,\" Hwang Woo-yea, education minister said on 12 October 2015. According to the government's plan, the current history textbooks of South Korea will be replaced by a single textbook written by a panel of government-appointed historians and the new series of publications would be issued under the title \"The Correct Textbook of History\" and are to be issued to the public and private primary and secondary schools in 2017 onwards.\nThe move has sparked fierce criticism from academics who argue that the system can be used to distort the history and glorify the history of those who served the Imperial Japanese government (Chinilpa) and of the authoritarian dictatorships. Moreover, 466 organizations including Korean Teachers and Education Workers Union formed History Act Network in solidarity and have staged protests: \"The government's decision allows the state too much control and power and, therefore, it is against political neutrality that is certainly the fundamental principle of education.\" Many South Korean historians condemned Kyohaksa for their text glorifying those who served the Imperial Japanese government (Chinilpa) and the authoritarian dictatorship with a far-right political perspective. On the other hand, New Right supporters welcomed the textbook, saying that \"the new textbook finally describes historical truths contrary to the history textbooks published by left-wing publishers\", and the textbook issue became intensified as a case of ideological conflict. In Korean history, the history textbook was once put under state control during the authoritarian regime under Park Chung Hee (1963\u20131979), who is a father of Park Geun-hye, former President of South Korea, and was used as a means to keep the Yushin Regime, also known as the Yushin Dictatorship; however, there had been continuous criticisms about the system especially from the 1980s when Korea experienced a dramatic democratic development. In 2003, reformation of textbook began when the textbooks on Korean modern and contemporary history were published though the Textbook Screening System, which allows textbooks to be published not by a single government body but by many different companies, for the first time.\nTurkey.\nEducation in Turkey is centralized, and its policy, administration, and content are each determined by the Turkish government. Textbooks taught in schools are either prepared directly by the Ministry of National Education (MEB) or must be approved by its Instruction and Education Board. In practice, this means that the Turkish government is directly responsible for what textbooks are taught in schools across Turkey. In 2014, Taner Ak\u00e7am, writing for the \"Armenian Weekly\", discussed 2014\u20132015 Turkish elementary and middle school textbooks that the MEB had made available on the internet. He found that Turkish history textbooks describe Armenians as people \"who are incited by foreigners, who aim to break apart the state and the country, and who murdered Turks and Muslims.\" The Armenian genocide is referred to as the \"Armenian matter\", and is described as a lie perpetrated to further the perceived hidden agenda of Armenians. Recognition of the Armenian genocide is defined as the \"biggest threat to Turkish national security\".\nAk\u00e7am summarized one textbook that claims the Armenians had sided with the Russians during the war. The 1909 Adana massacre, in which as many as 20,000\u201330,000 Armenians were massacred, is identified as \"The Rebellion of Armenians of Adana\". According to the book, the Armenian Hnchak and Dashnak organizations instituted rebellions in many parts of Anatolia, and \"didn't hesitate to kill Armenians who would not join them,\" issuing instructions that \"if you want to survive you have to kill your neighbor first.\" Claims highlighted by Ak\u00e7am: \"[The Armenians murdered] many people living in villages, even children, by attacking Turkish villages, which had become defenseless because all the Turkish men were fighting on the war fronts. ... They stabbed the Ottoman forces in the back. They created obstacles for the operations of the Ottoman units by cutting off their supply routes and destroying bridges and roads. ... They spied for Russia and by rebelling in the cities where they were located, they eased the way for the Russian invasion. ... Since the Armenians who engaged in massacres in collaboration with the Russians created a dangerous situation, this law required the migration of [Armenian people] from the towns they were living in to Syria, a safe Ottoman territory. ... Despite being in the midst of war, the Ottoman state took precautions and measures when it came to the Armenians who were migrating. Their tax payments were postponed, they were permitted to take any personal property they wished, government officials were assigned to ensure that they were protected from attacks during the journey and that their needs were met, police stations were established to ensure that their lives and properties were secure.\"\nSimilar revisionist claims found in other textbooks by Ak\u00e7am included that Armenian \"back-stabbing\" was the reason the Ottomans lost the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u201378 (similar to the post-War German stab-in-the-back myth), that the Hamidian massacres never happened, that the Armenians were armed by the Russians during late World War I to fight the Ottomans (in reality they had already been nearly annihilated from the area by this point), that Armenians killed 600,000 Turks during said war, that the deportation were to save Armenians from other violent Armenian gangs, and that deported Armenians were later allowed to retrieve their possessions and return to Turkey unharmed. As of 2015, Turkish textbooks continue to refer to Armenians as \"traitors,\" deny the genocide, and assert that the Ottoman Turks \"took necessary measures to counter Armenian separatism\". Students are taught that Armenians were forcibly relocated to defend Turkish nationals from attacks, and Armenians are described as \"dishonorable and treacherous\".\nYugoslavia.\nThroughout the post war era, though Tito denounced nationalist sentiments in historiography, those trends continued with Croat and Serbian academics at times accusing each other of misrepresenting each other's histories, especially in relation to the Croat-Nazi alliance. Communist historiography was challenged in the 1980s and a rehabilitation of Serbian nationalism by Serbian historians began. Historians and other members of the intelligentsia belonging to the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts (SANU) and the Writers Association played a significant role in the explanation of the new historical narrative. The process of writing a \"new Serbian history\" paralleled alongside the emerging ethno-nationalist mobilization of Serbs with the objective of reorganizing the Yugoslav federation. Using ideas and concepts from Holocaust historiography, Serbian historians alongside church leaders applied it to World War Two Yugoslavia and equated the Serbs with Jews and Croats with Nazi Germans.\nChetniks along with the Ustashe were vilified by Tito era historiography within Yugoslavia. In the 1980s, Serbian historians initiated the process of re-examining the narrative of how World War Two was told in Yugoslavia which was accompanied by the rehabilitation of \u010cetnik leader Dra\u017ea Mihailovi\u0107. Monographs relating to Mihailovi\u0107 and the \u010cetnik movement were produced by some younger historians who were ideologically close to it towards the end of the 1990s. Being preoccupied with the era, Serbian historians have looked to vindicate the history of the Chetniks by portraying them as righteous freedom fighters battling the Nazis while removing from history books the ambiguous alliances with the Italians and Germans. Whereas the crimes committed by Chetniks against Croats and Muslims in Serbian historiography are overall \"cloaked in silence\". During the Milo\u0161evi\u0107 era, Serbian history was falsified to obscure the role Serbian collaborators Milan Nedi\u0107 and Dimitrije Ljoti\u0107 played in cleansing Serbia's Jewish community, killing them in the country or deporting them to Eastern European concentration camps.\nIn the 1990s following a massive Western media coverage of the Yugoslav Wars, there was a rise of the publications considering the matter on historical revisionism of former Yugoslavia. One of the most prominent authors on the field of historical revisionism in the 1990s considering the newly emerged republics is Noel Malcolm and his works \"Bosnia: A Short History (1994)\" and \"Kosovo: A Short History (1998)\", that have seen a robust debate among historians following their release; following the release of the latter, the merits of the book were the subject of an extended debate in \"Foreign Affairs\". Critics said that the book was \"marred by his sympathies for its ethnic Albanian separatists, anti-Serbian bias, and illusions about the Balkans\". In late 1999, Thomas Emmert of the history faculty of Gustavus Adolphus College in Minnesota reviewed the book in \"Journal of Southern Europe and the Balkans Online\" and while praising aspects of the book also asserted that it was \"shaped by the author's overriding determination to challenge Serbian myths\", that Malcolm was \"partisan\", and also complained that the book made a \"transparent attempt to prove that the main Serbian myths are false\". In 2006, a study by Frederick Anscombe looked at issues surrounding scholarship on Kosovo such as Noel Malcolm's work \"Kosovo: A Short History\". Anscombe noted that Malcolm offered a \"detailed critique of the competing versions of Kosovo's history\" and that his work marked a \"remarkable reversal\" of previous acceptance by Western historians of the \"Serbian account\" regarding the migration of the Serbs (1690) from Kosovo. Malcolm has been criticized for being \"anti-Serbian\" and selective like the Serbs with the sources, while other more restrained critics note that \"his arguments are unconvincing\". Anscombe noted that Malcolm, like Serbian and Yugoslav historians who have ignored his conclusions, sidelines and is unwilling to consider indigenous evidence such as that from the Ottoman archive when composing national history.\nFrench law recognizing colonialism's positive value.\nOn 23 February 2005, the Union for a Popular Movement conservative majority at the French National Assembly voted a law compelling history textbooks and teachers to \"acknowledge and recognize in particular the positive role of the French presence abroad, especially in North Africa\". It was criticized by historians and teachers, among them Pierre Vidal-Naquet, who refused to recognize the French Parliament's right to influence the way history is written (despite the French Holocaust denial laws, see \"Loi Gayssot\"). That law was also challenged by left-wing parties and the former French colonies; critics argued that the law was tantamount to refusing to acknowledge the racism inherent to French colonialism, and that the law proper is a form of historical revisionism.\nMarcos martial law negationism in the Philippines.\nIn the Philippines, the biggest examples of historical negationism are linked to the Marcos family dynasty, usually Imelda Marcos, Bongbong Marcos, and Imee Marcos specifically. They have been accused of denying or trivializing the human rights violations during martial law and the plunder of the Philippines' coffers while Ferdinand Marcos was president.\nDenial of the Muslim conquest of the Iberian peninsula.\nA spin-off of the vision of history espoused by the \"inclusive Spanish nationalism\" built in opposition to the National-Catholic brand of Spanish nationalism, it was first coined by Ignacio Olag\u00fce (a dilettante historian connected to the early Spanish fascism) particularly in the former's 1974 work \"La revoluci\u00f3n isl\u00e1mica en Occidente\" (\"The Islamic revolution in the West\"). Olag\u00fce argued that it was impossible for Arabs to have invaded Hispania in 711 since they had not yet established their dominance over the neighbouring part of North Africa. Instead, Olag\u00fce held that the events of 711 could be explained as skirmishes involving allied North African troops within the context of a civil war pitting Catholic Goths led by Roderic against Goths adhering to some form of Arianism and a largely-nontrinitarian Spanish population, including Nestorians, Gnostics and Manichaeans. The negationist postulates of Olag\u00fce were later adopted by certain sectors within Andalusian nationalism. These ideas were resurrected in the early 21st century by the Arabist Emilio Gonz\u00e1lez Ferr\u00edn.\nAustralia.\nThe Indigenous Australian population plummeted in the Australian frontier wars. The aboriginal people were regarded as lacking any concept of property or land rights: consequently, Australia was considered \"terra nullius\". Massacres and mass poisonings were carried out against indigenous people. Indigenous children were removed from their families in what is known as the Stolen Generations. Several critics like Andrew Bolt and Keith Windschuttle have rejected the scholarly evidence pointing to the genocide against Indigenous Australians and have accused historians like Henry Reynolds and Lyndall Ryan of deliberately fabricating Australian history to suit a political agenda.\nNakba.\nNakba denial is a form of historical denialism pertaining to the 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight and its accompanying effects, which Palestinians refer to collectively as the \"Nakba\" (lit.\u2009'catastrophe'). Underlying assumptions of Nakba denial cited by scholars can include the denial of historically documented violence against Palestinians, the denial of a distinct Palestinian identity, the idea that Palestine was barren land, and the notion that Palestinian dispossession were part of mutual transfers between Arabs and Jews justified by war.\nRamifications and judicature.\n16 European countries as well as Canada and Israel have criminalized historical negationism of the Holocaust. The Council of Europe defines it as the \"denial, gross minimisation, approval or justification of genocide or crimes against humanity\" (article 6, \"Additional Protocol to the Convention on cybercrime\").\nInternational law.\nSome council-member states proposed an additional protocol to the Council of Europe Cybercrime Convention, addressing materials and \"acts of racist or xenophobic nature committed through computer networks\"; it was negotiated from late 2001 to early 2002, and, on 7 November 2002, the Council of Europe Committee of Ministers adopted the protocol's final text titled \"Additional Protocol to the Convention on Cyber-crime, Concerning the Criminalization of Acts of a Racist and Xenophobic Nature Committed through Computer Systems\", (\"Protocol\"). It opened on 28 January 2003, and became current on 1 March 2006; as of 30 November 2011, 20 States have signed and ratified the Protocol, and 15 others have signed, but not yet ratified it (including Canada and South Africa).\nThe Protocol requires participant States to criminalize the dissemination of racist and xenophobic material, and of racist and xenophobic threats and insults through computer networks, such as the Internet. Article 6, Section 1 of the Protocol specifically covers Holocaust denial, and other genocides recognized as such by international courts, established since 1945, by relevant international legal instruments. Section 2 of Article 6 allows a Party to the Protocol, at their discretion, only to prosecute the violator if the crime is committed with the intent to incite hatred or discrimination or violence; or to use a reservation, by allowing a Party not to apply Article 6 \u2013 either partly or entirely. The Council of Europe's \"Explanatory Report\" of the Protocol says that the \"European Court of Human Rights has made it clear that the denial or revision of 'clearly established historical facts \u2013 such as the Holocaust \u00a0\u2013 \u00a0... would be removed from the protection of Article 10 by Article 17' of the European Convention on Human Rights\" (see the \"Lehideux and Isorni\" judgement of 23 September 1998);\nTwo of the English-speaking states in Europe, Ireland and the United Kingdom, have not signed the additional protocol, (the third, Malta, signed on 28 January 2003, but has not yet ratified it). On 8 July 2005 Canada became the only non-European state to sign the convention. They were joined by South Africa in April 2008. The United States government does not believe that the final version of the Protocol is consistent with the United States' First Amendment Constitutional rights and has informed the Council of Europe that the United States will not become a Party to the protocol.\nDomestic law.\nThere are domestic laws against negationism and hate speech (which may encompass negationism) in several countries, including:\nAdditionally, the Netherlands considers denying the Holocaust as a hate crime \u2013 which is a punishable offence. Wider use of domestic laws include the 1990 French Gayssot Act that prohibits any \"racist, anti-Semitic or xenophobic\" speech, and the Czech Republic and Ukraine have criminalized the denial and the minimization of Communist-era crimes.\nIn fiction.\nIn the novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\" (1949) by George Orwell, the government of Oceania continually revises historical records to concord with the contemporary political explanations of The Party. When Oceania is at war with Eurasia, the public records (newspapers, cinema, television) indicate that Oceania has been always at war with Eurasia; yet, when Eurasia and Oceania are no longer fighting each other, the historical records are subjected to negationism; thus, the populace are brainwashed to believe that Oceania and Eurasia always have been allies against Eastasia. The protagonist of the story, Winston Smith, is an editor in the Ministry of Truth, responsible for effecting the continual historical revisionism that will negate the contradictions of the past upon the contemporary world of Oceania.\nTo cope with the psychological stresses of life during wartime, Smith begins a diary, in which he observes that \"He who controls the present, controls the past. He who controls the past, controls the future\", and so illustrates the principal, ideological purpose of historical negationism.\nFranz Kurowski was an extremely prolific right-wing German writer who dedicated his entire career to the production of Nazi military propaganda, followed by post-war military pulp fiction and revisionist histories of World War II, claiming the humane behaviour and innocence of war crimes of the \"Wehrmacht\", glorifying war as a desirable state, while fabricating eyewitness reports of atrocities allegedly committed by the Allies, especially Bomber Command and the air raids on Cologne and Dresden as a planned genocide of the civilian population.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26094", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26094", "title": "Romanticism", "text": "Artistic, literary, musical, and intellectual movement\nRomanticism (also known as the Romantic movement or Romantic era) was an artistic and intellectual movement that originated in Europe towards the end of the 18th century. The purpose of the movement was to advocate for the importance of subjectivity, imagination, and appreciation of nature in society and culture in response to the Age of Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution.\nRomanticists rejected the social conventions of the time in favour of a moral outlook known as individualism. They argued that passion and intuition were crucial to understanding the world, and that beauty is more than merely an affair of form, but rather something that evokes a strong emotional response. With this philosophical foundation, the Romanticists elevated several key themes to which they were deeply committed: a reverence for nature and the supernatural, an idealization of the past as a nobler era, a fascination with the exotic and the mysterious, and a celebration of the heroic and the sublime.\nThe Romanticist movement had a particular fondness for the Middle Ages, which to them represented an era of chivalry, heroism, and a more organic relationship between humans and their environment. This idealization contrasted sharply with the values of their contemporary industrial society, which they considered alienating for its economic materialism and environmental degradation. The movement's illustration of the Middle Ages was a central theme in debates, with allegations that Romanticist portrayals often overlooked the downsides of medieval life.\nThe consensus is that Romanticism peaked from 1800 until 1850. However, a \"Late Romantic\" period and \"Neoromantic\" revivals are also discussed. These extensions of the movement are characterized by a resistance to the increasingly experimental and abstract forms that culminated in modern art, and the deconstruction of traditional tonal harmony in music. They continued the Romantic ideal, stressing depth of emotion in art and music while showcasing technical mastery in a mature Romantic style. By the time of World War I, though, the cultural and artistic climate had changed to such a degree that Romanticism essentially dispersed into subsequent movements. The final Late Romanticist figures to maintain the Romantic ideals died in the 1940s. Though they were still widely respected, they were seen as anachronisms at that point.\nRomanticism was a complex movement with a variety of viewpoints that permeated Western civilization across the globe. The movement and its opposing ideologies mutually shaped each other over time. After its end, Romantic thought and art exerted a sweeping influence on art and music, speculative fiction, philosophy, politics, and environmentalism that has endured to the present day, although the modern notion of \"romanticization\" and the act of \"romanticizing\" something often has little to do with the historical movement.\nOverview.\nTime line.\nFor most of the Western world, Romanticism was at its peak from approximately 1800 to 1850. The first Romantic ideas arose from an earlier German Counter-Enlightenment movement called \"Sturm und Drang\" (German: \"Storm and Stress\"). This movement directly criticized the Enlightenment's position that humans can fully comprehend the world through rationality alone, suggesting that intuition and emotion are key components of insight and understanding. Published in 1774, \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe began to shape the Romanticist movement and its ideals. The events and ideologies of the French Revolution were also direct influences on the movement; many early Romantics throughout Europe sympathized with the ideals and achievements of French revolutionaries.\nA confluence of circumstances led to Romanticism's decline in the mid-19th century, including (but not limited to) the rise of Realism and Naturalism, Charles Darwin's publishing of the \"Origin of Species\", the transition from widespread revolution in Europe to a more conservative climate, and a shift in public consciousness to the immediate impact of technology and urbanization on the working class. By World War I, Romanticism was overshadowed by new cultural, social, and political movements, many of them hostile to the perceived illusions and preoccupations of the Romantics.\nHowever, Romanticism has had a lasting impact on Western civilization, and many works of art, music, and literature that embody the Romantic ideals have been made after the end of the Romantic era. The movement's advocacy for nature appreciation is cited as an influence for current nature conservation efforts. The majority of film scores from the Golden Age of Hollywood were written in the lush orchestral Romantic style, and this genre of orchestral cinematic music is still often seen in films of the 21st century. The philosophical underpinnings of the movement have influenced modern political theory, both among liberals and conservatives.\nPurpose.\nRomanticism was characterized by its emphasis on emotion and individualism as well as the glorification of the past and nature, preferring the medieval over the classical. Romanticism was partly a reaction to the Industrial Revolution, and the prevailing ideology of the Age of Enlightenment, especially the scientific rationalization of Nature. \nThe movement's ideals were embodied most strongly in the visual arts, music, and literature; it also had an impact on historiography, education, chess, and the social sciences. \nRomanticism had a significant and complex effect on politics: Romantic thinking influenced conservatism, liberalism, radicalism, and nationalism.\nRomanticism prioritized the artist's unique, individual imagination above the strictures of classical form. The movement emphasized intense emotion as an authentic source of aesthetic experience. It granted a new importance to experiences of sympathy, awe, wonder, and terror, in part by naturalizing such emotions as responses to the \"beautiful\" and the \"sublime\".\nRomantics stressed the nobility of folk art and ancient cultural practices, but also championed radical politics, unconventional behavior, and authentic spontaneity. In contrast to the rationalism and classicism of the Enlightenment, Romanticism revived medievalism and juxtaposed a pastoral conception of a more \"authentic\" European past with a highly critical view of recent social changes, including urbanization, brought about by the Industrial Revolution. Romanticism lionized the achievements of \"heroic\" individuals\u2014especially artists, who began to be represented as cultural leaders (one Romantic luminary, Percy Bysshe Shelley, described poets as the \"unacknowledged legislators of the world\" in his \"Defence of Poetry\").\nDefining Romanticism.\nBasic characteristics.\nRomanticism placed the highest importance on the freedom of the artists to authentically express their sentiments and ideas. Romantics like the German painter Caspar David Friedrich believed that an artist's emotions should dictate their formal approach; Friedrich went as far as declaring that \"the artist's feeling is his law\". The Romantic poet William Wordsworth, thinking along similar lines, wrote that poetry should begin with \"the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings\", which the poet then \"recollect[s] in tranquility\", enabling the poet to find a suitably unique form for representing such feelings.\nThe Romantics never doubted that emotionally motivated art would find suitable, harmonious modes for expressing its vital content\u2014if, that is, the artist steered clear of moribund conventions and distracting precedents. Samuel Taylor Coleridge and others thought there were natural laws the imagination of born artists followed instinctively when these individuals were, so to speak, \"left alone\" during the creative process. These \"natural laws\" could support a wide range of different formal approaches: as many, perhaps, as there were individuals making personally meaningful works of art. Many Romantics believed that works of artistic genius were created \"ex nihilo\", \"from nothing\", without recourse to existing models. This idea is often called \"romantic originality\". The translator and prominent Romantic August Wilhelm Schlegel argued in his \"Lectures on Dramatic Arts and Letters\" that the most valuable quality of human nature is its tendency to diverge and diversify.\nAccording to Isaiah Berlin, Romanticism embodied \"a new and restless spirit, seeking violently to burst through old and cramping forms, a nervous preoccupation with perpetually changing inner states of consciousness, a longing for the unbounded and the indefinable, for perpetual movement and change, an effort to return to the forgotten sources of life, a passionate effort at self-assertion both individual and collective, a search after means of expressing an unappeasable yearning for unattainable goals\".\nRomantic artists also shared a strong belief in the importance and inspirational qualities of Nature. Romantics were distrustful of cities and social conventions. They deplored Restoration and Enlightenment Era artists who were largely concerned with depicting and critiquing social relations, thereby neglecting the relationship between people and Nature. Romantics generally believed a close connection with Nature was beneficial for human beings, especially for individuals who broke off from society in order to encounter the natural world by themselves. \nRomantic literature was frequently written in a distinctive, personal \"voice\". As critic M. H. Abrams has observed, \"much of romantic poetry invited the reader to identify the protagonists with the poets themselves.\" This quality in Romantic literature, in turn, influenced the approach and reception of works in other media; it has seeped into everything from critical evaluations of individual style in painting, fashion, and music, to the auteur movement in modern filmmaking.\nEtymology.\nThe group of words with the root \"Roman\" in the various European languages, such as \"romance\" and \"Romanesque\", has a complicated history. By the 18th century, European languages\u2014notably German, French and Slavic languages\u2014were using the term \"Roman\" in the sense of the English word \"novel\", i.e. a work of popular narrative fiction. This usage derived from the term \"Romance languages\", which referred to vernacular (or popular) language in contrast to formal Latin. Most such novels took the form of \"chivalric romance\", tales of adventure, devotion and honour.\nThe founders of Romanticism, critics (and brothers) August Wilhelm Schlegel and Friedrich Schlegel, began to speak of \"romantische Poesie\" (\"romantic poetry\") in the 1790s, contrasting it with \"classic\" but in terms of spirit rather than merely dating. Friedrich Schlegel wrote in his 1800 essay \"Gespr\u00e4ch \u00fcber die Poesie\" (\"Dialogue on Poetry\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I seek and find the romantic among the older moderns, in Shakespeare, in Cervantes, in Italian poetry, in that age of chivalry, love and fable, from which the phenomenon and the word itself are derived.\nThe modern sense of the term spread more widely in France by its persistent use by Germaine de Sta\u00ebl in her \"De l'Allemagne\" (1813), recounting her travels in Germany. In England Wordsworth wrote in a preface to his poems of 1815 of the \"romantic harp\" and \"classic lyre\", but in 1820 Byron could still write, perhaps slightly disingenuously,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I perceive that in Germany, as well as in Italy, there is a great struggle about what they call 'Classical' and 'Romantic', terms which were not subjects of classification in England, at least when I left it four or five years ago.\nIt is only from the 1820s that Romanticism certainly knew itself by its name, and in 1824 the Acad\u00e9mie fran\u00e7aise took the wholly ineffective step of issuing a decree condemning it in literature.\nPeriod.\nThe period typically called Romantic varies greatly between different countries and different artistic media or areas of thought. Margaret Drabble described it in literature as taking place \"roughly between 1770 and 1848\", and few dates much earlier than 1770 will be found. In English literature, M. H. Abrams placed it between 1789, or 1798, this latter a very typical view, and about 1830, perhaps a little later than some other critics. Others have proposed 1780\u20131830. In other fields and other countries the period denominated as Romantic can be considerably different; musical Romanticism, for example, is generally regarded as only having ceased as a major artistic force as late as 1910, but in an extreme extension the \"Four Last Songs\" of Richard Strauss are described stylistically as \"Late Romantic\" and were composed in 1946\u20131948. However, in most fields the Romantic period is said to be over by about 1850, or earlier.\nThe early period of the Romantic era was a time of war, with the French Revolution (1789\u20131799) followed by the Napoleonic Wars until 1815. These wars, along with the political and social turmoil that went along with them, served as the background for Romanticism. The key generation of French Romantics born between 1795 and 1805 had, in the words of one of their number, Alfred de Vigny, been \"conceived between battles, attended school to the rolling of drums\". According to Jacques Barzun, there were three generations of Romantic artists. The first emerged in the 1790s and 1800s, the second in the 1820s, and the third later in the century.\nContext and place in history.\nThe precise characterization and specific definition of Romanticism has been the subject of debate in the fields of intellectual history and literary history throughout the 20th century, without any great measure of consensus emerging. That it was part of the Counter-Enlightenment, a reaction against the Age of Enlightenment, is generally accepted in current scholarship. Its relationship to the French Revolution, which began in 1789 in the very early stages of the period, is clearly important, but highly variable depending on geography and individual reactions. Most Romantics can be said to be broadly progressive in their views, but a considerable number always had, or developed, a wide range of conservative views, and nationalism was in many countries strongly associated with Romanticism, as discussed in detail below.\nIn philosophy and the history of ideas, Romanticism was seen by Isaiah Berlin as disrupting for over a century the classic Western traditions of rationality and the idea of moral absolutes and agreed values, leading \"to something like the melting away of the very notion of objective truth\", and hence not only to nationalism, but also fascism and totalitarianism, with a gradual recovery coming only after World War II. For the Romantics, Berlin says, in the realm of ethics, politics, aesthetics it was the authenticity and sincerity of the pursuit of inner goals that mattered; this applied equally to individuals and groups\u2014states, nations, movements. This is most evident in the aesthetics of romanticism, where the notion of eternal models, a Platonic vision of ideal beauty, which the artist seeks to convey, however imperfectly, on canvas or in sound, is replaced by a passionate belief in spiritual freedom, individual creativity. The painter, the poet, the composer do not hold up a mirror to nature, however ideal, but invent; they do not imitate (the doctrine of mimesis), but create not merely the means but the goals that they pursue; these goals represent the self-expression of the artist's own unique, inner vision, to set aside which in response to the demands of some \"external\" voice\u2014church, state, public opinion, family friends, arbiters of taste\u2014is an act of betrayal of what alone justifies their existence for those who are in any sense creative.\nArthur Lovejoy attempted to demonstrate the difficulty of defining Romanticism in his seminal article \"On the Discrimination of Romanticisms\" in his \"Essays in the History of Ideas\" (1948); some scholars see Romanticism as essentially continuous with the present, some like Robert Hughes see in it the inaugural moment of modernity, while writers of the 19th Century such as Chateaubriand, Novalis and Samuel Taylor Coleridge saw it as the beginning of a tradition of resistance to Enlightenment rationalism\u2014a \"Counter-Enlightenment\"\u2014 to be associated most closely with German Romanticism. Another early definition comes from Charles Baudelaire: \"Romanticism is precisely situated neither in choice of subject nor exact truth, but in the way of feeling.\"\nThe end of the Romantic era is marked in some areas by a new style of Realism, which affected literature, especially the novel and drama, painting, and even music, through Verismo opera. This movement was led by France, with Balzac and Flaubert in literature and Courbet in painting; Stendhal and Goya were important precursors of Realism in their respective media. However, Romantic styles, now often representing the established and safe style against which Realists rebelled, continued to flourish in many fields for the rest of the century and beyond. In music such works from after about 1850 are referred to by some writers as \"Late Romantic\" and by others as \"Neoromantic\" or \"Postromantic\", but other fields do not usually use these terms; in English literature and painting the convenient term \"Victorian\" avoids having to characterise the period further.\nIn northern Europe, the Early Romantic visionary optimism and belief that the world was in the process of great change and improvement had largely vanished, and some art became more conventionally political and polemical as its creators engaged polemically with the world as it was. Elsewhere, including in very different ways the United States and Russia, feelings that great change was underway or just about to come were still possible. Displays of intense emotion in art remained prominent, as did the exotic and historical settings pioneered by the Romantics, but experimentation with form and technique was generally reduced, often replaced with meticulous technique, as in the poems of Tennyson or many paintings. If not realist, late 19th-century art was often extremely detailed, and pride was taken in adding authentic details in a way that earlier Romantics did not trouble with. Many Romantic ideas about the nature and purpose of art, above all the pre-eminent importance of originality, remained important for later generations, and often underlie modern views, despite opposition from theorists. \nLiterature.\nIn literature, Romanticism found recurrent themes in the evocation or criticism of the past, the cult of \"sensibility\" with its emphasis on women and children, the isolation of the artist or narrator, and respect for nature. Furthermore, several romantic authors, such as Edgar Allan Poe, Charles Maturin and Nathaniel Hawthorne, based their writings on the supernatural/occult and human psychology. Romanticism tended to regard satire as something unworthy of serious attention, a view still influential today. The Romantic movement in literature was preceded by the Enlightenment and succeeded by Realism.\nThe precursors of Romanticism in English poetry go back to the middle of the 18th century, including figures such as Joseph Warton (headmaster at Winchester College) and his brother Thomas Warton, Professor of Poetry at Oxford University. Joseph maintained that invention and imagination were the chief qualities of a poet. The Scottish poet James Macpherson influenced the early development of Romanticism with the international success of his Ossian cycle of poems published in 1762, inspiring both Goethe and the young Walter Scott. Thomas Chatterton is generally considered the first Romantic poet in English. Both Chatterton and Macpherson's work involved elements of fraud, as what they claimed was earlier literature that they had discovered or compiled was, in fact, entirely their own work. The Gothic novel, beginning with Horace Walpole's \"The Castle of Otranto\" (1764), was an important precursor of one strain of Romanticism, with a delight in horror and threat, and exotic picturesque settings, matched in Walpole's case by his role in the early revival of Gothic architecture. \"Tristram Shandy\", a novel by Laurence Sterne (1759\u20131767), introduced a whimsical version of the anti-rational sentimental novel to the English literary public.\nGermany.\nAn early German influence came from Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, whose 1774 novel \"The Sorrows of Young Werther\" had young men throughout Europe emulating its protagonist, a young artist with a very sensitive and passionate temperament. At that time Germany was a multitude of small separate states, and Goethe's works would have a seminal influence in developing a unifying sense of nationalism. Another philosophical influence came from the German idealism of Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Friedrich Schelling, making Jena (where Fichte lived, as well as Schelling, Hegel, Schiller and the brothers Schlegel) a centre for early German Romanticism (also known as Jena Romanticism). Important writers were Ludwig Tieck, Novalis, Heinrich von Kleist, Friedrich H\u00f6lderlin and Heinrich Heine. Heidelberg later became a centre of German Romanticism, where writers and poets such as Clemens Brentano, Achim von Arnim and Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff (\"Aus dem Leben eines Taugenichts\") met regularly in literary circles.\nImportant motifs in German Romanticism are travelling, nature, for example the German Forest, and Germanic myths. The later German Romanticism of, for example E. T. A. Hoffmann's \"Der Sandmann\" (\"The Sandman\"), 1817, and Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff's \"Das Marmorbild\" (\"The Marble Statue\"), 1819, was darker in its motifs and has gothic elements. The significance to Romanticism of childhood innocence, the importance of imagination, and racial theories all combined to give an unprecedented importance to folk literature, non-classical mythology and children's literature, above all in Germany. Brentano and von Arnim were significant literary figures who together published \"Des Knaben Wunderhorn\" (\"The Boy's Magic Horn\" or cornucopia), a collection of versified folk tales, in 1806\u20131808. The first collection of \"Grimms' Fairy Tales\" by the Brothers Grimm was published in 1812. Unlike the much later work of Hans Christian Andersen, who was publishing his invented tales in Danish from 1835, these German works were at least mainly based on collected folk tales, and the Grimms remained true to the style of the telling in their early editions, though later rewriting some parts. One of the brothers, Jacob, published in 1835 \"Deutsche Mythologie\", a long academic work on Germanic mythology. Another strain is exemplified by Schiller's highly emotional language and the depiction of physical violence in his play \"The Robbers\" of 1781.\nGreat Britain.\nIn English literature, the key figures of the Romantic movement are considered to be the group of poets including William Wordsworth, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, John Keats, Lord Byron, Percy Bysshe Shelley and the much older William Blake, followed later by the isolated figure of John Clare; also such novelists as Walter Scott from Scotland and Mary Shelley, and the essayists William Hazlitt and Charles Lamb. The publication in 1798 of \"Lyrical Ballads\", with many of the finest poems by Wordsworth and Coleridge, is often held to mark the start of the movement..The majority of the poems in \"Lyrical Ballards\" were by Wordsworth, and many dealt with the lives of the poor in his native Lake District, or his feelings about nature\u2014which he more fully developed in his long poem \"The Prelude\", never published in his lifetime. The longest poem in the \"Lyrical Ballads\" was Coleridge's \"The Rime of the Ancient Mariner\", which showed the Gothic side of English Romanticism, and the exotic settings that many works featured. In the period when the two were writing, the Lake Poets were widely regarded as a marginal group of radicals, though they were supported by the critic and writer William Hazlitt and others. \nIn contrast, Lord Byron and Walter Scott achieved enormous fame and influence throughout Europe with works exploiting the violence and drama of their exotic and historical settings; Goethe called Byron \"undoubtedly the greatest genius of our century\". Scott achieved immediate success with his long narrative poem \"The Lay of the Last Minstrel\" in 1805, followed by the full epic poem \"Marmion\" in 1808. Both were set in the distant Scottish past, already evoked in \"Ossian\"; Romanticism and Scotland were to have a long and fruitful partnership. Byron had equal success with the first part of \"Childe Harold's Pilgrimage\" in 1812, followed by four \"Turkish tales\", all in the form of long poems, starting with \"The Giaour\" in 1813, drawing from his Grand Tour, which had reached Ottoman Europe, and orientalizing the themes of the Gothic novel in verse. These featured different variations of the \"Byronic hero\", and his own life contributed a further version. Scott meanwhile was effectively inventing the historical novel, beginning in 1814 with \"Waverley\", set in the 1745 Jacobite rising, which was a highly profitable success, followed by over 20 further Waverley Novels over the next 17 years, with settings going back to the Crusades that he had researched to a degree that was new in literature.\nIn contrast to Germany, Romanticism in English literature had little connection with nationalism, and the Romantics were often regarded with suspicion for the sympathy many felt for the ideals of the French Revolution, whose collapse and replacement with the dictatorship of Napoleon was, as elsewhere in Europe, a shock to the movement. Though his novels celebrated Scottish identity and history, Scott was politically a firm Unionist, but admitted to Jacobite sympathies. Several Romantics spent much time abroad, and a famous stay on Lake Geneva with Byron and Shelley in 1816 produced the hugely influential novel \"Frankenstein\" by Shelley's wife-to-be Mary Shelley and the novella \"The Vampyre\" by Byron's doctor John William Polidori. The lyrics of Robert Burns in Scotland, and Thomas Moore from Ireland, reflected in different ways their countries and the Romantic interest in folk literature, but neither had a fully Romantic approach to life or their work.\nThough they have modern critical champions such as Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs, Scott's novels are today more likely to be experienced in the form of the many operas that composers continued to base on them over the following decades, such as Donizetti's \"Lucia di Lammermoor\" and Vincenzo Bellini's \"I puritani\" (both 1835). Byron is now most highly regarded for his short lyrics and his generally unromantic prose writings, especially his letters, and his unfinished satire \"Don Juan\". Unlike many Romantics, Byron's widely publicised personal life appeared to match his work, and his death at 36 in 1824 from disease when helping the Greek War of Independence appeared from a distance to be a suitably Romantic end, entrenching his legend. Keats in 1821 and Shelley in 1822 both died in Italy, Blake (at almost 70) in 1827, and Coleridge largely ceased to write in the 1820s. Wordsworth was by 1820 respectable and highly regarded, holding a government sinecure, but wrote relatively little. In the discussion of English literature, the Romantic period is often regarded as finishing around the 1820s, or sometimes even earlier, although many authors of the succeeding decades were no less committed to Romantic values.\nThe most significant novelist in English during the peak Romantic period, other than Walter Scott, was Jane Austen, whose essentially conservative world-view had little in common with her Romantic contemporaries, retaining a strong belief in decorum and social rules, though critics such as Claudia L. Johnson have detected tremors under the surface of many works, such as \"Northanger Abbey\" (1817), \"Mansfield Park\" (1814) and \"Persuasion\" (1817). But around the mid-century the undoubtedly Romantic novels of the Yorkshire-based Bront\u00eb family appeared, most notably Charlotte's \"Jane Eyre\" and Emily's \"Wuthering Heights\", both published in 1847, which also introduced more Gothic themes. While these two novels were written and published after the Romantic period is said to have ended, their novels were heavily influenced by Romantic literature they had read as children.\nByron, Keats, and Shelley all wrote for the stage, but with little success in England, with Shelley's \"The Cenci\" perhaps the best work produced, though that was not played in a public theatre in England until a century after his death. Byron's plays, along with dramatizations of his poems and Scott's novels, were much more popular on the Continent, and especially in France, and through these versions several were turned into operas, many still performed today. If contemporary poets had little success on the stage, the period was a legendary one for performances of Shakespeare, and went some way to restoring his original texts and removing the Augustan \"improvements\" to them. The greatest actor of the period, Edmund Kean, restored the tragic ending to \"King Lear\"; Coleridge said that \"Seeing him act was like reading Shakespeare by flashes of lightning.\"\nScotland.\nAlthough after union with England in 1707 Scotland increasingly adopted English language and wider cultural norms, its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation. Allan Ramsay (1686\u20131758) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature, as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry, helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form. James Macpherson (1736\u20131796) was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation. Claiming to have found poetry written by the ancient bard Ossian, he published translations that acquired international popularity, being proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics. \"Fingal\", written in 1762, was speedily translated into many European languages, and its appreciation of natural beauty and treatment of the ancient legend has been credited more than any single work with bringing about the Romantic movement in European, and especially in German literature, through its influence on Johann Gottfried von Herder and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. It was also popularised in France by figures that included Napoleon. Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from Scottish Gaelic, but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience.\nRobert Burns (1759\u201396) and Walter Scott (1771\u20131832) were highly influenced by the Ossian cycle. Burns, an Ayrshire poet and lyricist, is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major influence on the Romantic movement. His poem (and song) \"Auld Lang Syne\" is often sung at Hogmanay (the last day of the year), and \"Scots Wha Hae\" served for a long time as an unofficial national anthem of the country. Scott began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads. His first prose work, \"Waverley\" in 1814, is often called the first historical novel. It launched a highly successful career, with other historical novels such as \"Rob Roy\" (1817), \"The Heart of Midlothian\" (1818) and \"Ivanhoe\" (1820). Scott probably did more than any other figure to define and popularise Scottish cultural identity in the nineteenth century. Other major literary figures connected with Romanticism include the poets and novelists James Hogg (1770\u20131835), Allan Cunningham (1784\u20131842) and John Galt (1779\u20131839). \n Scotland was also the location of two of the most important literary magazines of the era, \"The Edinburgh Review\" (founded in 1802) and \"Blackwood's Magazine\" (founded in 1817), which had a major impact on the development of British literature and drama in the era of Romanticism. Ian Duncan and Alex Benchimol suggest that publications like the novels of Scott and these magazines were part of a highly dynamic Scottish Romanticism that by the early nineteenth century, caused Edinburgh to emerge as the cultural capital of Britain and become central to a wider formation of a \"British Isles nationalism\".\nScottish \"national drama\" emerged in the early 1800s, as plays with specifically Scottish themes began to dominate the Scottish stage. Theatres had been discouraged by the Church of Scotland and fears of Jacobite assemblies. In the later eighteenth century, many plays were written for and performed by small amateur companies and were not published and so most have been lost. Towards the end of the century there were \"closet dramas\", primarily designed to be read, rather than performed, including work by Scott, Hogg, Galt and Joanna Baillie (1762\u20131851), often influenced by the ballad tradition and Gothic Romanticism.\nFrance.\nRomanticism was relatively late in developing in French literature, more so than in the visual arts. The 18th-century precursor to Romanticism, the cult of sensibility, had become associated with the \"Ancien R\u00e9gime\", and the French Revolution had been more of an inspiration to foreign writers than those experiencing it at first-hand. The first major figure was Fran\u00e7ois-Ren\u00e9 de Chateaubriand, an aristocrat who had remained a royalist throughout the Revolution, and returned to France from exile in England and America under Napoleon, with whose regime he had an uneasy relationship. His writings, all in prose, included some fiction, such as his influential novella of exile \"Ren\u00e9\" (1802), which anticipated Byron in its alienated hero, but mostly contemporary history and politics, his travels, a defence of religion and the medieval spirit (\"G\u00e9nie du christianisme\", 1802), and finally in the 1830s and 1840s his enormous autobiography \"M\u00e9moires d'Outre-Tombe\" (\"Memoirs from beyond the grave\").\nAfter the Bourbon Restoration, French Romanticism developed in the lively world of Parisian theatre, with productions of Shakespeare, Schiller (in France a key Romantic author), and adaptations of Scott and Byron alongside French authors, several of whom began to write in the late 1820s. Cliques of pro- and anti-Romantics developed, and productions were often accompanied by raucous vocalizing by the two sides, including the shouted assertion by one theatregoer in 1822 that \"Shakespeare, c'est l'aide-de-camp de Wellington\" (\"Shakespeare is Wellington's aide-de-camp\"). Alexandre Dumas began as a dramatist, with a series of successes beginning with \"Henri III et sa cour\" (1829) before turning to novels that were mostly historical adventures somewhat in the manner of Scott, most famously \"The Three Musketeers\" and \"The Count of Monte Cristo\", both of 1844. Victor Hugo published as a poet in the 1820s before achieving success on the stage with \"Hernani\"\u2014a historical drama in a quasi-Shakespearean style that had famously riotous performances on its first run in 1830. Like Dumas, Hugo is best known for his novels, and was already writing \"The Hunchback of Notre-Dame\" (1831), one of the best known works, which became a paradigm of the French Romantic movement. The preface to his unperformed play \"Cromwell\" gives an important manifesto of French Romanticism, stating that \"there are no rules, or models\". The career of Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e followed a similar pattern; he is now best known as the originator of the story of \"Carmen\", with his novella published 1845. Alfred de Vigny remains best known as a dramatist, with his play on the life of the English poet \"Chatterton\" (1835) perhaps his best work. George Sand was a central figure of the Parisian literary scene, famous both for her novels and criticism and her affairs with Chopin and several others; she too was inspired by the theatre, and wrote works to be staged at her private estate.\nFrench Romantic poets of the 1830s to 1850s include Alfred de Musset, G\u00e9rard de Nerval, Alphonse de Lamartine and the flamboyant Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, whose prolific output in various forms continued until his death in 1872.\nStendhal is today probably the most highly regarded French novelist of the period, but he stands in a complex relation with Romanticism, and is notable for his penetrating psychological insight into his characters and his realism, qualities rarely prominent in Romantic fiction. As a survivor of the French retreat from Moscow in 1812, fantasies of heroism and adventure had little appeal for him, and like Goya he is often seen as a forerunner of Realism. His most important works are \"Le Rouge et le Noir\" (\"The Red and the Black\", 1830) and \"La Chartreuse de Parme\" (\"The Charterhouse of Parma\", 1839).\nPoland.\nRomanticism in Poland is often taken to begin with the publication of Adam Mickiewicz's first poems in 1822, and end with the crushing of the January Uprising of 1863 against the Russians. It was strongly marked by interest in Polish history. Polish Romanticism revived the old \"Sarmatism\" traditions of the \"szlachta\" or Polish nobility. Old traditions and customs were revived and portrayed in a positive light in the Polish messianic movement and in works of great Polish poets such as Adam Mickiewicz (\"Pan Tadeusz\"), Juliusz S\u0142owacki and Zygmunt Krasi\u0144ski. This close connection between Polish Romanticism and Polish history became one of the defining qualities of the literature of Polish Romanticism period, differentiating it from that of other countries. They had not suffered the loss of national statehood as was the case with Poland. Influenced by the general spirit and main ideas of European Romanticism, the literature of Polish Romanticism is unique, as many scholars have pointed out, in having developed largely outside of Poland and in its emphatic focus upon the issue of Polish nationalism. The Polish intelligentsia, along with leading members of its government, left Poland in the early 1830s, during what is referred to as the \"Great Emigration\", resettling in France, Germany, Great Britain, Turkey, and the United States.\nTheir art featured emotionalism and irrationality, fantasy and imagination, personality cults, folklore and country life, and the propagation of ideals of freedom. In the second period, many of the Polish Romantics worked abroad, often banished from Poland by the occupying powers due to their politically subversive ideas. Their work became increasingly dominated by the ideals of political struggle for freedom and their country's sovereignty. Elements of mysticism became more prominent. There developed the idea of the \"poeta wieszcz\" (the prophet). The \"wieszcz\" (bard) functioned as spiritual leader to the nation fighting for its independence. The most notable poet so recognized was Adam Mickiewicz.\nZygmunt Krasi\u0144ski also wrote to inspire political and religious hope in his countrymen. Unlike his predecessors, who called for victory at whatever price in Poland's struggle against Russia, Krasinski emphasized Poland's spiritual role in its fight for independence, advocating an intellectual rather than a military superiority. His works best exemplify the Messianic movement in Poland: in two early dramas, \"Nie-boska komedia\" (1835; \"The Undivine Comedy\") and \"Irydion\" (1836; \"Iridion\"), as well as in the later \"Psalmy przysz\u0142o\u015bci\" (1845), he asserted that Poland was the Christ of Europe: specifically chosen by God to carry the world's burdens, to suffer, and eventually be resurrected.\nRussia.\nEarly Russian Romanticism is associated with the writers Konstantin Batyushkov (\"A Vision on the Shores of the Lethe\", 1809), Vasily Zhukovsky (\"The Bard\", 1811; \"Svetlana\", 1813) and Nikolay Karamzin (\"Poor Liza\", 1792; \"Julia\", 1796; \"Martha the Mayoress\", 1802; \"The Sensitive and the Cold\", 1803). However the principal exponent of Romanticism in Russia is Alexander Pushkin (\"The Prisoner of the Caucasus\", 1820\u20131821; \"The Robber Brothers\", 1822; \"Ruslan and Ludmila\", 1820; \"Eugene Onegin\", 1825\u20131832). Pushkin's work influenced many writers in the 19th century and led to his eventual recognition as Russia's greatest poet. Other Russian Romantic poets include Mikhail Lermontov (\"A Hero of Our Time\", 1839), Fyodor Tyutchev (\"Silentium!\", 1830), Yevgeny Baratynsky (\"Eda\", 1826), Anton Delvig, and Wilhelm K\u00fcchelbecker.\nInfluenced heavily by Lord Byron, Lermontov sought to explore the Romantic emphasis on metaphysical discontent with society and self, while Tyutchev's poems often described scenes of nature or passions of love. Tyutchev commonly operated with such categories as night and day, north and south, dream and reality, cosmos and chaos, and the still world of winter and spring teeming with life. Baratynsky's style was fairly classical in nature, dwelling on the models of the previous century.\nSpain.\nRomanticism in Spanish literature developed a well-known literature with a huge variety of poets and playwrights. The most important Spanish poet during this movement was Jos\u00e9 de Espronceda. After him there were other poets like Gustavo Adolfo B\u00e9cquer, Mariano Jos\u00e9 de Larra and the dramatists \u00c1ngel de Saavedra and Jos\u00e9 Zorrilla, author of \"Don Juan Tenorio\". Before them may be mentioned the pre-romantics Jos\u00e9 Cadalso and Manuel Jos\u00e9 Quintana. The plays of Antonio Garc\u00eda Guti\u00e9rrez were adapted to produce Giuseppe Verdi's operas \"Il trovatore\" and \"Simon Boccanegra\". Spanish Romanticism also influenced regional literatures. For example, in Catalonia and in Galicia there was a national boom of writers in the local languages, like the Catalan Jacint Verdaguer and the Galician Rosal\u00eda de Castro, the main figures of the national revivalist movements Renaixen\u00e7a and Rexurdimento, respectively.\nThere are scholars who consider Spanish Romanticism to be Proto-Existentialism because it is more anguished than the movement in other European countries. Foster et al., for example, say that the work of Spain's writers such as Espronceda, Larra, and other writers in the 19th century demonstrated a \"metaphysical crisis\". These observers put more weight on the link between the 19th-century Spanish writers with the existentialist movement that emerged immediately after. According to Richard Caldwell, the writers that we now identify with Spain's romanticism were actually precursors to those who galvanized the literary movement that emerged in the 1920s. This notion is the subject of debate for there are authors who stress that Spain's romanticism is one of the earliest in Europe, while some assert that Spain really had no period of literary romanticism. This controversy underscores a certain uniqueness to Spanish Romanticism in comparison to its European counterparts.\nPortugal.\nRomanticism began in Portugal with the publication of the poem \"Cam\u00f5es\" (1825), by Almeida Garrett, who was raised by his uncle D. Alexandre, bishop of Angra, in the precepts of Neoclassicism, which can be observed in his early work. The author himself confesses (in \"Cam\u00f5es\"' preface) that he voluntarily refused to follow the principles of epic poetry enunciated by Aristotle in his \"Poetics\", as he did the same to Horace's \"Ars Poetica\". Almeida Garrett had participated in the 1820 Liberal Revolution, which caused him to exile himself in England in 1823 and then in France, after the Vila-Francada. While living in Great Britain, he had contacts with the Romantic movement and read authors such as Shakespeare, Scott, Ossian, Byron, Hugo, Lamartine and de Sta\u00ebl, at the same time visiting feudal castles and ruins of Gothic churches and abbeys, which would be reflected in his writings. In 1838, he presented \"Um Auto de Gil Vicente\" (\"A Play by Gil Vicente\"), in an attempt to create a new national theatre, free of Greco-Roman and foreign influence. But his masterpiece would be \"Frei Lu\u00eds de Sousa\" (1843), named by himself as a \"Romantic drama\" and it was acclaimed as an exceptional work, dealing with themes as national independence, faith, justice and love. He was also deeply interested in Portuguese folkloric verse, which resulted in the publication of \"Romanceiro\" (\"Traditional Portuguese Ballads\") (1843), that recollect a great number of ancient popular ballads, known as \"romances\" or \"rimances\", in \"redondilha maior\" verse form, that contained stories of chivalry, life of saints, crusades, courtly love, etc. He wrote the novels \"Viagens na Minha Terra\", \"O Arco de Sant'Ana\" and \"Helena.\"\nAlexandre Herculano is, alongside Almeida Garrett, one of the founders of Portuguese Romanticism. He too was forced to exile to Great Britain and France because of his liberal ideals. All of his poetry and prose are (unlike Almeida Garrett's) entirely Romantic, rejecting Greco-Roman myth and history. He sought inspiration in medieval Portuguese poems and chronicles as in the Bible. His output is vast and covers many different genres, such as historical essays, poetry, novels, opuscules and theatre, where he brings back a whole world of Portuguese legends, tradition and history, especially in \"Eurico, o Presb\u00edtero\" (\"Eurico, the Priest\") and \"Lendas e Narrativas\" (\"Legends and Narratives\"). His work was influenced by Chateaubriand, Schiller, Klopstock, Walter Scott and the Old Testament Psalms.\nAnt\u00f3nio Feliciano de Castilho made the case for Ultra-Romanticism, publishing the poems \"A Noite no Castelo\" (\"Night in the Castle\") and \"Os Ci\u00fames do Bardo\" (\"The Jealousy of the Bard\"), both in 1836, and the drama \"Cam\u00f5es\". He became an unquestionable master for successive Ultra-Romantic generations, whose influence would not be challenged until the famous Coimbra Question. He also created polemics by translating Goethe's \"Faust\" without knowing German, but using French versions of the play. Other notable figures of Portuguese Romanticism are the famous novelists Camilo Castelo Branco and J\u00falio Dinis, and Soares de Passos, Bulh\u00e3o Pato and Pinheiro Chagas.\nRomantic style would be revived in the beginning of the 20th century, notably through the works of poets linked to the Portuguese Renaissance, such as Teixeira de Pascoais, Jaime Cortes\u00e3o, M\u00e1rio Beir\u00e3o, among others, who can be considered Neo-Romantics. An early Portuguese expression of Romanticism is found already in poets such as Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage (especially in his sonnets dated at the end of the 18th century) and Leonor de Almeida Portugal, Marquise of Alorna.\nItaly.\nRomanticism in Italian literature was initially a minor movement although some important works were later produced; it began officially in 1816 when Germaine de Sta\u00ebl wrote an article in the journal \"Biblioteca italiana\" called \"On the manner and usefulness of translations\", inviting Italian people to reject Neoclassicism and to study new authors from other countries. \nBefore that date, Ugo Foscolo had already published poems anticipating Romantic themes.\nThe most important Romantic writers were Ludovico di Breme, Pietro Borsieri and Giovanni Berchet. Better known authors such as Alessandro Manzoni and Giacomo Leopardi were influenced by Enlightenment as well as by Romanticism and Classicism. \nAmong minor Romantic authors were d'Azeglio, Pellico, Niccolini, Nievo, Guerrazzi, Aleardi, Prati, Botero.\nSouth America.\nSpanish-speaking South American Romanticism was influenced heavily by Esteban Echeverr\u00eda, who wrote in the 1830s and 1840s. His writings were influenced by his hatred for the Argentine dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas, and filled with themes of blood and terror, using the metaphor of a slaughterhouse to portray the violence of Rosas' dictatorship.\nAnother important milestone in Argentine Romantic literature is \"Amalia\" by Jos\u00e9 M\u00e1rmol, which is a love story set in the context of the Rosas' dictatorial regime.\nDomingo Sarmiento, who would later become President of Argentina, published \"Facundo\" in 1845, a work of creative non-fiction, of considerable Romantic and positivist influence, in which he discussed the region's development, modernization, power and culture. Literary critic Roberto Gonz\u00e1lez Echeverr\u00eda calls the work \"the most important book written by a Latin American in any discipline or genre\".\nBrazilian Romanticism is characterized and divided in three different periods. The first period is focused on the creation of a sense of national identity, using the ideal of the heroic Indian. Some examples include Jos\u00e9 de Alencar, who wrote \"Iracema\" and \"O Guarani\", and Gon\u00e7alves Dias, renowned by the poem \"Can\u00e7\u00e3o do Ex\u00edlio\" (Song of the Exile). The second period, sometimes called Ultra-Romanticism, is marked by a profound influence of European themes and traditions, involving the melancholy, sadness and despair related to unobtainable love. Goethe and Lord Byron are commonly quoted in these works. Some of the most notable authors of this phase are \u00c1lvares de Azevedo, Casimiro de Abreu, Fagundes Varela and Junqueira Freire. The third period is marked by social poetry, especially the abolitionist movement, and it includes Castro Alves, Tobias Barreto and Pedro Lu\u00eds Pereira de Sousa.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, at least by 1818 with William Cullen Bryant's \"To a Waterfowl\", Romantic poetry was being published. American Romantic Gothic literature made an early appearance with Washington Irving's \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" (1820) and \"Rip Van Winkle\" (1819), followed from 1823 onwards by the \"Leatherstocking Tales\" of James Fenimore Cooper, with their emphasis on heroic simplicity and their fervent landscape descriptions of an already-exotic mythicized frontier peopled by \"noble savages\", similar to the philosophical theory of Rousseau, exemplified by Uncas, from \"The Last of the Mohicans\". There are picturesque \"local colour\" elements in Washington Irving's essays and especially his travel books. Edgar Allan Poe's tales of the macabre and his balladic poetry were more influential in France than at home, but the romantic American novel developed fully with the atmosphere and drama of Nathaniel Hawthorne's \"The Scarlet Letter\" (1850). Later Transcendentalist writers such as Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson still show elements of its influence and imagination, as does the romantic realism of Walt Whitman. The poetry of Emily Dickinson\u2014nearly unread in her own time\u2014and Herman Melville's novel \"Moby-Dick\" can be taken as epitomes of American Romantic literature. By the 1880s, however, psychological and social realism were competing with Romanticism in the novel.\nInfluence of European Romanticism on American writers.\nThe European Romantic movement reached America in the early 19th century. American Romanticism was just as multifaceted and individualistic as it was in Europe. Like the Europeans, the American Romantics demonstrated a high level of moral enthusiasm, commitment to individualism and the unfolding of the self, an emphasis on intuitive perception, and the assumption that the natural world was inherently good, while human society was filled with corruption.\nRomanticism became popular in American politics, philosophy and art. The movement appealed to the revolutionary spirit of America as well as to those longing to break free of the strict religious traditions of early settlement. The Romantics rejected rationalism and religious intellect. It appealed to those in opposition of Calvinism, which includes the belief that the destiny of each individual is preordained. The Romantic movement gave rise to New England Transcendentalism, which portrayed a less restrictive relationship between God and Universe. The new philosophy presented the individual with a more personal relationship with God. Transcendentalism and Romanticism appealed to Americans in a similar fashion, for both privileged feeling over reason, individual freedom of expression over the restraints of tradition and custom. It often involved a rapturous response to nature. It encouraged the rejection of harsh, rigid Calvinism, and promised a new blossoming of American culture.\nAmerican Romanticism embraced the individual and rebelled against the confinement of neoclassicism and religious tradition. The Romantic movement in America created a new literary genre that continues to influence American writers. Novels, short stories, and poems replaced the sermons and manifestos of yore. Romantic literature was personal, intense, and portrayed more emotion than ever seen in neoclassical literature. America's preoccupation with freedom became a great source of motivation for Romantic writers as many were delighted in free expression and emotion without so much fear of ridicule and controversy. They also put more effort into the psychological development of their characters, and the main characters typically displayed extremes of sensitivity and excitement.\nThe works of the Romantic era also differed from preceding works in that they spoke to a wider audience, partly reflecting the greater distribution of books as costs came down during the period.\nArchitecture.\nRomantic architecture appeared in the late 18th century in a reaction against the rigid forms of neoclassical architecture. Romantic architecture reached its peak in the mid-19th century, and continued to appear until the end of the 19th century. It was designed to evoke an emotional reaction, either respect for tradition or nostalgia for a bucolic past. It was frequently inspired by the architecture of the Middle Ages, especially Gothic architecture, it was strongly influenced by romanticism in literature, particularly the historical novels of Victor Hugo and Walter Scott. It sometimes moved into the domain of eclecticism, with features assembled from different historic periods and regions of the world.\nGothic Revival architecture was a popular variant of the romantic style, particularly in the construction of churches, Cathedrals, and university buildings. Notable examples include the completion of Cologne Cathedral in Germany, by Karl Friedrich Schinkel. The cathedral's construction began in 1248, but was halted in 1473. The original plans for the fa\u00e7ade were discovered in 1840, and it was decided to recommence. Schinkel followed the original design as much as possible, but he also used modern construction technology, including an iron frame for the roof. The building was finished in 1880.\nIn Britain, notable examples include the Royal Pavilion in Brighton, a romantic version of traditional Indian architecture by John Nash (1815\u20131823), and the Houses of Parliament in London, built in a Gothic revival style by Charles Barry between 1840 and 1876.\nIn France, one of the earliest examples of romantic architecture is the Hameau de la Reine, the small rustic hamlet created at the Palace of Versailles for Queen Marie Antoinette between 1783 and 1785 by the royal architect Richard Mique with the help of the romantic painter Hubert Robert. It consisted of twelve structures, ten of which still exist, in the style of villages in Normandy. It was designed for the Queen and her friends to amuse themselves by playing at being peasants, and included a farmhouse with a dairy, a mill, a boudoir, a pigeon loft, a tower in the form of a lighthouse from which one could fish in the pond, a belvedere, a cascade and grotto, and a luxuriously furnished cottage with a billiard room for the Queen.\nFrench romantic architecture in the 19th century was strongly influenced by two writers; Victor Hugo, whose novel \"The Hunchback of Notre Dame\" inspired a resurgence in interest in the Middle Ages; and Prosper M\u00e9rim\u00e9e, who wrote celebrated romantic novels and short stories and was also the first head of the commission of Historic Monuments in France, responsible for publicizing and restoring (and sometimes romanticizing) many French cathedrals and monuments desecrated and ruined after the French Revolution. His projects were carried out by the architect Eug\u00e8ne Viollet-le-Duc. These included the restoration (sometimes creative) of the Cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, the fortified city of Carcassonne, and the unfinished medieval Ch\u00e2teau de Pierrefonds.\nThe romantic style continued in the second half of the 19th century. The Palais Garnier, the Paris opera house designed by Charles Garnier was a highly romantic and eclectic combination of artistic styles. Another notable example of late 19th century romanticism is the Basilica of Sacr\u00e9-C\u0153ur by Paul Abadie, who drew upon the model of Byzantine architecture for his elongated domes (1875\u20131914).\nVisual arts.\nIn the visual arts, Romanticism first showed itself in landscape painting, where from as early as the 1760s British artists began to turn to wilder landscapes and storms, and Gothic architecture, even if they had to make do with Wales as a setting. Caspar David Friedrich and J. M. W. Turner were born less than a year apart in 1774 and 1775 respectively and were to take German and English landscape painting to their extremes of Romanticism, but both their artistic sensibilities were formed when forms of Romanticism was already strongly present in art. John Constable, born in 1776, stayed closer to the English landscape tradition, but in his largest \"six-footers\" insisted on the heroic status of a patch of the working countryside where he had grown up\u2014challenging the traditional hierarchy of genres, which relegated landscape painting to a low status. Turner also painted very large landscapes, and above all, seascapes. Some of these large paintings had contemporary settings and staffage, but others had small figures that turned the work into history painting in the manner of Claude Lorrain, like Salvator Rosa, a late Baroque artist whose landscapes had elements that Romantic painters repeatedly turned to. Friedrich often used single figures, or features like crosses, set alone amidst a huge landscape, \"making them images of the transitoriness of human life and the premonition of death\".\nOther groups of artists expressed feelings that verged on the mystical, many largely abandoning classical drawing and proportions. These included William Blake and Samuel Palmer and the other members of the Ancients in England, and in Germany Philipp Otto Runge. Like Friedrich, none of these artists had significant influence after their deaths for the rest of the 19th century, and were 20th-century rediscoveries from obscurity, though Blake was always known as a poet, and Norway's leading painter Johan Christian Dahl was heavily influenced by Friedrich. The Rome-based Nazarene movement of German artists, active from 1810, took a very different path, concentrating on medievalizing history paintings with religious and nationalist themes.\nThe arrival of Romanticism in French art was delayed by the strong hold of Neoclassicism on the academies, but from the Napoleonic period it became increasingly popular, initially in the form of history paintings propagandising for the new regime, of which Girodet's \"Ossian receiving the Ghosts of the French Heroes\", for Napoleon's Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison, was one of the earliest. Girodet's old teacher David was puzzled and disappointed by his pupil's direction, saying: \"Either Girodet is mad or I no longer know anything of the art of painting\". A new generation of the French school, developed personal Romantic styles, though still concentrating on history painting with a political message. Th\u00e9odore G\u00e9ricault (1791\u20131824) had his first success with \"The Charging Chasseur\", a heroic military figure derived from Rubens, at the Paris Salon of 1812 in the years of the Empire, but his next major completed work, \"The Raft of the Medusa\" of 1818\u201319, remains the greatest achievement of the Romantic history painting, which in its day had a powerful anti-government message.\nEug\u00e8ne Delacroix (1798\u20131863) made his first Salon hits with \"The Barque of Dante\" (1822), \"The Massacre at Chios\" (1824) and \"Death of Sardanapalus\" (1827). The second was a scene from the Greek War of Independence, completed the year Byron died there, and the last was a scene from one of Byron's plays. With Shakespeare, Byron was to provide the subject matter for many other works of Delacroix, who also spent long periods in North Africa, painting colourful scenes of mounted Arab warriors. His \"Liberty Leading the People\" (1830) remains, with the \"Medusa\", one of the best-known works of French Romantic painting. Both reflected current events, and increasingly \"history painting\", literally \"story painting\", a phrase dating back to the Italian Renaissance meaning the painting of subjects with groups of figures, long considered the highest and most difficult form of art, did indeed become the painting of historical scenes, rather than those from religion or mythology.\nFrancisco Goya was called \"the last great painter in whose art thought and observation were balanced and combined to form a faultless unity\". But the extent to which he was a Romantic is a complex question. In Spain, there was still a struggle to introduce the values of the Enlightenment, in which Goya saw himself as a participant. The demonic and anti-rational monsters thrown up by his imagination are only superficially similar to those of the Gothic fantasies of northern Europe, and in many ways he remained wedded to the classicism and realism of his training, as well as looking forward to the Realism of the later 19th century. But he, more than any other artist of the period, exemplified the Romantic values of the expression of the artist's feelings and his personal imaginative world. He also shared with many of the Romantic painters a more free handling of paint, emphasized in the new prominence of the brushstroke and impasto, which tended to be repressed in neoclassicism under a self-effacing finish.\nSculpture remained largely impervious to Romanticism, probably partly for technical reasons, as the most prestigious material of the day, marble, does not lend itself to expansive gestures. The leading sculptors in Europe, Antonio Canova and Bertel Thorvaldsen, were both based in Rome and firm Neoclassicists, not at all tempted to allow influence from medieval sculpture, which would have been one possible approach to Romantic sculpture. When it did develop, true Romantic sculpture\u2014with the exception of a few artists such as Rudolf Maison\u2014rather oddly was missing in Germany, and mainly found in France, with Fran\u00e7ois Rude, best known from his group of the 1830s from the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, David d'Angers, and Auguste Pr\u00e9ault. Pr\u00e9ault's plaster relief entitled \"Slaughter\", which represented the horrors of wars with exacerbated passion, caused so much scandal at the Salon of 1834 that Pr\u00e9ault was banned from this official annual exhibition for nearly twenty years. In Italy, the most important Romantic sculptor was Lorenzo Bartolini.\nIn France, historical painting on idealized medieval and Renaissance themes is known as the \"style Troubadour\", a term with no equivalent for other countries, though the same trends occurred there. Delacroix, Ingres and Richard Parkes Bonington all worked in this style, as did lesser specialists such as Pierre-Henri R\u00e9voil (1776\u20131842) and Fleury-Fran\u00e7ois Richard (1777\u20131852). Their pictures are often small, and feature intimate private and anecdotal moments, as well as those of high drama. The lives of great artists such as Raphael were commemorated on equal terms with those of rulers, and fictional characters were also depicted. Fleury-Richard's \"Valentine of Milan weeping for the death of her husband\", shown in the Paris Salon of 1802, marked the arrival of the style, which lasted until the mid-century, before being subsumed into the increasingly academic history painting of artists like Paul Delaroche.\n \nAnother trend was for very large apocalyptic history paintings, often combining extreme natural events, or divine wrath, with human disaster, attempting to outdo \"The Raft of the Medusa\", and now often drawing comparisons with effects from Hollywood. The leading English artist in the style was John Martin, whose tiny figures were dwarfed by enormous earthquakes and storms, and worked his way through the biblical disasters, and those to come in the final days. Other works such as Delacroix's \"Death of Sardanapalus\" included larger figures, and these often drew heavily on earlier artists, especially Poussin and Rubens, with extra emotionalism and special effects.\nElsewhere in Europe, leading artists adopted Romantic styles: in Russia there were the portraitists Orest Kiprensky and Vasily Tropinin, with Ivan Aivazovsky specializing in marine painting, and in Norway Hans Gude painted scenes of fjords. In Poland, Piotr Micha\u0142owski (1800\u20131855) used a Romantic style in paintings particularly relating to the history of Napoleonic Wars. In Italy Francesco Hayez (1791\u20131882) was the leading artist of Romanticism in mid-19th-century Milan. His long, prolific and extremely successful career saw him begin as a Neoclassical painter, pass right through the Romantic period, and emerge at the other end as a sentimental painter of young women. His Romantic period included many historical pieces of \"Troubadour\" tendencies, but on a very large scale, that are heavily influenced by Gian Battista Tiepolo and other late Baroque Italian masters.\nLiterary Romanticism had its counterpart in the American visual arts, most especially in the exaltation of an untamed American landscape found in the paintings of the Hudson River School. Painters like Thomas Cole, Albert Bierstadt and Frederic Edwin Church and others often expressed Romantic themes in their paintings. They sometimes depicted ancient ruins of the old world, such as in Fredric Edwin Church's piece \"Sunrise in Syria\". These works reflected the Gothic feelings of death and decay. They also show the Romantic ideal that Nature is powerful and will eventually overcome the transient creations of men. More often, they worked to distinguish themselves from their European counterparts by depicting uniquely American scenes and landscapes. This idea of an American identity in the art world is reflected in W. C. Bryant's poem \"To Cole, the Painter, Departing for Europe\", where Bryant encourages Cole to remember the powerful scenes that can only be found in America.\nSome American paintings (such as Albert Bierstadt's \"The Rocky Mountains, Lander's Peak\") promote the literary idea of the \"noble savage\" by portraying idealized Native Americans living in harmony with the natural world. Thomas Cole's paintings tend towards allegory, explicit in \"The Voyage of Life\" series painted in the early 1840s, showing the stages of life set amidst an awesome and immense nature.\nMusic.\nThe term \"Romanticism\" when applied to music has come to imply the period roughly from 1800 until 1850, or else until around 1900. Musical Romanticism is predominantly a German phenomenon\u2014so much so that one respected French reference work defines it entirely in terms of \"The role of music in the aesthetics of German romanticism\". Another French encyclopedia holds that the German temperament generally \"can be described as the deep and diverse action of romanticism on German musicians\", and that there is only one true representative of Romanticism in French music, Hector Berlioz, while in Italy, the sole great name of musical Romanticism is Giuseppe Verdi, \"a sort of [Victor] Hugo of opera, gifted with a real genius for dramatic effect\". Similarly, in his analysis of Romanticism and its pursuit of harmony, Henri Lefebvre posits that, \"But of course, German romanticism was more closely linked to music than French romanticism was, so it is there we should look for the direct expression of harmony as the central romantic idea.\" Nevertheless, the huge popularity of German Romantic music led, \"whether by imitation or by reaction\", to an often nationalistically inspired vogue amongst Polish, Hungarian, Russian, Czech, and Scandinavian musicians, successful \"perhaps more because of its extra-musical traits than for the actual value of musical works by its masters\".\nIn the contemporary music culture, the romantic musician followed a public career depending on sensitive middle-class audiences rather than on a courtly patron, as had been the case with earlier musicians and composers. Public persona characterized a new generation of virtuosi who made their way as soloists, epitomized in the concert tours of Paganini and Liszt, and the conductor began to emerge as an important figure, on whose skill the interpretation of the increasingly complex music depended.\nEvolution of the term in musicology.\nAlthough the term \"Romanticism\" when applied to music has come to imply the period roughly from 1800 until 1850, or else until around 1900, the contemporary application of \"romantic\" to music did not coincide with this modern interpretation. Indeed, one of the earliest sustained applications of the term to music occurs in 1789, in the \"M\u00e9moires\" of Andr\u00e9 Gr\u00e9try. This is of particular interest because it is a French source on a subject mainly dominated by Germans, but also because it explicitly acknowledges its debt to Jean-Jacques Rousseau (himself a composer, amongst other things) and, by so doing, establishes a link to one of the major influences on the Romantic movement generally. In 1810 E. T. A. Hoffmann named Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven as \"the three masters of instrumental compositions\" who \"breathe one and the same romantic spirit\". He justified his view on the basis of these composers' depth of evocative expression and their marked individuality. In Haydn's music, according to Hoffmann, \"a child-like, serene disposition prevails\", while Mozart (in the late E-flat major Symphony, for example) \"leads us into the depths of the spiritual world\", with elements of fear, love, and sorrow, \"a presentiment of the infinite ... in the eternal dance of the spheres\". Beethoven's music, on the other hand, conveys a sense of \"the monstrous and immeasurable\", with the pain of an endless longing that \"will burst our breasts in a fully coherent concord of all the passions\". This elevation in the valuation of pure emotion resulted in the promotion of music from the subordinate position it had held in relation to the verbal and plastic arts during the Enlightenment. Because music was considered to be free of the constraints of reason, imagery, or any other precise concept, it came to be regarded, first in the writings of Wackenroder and Tieck and later by writers such as Schelling and Wagner, as preeminent among the arts, the one best able to express the secrets of the universe, to evoke the spirit world, infinity, and the absolute.\nThis chronologic agreement of musical and literary Romanticism continued as far as the middle of the 19th century, when Richard Wagner denigrated the music of Meyerbeer and Berlioz as \"neoromantic\": \"The Opera, to which we shall now return, has swallowed down the Neoromanticism of Berlioz, too, as a plump, fine-flavoured oyster, whose digestion has conferred on it anew a brisk and well-to-do appearance.\"\nIt was only toward the end of the 19th century that the newly emergent discipline of \"Musikwissenschaft\" (musicology)\u2014itself a product of the historicizing proclivity of the age\u2014attempted a more scientific periodization of music history, and a distinction between Viennese Classical and Romantic periods was proposed. The key figure in this trend was Guido Adler, who viewed Beethoven and Franz Schubert as transitional but essentially Classical composers, with Romanticism achieving full maturity only in the post-Beethoven generation of Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin, Felix Mendelssohn, Robert Schumann, Hector Berlioz and Franz Liszt. From Adler's viewpoint, found in books like \"Der Stil in der Musik\" (1911), composers of the New German School and various late-19th-century nationalist composers were not Romantics but \"moderns\" or \"realists\" (by analogy with the fields of painting and literature), and this schema remained prevalent through the first decades of the 20th century.\nBy the second quarter of the 20th century, an awareness that radical changes in musical syntax had occurred during the early 1900s caused another shift in historical viewpoint, and the change of century came to be seen as marking a decisive break with the musical past. This in turn led historians such as Alfred Einstein to extend the musical \"Romantic era\" throughout the 19th century and into the first decade of the 20th. It has continued to be referred to as such in some of the standard music references such as \"The Oxford Companion to Music\" and Grout's \"History of Western Music\" but was not unchallenged. For example, the prominent German musicologist Friedrich Blume, the chief editor of the first edition of \"Die Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart\" (1949\u201386), accepted the earlier position that Classicism and Romanticism together constitute a single period beginning in the middle of the 18th century, but at the same time held that it continued into the 20th century, including such pre-World War II developments as expressionism and neoclassicism. This is reflected in some notable recent reference works such as the \"New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" and the new edition of \"Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart\".\nOutside the arts.\nSciences.\nThe Romantic movement affected most aspects of intellectual life, and Romanticism and science had a powerful connection, especially in the period 1800\u20131840. Many scientists were influenced by versions of the \"Naturphilosophie\" of Johann Gottlieb Fichte, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and others, and without abandoning empiricism, sought in their work to uncover what they tended to believe was a unified and organic Nature. The English scientist Sir Humphry Davy, a prominent Romantic thinker, said that understanding nature required \"an attitude of admiration, love and worship, [...] a personal response\". He believed that knowledge was only attainable by those who truly appreciated and respected nature. Self-understanding was an important aspect of Romanticism. It had less to do with proving that man was capable of understanding nature (through his budding intellect) and therefore controlling it, and more to do with the emotional appeal of connecting himself with nature and understanding it through a harmonious co-existence.\nHistoriography.\nHistory writing was very strongly, and many would say harmfully, influenced by Romanticism. In England, Thomas Carlyle was a highly influential essayist who turned historian; he both invented and exemplified the phrase \"hero-worship\", lavishing largely uncritical praise on strong leaders such as Oliver Cromwell, Frederick the Great and Napoleon. Romantic nationalism had a largely negative effect on the writing of history in the 19th century, as each nation tended to produce its own version of history, and the critical attitude, even cynicism, of earlier historians was often replaced by a tendency to create romantic stories with clearly distinguished heroes and villains. Nationalist ideology of the period placed great emphasis on racial coherence, and the antiquity of peoples, and tended to vastly overemphasize the continuity between past periods and the present, leading to national mysticism. Much historical effort in the 20th century was devoted to combating the romantic historical myths created in the 19th century.\nTheology.\nTo insulate theology from scientism or reductionism in science, 19th-century post-Enlightenment German theologians developed a modernist or so-called liberal conception of Christianity, led by Friedrich Schleiermacher and Albrecht Ritschl. They took the Romantic approach of rooting religion in the inner world of the human spirit, so that it is a person's feeling or sensibility about spiritual matters that comprises religion.\nChess.\nRomantic chess was the style of chess which emphasized quick, tactical maneuvers characterized by aesthetic beauty rather than long-term strategic planning, which was considered to be of secondary importance. The Romantic era in chess is generally considered to have begun around the 18th century (although a primarily tactical style of chess was predominant even earlier), and to have reached its peak with Joseph MacDonnell and Pierre LaBourdonnais, the two dominant chess players in the 1830s. The 1840s were dominated by Howard Staunton, and other leading players of the era included Adolf Anderssen, Daniel Harrwitz, Henry Bird, Louis Paulsen, and Paul Morphy. The \"Immortal Game\", played by Anderssen and Lionel Kieseritzky on 21 June 1851 in London\u2014where Anderssen made bold sacrifices to secure victory, giving up both rooks and a bishop, then his queen, and then checkmating his opponent with his three remaining minor pieces\u2014is considered a supreme example of Romantic chess. The end of the Romantic era in chess is considered to be the 1873 Vienna Tournament where Wilhelm Steinitz popularized positional play and the closed game.\nRomantic nationalism.\nOne of Romanticism's key ideas and most enduring legacies is the assertion of nationalism, which became a central theme of Romantic art and political philosophy. From the earliest parts of the movement, with their focus on development of national languages and folklore, and the importance of local customs and traditions, to the movements that would redraw the map of Europe and lead to calls for self-determination of nationalities, nationalism was one of the key vehicles of Romanticism, its role, expression and meaning. One of the most important functions of medieval references in the 19th century was nationalist. Popular and epic poetry were its workhorses. This is visible in Germany and Ireland, where underlying Germanic or Celtic linguistic substrates dating from before the Romanization-Latinization were sought out.\nEarly Romantic nationalism was strongly inspired by Rousseau, and by the ideas of Johann Gottfried von Herder, who in 1784 argued that the geography formed the natural economy of a people, and shaped their customs and society.\nThe nature of nationalism changed dramatically, however, after the French Revolution with the rise of Napoleon, and the reactions in other nations. Napoleonic nationalism and republicanism were, at first, inspirational to movements in other nations: self-determination and a consciousness of national unity were held to be two of the reasons why France was able to defeat other countries in battle. But as the French Republic became Napoleon's Empire, Napoleon became not the inspiration for nationalism, but the object of its struggle. In Prussia, the development of spiritual renewal as a means to engage in the struggle against Napoleon was argued by, among others, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, a disciple of Kant. The word \"Volkstum\", or nationality, was coined in German as part of this resistance to the now conquering emperor. Fichte expressed the unity of language and nation in his address \"To the German Nation\" in 1806:\nThose who speak the same language are joined to each other by a multitude of invisible bonds by nature herself, long before any human art begins; they understand each other and have the power of continuing to make themselves understood more and more clearly; they belong together and are by nature one and an inseparable whole. ...Only when each people, left to itself, develops and forms itself in accordance with its own peculiar quality, and only when in every people each individual develops himself in accordance with that common quality, as well as in accordance with his own peculiar quality\u2014then, and then only, does the manifestation of divinity appear in its true mirror as it ought to be.\nThis view of nationalism inspired the collection of folklore by such people as the Brothers Grimm, the revival of old epics as national, and the construction of new epics as if they were old, as in the \"Kalevala\", compiled from Finnish tales and folklore, or \"Ossian\", where the claimed ancient roots were invented. The view that fairy tales, unless contaminated from outside literary sources, were preserved in the same form over thousands of years, was not exclusive to Romantic Nationalists, but fit in well with their views that such tales expressed the primordial nature of a people. For instance, the Brothers Grimm rejected many tales they collected because of their similarity to tales by Charles Perrault, which they thought proved they were not truly German tales; \"Sleeping Beauty\" survived in their collection because the tale of Brynhildr convinced them that the figure of the sleeping princess was authentically German. Vuk Karad\u017ei\u0107 contributed to Serbian folk literature, using peasant culture as the foundation. He regarded the oral literature of the peasants as an integral part of Serbian culture, compiling it to use in his collections of folk songs, tales and proverbs, as well as the first dictionary of vernacular Serbian. Similar projects were undertaken by the Russian Alexander Afanasyev, the Norwegians Peter Christen Asbj\u00f8rnsen and J\u00f8rgen Moe, and the Englishman Joseph Jacobs.\nPolish nationalism and messianism.\nRomanticism played an essential role in the national awakening of many Central European peoples lacking their own national states, not least in Poland, which had recently failed to restore its independence when Russia's army crushed the Polish Uprising under Nicholas I. Revival and reinterpretation of ancient myths, customs and traditions by Romantic poets and painters helped to distinguish their indigenous cultures from those of the dominant nations and crystallise the mythography of Romantic nationalism. Patriotism, nationalism, revolution and armed struggle for independence also became popular themes in the arts of this period. Arguably, the most distinguished Romantic poet of this part of Europe was Adam Mickiewicz, who developed an idea that Poland was the Messiah of Nations, predestined to suffer just as Jesus had suffered to save all the people. The Polish self-image as a \"Christ among nations\" or the martyr of Europe can be traced back to its history of Christendom and suffering under invasions. During the periods of foreign occupation, the Catholic Church served as bastion of Poland's national identity and language, and the major promoter of Polish culture. The partitions came to be seen in Poland as a Polish sacrifice for the security for Western civilization. Adam Mickiewicz wrote the patriotic drama \"Dziady\" (directed against the Russians), where he depicts Poland as the Christ of Nations. He also wrote \"Verily I say unto you, it is not for you to learn civilization from foreigners, but it is you who are to teach them civilization ... You are among the foreigners like the Apostles among the idolaters\". In \"Books of the Polish Nation and Polish Pilgrimage\" Mickiewicz detailed his vision of Poland as a Messias and a Christ of Nations, that would save mankind. Dziady is known for various interpretation. The most known ones are the moral aspect of part II, individualist and romantic message of part IV, as well as deeply patriotic, messianistic and Christian vision in part III of the poem. Zdzis\u0142aw K\u0119pi\u0144ski, however, focuses his interpretation on Slavic pagan and occult elements found in the drama. In his book \"Mickiewicz hermetyczny\" he writes about hermetic, theosophic and alchemical philosophy on the book as well as Masonic symbols.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26095", "revid": "400707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26095", "title": "Room (disambiguation)", "text": "A room is an enclosed space in a building.\nRoom or rooms may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26096", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26096", "title": "Romantic nationalism", "text": "Type of nationalism\nRomantic nationalism (also national romanticism, organic nationalism, identity nationalism) is the form of nationalism in which the state claims its political legitimacy as an organic consequence of the unity of those it governs. This includes such factors as language, race, ethnicity, culture, religion, and customs of the nation in its primal sense of those who were born within its culture. It can be applied to ethnic nationalism as well as civic nationalism. Romantic nationalism arose in reaction to dynastic or imperial hegemony, which assessed the legitimacy of the state from the top down, emanating from a monarch or other authority, which justified its existence. Such downward-radiating power might ultimately derive from a god or gods\n(see the divine right of kings and the Mandate of Heaven).\nAmong the key themes of Romanticism, and its most enduring legacy, the cultural assertions of romantic nationalism have also been central in post-Enlightenment art and political philosophy. From its earliest stirrings, with their focus on the development of national languages and folklore, and the spiritual value of local customs and traditions, to the movements that would redraw the map of Europe and lead to calls for self-determination of nationalities, nationalism was one of the key issues in Romanticism, determining its roles, expressions and meanings. Romantic nationalism, resulting from this interaction between cultural production and political thought, became \"the celebration of the nation (defined in its language, history and cultural character) as an inspiring ideal for artistic expression; and the instrumentalization of that expression in political consciousness-raising\".\nHistorically in Europe, the watershed year for romantic nationalism was 1848, when a revolutionary wave spread across the continent; numerous nationalistic revolutions occurred in various fragmented regions (such as Italy) or multinational states (such as the Austrian Empire). While initially the revolutions fell to reactionary forces and the old order was quickly re-established, the many revolutions would mark the first step towards liberalisation and the formation of modern nation states across much of Europe.\nBrief history.\nNationalism and revolution.\nIn the Balkans, Romantic views of a connection with classical Greece, which inspired Philhellenism infused the Greek War of Independence (1821\u201330), in which the Romantic poet Lord Byron died of high fever. Rossini's opera \"William Tell\" (1829) marked the onset of the Romantic opera, using the central national myth unifying Switzerland; and in Brussels, a riot (August 1830) after an opera that set a doomed romance against a background of foreign oppression (Auber's \"La Muette de Portici\") sparked the Belgian Revolution of 1830\u201331, the first successful revolution in the model of Romantic nationalism. Verdi's opera choruses of an oppressed people inspired two generations of patriots in Italy, especially with \"Va pensiero\" (\"Nabucco\", 1842). Under the influence of romantic nationalism, among economic and political forces, both Germany and Italy found political unity, and movements to create nations similarly based upon ethnic groups. It would flower in the Balkans (see for example, the Carinthian Plebiscite, 1920), along the Baltic Sea, and in the interior of Central Europe, where in the eventual outcome, the Habsburgs succumbed to the surge of Romantic nationalism.\nIn Norway, romanticism was embodied, not in literature, but in the movement toward a national style, both in architecture and in \"ethos\". Earlier, there was a strong romantic nationalist element mixed with Enlightenment rationalism in the rhetoric used in North America, in the American colonists' declaration of independence from Great Britain and the drafting of the U.S. Constitution of 1787, as well as the rhetoric in the wave of rebellions, inspired by new senses of localized identities, which swept the American colonies of Spain, one after the other, from the May Revolution of Argentina in 1810.\nConservatism and revolution in the 19th century.\nFollowing the ultimate collapse of the First French Empire with the fall of Napoleon, conservative elements took control in Europe, led by the Austrian noble Klemens von Metternich, ideals of the balance of power between the great powers of Europe dominated continental politics of the first half of the 19th century. Following the Congress of Vienna, and subsequent Concert of Europe system, several major empires took control of European politics. Among these were the Russian Empire; the restored French monarchy; the German Confederation, under the dominance of Prussia; the Austrian Empire; and the Ottoman Empire.\nThe conservative forces held sway until the Revolutions of 1848 swept across Europe and threatened the old order. Numerous movements developed around various cultural groups, who began to develop a sense of national identity. While initially, all of these revolutions failed, and reactionary forces would re-establish political control, the revolutions marked the start of the steady progress towards the end of the Concert of Europe under the dominance of a few multi-national empires and led to the establishment of the modern nation state in Europe; a process that would not be complete for over a century and a half. Central and Eastern Europe's political situation was partly shaped by the two World Wars, while many national identities in these two regions formed modern nation states when the collapse of the Soviet Union and the multinational states Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia led to numerous new states forming during the last decade of the 20th century.\nFolk culture.\nRomantic nationalism inspired the collection of folklore by such people as the Brothers Grimm. The view that fairy tales, unless contaminated from outside literary sources, were preserved in the same form over thousands of years, was not exclusive to Romantic Nationalists, but it fit in well with their views that such tales expressed the primordial nature of a people.\nThe Brothers Grimm were criticized because their first edition was insufficiently German, and they followed the advice. They rejected many tales they collected because of their similarity to tales by Charles Perrault, which they thought proved they were not truly German tales; \"Sleeping Beauty\" survived in their collection because the tale of Brynhildr convinced them that the figure of the sleeping princess was authentically German. They also altered the language used, changing each \"Fee\" (fairy) to an enchantress or wise woman, every \"prince\" to a \"king's son\", every \"princess\" to a \"king's daughter\". Discussing these views in their third editions, they particularly singled out Giambattista Basile's \"Pentamerone\" as the first \"national\" collection of fairy tales, and as capturing the Neapolitan voice.\nThe work of the Brothers Grimm influenced other collectors, both inspiring them to collect tales and leading them to similarly believe that the fairy tales of a country were particularly representative of it, to the neglect of cross-cultural influence. Among those influenced were the Russian Alexander Afanasyev, the Norwegians Peter Christen Asbj\u00f8rnsen and J\u00f8rgen Moe, and the Australian Joseph Jacobs.\nNational epics.\nThe concept of a \"national epic\", an extensively mythologized legendary work of poetry of defining importance to a certain nation, is another product of Romantic nationalism. The \"discovery\" of \"Beowulf\" in a single manuscript, first transcribed in 1818, came under the impetus of Romantic nationalism, after the manuscript had lain as an ignored curiosity in scholars' collections for two centuries. \"Beowulf\" was felt to provide people self-identified as \"Anglo-Saxon\" with their missing \"national epic\", just when the need for it was first being felt: the fact that Beowulf himself was a Geat was easily overlooked. The pseudo-Gaelic literary forgeries of \"Ossian\" had failed, finally, to fill the need for the first Romantic generation.\nThe first publication of \"The Tale of Igor's Campaign\" coincided with the rise in Russian national spirit in the wake of the Napoleonic wars and Suvorov's campaigns in Central Europe. The unseen and unheard \"Song of Roland\" had become a dim memory, until the antiquary Francisque Michel transcribed a worn copy in the Bodleian Library and put it into print in 1837; it was timely: French interest in the national epic revived among the Romantic generation. In Greece, the \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" took on new urgency during the Greek War of Independence. Amongst the world's Jewish community, the early Zionists considered the Bible a more suitable national epic than the Talmud.\nMany other \"national epics\", epic poetry considered to reflect the national spirit, were produced or revived under the influence of Romantic nationalism: particularly in the Russian Empire, national minorities seeking to assert their own identities in the face of Russification produced new national poetry\u00a0\u2013 either out of whole cloth, or from cobbling together folk poetry, or by resurrecting older narrative poetry. Examples include the Estonian \"Kalevipoeg\", Finnish \"Kalevala\", Polish \"Pan Tadeusz\", Latvian \"L\u0101\u010dpl\u0113sis\", Armenian \"Sasuntzi Davit\" by Hovhannes Tumanyan, Georgian \"The Knight in the Panther's Skin\" and Greater Iran, \"Shahnameh.\"\nGerman Romantic nationalism.\nThe Romantic movement was essential in spearheading the upsurge of German nationalism in the 19th century and especially the popular movement aiding the resurgence of Prussia after its defeat to Napoleon in the 1806 Battle of Jena. Johann Gottlieb Fichte's 1808 \"Addresses to the German Nation\", Heinrich von Kleist's fervent patriotic stage dramas before his death, and Ernst Moritz Arndt's war poetry during the anti-Napoleonic struggle of 1813\u201315 were all instrumental in shaping the character of German nationalism for the next one-and-a-half century in a racialized ethnic rather than civic nationalist direction. Romanticism also played a role in the popularization of the Kyffh\u00e4user myth, about the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa sleeping atop the Kyffh\u00e4user mountain and being expected to rise in a given time and save Germany) and the legend of the Lorelei (by Brentano and Heine) among others.\nThe Nazi movement later appropriated the nationalistic elements of Romanticism, with Nazi chief ideologue Alfred Rosenberg writing: \"The reaction in the form of German Romanticism was therefore as welcome as rain after a long drought. But in our own era of universal internationalism, it becomes necessary to follow this racially linked Romanticism to its core, and to free it from certain nervous convulsions which still adhere to it.\" Joseph Goebbels told theatre directors on 8 May 1933, just two days before the Nazi book burnings in Berlin, that: \"German art of the next decade will be heroic, it will be like steel, it will be Romantic, non-sentimental, factual; it will be national with great pathos, and at once obligatory and binding, or it will be nothing.\"\nOf this phenomenon, the Soviet literary scholar Naum Berkovsky wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;German fascism extracted Romanticism from the naphthalene of the past, established its ideological kinship with it, included it in its canon of forerunners, and after some cleansing on racial grounds, absorbed it into the system of its ideology and thereby gave this trend, which in its time was not apolitical, a purely political and topical meaning ... Schelling, Adam M\u00fcller and others thanks to the fascists again became our contemporaries, though in the specific sense in which every corpse taken out of its century-old coffin for any need becomes a \"contemporary\". In his book \"The Tasks of National Socialist Literary Criticism\", Walther Linden, who revised the history of German literature from a fascist point of view, considers the most valuable for fascism that stage in the development of German Romanticism when it freed itself from the influences of the French Revolution and thanks to Adam M\u00fcller, G\u00f6rres, Arnim and Schelling began to create truly German national literature on the basis of German medieval art, religion and patriotism.\nThis made scholars and critics like Fritz Strich, Thomas Mann and Victor Klemperer, who before the war were supporters of Romanticism, to reconsider their stance after the war and the Nazi experience and to adopt a more anti-Romantic position.\nHeinrich Heine parodied such Romantic modernizations of medieval folkloric myths in the \"Barbarossa\" chapter of his large 1844 poem \"Germany. A Winter's Tale\":\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:1em; float:left;\"&gt;Forgive, O Barbarossa, my hasty words! \nI do not possess a wise soul \nLike you, and I have little patience,\nSo, please, come back soon, after all!\nRetain the old methods of punishment, \nIf you judge the guillotine unpleasant:\nThe sword for the nobleman, and the cord\nFor the townsman and vulgar peasant.\nBut, do switch things around, now and then: \nPeasants and townsmen should die by the sword,\nAnd noblemen should hang on a rope.\nWe\u2019re all the creatures of the Lord!\nBring back the laws of Charles the Fifth,\nWith the hanging courts restoration,\nAnd divide the people, as before,\nInto guild, estate and corporation.\nRestore the old Holy Roman Empire, \nAs it was, whole and immense.\nBring back all its musty junk,\nAnd all its foolish nonsense.\nThe Middle Ages I\u2019ll endure,\nIf you bring back the genuine item;\nJust rescue us from this bastard state,\nAnd from its farcical system,\nFrom that mongrel chivalry,\nSuch a nauseating dish\nOf Gothic fancies and modern deceit,\nThat is neither flesh nor fish.\nShut down all the theatres, \nAnd chase their comedians pack,\nWho parody the olden days.\nO, Emperor, do come back!&lt;/poem&gt;\nPolish nationalism and messianism.\nRomanticism played an essential role in the national awakening of many Central European peoples lacking their own national states, not least in Poland, which had recently failed to restore its independence when Russia's army crushed the Polish Uprising under Nicholas I. Revival and reinterpretation of ancient myths, customs and traditions by Romantic poets and painters helped to distinguish their indigenous cultures from those of the dominant nations and crystallise the mythography of Romantic nationalism. Patriotism, nationalism, revolution and armed struggle for independence also became popular themes in the arts of this period. Arguably, the most distinguished Romantic poet of this part of Europe was Adam Mickiewicz, who developed an idea that Poland was the Messiah of Nations, predestined to suffer just as Jesus had suffered to save all the people. The Polish self-image as a \"Christ among nations\" or the martyr of Europe can be traced back to its history of Christendom and suffering under invasions. During the periods of foreign occupation, the Catholic Church served as bastion of Poland's national identity and language, and the major promoter of Polish culture. The partitions came to be seen in Poland as a Polish sacrifice for the security for Western civilization. Adam Mickiewicz wrote the patriotic drama \"Dziady\" (directed against the Russians), where he depicts Poland as the Christ of Nations. He also wrote \"Verily I say unto you, it is not for you to learn civilization from foreigners, but it is you who are to teach them civilization ... You are among the foreigners like the Apostles among the idolaters\". In \"Books of the Polish Nation and Polish Pilgrimage\" Mickiewicz detailed his vision of Poland as a Messias and a Christ of Nations, that would save mankind. Dziady is known for various interpretation. The most known ones are the moral aspect of part II, individualist and romantic message of part IV, as well as deeply patriotic, messianistic and Christian vision in part III of the poem. Zdzis\u0142aw K\u0119pi\u0144ski, however, focuses his interpretation on Slavic pagan and occult elements found in the drama. In his book \"Mickiewicz hermetyczny\" he writes about hermetic, theosophic and alchemical philosophy on the book as well as Masonic symbols.\nArts.\nAfter the 1870s \"national romanticism\", as it is more usually called, became a familiar movement in the arts. Romantic musical nationalism is exemplified by the work of Bed\u0159ich Smetana, especially the symphonic poem \"Vltava\". In Scandinavia and the Slavic parts of Europe especially, \"national romanticism\" provided a series of answers to the 19th-century search for styles that would be culturally meaningful and evocative, yet not merely historicist. When a church was built over the spot in St Petersburg where Tsar Alexander II of Russia had been assassinated, the \"Church of the Savior on Blood\", the natural style to use was one that best evoked traditional Russian features (\"illustration, left\"). In Finland, the reassembly of the national epic, the \"Kalevala,\" inspired paintings and murals in the National Romantic style that substituted there for the international Art Nouveau styles. The foremost proponent in Finland was Akseli Gallen-Kallela (\"illustration, below right\").\nBy the turn of the century, ethnic self-determination had become an assumption held as being progressive and liberal. There were romantic nationalist movements for separation in Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, the Kingdom of Bavaria held apart from a united Germany, and Czech and Serb nationalism continued to trouble Imperial politics. The flowering of arts which drew inspiration from national epics and song continued unabated. The Zionist movement revived Hebrew, and began immigration to Eretz Yisrael, and Welsh and Irish tongues also experienced a poetic revival.\nClaims of primacy or superiority.\nAt the same time, linguistic and cultural nationality, colored with pre-genetic concepts of race, bolstered two rhetorical claims used to this day: claims of primacy and claims of superiority. Primacy is the claimed inalienable right of a culturally and racially defined people to a geographical terrain, a \"heartland\" (a vivid expression) or homeland. Richard Wagner notoriously argued that those who were ethnically different could not comprehend the artistic and cultural meaning inherent in national culture. Identifying \"Jewishness\" even in musical style, he specifically attacked the Jews as being unwilling to assimilate into German culture, and thus unable to truly comprehend the mysteries of its music and language. Sometimes \"national epics\" such as the Nibelunglied have had a galvanizing effect on social politics.\nTwentieth-century political developments.\nIn the first two decades of the 20th century, Romantic Nationalism as an idea was to have crucial influence on political events. Following the Panic of 1873 that gave rise to a new wave of antisemitism and racism in the German Empire politically ruled by an authoritarian, militaristic conservatism under Otto von Bismarck and in parallel with the \"Fin de si\u00e8cle\" (which was also reflected to a degree in the contemporary art movements of symbolism, the Decadent movement, and \"Art Nouveau\"), the racialist \"v\u00f6lkisch\" movement which grew out of romantic nationalism in Germany in the late 19th century.\nThe rising nationalistic and imperialistic tensions between the European nations throughout the \"Fin de si\u00e8cle\" period eventually erupted in the First World War. After Germany had lost the war and undergone the tumultuous German Revolution, the \"v\u00f6lkisch\" movement drastically radicalized itself in Weimar Germany under the harsh terms of the Treaty of Versailles, and Adolf Hitler would go on to say that \"the basic ideas of National-Socialism are \"v\u00f6lkisch\", just as the \"v\u00f6lkisch\" ideas are National-Socialist\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26098", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26098", "title": "Republicans", "text": ""}
{"id": "26100", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26100", "title": "Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia", "text": "Colombian guerrilla movement\nThe Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia \u2013 People's Army (, FARC\u2013EP or FARC) was a far-left Marxist\u2013Leninist guerrilla group involved in the continuing Colombian conflict starting in 1964. The FARC-EP was officially founded in 1966 from peasant self-defense groups formed from 1948 during \"La Violencia\" as a peasant force promoting a political line of agrarianism and anti-imperialism. They were known to employ a variety of military tactics, in addition to more unconventional methods, including terrorism.\nThe operations of the FARC\u2013EP were funded by kidnap and ransom, mining, extortion, and taxation of various forms of economic activity, and the production and distribution of drugs. They are only one actor in a complex conflict where atrocities have been committed by the state, right-wing paramilitaries, and left-wing guerrillas not limited to FARC, such as ELN, M-19, and others. Colombia's National Centre for Historical Memory, a government agency, has estimated that between 1981 and 2012 paramilitary groups have caused 38.4% of the civilian deaths, while the Guerillas are responsible for 16.8%, the Colombian Security Forces for 10.1%, and other non-identified armed groups for 27.7%. The National Centre for Historical Memory has also concluded that of the 27,023 kidnappings carried out between 1970 and 2010, the Guerillas were responsible for 90.6% of them.\nThe strength of the FARC\u2013EP forces was high; in 2007, the FARC said they were an armed force of 18,000 men and women; in 2010, the Colombian military calculated that FARC forces consisted of about 13,800 members, 50 percent of whom were armed guerrilla combatants; and in 2011 the president of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, said that FARC\u2013EP forces comprised fewer than 10,000 members. The Colombian Ministry of Defense reported 19,504 deserters, or individually demobilized members, from the FARC between August 2002 and their collective demobilization in 2017, despite potentially severe punishment, including execution, for attempted desertion in the FARC.\nFARC made 239 attacks on the energy infrastructure; however, they showed signs of fatigue. By 2014, the FARC were not seeking to engage in outright combat with the army, instead concentrating on small-scale ambushes against isolated army units. Meanwhile, from 2008 to 2017, the FARC opted to attack police patrols with home-made mortars, sniper rifles, and explosives, as they were not considered strong enough to engage police units directly. This followed the trend of the 1990s during the strengthening of Colombian government forces.\nIn June 2016, the FARC signed a ceasefire accord with President Santos in Havana. This accord was seen as an historic step to ending the war that has gone on for fifty years. Santos announced that four years of negotiation had secured a peace deal with FARC and that a national referendum would take place on 2 October. The referendum failed with 50.24% voting against. In November 2016, the Colombian government and the FARC signed a revised peace deal, which was approved by Congress.\nOn 27 June 2017, FARC ceased to be an armed group, disarming itself and handing over its weapons to the United Nations. A month later, FARC announced its reformation as a legal political party, later renamed the Commons, in accordance with the terms of the peace deal. However, about 2,000 to 2,500 FARC dissidents still take on FARC's original doctrine and continue with drug trafficking, though far smaller than the group at its peak.\nA small faction of FARC leaders announced a return to armed activity on 29 August 2019, stating that the Colombian government did not respect peace agreements, a position Colombian officials disagreed with. The Colombian government responded with preemptive strikes, killing FARC members planning to lead rearmament activities. In October 2023, the Colombian government engaged in peace talks with the FARC splinter group and agreed to a ceasefire. In January, both sides agreed to extend the ceasefire to June 2024.\nAs of February 2024, the vast majority of former FARC members have honored the 2016 peace agreement. However, in August 2024 the government announced an end to a ceasefire with the smaller dissident FARC faction the Estado Mayor Central, EMC, who reject the 2016 peace deal.\nBackground.\n\"La Violencia\" and the National Front.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"There is more repression of individual freedom here, than in any country we've been to; the police patrol the streets, carrying rifles, and demand your papers every few minutes\u00a0... the atmosphere, here, is tense, and it seems a revolution may be brewing. The countryside is in open revolt, and the army is powerless to suppress it.\"\n Diary of Ernesto \"Che\" Guevara, 6 July 1952\nIn 1948, in the aftermath of the assassination of the populist politician Jorge Eli\u00e9cer Gait\u00e1n, there occurred a decade of large-scale political violence throughout Colombia, which was a Conservative \u2013 Liberal civil war that killed more than 200,000 people. In Colombian history and culture, the killings are known as \"La Violencia\" (The Violence, 1948\u201358); most of the people killed were peasants and laborers in rural Colombia. In 1957\u20131958, the political leadership of the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party agreed to establish a bipartisan political system known as the National Front (Frente Nacional, 1958\u201374). The Liberal and the Conservative parties agreed to alternate in the exercise of government power by presenting a joint National Front candidate to each election and restricting the participation of other political movements.\nThe pact was ratified as a constitutional amendment by a national plebiscite on 1 December 1957 and was supported by the Church as well as Colombia's business leaders. The initial power-sharing agreement was effective until 1974; nonetheless, with modifications, the Liberal\u2013Conservative bipartisan system lasted until 1990. The 16-year extension of the bipartisan power-sharing agreement permitted the Liberal and Conservative elites to consolidate their socioeconomic control of Colombian society, and to strengthen the military to suppress political reform and radical politics proposing alternative forms of government for Colombia.\nAccelerated Economic Development.\nDuring the 1960s, the Colombian government effected a policy of Accelerated Economic Development (AED), the agribusiness plan of Lauchlin Currie, a Canadian-born U.S. economist who owned ranching land in Colombia. The plan promoted industrial farming that would produce great yields of agricultural and animal products for worldwide exportation, while the Colombian government would provide subsidies to large-scale private farms. The AED policy came at the expense of the small-scale family farms that only yielded food supplies for local consumption. Based on a legalistic interpretation of what constituted \"efficient use\" of the land, thousands of peasants were forcefully evicted from their farms and migrated to the cities, where they became part of the industrial labor pool. In 1961, the dispossession of farmland had produced 40,000 landless families and by 1969 their numbers amounted to 400,000 throughout Colombia. By 1970, the \"latifundio\" type of industrial farm (more than 50 hectares) occupied more than 77 per cent of arable land in the country. The AED policy increased the concentration of land ownership among cattle ranchers and urban industrialists, whose businesses expanded their profits as a result of reductions in the cost of labor wages after the influx of thousands of displaced peasants into the cities. During this period, most rural workers lacked basic medical care and malnutrition was almost universal, which increased the rates of preventable disease and infant mortality.\nHistory.\nPCC and self-defense communities.\nCommunists were active throughout rural and urban Colombia in the period immediately following World War I. The Colombian Communist Party (\"Partido Comunista Colombiano\", PCC) was formally accredited by the Comintern in 1930. The PCC began establishing \"peasant leagues\" in rural areas and \"popular fronts\" in urban areas, calling for improved living and working conditions, education, and rights for the working class. These groups began networking together to present a defensive front against the state-supported violence of large landholders. Members organized strikes, protests, seizures of land, and organized communist-controlled \"self-defense communities\" in southern Colombia that were able to resist state military forces, while providing for the subsistence needs of the populace. Many of the PCC's attempts at organizing peasants were met with violent repression by the Colombian government and the landowning class. U.S. military intelligence estimated that in 1962, the size of the PCC had grown to 8,000 to 10,000 active members, and an additional 28,000 supporters.\nIn 1961, a guerrilla leader and long-time PCC organizer named Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez declared an independent \"Republic of Marquetalia\". The Lleras government attempted unsuccessfully to attack the communities to drive out the guerrillas, due to fears that \"a Cuban-style revolutionary situation might develop\". After the failed attacks, several army outposts were set up in the area.\nIn October 1959, the United States sent a \"Special Survey Team\" composed of counterinsurgency experts to investigate Colombia's internal security situation. Among other policy recommendations the US team advised that \"to shield the interests of both Colombian and US authorities against 'interventionist' charges any special aid given for internal security was to be sterile and covert in nature\". In February 1962, three years after the 1959 \"US Special Survey Team\", a Fort Bragg top-level U.S. Special Warfare team headed by Special Warfare Center commander General William P. Yarborough, visited Colombia for a second survey.\nIn a secret supplement to his report to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Yarborough encouraged the creation and deployment of a US-backed force to commit \"paramilitary, sabotage and/or terrorist activities against known communist proponents\".\nThe new counter-insurgency policy was instituted as Plan Lazo in 1962 and called for https:// and civic action programs in violent areas. Following Yarborough's recommendations, the Colombian military recruited civilians into \"civil defense\" groups which worked alongside the military in its counter-insurgency campaign, as well as in civilian intelligence networks to gather information on guerrilla activity. Doug Stokes argues that it was not until the early part of the 1980s that the Colombian government attempted to move away from the counterinsurgency strategy represented by Plan Lazo and Yarborough's 1962 recommendations.\nCreation of FARC.\nThe Colombian government began attacking many of the communist groups in the early 1960s, attempting to re-assimilate the territories under the control of the national government. FARC was formed in 1964 by Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez and other PCC members, after a military attack on the community of Marquetalia. 16,000 Colombian troops attacked the community, which only had 48 armed fighters. Marulanda and 47 others fought against government forces at Marquetalia and then escaped into the mountains along with the other fighters. These 48 men formed the core of FARC, which later grew in size to hundreds of fighters.\nBetancur and Barco presidencies (1982\u20131990).\nSeventh Guerrilla Conference of the FARC\u2013EP.\nIn 1982, FARC\u2013EP held its Seventh Guerrilla Conference, which called for a major shift in FARC's strategy. FARC had historically been doing most of its fighting in rural areas and was limited to small-scale confrontations with Colombian military forces. By 1982, increased income from the \"coca boom\" allowed them to expand into an irregular army, which would then stage large-scale attacks on Colombian troops. They also began sending fighters to Vietnam and the Soviet Union for advanced military training. They also planned to move closer to middle-sized cities, as opposed to only remote rural areas, and closer to areas rich in natural resources, in order to create a strong economic infrastructure. It was also at this conference that FARC added the initials \"EP\", for \"Ej\u00e9rcito del Pueblo\" or \"People's Army\", to the organization's name.\n\"La Uribe\" Agreement and \"Union Patri\u00f3tica\".\nIn the early 1980s, President Belisario Betancur began discussing the possibility of peace talks with the guerrillas. This resulted in the 1984 \"La Uribe\" Agreement, which called for a cease-fire, which ended up lasting from 1984 to 1987.\nIn 1985, members of the FARC\u2013EP, along with a large number of other leftist and communist groups, formed a political party known as the \"Union Patri\u00f3tica\" (\"Patriotic Union\", UP). The UP sought political reforms (known as \"Apertura Democratica\") such as constitutional reform, more democratic local elections, political decentralization, and ending the domination of Colombian politics by the Liberal and Conservative parties. They also pursued socioeconomic reforms such land redistribution, greater health and education spending, the nationalization of foreign businesses, Colombian banks, and transportation, and greater public access to mass media. While many members of the UP were involved with the FARC\u2013EP, the large majority of them were not and came from a wide variety of backgrounds such as labor unions and socialist parties such as the PCC. In the cities, the FARC\u2013EP began integrating itself with the UP and forming \"Juntas Patri\u00f3ticas\" (or \"solidarity cells\") \u2013 small groups of people associated with labor unions, student activist groups, and peasant leagues, who traveled into the \"barrios\" discussing social problems, building support for the UP, and determining the sociopolitical stance of the urban peasantry.\nThe UP performed better in elections than any other leftist party in Colombia's history. In 1986, UP candidates won 350 local council seats, 23 deputy positions in departmental assemblies, 9 seats in the House, and 6 seats in the Senate. The 1986 presidential candidate, Jaime Pardo Leal, won 4.6% of the national vote.\nSince 1986, thousands of members of the UP and other leftist parties were murdered (estimates range from 4,000 to 6,000). In 1987, the President of the UP, Jaime Pardo, was murdered. In 1989 a single large landholder had over 400 UP members murdered. Over 70% of all Colombian presidential candidates in 1990\u2014and 100% of those from center-left parties\u2014were assassinated.\nGaviria and Samper presidencies (1990\u20131998).\nDuring this period, the Colombian government continued its negotiations with the FARC\u2013EP and other armed groups, some of which were successful. Some of the groups which demobilized at this time include the EPL, the ERP, the Quint\u00edn Lame Armed Movement, and the M-19.\nOn 10 August 1990, senior leader Jacobo Arenas, an ideological leader and founder of FARC\u2013EP, died of a heart attack at the Casa Verde compound in Colombia's eastern mountains.\nTowards the end of 1990, the Colombian army, with no advance warning and while negotiations were still ongoing with the group, attacked and seized four linked bases. The last of these a compound known as Casa Verde, which housed the National Secretariat of the FARC\u2013EP, was seized on 15 December 1990. The Colombian government argued that the attack was caused by the FARC\u2013EP's lack of commitment to the process, demonstrated by continuing its criminal activities and FARC attacks in November.\nOn 3 June 1991, dialogue resumed between the Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar Guerrilla Coordinating Board and the government on neutral territory in Caracas, Venezuela and Tlaxcala, Mexico. However, the war did not stop, and armed attacks by both sides continued. The negotiation process was broken off in 1993 after no agreement was reached. The Coordinating Board disappeared not long after that time, and guerrilla groups continued their activities independently.\nBefore the break off of dialogue, a letter written by a group of Colombian intellectuals (among whom were Nobel laureate Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez) to the Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar Guerrilla Coordinating Board was released denouncing the approach taken by the FARC\u2013EP and the dire consequences that it was having for the country.\nIn the early 1990s, the FARC\u2013EP had between 7,000 and 10,000 fighters, organized into 70 fronts spread throughout the country. From 1996 to 1998 they inflicted a series of strikes on the Colombian Army, including a three-day offensive in Mit\u00fa (Vaup\u00e9s department), taking a large number of soldiers prisoner.\nOn 23 September 1994, the FARC kidnapped American agricultural scientist Thomas Hargrove and held him captive for 11 months. After his release, Hargrove wrote a book about his ordeal which inspired the 2000 film \"Proof of Life\" starring Meg Ryan and Russell Crowe.\nOver this period in Colombia, the cultivation of different drugs expanded and there were widespread coca farmers' marches. These marches brought to a halt several major arteries in southern Colombia. Government officials said that FARC-EP had forced the protesters to participate. According to social anthropologist Mar\u00eda Clemencia Ram\u00edrez, the relationship between the guerrillas and the marches was ambivalent: FARC-EP promoted the 1996 protests as part of their participatory democracy policies yet also exercised authoritarianism, which led to tensions and negotiations with peasant leaders, but the \"cocalero\" movement brought proposals on behalf of the coca growers and defended its own interests.\nFrench sociologist Alain Labrousse, who has conducted extensive research on the illicit narcotics industry in Latin America and Central Asia, has noted similarities in the reliance on the drug trade by both the FARC-EP and the Taliban. In his thesis, Labrousse asserts that the FARC-EP leadership, like that of the Taliban, explicitly bans the use of drugs by its membership and within the local population, but vigorously advocates for legalization of drug trafficking as a tool to finance its military objectives. In both cases, the insurgency groups manage to garner significant political support of farmers who serve to benefit from the illicit drug trade, prompting grassroots mobilization, political activism, and agitation to demand legalization by the government.\nPastrana presidency (1998\u20132002).\nIn March 1999 members of a local FARC contingent killed three United States\u2013based indigenous rights activists, who were working with the U'Wa people to build a school for U'Wa children, and were fighting against encroachment of U'Wa territory by multinational oil corporations. The killings were questioned by many and condemned by many others, and led the United States to increase pressure on the Pastrana administration to crack down on FARC guerrillas.\n1998\u20132002 peace process.\nWith the hope of negotiating a peace settlement, on 7 November 1998, President Andr\u00e9s Pastrana granted FARC-EP a safe haven meant to serve as a confidence building measure, centred on the San Vicente del Cagu\u00e1n settlement.\nAfter a series of high-profile guerrilla actions, including the hijacking of an aircraft, the attack on several small towns and cities, the arrest of the Irish Colombia Three (see below) and the alleged training of FARC-EP militants in bomb making by them, and the kidnapping of several political figures, Pastrana ended the peace talks on 21 February 2002 and ordered the armed forces to start retaking the FARC-EP controlled zone, beginning at midnight. A 48-hour respite that had been previously agreed to with the rebel group was not respected as the government argued that it had already been granted during an earlier crisis in January, when most of the more prominent FARC-EP commanders had apparently left the demilitarised zone. Shortly after the end of talks, the FARC-EP kidnapped Oxygen Green Party presidential candidate \u00cdngrid Betancourt, who was travelling in Colombian territory. Betancourt was rescued by the Colombian government on 2 July 2008 (see Operation Jaque below).\nThe Colombia Three case.\nOn 24 April 2002, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on International Relations published the findings of its investigation into IRA activities in Colombia. Their report alleged a longstanding connection between the IRA and FARC\u2013EP, mentioned at least 15 IRA members who had been travelling in and out of Colombia since 1998, and estimated that the IRA had received at least $2\u00a0million in drug proceeds for training FARC-EP members. The IRA/FARC-EP connection was first made public on 11 August 2001, following the arrest in Bogot\u00e1 of two IRA explosives and urban warfare experts and of a representative of Sinn F\u00e9in who was known to be stationed in Cuba. Jim Monaghan, Martin McCauley and Niall Connolly (known as the Colombia Three), were arrested in Colombia in August 2001 and were accused of teaching bomb-making methods to FARC\u2013EP.\nOn 15 February 2002, the Colombia Three were charged with training FARC-EP members in bomb-making in Colombia. The Colombian authorities had received satellite footage of the men with FARC-EP in an isolated jungle area, where they were thought to have spent five weeks. They could have spent up to 20 years in gaol if the allegations were proved.\nDuring October 2001, a key witness in the case against the three Irish republicans disappeared. This came as Sinn F\u00e9in President Gerry Adams admitted one of the men was the party's representative in Cuba. The missing witness, a former police inspector, said he had seen Mr McCauley with FARC-EP members in 1998. Without his testimony, legal sources said the chances of convicting the three men were reduced.\nThey were eventually found guilty of travelling on false passports in June 2004 but were acquitted of training FARC-EP members. That decision was reversed after an appeal by the Attorney General of Colombia and they were sentenced to 17-year terms. However, they vanished in December 2004 while on bail and returned to Ireland. T\u00e1naiste Mary Harney said no deal had been done with Sinn F\u00e9in or the IRA over the three's return to Ireland adding that the Irish government would consider any request from the Colombian authorities for their extradition. Colombian vice-president Francisco Santos Calder\u00f3n did not rule out allowing them to serve their sentences in Ireland.\nUribe presidency (2002\u20132010).\n2002\u20132007.\nFor most of the period between 2002 and 2005, the FARC-EP was in a strategic withdrawal due to the increasing military and police actions of new president \u00c1lvaro Uribe, which led to the capture or desertion of many fighters and medium-level commanders. Uribe ran for office on an anti-FARC-EP platform and was determined to defeat FARC-EP in a bid to create \"confidence\" in the country. Uribe's own father had been killed by FARC-EP in an attempted kidnapping in 1983.\nIn 2002 and 2003, FARC broke up 10 large ranches in Meta, an eastern Colombian province, and distributed the land to local subsistence farmers.\nDuring the first two years of the Uribe administration, several FARC-EP fronts, most notably in Cundinamarca and Antioquia, were broken by the government's military operations.\nOn 5 May 2003, the FARC assassinated the governor of Antioquia, Guillermo Gaviria Correa, his advisor for peace, former defence minister Gilberto Echeverri Mej\u00eda, and eight soldiers. The FARC had kidnapped Mr. Gaviria and Mr. Echeverri a year earlier, when the two men were leading a march for peace from Medell\u00edn to Caicedo in Antioquia.\nOn 13 July 2004, the office of the United Nations' High Commissioner for Human Rights publicly condemned the group, given evidence that FARC-EP violated article 17 of the additional Protocol II of the Geneva Convention and international humanitarian law, as a result of the 10 July massacre of seven peasants and the subsequent displacement of 80 individuals in San Carlos, Antioquia.\nIn early February 2005, a series of small-scale actions by the FARC-EP around the southwestern departments of Colombia, resulted in an estimated 40 casualties. The FARC\u2013EP, in response to government military operations in the south and in the southeast, displaced its military centre of gravity towards the Nari\u00f1o, Putumayo and Cauca departments.\nThe FARC-EP originally said that they would only release the police and military members they held captive (whom they considered to be prisoners of war) through exchanges with the government for imprisoned FARC-EP members. During the duration of the DMZ negotiations, a small humanitarian exchange took place.\nThe group demanded a demilitarised zone including two towns (Florida and Pradera) in the strategic region of Valle del Cauca, where much of the current military action against them has taken place. This region is also an important way of transporting drugs to the Pacific coast and was even the primary location for Norte del Valle Cartel and Cali Cartel. This demand was rejected by the Colombian government based on previous experience during the 2002 peace talks.\nOn 2 December 2004, the government announced the pardon of 23 FARC\u2013EP prisoners, to encourage a reciprocal move. The prisoners to be released were all of low rank and had promised not to rejoin the armed struggle. In November 2004, the FARC\u2013EP had rejected a proposal to hand over 59 of its captives in exchange for 50 guerrillas imprisoned by the government.\nIn a communique dated 28 November but released publicly on 3 December, the FARC-EP declared that they were no longer insisting on the demilitarisation of San Vicente del Cagu\u00e1n and Cartagena del Chair\u00e1 as a precondition for the negotiation of the prisoner exchange, but instead that of Florida and Pradera in the Valle department. They state that this area would lie outside the \"area of influence\" of both their Southern and Eastern Blocks (the FARC-EP's strongest) and that of the military operations being carried out by the Uribe administration.\nThey requested security guarantees both for the displacement of their negotiators and that of the guerrillas that would be freed, which were stated to number as many as 500 or more, and ask the Catholic Church to coordinate the participation of the United Nations and other countries in the process.\nThe FARC\u2013EP also mention in the communique that Sim\u00f3n Trinidad's extradition, would be a serious obstacle to reaching a prisoner exchange agreement with the government. On 17 December 2004, the Colombian government authorised Trinidad's extradition to the United States, but stated that the measure could be revoked if the FARC-EP released all political hostages and military captives in its possession before 30 December. The FARC-EP rejected the demand.\nOn 25 March 2006, after a public announcement made weeks earlier, the FARC\u2013EP released two captured policemen at La Dorada, Putumayo. The release took place some southwest of Bogot\u00e1, near the Ecuadorean border. The Red Cross said the two were released in good health. Military operations in the area and bad weather had prevented the release from occurring one week earlier.\nIn a separate series of events, the German government and a foreign ministry crisis team negotiated the release of civilian hostage and German citizen Lothar Hintze on 4 April 2006 after five years in captivity. Hintze had been kidnapped from a tourist center in Prado on 16 March 2001 for extortion purposes. His wife had paid multiple ransom payments with no result.\nOne prisoner, Julian Ernesto Guevara Castro, a police officer, died of tuberculosis on 28 January 2006. He was a captain and was captured on 1 November 1998. On 29 March 2009, the FARC-EP announced that they would give Guevara's remains to his mother. The FARC handed over Guevara's remains on 1 April 2010.\nAnother civilian hostage, Fernando Ara\u00fajo, later named Minister of Foreign Relations and formerly Development Minister, escaped his captors on 31 December 2006. Ara\u00fajo had to walk through the jungle for five days before being found by troops in the hamlet of San Agustin, north of Bogot\u00e1. He was kidnapped on 5 December 2000 while jogging in the Caribbean coastal city of Cartagena. He was reunited with his family on 5 January 2007.\nAnother prisoner, Frank Pinchao, a police officer, escaped his captors on 28 April 2007 after nine years in captivity. He was reunited with his family on 15 May 2007.\n2007 death of 11 hostage deputies.\nOn 28 June 2007, the FARC\u2013EP reported the death of 11 out of 12 provincial deputies from the Valle del Cauca Department whom the guerrillas had kidnapped in 2002. The guerrillas claimed that the deputies had been killed by crossfire during an attack by an \"unidentified military group.\" The Colombian government stated that government forces had not made any rescue attempts and that the FARC\u2013EP executed the hostages. FARC did not report any other casualties on either side and delayed months before permitting the Red Cross to recover the remains. According to the government, the guerrillas delayed turning over the corpses to let decomposition hide evidence of how they died. The Red Cross reported that the corpses had been washed and their clothing changed before burial, hiding evidence of how they were killed. The Red Cross also reported that the deputies had been killed by multiple close-range shots, many of them in the backs of the victims, and even two by shots to the head.\nIn February 2009, Sigifredo L\u00f3pez, the only deputy who survived and was later released by FARC, accused the group of killing the 11 captives and denied that any military rescue attempt had taken place. According to L\u00f3pez, the unexpected arrival of another guerrilla unit resulted in confusion and paranoia, leading the rebels to kill the rest of the Valle deputies. He survived after previously being punished for insubordination and was held in chains nearby but separated from the rest of the group.\nEarly-2008 prisoner events.\nOn 10 January 2008, former vice presidential candidate Clara Rojas and former congresswoman Consuelo Gonz\u00e1lez were freed after nearly six years in captivity. In a Venezuela-brokered deal, a helicopter flew deep into Colombia to pick up both hostages. The women were escorted out of the jungle by armed guerrillas to a clearing where they were picked up by Venezuelan helicopters that bore International Red Cross insignias. In a statement published on a pro-rebel Web site, the FARC-EP said the unilateral release demonstrated the group's willingness to engage the Colombian government in talks over the release of as many as 800 people who are still being held. In a televised speech, Colombia's U.S.-allied president, \u00c1lvaro Uribe, thanked Ch\u00e1vez for his efforts.\nDuring the period she was held kidnapped in the jungle in 2004, Clara Rojas gave birth to her son by Caesarean. At 8 months old, the baby was removed from the area and Rojas didn't hear of the boy again until 31 December, when she heard Colombian President \u00c1lvaro Uribe say on the radio that the child was no longer with her captors. DNA tests later confirmed the boy, who had been living in a Bogot\u00e1 foster home for more than two years under a different name, was hers. She reclaimed her son. Asked about her opinion of the FARC\u2013EP as group, Rojas called it \"a criminal organisation\", condemning its kidnappings as \"a total violation of human dignity\" and saying some captive police and soldiers are constantly chained.\nOn 31 January 2008, the FARC\u2013EP announced that they would release civilian hostages Luis Eladio Perez Bonilla, Gloria Polanco, and Orlando Beltran Cuellar to Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez as a humanitarian gesture. On 27 February 2008, the three hostages and Jorge Eduardo Gechem Turbay (who was added to the list due to his poor health) were released by FARC\u2013EP. With the authorization of the Colombian government and the participation of the International Red Cross, a Venezuelan helicopter transported them to Caracas from San Jos\u00e9 del Guaviare. The FARC\u2013EP had called its planned release of the hostages a gesture of recognition for the mediation efforts of Ch\u00e1vez, who had called on the international community to recognize the rebels as belligerents a month prior. Colombian President \u00c1lvaro Uribe, who had tense relations with Ch\u00e1vez, thanked the socialist leader and called for the release of all hostages. He said Colombia was still in a fight \"against terrorist actions\" but was open to reconciliation.\nAnti-FARC rallies.\nOn 4 February 2008, anti-FARC protests were held in 45 Colombian cities and towns, with an estimated 1.5\u00a0million people coming out in Bogot\u00e1 alone. Solidarity rallies were held in some 200 cities worldwide including Berlin, Barcelona, London, Madrid, Toronto, Dubai, Miami, New York, Brisbane, and La Paz. The protests were originally organised through Facebook and were also supported by local Colombian media outlets as well as the Colombian government. Participation estimates vary from the hundreds of thousands to several millions of people in Colombia and thousands worldwide.\nShortly before the rallies took place 13 demobilised AUC paramilitary leaders, including Salvatore Mancuso, had expressed their support of the protest through a communique. However, this move was rejected by organiser Carlos Andr\u00e9s Santiago, who stated that such an endorsement was harmful and criticised the AUC's actions.\nOn 20 July 2008, a subsequent set of rallies against FARC included thousands of Colombians in Bogot\u00e1 and hundreds of thousands throughout the rest of the country.\nDeaths of Ra\u00fal Reyes and Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez.\nOn 1 March 2008, Raul Reyes, a member of FARC's ruling Secretariat, was killed just across the border from Colombia, in the small village of Santa Rosa, Ecuador, after Colombian planes bombarded a FARC camp there. The bombardment was \"followed by troops in helicopters who recovered the bodies of Reyes and another 16 rebels.\" Reyes was the former FARC chief negotiator during the unsuccessful 1998\u20132002 peace process, and was also a key FARC hostage release negotiator. Reyes' demise marked the first time that a FARC Secretariat member had been killed in combat.\nThis incident led to a breakdown in diplomatic relations between Ecuador and Colombia, and between Venezuela and Colombia. Ecuador condemned the attack. The incident also resulted in diplomatic strains between the United States and Ecuador, following revelations that the Central Intelligence Agency provided intelligence that allowed the Colombian military to locate the FARC\u2013EP commander and ordnance used in the attack.\nIt has been considered the biggest blow against FARC\u2013EP in its more than four decades of existence. This event was quickly followed by the death of Iv\u00e1n R\u00edos, another member of FARC\u2013EP's seven-man Secretariat, less than a week later, by the hand of his own bodyguard. It came as a result of heavy Colombian military pressure and a reward offer of up to $5\u00a0million from the Colombian government.\nAfter the attack, the Colombian military forces managed to secure six laptop computers belonging to Reyes, in which they found information linking several left-wing Colombian personalities, such as politicians, journalists and human rights activists with terrorist activities.\nManuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez died on 26 March 2008 after a heart attack. His death would be kept a secret, until Colombian magazine \"Semana\" published an interview with Colombian defence minister Juan Manuel Santos on 24 May 2008 in which Santos mentions the death of Manuel Marulanda V\u00e9lez. The news was confirmed by FARC\u2013EP commander Timochenko on Latin American television station teleSUR on 25 May 2008. Timochenko announced the new commander in chief was Alfonso Cano After speculations in several national and international media about the \"softening up\" of the FARC and the announcement of Colombian President \u00c1lvaro Uribe that several FARC leaders were ready to surrender and free their captives, the secretariat of the FARC sent out a communiqu\u00e9 emphasising the death of their founder would not change their approach towards the captives or the humanitarian agreement.\nLate-2008 prisoner events.\nOn 11 January 2008 during the annual State of the Nation in the Venezuelan National Assembly, Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez referred to the FARC as \"a real army that occupies territory in Colombia, they're not terrorists\u00a0... They have a political goal and we have to recognise that\". However, on 13 January 2008, Ch\u00e1vez stated his disapproval of the FARC\u2013EP strategy of armed struggle and kidnapping, saying \"I don't agree with kidnapping and I don't agree with armed struggle\". On 7 March at the Cumbre de Rio, Ch\u00e1vez stated again that the FARC\u2013EP should lay down their arms \"Look at what has happened and is happening in Latin America, reflect on this (FARC-EP), we are done with war\u00a0... enough with all this death\". On 8 June Chavez repeated his call for a political solution and an end to the war, \"The guerrilla war is history\u00a0... At this moment in Latin America, an armed guerrilla movement is out of place\".\nOn 2 July 2008, under a Colombian military operation called Operation Jaque, the FARC\u2013EP was tricked by the Colombian Government into releasing 15 captives to Colombian Intelligence agents disguised as journalists and international aid workers in a helicopter rescue. Military intelligence agents infiltrated the guerrilla ranks and led the local commander in charge of the captives, Gerardo Aguilar Ram\u00edrez, alias Cesar, to believe they were going to take them by helicopter to Alfonso Cano, the guerrillas' supreme leader. The rescued included \u00cdngrid Betancourt (former presidential candidate), U.S. military contractors Marc Gonsalves, Thomas Howes, and Keith Stansell, as well as eleven Colombian police officers and soldiers. The commander, Cesar and one other rebel were taken into custody by agents without incident after boarding the helicopter. On 4 July, some observers questioned whether or not this was an intercepted captive release made to look like a rescue. In a 5 July communique, FARC itself blamed rebels Cesar and Enrique for the escape of the captives and acknowledged the event as a setback but reiterated their willingness to reach future humanitarian agreements. Immediately after the captive rescue, Colombian military forces cornered the rest of FARC\u2013EP's 1st Front, the unit which had held the captives. Colombian forces did not wish to attack the 1st Front but instead offered them amnesty if they surrender. Colombia's Program for Humanitarian Attention for the Demobilized announced in August 2008 that 339 members of Colombia's rebel groups surrendered and handed in their weapons in July, including 282 guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.\n\u00d3scar Tulio Lizcano, a Colombian Conservative Party congressman, was kidnapped 5 August 2000. On Sunday, 26 October 2008, the ex-congressman escaped from FARC\u2013EP rebels. Tulio Lizcano was a hostage for over 8 years, and escaped with a FARC\u2013EP rebel he convinced to travel with him. They evaded pursuit for three days as they trekked through mountains and forests, encountering the military in the western coastal region of Colombia. Tulio Lizcano is the first hostage to escape since the successful military rescue of \u00cdngrid Betancourt, and the longest held political hostage by the organization. He became the 22nd Colombian political hostage to gain freedom during 2008.\nDuring his final days in captivity, Lizcano told Santos, they had nothing to eat but wild palm hearts and sugar cane. With the military tightening the noose, a FARC\u2013EP rebel turned himself in and provided Colombian authorities with Lizcano's exact location in the northwest state of Choco. As police and army troops prepared to launch a rescue operation, Lizcano escaped alongside one of his guerrilla guards who had decided to desert. The two men hiked through the rain forest for three days and nights until they encountered an army patrol. Speaking from a clinic in the western city of Cali, Mr Lizcano said that when soldiers saw him screaming from across a jungle river, they thought he was drunk and ignored him. Only when he lifted the FARC\u2013EP rebel's Galil assault rifle did the soldiers begin to understand that he was escaping from the FARC\u2013EP rebels. \"They jumped into the river, and then I started to shout, 'I'm Lizcano'\", he said.\nSoon after the liberation of this prominent political hostage, the Vice President of Colombia Francisco Santos Calder\u00f3n called Latin America's biggest guerrilla group a \"paper tiger\" with little control of the nation's territory, adding that \"they have really been diminished to the point where we can say they are a minimal threat to Colombian security\", and that \"After six years of going after them, reducing their income and promoting reinsertion of most of their members, they look like a paper tiger.\" However, he warned against any kind of premature triumphalism, because \"crushing the rebels will take time\". The of jungle in Colombia makes it hard to track them down to fight.\n2009 prisoner events.\nOn 21 December 2008, The FARC\u2013EP announced that they would release civilian hostages Alan Jara, Sigifredo L\u00f3pez, three low-ranking police officers and a low-ranking soldier to Senator Piedad C\u00f3rdoba as a humanitarian gesture. On 1 February 2009, the FARC\u2013EP proceeded with the release of the four security force members, Juan Fernando Galicio Uribe, Jos\u00e9 Walter Lozano Guarnizo, Alexis Torres Zapata and William Giovanni Dom\u00ednguez Castro. All of them were captured in 2007. Jara (kidnapped in 2001) was released on 3 February and L\u00f3pez (kidnapped in 2002) was released on 5 February.\nOn 17 March 2009, The FARC-EP released Swedish hostage Erik Roland Larsson. Larsson, paralyzed in half his body, was handed over to detectives in a rugged region of the northern state of C\u00f3rdoba. Larsson was kidnapped from his ranch in Tierralta, not far from where he was freed, on 16 May 2007, along with his Colombian girlfriend, Diana Patricia Pena while paying workers. She escaped that same month following a gun battle between her captors and police. Larsson suffered a stroke while in captivity. The FARC-EP had sought a $5\u00a0million ransom. One of Larsson's sons said that the ransom was not paid.\nOn 22 December 2009, the body of Luis Francisco Cu\u00e9llar, the Governor of Caquet\u00e1, was discovered, a day after he had been kidnapped from his house in Florencia, Caquet\u00e1. Officials said the abduction and execution had been carried by the FARC. According to officials, he had been killed soon after the abduction. The kidnappers cut the governor's throat as they evaded security forces. In a statement broadcast on radio, the acting governor, Patricia Vega, said, \"I no longer have any doubts that FARC has done it again.\" The FARC claimed responsibility for Cu\u00e9llar's kidnapping and murder in January 2010. The group said that they kidnapped him in order to \"put him on trial for corruption\" and blamed his death on an attempt to rescue him by force.\nOn 16 April 2009, the FARC-EP announced that they would release Army Corporal Pablo Emilio Moncayo Cabrera to Piedad C\u00f3rdoba as a humanitarian gesture. Moncayo was kidnapped on 21 December 1997. On 28 June 2009, the FARC announced that they would release soldier Josue Daniel Calvo Sanchez. Calvo was kidnapped on 20 April 2009. Calvo was released on 28 March 2010. Moncayo was released on 30 March 2010.\nOn 13 June 2010, Colombian troops rescued Police Colonel Luis Herlindo Mendieta Ovalle, Police Captain Enrique Murillo Sanchez and Army Sergeant Arbey Delgado Argote in an event known as Operation Chameleon, twelve years after the individuals were captured; Argote was kidnapped on 3 August 1998. Ovalle and Sanchez were kidnapped on 1 November 1998. On 14 June, Police Lieutenant William Donato Gomez was also rescued. He was also kidnapped on 3 August 1998.\nSantos presidency (2010\u20132018).\n2010\u20132011: Increased violence.\nPresident Juan Manuel Santos began his term with a suspected FARC bomb-blast in Bogot\u00e1. This followed the resolution of the 2010 Colombia\u2013Venezuela diplomatic crisis which erupted over outgoing President \u00c1lvaro Uribe's allegations of active Venezuelan support for FARC.\nIn early September 2010, FARC-EP attacks in the Nari\u00f1o Department and Putumayo Department in southern Colombia killed some fifty policemen and soldiers in hit-and-run assaults.\nAccording to a December report by the Corporaci\u00f3n Nuevo Arco Iris NGO, 473 FARC-EP guerrillas and 357 members of the Colombian security forces died in combat between January and September 2010. An additional 1,382 government soldiers or policemen were wounded during the same period, with the report estimating that the total number of casualties could reach 2,500 by the end of the year. Nuevo Arco Iris head Le\u00f3n Valencia considered that FARC guerrillas have reacted to a series of successful military blows against them by splitting up their forces into smaller groups and intensifying the offensive use of anti-personnel land mines, leading to what he called a further \"degradation\" of the conflict. Valencia also added that both coca crops and the drug trade have \"doubled\" in areas with FARC-EP presence. Researcher Claudia L\u00f3pez considered that the Colombian government is winning the strategic and aerial side of the war but not the infantry front, where both the FARC-EP and ELN continue to maintain an offensive capacity.\nThe International Crisis Group claimed that the military offensives carried out under former President \u00c1lvaro Uribe and President Juan Manuel Santos had led to the number of FARC-EC combatants being reduced to around 7,000, less than half the 20,000 combatants estimated to have been employed by the FARC-EC in the early 2000s. The same organisation also stated that the military offensive had been able to reduce FARC territorial control and push guerillas to more remote and sparsely populated regions, often close to territorial or internal borders.\nColombian authorities announced the death of V\u00edctor Julio Su\u00e1rez Rojas, also known as \"Mono Jojoy\", on 23 September 2010. President Juan Manuel Santos stated that the FARC commander was killed in an operation that began in the early hours of 21 September in the department of Meta, south of the capital Bogot\u00e1. According to Santos, he was \"the impersonation of terror and a symbol of violence\". After this event, the FARC-EP released a statement saying that defeating the group would not bring peace to Colombia and called for a negotiated solution, not surrender, to the social and political conflict.\nIn January 2011 Juan Manuel Santos admitted that FARC-EP had killed 460 government soldiers and wounded over 2,000 in 2010. In April 2011 the Colombian congress issued a statement saying that FARC has a \"strong presence\" in roughly one third of the municipalities in Colombia, while their attacks have increased. Overall FARC operations, including attacks against security forces as well as kidnappings and the use of land mines, have increased every year since 2005. In the first six months of 2011 the FARC carried out an estimated 1,115 actions, which constitutes a 10% increase over the same period in 2010.\nBy early 2011 Colombian authorities and news media reported that the FARC and the clandestine sister groups had partly shifted strategy from guerrilla warfare to \"a war of militias\", meaning that they were increasingly operating in civilian clothes while hiding amongst sympathizers in the civilian population. In early January 2011 the Colombian army said that the FARC has some 18,000 members, with 9,000 of those forming part of the militias. The army says it has identified at least 1,400 such militia members in the FARC strongholds of Valle del Cauca and Cauca in 2011. In June 2011 Colombian chief of staff Edgar Cely claimed that the FARC wants to \"urbanize their actions\", which could partly explain the increased guerrilla activity in Medell\u00edn and particularly Cali. Jeremy McDermott, co-director of Insight Crime, estimates that FARC may have some 30,000 'part-time fighters' in 2011, consisting of both armed and unarmed civilian supporters making up the rebel militia network, instead of full-time fighters wearing uniforms.\nAccording to Corporaci\u00f3n Nuevo Arco Iris, FARC-EP killed 429 members of the Colombian government's security forces between January and October 2011. During this same period, the rebel group lost 316 of its own members. The year 2011 saw over 2,000 incidents of FARC activity, which was the highest figure recorded since 1998. The NGO has stated that while most of these incidents remain defensive in nature and were not like the large offensives from years past, FARC actions grew since 2005, and the rebel group was carrying out intense operations against small and medium-sized Colombian military units in vulnerable areas.\nColombian troops killed FARC leader Alfonso Cano in a firefight on 4 November 2011. The 6th Front of the FARC, which was in charge of Cano's security at the time of his death, retaliated by killing two policemen in Suarez and Jambal\u00f3 some 24 hours after the death of Cano. After the death of Alfonso Cano, Timole\u00f3n Jim\u00e9nez, nicknamed Timochenko, took over the FARC-EP leadership.\nOn 26 November 2011, the FARC killed Police Captain Edgar Yesid Duarte Valero, Police Lieutenant Elkin Hern\u00e1ndez Rivas, Army Corporal Libio Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ednez Estrada, and Police Intendant \u00c1lvaro Moreno after government troops approached the guerrilla camp where they were held in an area of the Caqueta department. Police Sergeant Luis Alberto Erazo Maya managed to escape his captors and was later rescued.\nThe Colombian military had information indicating that there could be captives in the area and initiated Operation Jupiter in October 2011, using a 56 men Special Forces unit to carry out surveillance for preparing a future rescue mission that would involve additional troops and air support. According to the Colombian military, this same unit remained in the area for 43 days and did not find the captives until they accidentally ran into the FARC camp on the way back, which led to a shootout. Relatives of the captives, former victims and civil society groups blamed both the government and FARC for the outcome, questioning the operation as well as criticizing military rescues.\n2012\u20132015: Peace talks and end of the armed conflict.\nIn 2012, FARC announced they would no longer participate in kidnappings for ransom and released the last ten soldiers and police officers they kept as prisoners, but it has kept silent about the status of hundreds of civilians still reported as hostages, and continued kidnapping soldiers and civilians. On 26 February 2012, the FARC announced that they would release their remaining ten political hostages. The hostages were released on 2 April 2012. The president of Colombia, Juan Manuel Santos, said that this incident was \"not enough\", and asked the FARC to release the civilian hostages they possess.\nOn 22 November 2012, the FARC released four Chinese oil workers. The hostages were working for the Emerald Energy oil company, a British-based subsidiary of China's Sinochem Group, when they were kidnapped on 8 June 2011. Their Colombian driver was also kidnapped, but released several hours later. Authorities identified the freed men as Tang Guofu, Zhao Hongwei, Jian Mingfu, and Jiang Shan.\nSantos announced on 27 August 2012 that the Colombian government has engaged in talks with FARC in order to seek an end to the conflict:\nExploratory conversations have been held with the FARC to find an end to the conflict. I want to make very clear to Colombians that the approaches that have been carried out and the ones that will happen in the future will be carried out within the framework based on these principles: We are going to learn from the mistakes made in the past so that they are not repeated. Second, any process must lead to the end of the conflict, not making it longer. Third, operations and military presence will be maintained across the entire national territory.\nHe also said that he would learn from the mistakes of previous leaders, who failed to secure a lasting ceasefire with FARC, though the military would still continue operations throughout Colombia while talks continued. An unnamed Colombian intelligence source said Santos has assured FARC that no one would be extradited to stand trial in another country. \"Al Jazeera\" reported that the initiative began after Santos met with Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and asked him to mediate. Former President Uribe has criticized Santos for seeking peace \"at any cost\" and rejected the idea of holding talks. \"Telesur\" reported that FARC and the Colombian government had signed a preliminary agreement in Havana the same day. The first round of the talks will take place in Oslo on 5 October and then return to Havana for approximately six months of talks before culminating in Colombia. However, Santos later ruled out a ceasefire pending the talks in Oslo and reiterated that offensive operations against FARC would continue.\nELN leader Nicol\u00e1s Rodr\u00edguez Bautista, otherwise known as Gabino, added that his group was interested in joining the talks too: \"Well we are open, it's exactly our proposal, to seek room for open dialogue without conditions and start to discuss the nation's biggest problems. But the government has said no! Santos says he has the keys to peace in his pocket, but I think he has lost them because there seems to be no possibility of a serious dialogue, we remain holding out for that.\"\nColombia's RCN Radio reported on 29 September that a preliminary draft of the proposals indicated that a resolution would involve answering FARC's historic grievances including rural development and agrarian reform; democracy development via an enhancement of the number of registered political parties; security and compensation for the victims of the conflict. In these regards, the Colombian government has already passed a series of laws that entail compensation for the victims and a return of land to the displaced. FARC also indicated a willingness to give up their arms. Former M19 member Antonio Navarro Wolff said: \"If the government wants a serious peace plan they will have to take control of the coca leaf plantations that are currently owned by the FARC because if not another criminal group will take over it.\" Santos later told \"Al Jazeera\" that peace was possible if there was \"goodwill\" on both sides. Santos told the General debate of the sixty-seventh session of the United Nations General Assembly on 26 September, that Venezuela and Chile were also helping in the discussion along with Cuba and Norway.\nPeace talks were formally started on 18 October in a hotel 30 miles north of the Norwegian capital Oslo with a joint-press conference by both delegations. The representatives of the government, led by Humberto de la Calle and the FARC, led by Iv\u00e1n M\u00e1rquez, said the so-called second phase of the peace process will be inaugurated in Oslo on 15 November, after which the delegations will go to Cuba to work on the negotiation of the peace accord, which will ultimately lead to a permanent agreement and ceasefire. The Colombian government has also stated that they expect that a post-Ch\u00e1vez government will continue to support the peace process. In late 2012, FARC declared a two-month unilateral cease-fire and said that they would be open to extending it as a bilateral truce afterwards during the rest of the negotiations. The Colombian government refused to agree to a bilateral cease-fire, alleging violations of the truce by FARC.\nShortly after lifting the ceasefire, FARC conducted attacks on a coal transport railway, which derailed 17 wagons and forced a suspension of operations and assaulted Mil\u00e1n, Caquet\u00e1, a town in the southern Caquet\u00e1, killing at least seven government soldiers and injuring five others.\nSantos has been far more responsive to threats against social leaders than his predecessors. He has also been decisive in combatting the New Illegal Armed Groups that emerged as a result of the paramilitary process, especially in fighting threats and violence against human rights defenders and social leaders. During Santos' presidency, private security and proclaimed self-defense movements have also lost their legitimacy.\nOn 27 May 2013, it was announced that one of the most contentious issues had been resolved. Land reform and compensation was tackled with promises to compensate those who had lost land. This is the first time the government and FARC have reached an agreement on a substantive issue in four different negotiating attempts over 30 years. The peace process then moved on to the issue of \"political participation\", during which FARC insisted on its demand for an elected Constituent Assembly to rewrite Colombia's constitution. This demand has been forcefully rejected by Colombia's lead government negotiator, Humberto de la Calle.\nOn 20 June 2013, FARC kidnapped American tourist Kevin Scott Sutay. He was released on 27 October 2013.\nOn 1 July 2013, FARC and the second-largest guerrilla group in Colombia, ELN, announced that they would be working together to find a \"political solution to the social and armed conflict.\" The details of this partnership, however, were far from clear; Washington Office on Latin America's Adam Isacson explains that two issues central to peace accords with ELN\u2014resource policy and kidnapping\u2014are currently off the table in the talks in Havana with FARC, and the addition of these topics may complicate and slow down an already sluggish process.\nOn 6 November 2013 the Colombian government and FARC announced that they had come to an agreement regarding the participation of political opposition and would begin discussing their next issue, the illicit drug trade.\nOn 23 January 2014 Juan Fernando Cristo, the President of the Senate of Colombia, proposed a second Plan Colombia during a conference on the Colombian peace process in Washington, D.C. Cristo stated that this new plan should be \"for the victims\" and should redirect the resources from the original Plan Colombia towards supporting a post-conflict Colombia.\nOn 16 May 2014, the Colombian government and the FARC rebels agreed to work together against drug trafficking, added to the development of these peace talks.\nOn 28 June 2015, humanitarian and spiritual leader Ravi Shankar, on a three-day-visit to Cuba, had several rounds of discussions with FARC members in an exercise of confidence-building in the peace process, which had many hurdles from the past three years.\nFARC requested Shankar to actively participate in the peace process. He said, \"In this conflict, everyone should be considered as victims. And inside every culprit, there is a victim crying for help.\"\nAfter many discussions, FARC finally agreed to embrace the Gandhian principle of non-violence. Commander Ivan Marquez declared in the press conference that they would adopt it. The FARC agreed that hatred had derailed the peace process. Marquez said, \"We will work for peace and justice for all the people of Colombia.\"\nOn 8 July 2015, FARC announced a unilateral ceasefire, which began on 20 July 2015.\nOn 30 September 2015, Ravi Shankar accused Norway of sidetracking his effort at brokering a peace deal between the Colombian government and FARC, after Norway, which was part of a four-nation group (along with Cuba, Chile and Venezuela) acting as guarantors in the talks, released a statement saying that the peace deal was a result of \"painstaking efforts undertaken by a league of Western nations\".\n2016\u20132017: Ceasefire and disarming.\nOn 23 June 2016 a ceasefire accord was signed between the FARC Guerilla Army and the Colombian Government, in Havana, Cuba. Leaders of several Latin American countries which contributed to the deal, including Cuba and Venezuela, were present. The final peace accord required a referendum to be approved.\nUnder the accord, the Colombian government will support massive investment for rural development and facilitate the FARC's reincarnation as a legal political party. FARC promised to help eradicate illegal drug crops, remove landmines in the areas of conflict, and offer reparations to victims. FARC leaders can avoid prosecution by acts of reparation to victims and other community work.\nOn 2 October 2016 Colombians voted and rejected the peace deal with FARC by 50.2% to 49.8%.\nThe government met with victims and peace opponents after the referendum was rejected, receiving over 500 proposed changes, and continued to negotiate with FARC. A revised agreement announced on 12 November 2016, which would require parliamentary approval rather than a nationwide referendum. Former President and chief peace opponent \u00c1lvaro Uribe met with President Juan Manuel Santos and thereafter issued a noncommittal statement that he awaited release of the full text. Among the reported 60 new or modified terms was a provision for FARC assets to be distributed for victim compensation. FARC members would be able to establish a political party, and would in general be granted full immunity for full confession and cooperation, although drug trafficking would be assessed on a case-by-case basis. Peace terms would be enforced by a Special Justice for the Peace, who would report to the Constitutional Court and not to an international body, and both Parliament and the Special Justice would have the ability to modify the terms of the agreement as seen necessary.\nThe Colombian government and the FARC on 24 November signed a revised peace deal, which Congress approved on 30 November.\nOn 18 February 2017, the last FARC guerrillas arrived in a designated transition zone, where they began the process of disarming. The rebels stayed in the zones until 31 May, after which they were registered and reintegrated into civilian life.\nOn 27 June 2017, the FARC ceased to be an armed group, with its forces disarming and handing more than 7,000 weapons to the United Nations at a ceremony hosted by the FARC leadership, and the Colombian government, which included the Cabinet and President Juan Manuel Santos. Peace observers had received the coordinates of 873 weapons caches hidden in Colombia's remote forests and mountains. The UN was able to remove 510 of these weapons caches, leaving the remaining 363 caches for the military to pick up.\nThe last batch of weapons belonging to former FARC rebels has been removed under UN supervision. The United Nations collected 8,112 guns, 1.3\u00a0million bullets, 22 tons of explosives, 3,000 grenades and 1,000 land mines from the FARC.\nThe Special Jurisdiction of Peace (\"Jurisdicci\u00f3n Especial para la Paz\", JEP) would be the transitional justice component of the Comprehensive System, complying with Colombia's duty to investigate, clarify, prosecute and punish serious human rights violations and grave breaches of international humanitarian law which occurred during the armed conflict. Its objectives would be to satisfy victims' right to justice, offer truth to the public, contribute to the reparation of victims, contribute to the fight against impunity, adopt decisions which give full legal security to direct and indirect participants in the conflict and contribute to the achievement of a stable and lasting peace. At the end of a six-day visit to Colombia, on 9 October 2017 the UN Assistant Secretary-General for human rights Andrew Gilmour issued statement welcoming progress in the demobilization and disarmament of the FARC. However, he expressed, \"concern about problems in the implementation of the accords which relate to the continued attacks against human rights defenders and community leaders.\"\nDuque presidency (2018\u20132022).\nMembership in Colombian Congress.\nOn 20 July 2019, ten former FARC members, including former senior leader Pablo Catatumbo, were sworn in as members of the Congress of Colombia. All of these ex-rebels are members of the Common Alternative Revolutionary Force political party. Five of these ten ex FARC rebels were sworn in as members of the House of Representatives, while the other five were sworn in as members of the Senate. As part of the peace agreement, these ten seats will remain under control of members from the Common Alternative Revolutionary Force until 2026.\n2019: Attempt to reinstate FARC.\nIn a video published on 29 August 2019, former second-in-command FARC leader Iv\u00e1n M\u00e1rquez announced his return to arms in the name of the guerrilla movement. M\u00e1rquez denounced that the Government did not comply with its part of the Havana accord, with 667 local activists and 150 former guerrillas killed since the peace accord was signed. This position was criticized by former FARC supreme leader Rodrigo Londo\u00f1o, who assured that his party remains committed to peace agreements and that \"[m]ore than 90 percent of former FARC guerrillas remain committed to the peace process\". Londo\u00f1o also criticized M\u00e1rquez, stating that the majority of former guerrillas killed were FARC dissidents who continued armed actions.\nAfter the announcement, President Iv\u00e1n Duque authorized the Joint Special Operations Command to start an offensive operation. Government forces conducted a bombing raid in San Vicente del Cagu\u00e1n in which twelve people identified as FARC dissidents were killed. According to Duque, one of them, Gildardo Cucho, was the leader of the group which would be joining Iv\u00e1n M\u00e1rquez in the rearmament. Duque also accused Venezuelan president Nicol\u00e1s Maduro of assisting FARC and providing a safe haven for militants in Venezuela.\nA Truth Commission report released in 2022 shows that the drug trafficking charges against Jes\u00fas Santrich and his arrest in 2019 were a plot by the DEA and Colombian Attorney General N\u00e9stor Humberto Mart\u00ednez to jeopardize the peace agreement, incite the FARC to take up arms again, and send a message to the public that the peace agreement had failed.\n2020\u20132021.\nGeneral Luis Fernando Navarro asserted on January 5, 2021 that FARC lost 1,500 members in 2020. The number includes deaths, capture, and desertions. He said the FARC still had 2,500 armed members.\nFinancing.\nFARC received most of its funding\u2014which was estimated to average some US$300\u00a0million per year\u2014from taxation of the illegal drug trade and other activities, ransom kidnappings, bank robberies, and extortion of large landholders, multinational corporations, and agribusiness. From taxation of illegal drugs and other economic activity, FARC was estimated to receive US$60\u2013100\u00a0million per year.\nMeans of financing.\nThe guerillas's main means of financing was through the drug trade which includes both direct and indirect participation; taxation, administration or control of areas of production and trafficking. A large but often difficult to estimate portion of funding comes from the taxation of businesses and even local farmers, often lumped in with or defined by its opponents as extortion.\nDrug trade.\nFARC was not initially involved in direct drug cultivation, trafficking, or trans-shipment prior to or during the 1980s. Instead, it maintained a system of taxation on the production that took place in the territories that they controlled, in exchange for protecting the growers and establishing law and order in these regions by implementing its own rules and regulations. During the 1990s, FARC expanded its operations, in some areas, to include trafficking and production, which had provided a significant portion of its funding. Right-wing paramilitary groups also receive a large portion of their income from drug trafficking and production operations.\nA 1992 Central Intelligence Agency report \"acknowledged that the FARC had become increasingly involved in drugs through their \"taxing\" of the trade in areas under their geographical control and that in some cases the insurgents protected trafficking infrastructure to further fund their insurgency\", but also described the relationship between the FARC and the drug traffickers as one \"characterized by both cooperation and friction\" and concluded that \"we do not believe that the drug industry [in Colombia] would be substantially disrupted in the short term by attacks against guerrillas. Indeed, many traffickers would probably welcome, and even assist, increased operations against insurgents.\"\nIn 1994, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) came to three similar conclusions. First, that any connections between drug trafficking organizations and Colombian insurgents were \"ad hoc 'alliances of convenience'\". Second, that \"the independent involvement of insurgents in Colombia's domestic drug productions, transportation, and distribution is limited\u00a0... there is no evidence that the national leadership of either the FARC or the ELN has directed, as a matter of policy, that their respective organizations directly engage in independent illicit drug production, transportation, or distribution.\" Third, the report determined that the DEA \"has no evidence that the FARC or ELN have been involved in the transportation, distribution, or marketing of illegal drugs in the United States. Furthermore it is doubtful that either insurgent group could develop the international transportation and logistics infrastructure necessary to establish independent drug distribution in the United States or Europe\u00a0... DEA believes that the insurgents never will be major players in Colombia's drug trade.\"\nFARC had called for crop substitution programs that would allow coca farmers to find alternative means of income and subsistence. In 1999, FARC worked with a United Nations alternative development project to enable the transition from coca production to sustainable food production. On its own, the group had also implemented agrarian reform programs in Putumayo.\nIn those FARC controlled territories that do produce coca, it is generally grown by peasants on small plots; in paramilitary or government controlled areas, coca is generally grown on large plantations. The FARC-EP generally made sure that peasant coca growers receive a much larger share of profits than the paramilitaries would give them, and demanded that traffickers pay a decent wage to their workers. When growers in a FARC-controlled area were caught selling coca to non-FARC brokers, they were generally forced to leave the region, but when growers were caught selling to FARC in paramilitary-controlled areas, they were generally killed. Lower prices paid for raw coca in paramilitary-controlled areas lead to significantly larger profits for the drug processing and trafficking organizations, which means that they generally prefer that paramilitaries control an area rather than FARC.\nIn 2000, FARC Spokesman Simon Trinidad said that taxes on drug laboratories represented an important part of the organization's income, although he didn't say how much it was. He defended this funding source, arguing that drug trade was endemic in Colombia because it had pervaded many sectors of its economy.\nAfter 21 April 2001 capture of Brazilian drug lord Luiz Fernando da Costa (a.k.a. Fernandinho Beira-Mar) in Colombia, Colombian and Brazilian authorities accused him of cooperating with FARC-EP through the exchange of weapons for cocaine. They also claimed that he received armed protection from the guerrilla group.\nOn 18 March 2002 the Attorney General of the United States John Ashcroft indicted leaders of the FARC after an 18-month investigation into their narcotics trafficking. Tom\u00e1s Molina Caracas, the commander of the FARC's 16th Front, led the 16th Front's drug-trafficking activities together with Carlos Bolas and a rebel known as Oscar El Negro. Between 1994 and 2001, Molina and other 16th Front members controlled Barranco Minas, where they collected cocaine from other FARC fronts to sell it to international drug traffickers for payment in currency, weapons and equipment.\nOn 22 March 2006 the Attorney General Alberto Gonzales announced the indictment of fifty leaders of FARC for exporting more than $25\u00a0billion worth of cocaine to the United States and other countries. Several of the FARC leaders appeared on the Justice Department's Consolidated Priority Organization target list, which identifies the most dangerous international drug trafficking organizations. Recognizing the increased profits, the FARC moved to become directly involved in the manufacture and distribution of cocaine by setting the price paid for cocaine paste and transporting it to jungle laboratories under FARC control. The charged FARC leaders ordered that Colombian farmers who sold paste to non-FARC buyers would be murdered and that U.S. fumigation planes should be shot down.\nOn 11 October 2012 Jamal Yousef, a.k.a. \"Talal Hassan Ghantou\", a native of Lebanon, was sentenced to 12 years in prison for conspiring to provide military-grade weapons to the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (the FARC), in exchange for over a ton of cocaine. Yousef pleaded guilty in May 2012 to one count of providing material support to the FARC.\nKidnappings.\nThe FARC-EP carried out both ransom and politically motivated kidnappings in Colombia and was responsible for the majority of such kidnappings carried out in the country.\nThe guerrillas initially targeted the families of drug traffickers, the wealthy upper-class and foreigners but the group later expanded its kidnapping and extortion operations to include the middle-class.\nDuring the 1984 peace negotiations, FARC pledged to stop kidnapping and condemned the practice. However, hostage-taking by FARC increased in the years following this declaration. In a 1997 interview, FARC-EP Commander Alfonso Cano argued that some guerrilla units continued to do so for \"political and economic reasons\" in spite of the prohibition issued by the leadership.\nIn 2000, the FARC-EP issued a directive called \"Law 002\" which demanded a \"tax\" from all individuals and corporations with assets worth at least US$1\u00a0million, warning that those who failed to pay would be detained by the group. In 2001, FARC Commander Sim\u00f3n Trinidad claimed that the FARC-EP does not engage in kidnapping but instead \"retains [individuals] in order to obtain resources needed for our struggle\". Commander Trinidad said he did not know how many people had been taken by FARC or how much money was collected by the organization in exchange for their freedom. In addition, FARC spokesperson Joaqu\u00edn G\u00f3mez stated that the payment demanded was a tax which many people paid \"voluntarily\", with kidnapping undertaken because \"those who have the resources must pay their share\".\nIn 2002, Amnesty International sent a letter to FARC-EP Commander Manuel Marulanda condemning kidnapping and hostage-taking as well as rejecting the threats directed at municipal or judicial officials and their families, arguing that they are civilians who are protected by international humanitarian law as long as they do not participate in hostilities.\nAccording to Amnesty International, the number of kidnappings decreased in the last years of the conflict, but the human rights organization estimated that FARC and ELN guerrillas continued to be behind hundreds of cases until their disarming. In 2008, press reports estimated that about 700 hostages continued to be held captive by FARC. According to the \"Fundaci\u00f3n Pa\u00eds Libre\" anti-kidnapping NGO, an estimated total of 6,778 people were kidnapped by FARC between 1997 and 2007. In 2009, the state's anti-kidnapping agency \"Fondelibertad\" reviewed 3,307 officially unsettled cases and removed those that had already been resolved or for which there was insufficient information. The agency concluded that 125 hostages remained in captivity nationwide of whom 66 were being held by the FARC\u2013EP. The government's revised figures were considered \"absurdly low\" by \"Fundaci\u00f3n Pa\u00eds Libre\", which has argued that its own archives suggest an estimated 1,617 people taken hostage between 2000 and 2008 remain in the hands of their captors, including hundreds seized by FARC. FARC claimed at the time that it was holding nine people for ransom in addition to hostages kept for a prisoner exchange.\nIn 2008, Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez expressed his disagreement with FARC-EP's resorting to kidnappings. Former President Fidel Castro of Cuba also criticized the use of hostage-taking by the guerrillas as \"objectively cruel\" and suggested that the group free all of its prisoners and hostages.\nIn February 2012, FARC announced that it would release ten members of the security forces, who it described as political prisoners, representing the last such captives in its custody. It further announced the repeal of Law 002, bringing to an end its support for the practice of kidnapping for ransom. However, it was not clear from the FARC statement what would happen to the civilians it still held in captivity. Colombian president Juan Manuel Santos used Twitter to welcome the move as a \"necessary, if insufficient, step in the right direction\".\nWomen in the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.\nParticipation and Roles.\nEstimates of the number of female combatants in the FARC vary. Some sources suggest that women made up approximately 40% of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC). Furthermore, between 1985 and 2012, it was estimated that over 11,000 women had been group members. Other studies present lower figures. By 2000, according to Carey (2006), women made up one-third of FARC\u2019s members. Similarly, Gut\u00ederrez San\u00edn (2008) found that female participation varied by unit. Female participation was approximately 30% within units attached to FARC\u2019s top leadership, likely due to the presence of orderlies and secretaries, while central operational units had less than 10% female participation. In contrast, women\u2019s participation was much higher on the more \u201ctypical\u201d combat fronts, accounting for 19% of the unit\u2019s members.\nAccording to former guerrillas, FARC-EP units typically consist of one-quarter to nearly one-half women, with some even containing girls aged eight or nine. This practice is not unique to FARC; other armed groups in Colombia also recruit girls and women as combatants. Of the 112 former child guerillas interviewed by Human Rights Watch, over a quarter were girls, most of whom were former members of FARC-EP.\nContrary to traditional gender roles, women actively engaged in combat on the frontlines alongside their male counterparts, rather than being restricted to domestic tasks such as nursing or cooking. They trained in weapon handling, intelligence gathering, and military operations, and, like their male colleagues, they faced the same risks of death and injury.\nHistory of Women in the FARC.\nEarly Involvement and Marginalization (1960s\u20131970s).\nWomen\u2019s involvement in the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) began early, with two of the group\u2019s original 48 combatants being female during the Marquetalia resistance. However, their roles were largely supportive rather than combat-oriented. In the 1960s, FARC operated as a peasant self-defense group primarily consisting of male combatants. Women and children were present daily but did not engage in combat or leadership roles. In fact, according to one guerrilla fighter,\u201cIn the 1960s, women accompanied men and participated in activities like cooking. During the Marquetalia resistance in 1964, women were helpers, they did not carry weapons. They participated actively, but were not fundamental. In the 1960s we had a mix of people\u2026 with women, children and even dogs.\u201dIn the latter half of the 1960s, FARC transformed into a mobile guerrilla armed group from a domestic model. It became an almost all-male force; men were expected to leave behind their families to form a fully mobilized unit, while women were largely relegated to support roles like assistance and cooking.\nFARC maintained ties with the pro-Soviet Communist Party (CP), which sought to promote female participation by creating specialized women\u2019s organizations, following a broader trend among communist movements worldwide. FARC, in tandem, also formed specialized female organizations; however, they were restricted to traditional roles such as cooking, food organization, and laundry. Neither the CP nor FARC expected women to engage in combat.\nInternal Debates and Shifting Roles (1970s-1980s).\nAs FARC expanded in the 1970s, women\u2019s involvement in the group became a topic of debate. Tirofijo, FARC\u2019s leader at the time, originally opposed women\u2019s participation in combat, citing their physical limitations for combat and lack of resilience as concerns. However, as FARC transformed into a more structured and militaristic army, it became evident that women\u2019s roles and participation needed to expand. During FARC\u2019s 7th National Conference in 1982, women\u2019s rights were added to the force\u2019s agenda; however, it only concerned women's rights within the group rather than broader gender equality.\nAt the same time, FARC rebranded itself as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia\u2014People\u2019s Army (FARC-EP) and adopted a stricter hierarchical and militaristic structure. This shift emphasized strict discipline, separation from civilians, lifelong commitment, ideological instruction, continuous training, and tight control over members\u2019 personal lives. These changes stimulated a greater incentive and need to include women within its combat ranks.\nGender Equality and Military Integration (1980s).\nBy 1985, FARC officially declared gender equality within its ranks and started actively recruiting women as combatants. The integration of women helped to reinforce the group's independence and autonomy by diminishing the effect of outside influences, as a members' entire lives\u2014personal and professional\u2014could exist within the confines of the organization.\nFARC\u2019s 2016 Declaration: Women at the Forefront of Change.\nIn 2016, FARC publicly declared to be part of a \u201cworldwide [movement] against\u2026patriarchy and all forms of discrimination between human beings,\u201d a stance driven mainly by women within the group.\nMotivation of Women for Joining.\nWomen and girls cite various reasons for joining FARC. The top motives include domestic or sexual abuse and an overall lack of meaningful options for women in Colombia. Oftentimes, in some regions, they will join armed groups as a way to avoid prostitution or working in cocoa production. This is especially true for women from rural areas who are enmeshed in poverty. However, women do not join just to avoid plights in their regions. To them, FARC often represents a way to escape restrictive gender roles and to access educational and leadership opportunities not available to women in the broader Colombian public. For example, a female FARC commander wanted to join at age 13 to learn how to read. However, she was told she couldn't join until she turned 14 years old. Another reason that women join is to gain the opportunity to defend their political convictions, which is especially true for wealthier, more educated women. Women essentially use their limited options to be able to safeguard and champion for female social and reproductive rights. In addition to ideological and educational motivations, some women and girls are drawn to the power that the FARC represents. Like many male recruits, female recruits are attracted to the group\u2019s militaristic elements. They like the idea of a uniform and being able to carry a gun. Female combatants also often join under the impression that they will be on the same level as their male counterparts; one of the FARC\u2019s main allures is the assertion of gender equality within its ranks. Overall, FARC functions as a \u201clifeline\u201d to many girls and women, representing a space where female combatants can find \u201ca certain degree of autonomy and personal development,\u201d which is often inaccessible to Colombian women, especially ones from rural regions.\nGender Dynamics in FARC.\nDaily Life and Gender Policies.\nDuring its tenure, FARC officially promoted gender equality: both men and women received the same basic military training, shared living quarters, and performed equal duties in combat. Some women even wore feminine embellishments, such as jewelry, in contrast to the group\u2019s militarized masculinity. In regions like Putumayo, FARC installed clear behavioral rules, mediating domestic disputes and punishing gender-based violence\u2014sometimes with severe penalties, like death. FARC formally prohibited sexual harassment and rape and, unlike some other paramilitary groups, did not systematically use sexual violence to assert territorial control. Despite these regulations, significant gender-based disparities persisted in practice.\nExploitation and Power Imbalances.\nMany women and girls faced gendered exploitation. Commanders often would use their authority to start sexual relationships with underage girls in exchange for privileges, gifts, and protection. These relationships\u2014sometimes described as consensual\u2014occurred in a context of a stark power imbalance, where refusal was difficult, and a female combatant\u2019s safety often depended on compliance. Furthermore, many female combatants reportedly faced sexual harassment or assault.\nDivision of Labor.\nA gendered division of labor was present. While women also fought, trained, and were subject to the same rules as men, women were often relegated to traditionally feminine roles, such as nursing or radio operating. Women in the FARC typically held the lowest positions in the groups, often carrying gear, marching, and caring for hostages. On that note, men rarely attended to hostages\u2014this role was almost exclusively assigned to women. Overall, women were primarily foot soldiers with heavy workloads equal to the men.\nLeadership and Advancement.\nOpportunities for career advancement were limited. While some women led small units, only one\u2014Elsa Nedis Mosquera, known as \u201cKarina\u201d\u2014rose to the position of Front Commander. No woman reached the top decision-making body, the Secretariat. Male members overwhelmingly held higher leadership roles. Success and survival often hinged on the sexual \u201cservices\u201d they provided, leading many women to view their bodies as tools or weapons within the group\u2019s internal power structure. Some women gained influence through relationships with male leaders, receiving privileges such as better guard shifts or informal leadership roles. Alternatively, women could rise through the ranks through ruthlessness and prowess in combat. Leadership roles, especially for women, often came at a tremendous personal cost. Success frequently depended on using their bodies for survival and dominance, with many cultivating fear to avoid being seen as weak. Karina, for example, became one of FARC\u2019s most feared commanders through her battle injuries\u2014such as losing an eye\u2014and her reputation of brutality, making her one of the highest-ranking guerrillas in the group.\nDespite these challenges, women in the FARC received political education and public speaking training, opportunities rarely available to women in the broader Colombian society.\nRegulations of Relationships and Motherhood.\nFurthermore, FARC sought to control sexual relationships between combatants, requiring commander approval for romantic pairings. This was intended to reduce disruptions to combat readiness and organizational cohesion. Female combatants were also forced to use contraception. Some girls, even aged 12 years old, had an intrauterine device (IUD) inserted. The organization also maintained strict rules about pregnancy, often forcing or coercing abortions or requiring newborns to be given away to other families. Leaders decided that motherhood was incompatible with guerilla life, fearing it would reduce the woman\u2019s effectiveness as a combatant and risk the lives of both the mother and the child.\nHuman rights concerns.\nFARC was accused of committing violations of human rights by numerous groups, including Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, the United Nations as well as by the Colombian, U.S. and European Union governments.\nA February 2005 report from the United Nations' High Commissioner for Human Rights mentioned that, during 2004, \"FARC-EP continued to commit grave breaches [of human rights] such as murders of protected persons, torture and hostage-taking, which affected many civilians, including men, women, returnees, boys and girls, and ethnic groups.\"\nExtrajudicial executions.\nFARC consistently carried out attacks against civilians specifically targeting suspected supporters of paramilitary groups, political adversaries, journalists, local leaders, and members of certain indigenous groups since at least as early as 1994. From 1994 to 1997 the region of Urab\u00e1 in Antioquia Department was the site of FARC attacks against civilians. FARC has also executed civilians for failing to pay \"war taxes\" to their group.\nIn 2001, Human Rights Watch (HRW) announced that the FARC-EP had abducted and executed civilians accused of supporting paramilitary groups in the demilitarized zone and elsewhere, without providing any legal defense mechanisms to the suspects and generally refusing to give any information to relatives of the victims. The human rights NGO directly investigated three such cases and received additional information about over twenty possible executions during a visit to the zone.\nAccording to HRW, those extrajudicial executions would qualify as forced disappearances if they had been carried out by agents of the government or on its behalf, but nevertheless remained \"blatant violations of the FARC-EP's obligations under international humanitarian law and in particular key provisions of article 4 of Protocol II, which protects against violence to the life, physical, and mental well-being of persons, torture, and ill-treatment\".\nThe Colombian human rights organization CINEP reported that FARC-EP killed an estimated total of 496 civilians during 2000.\nUse of gas cylinder mortars and landmines.\nThe FARC-EP has employed a type of improvised mortars made from gas canisters (or cylinders), when launching attacks.\nAccording to Human Rights Watch, the FARC-EP has killed civilians not involved in the conflict through the use of gas cylinder mortars and its use of landmines.\nHuman Rights Watch considers that \"the FARC-EP's continued use of gas cylinder mortars shows this armed group's flagrant disregard for lives of civilians...gas cylinder bombs are impossible to aim with accuracy and, as a result, frequently strike civilian objects and cause avoidable civilian casualties.\"\nAccording to the ICBL Landmine and Cluster Munitions Monitor, \"FARC is probably the most prolific current user of antipersonnel mines among rebel groups anywhere in the world.\" Furthermore, FARC use child soldiers to carry and deploy antipersonnel mines.\nTreatment of women.\nFemale membership of the group is around 30 to 40 percent and while FARC's official policy forbids sexual assault of any kind, female members have experienced rape, sex slavery, and forced abortions. In a 2011 Colombia Police report, 112 women had deserted FARC and reported instances of being forced to have sex with commanding officers which lead to the spread of sexually transmitted diseases as well as pregnancy. Members who became pregnant were forced to have abortions at any stage of gestation, with an estimated 80 to 90 percent of ex-FARC female members having had at least one abortion, some having up to four. The report also claims that girls as young as 13 were recruited by FARC to fill a quota of women because \"The women are [considered] necessary to maintain the discipline of the FARC.\" In an interview with Reuters, Claudia Roa, who joined FARC when she was 14, told how she was unknowingly given pills to induce birth when she was 8 months pregnant, after which her child was suffocated to death. According to Roa, many other women faced similar treatment, but those who became girlfriends to commanders were awarded special privileges, including the right to have children. One Colombian newspaper, after reviewing uncovered FARC documents and speaking with investigators, estimated that 1,000 forced abortions occur each year in FARC camps. In 2015, the Colombian attorney general opened an investigation into 150 cases of ex-FARC women being forced to terminate their pregnancies.\nViolence against indigenous people.\nFARC sometimes threatened or assassinated indigenous Colombian leaders for attempting to prevent FARC incursions into their territory and resisting the forcible recruitment by FARC of indigenous youth. Between 1986 and 2001, FARC was responsible for 27 assassinations, 15 threats, and 14 other abuses of indigenous people in Antioquia Department.\nIn March 1999 members of a local FARC contingent killed 3 indigenous rights activists, who were working with the U'Wa people to build a school for U'Wa children, and were fighting against encroachment of U'Wa territory by multinational oil corporations. The killings were almost universally condemned, and seriously harmed public perceptions of FARC.\nMembers of indigenous groups have demanded the removal of military bases set up by the Colombian government and guerrilla encampments established by FARC in their territories, claiming that both the Colombian National Army and the FARC should respect indigenous autonomy and international humanitarian law. According to a 2012 research from the National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (ONIC), 80,000 members of indigenous communities have been displaced from their native lands since 2004 because of FARC-related violence.\nLuis Evelis, an indigenous leader and ONIC representative, has stated that \"the armed conflict is still in force, causing damages to the indigenous. Our territories are self-governed and we demand our autonomy. During the year 2011, fifty-six indigenous people have been killed.\" The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples has indicated that no military activities may be carried out within indigenous territories without first undertaking an \"effective consultation\" with indigenous representatives and authorities from the communities involved.\nThe Regional Indigenous Council of Cauca (CRIC) issued a statement concerning the release of two hostages taken by FARC in 2011: \"Compared to past statements made by the national government, it is important to reiterate that the presence of armed groups in our territories is a fact that has been imposed by force of arms, against which our communities and their leaders have remained in peaceful resistance.\" The CRIC also indicated that neither the Colombian government nor the mediators and armed groups involved consulted with the indigenous people and their authorities about the hostage release, raising concerns about the application of national and international law guaranteeing their autonomy, self-determination and self-government. The indigenous organization also demanded the immediate end of all violence and conflict within indigenous territories and called for a negotiated solution to the war.\nOfficial Colombian government statistics show that murders of indigenous people between January and May 2011 have increased 38% compared to the same timeframe in 2010. Colombia is home to nearly 1\u00a0million indigenous people, divided into around 100 different ethnicities. The Colombian Constitutional Court has warned that 35 of those groups are in danger of dying out. The Permanent Assembly for the Defense of Life and Territorial Control has stated that the armed conflict \"is not only part of one or two areas, it is a problem of all the indigenous people.\"\nOrganization and structure.\nFARC\u2013EP was the largest and oldest insurgent group in the Americas. According to the Colombian government, FARC\u2013EP had an estimated 6,000\u20138,000 members in 2008, down from 16,000 in 2001, and lost much of its fighting force since President \u00c1lvaro Uribe took office in 2002. Political analyst and former guerrilla Le\u00f3n Valencia estimated that FARC's numbers were reduced to around 11,000 from their 18,000 peak but cautioned against considering the group a defeated force. In 2007, FARC\u2013EP Commander Ra\u00fal Reyes claimed that their force consisted of 18,000 guerrillas.\nAccording to a report from Human Rights Watch in 2006, approximately 10\u201315% of the recruits were minors, some of whom were forced to join the FARC, while women comprise around 40 percent of the guerilla army.\nFARC was organized hierarchically into military units as follows:\nThe FARC\u2013EP secretariat was led by Alfonso Cano and six others after the death of Manuel Marulanda (Pedro Antonio Mar\u00edn), also known as \"Tirofijo\", or Sureshot, in 2008. The \"international spokesman\" of the organization was Ra\u00fal Reyes, who was killed in a Colombian army raid against a guerrilla camp in Ecuador on 1 March 2008. Cano was killed in a military operation on 4 November 2011.\nFARC\u2013EP was open to a negotiated solution to the nation's conflict through dialogue with a flexible government that agreed to certain conditions, such as the demilitarization of certain areas, cessation of paramilitary and government violence against rural peasants, social reforms to reduce poverty and inequality, and the release of all jailed (and extradited) FARC\u2013EP rebels. It said that until these conditions surfaced, the armed revolutionary struggle would remain necessary to fight against Colombia's elites. The FARC\u2013EP said it would continue its armed struggle because it perceived the Colombian government as an enemy because of historical politically motivated violence against its members and supporters, including members of the Patriotic Union, a FARC\u2013EP-created political party.\nTerritorial operations.\nThe largest concentrations of FARC\u2013EP guerrillas were located in the southeastern parts of Colombia's of forests and in the plains at the base of the Andean mountains. However, the FARC and the ELN lost control of much of their territory, especially in urban areas, forcing them to relocate to remote areas in the forests and the mountains.\nRelations between the FARC-EP and local populations vary greatly depending on the history and specific characteristics of each region. In rural areas where the guerrillas have maintained a continuous presence for several decades, there are often organic links between the FARC and peasant communities. Such ties include shared generational membership and historical struggles dating back to the period of \"La Violencia\". These areas have traditionally been located in the departments of Caquet\u00e1, Meta, Guaviare and Putumayo, and \u2013 to a lesser extent \u2013 portions of Huila, Tolima and Nari\u00f1o. Within remote locations under FARC control and where the national government is generally absent, the group can function as a revolutionary vanguard and institutes its \"de facto\" rule of law by carrying out activities that aim to combat corruption and reduce small-scale crime.\nThe FARC had also been able to provide limited social services in these regions, such as health care and education, including building minor infrastructure works in the form of rural roads. Peasants who have grown up in areas under historical FARC control may become accustomed to accepting them as the local authority. The guerrillas also attempt to keep the peace between peasants and drug traffickers in addition to regulating other aspects of daily life and economics.\nIn other rural regions of the country, where a FARC presence had only been established within the last twenty years of the conflict and primarily remained military in nature, there was often a level of distrust between FARC rebels and the local peasant communities, which lack historical ties to the group. Civilians in these locations also tended to get caught in the middle of the conflict between FARC and its government or paramilitary opponents. In the populated urban areas where the Colombian state has maintained a solid historical presence, some FARC sympathies may have existed in the poorest neighborhoods and among certain progressive sectors of the middle class, but most city inhabitants tended to view the guerrillas as one of Colombia's main problems.\nBy the end of 2010, FARC-EP influence was significantly reduced in the regions where it had only carried out a recent military-focused expansion during the 1980s and 1990s, in part due to the failure to establish close social ties with local populations. Government offensives eradicated much of the visible guerrilla presence in northern and central Colombia as well as in Guain\u00eda, Vaup\u00e9s and Amazonas, limiting FARC to clandestine operations. Similar military setbacks and retreats occurred even within its traditional strongholds, forcing the FARC to move towards the most remote areas, but there the guerrillas did appear to maintain popular support among the peasants that had developed organic links to the insurgency.\nFARC dissidents.\nThe FARC dissidents refers to a group formerly part of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, who have refused to lay down their arms after the FARC-government peace treaty came into effect in 2016. The dissidents number some 1,200 armed combatants with an unknown number of civilian militia supporting them. The FARC dissidents have become \"an increasing headache\" for the Colombian armed forces, as they have to fight them, the EPL, ELN and Clan del Golfo at the same time. FARC dissidents are led by former mid-level commanders such as alias Gentil Duarte, alias Euclides Mora, alias John 40, alias Giovanny Chuspas y alias Juli\u00e1n Chollo. The FARC dissidents have been responsible for several attacks on the Colombian armed forces. Dissidents of FARC's 1st Front are located in the eastern plains of Colombia. John 40 and their dissident 43rd Front moved into the Amazonas state of western Venezuela. Venezuela has served as the primary location for many FARC dissidents.\nOn 15 July 2018, the Colombian and Peruvian governments launched a joint military effort known as Operation Armageddon to combat FARC dissidents. Peru issued a 60-day state of emergency in the Putumayo Province, an area bordering both Colombia and Ecuador. On the first day alone, more than 50 individuals were arrested in the operation, with the majority being Colombian nationals, while four cocaine labs were dismantled.\nInternational response.\nThe FARC were a violent non-state actor (VNSA) whose formal recognition as legitimate belligerent forces is disputed by some organizations. As such, the FARC has been classified as a terrorist organization by the governments of Colombia, (since 1997) the United States (until 2021), Canada, Chile, (since 2010) New Zealand, and (until 2016) the European Union; whereas the governments of Venezuela (Maduro-led government), Brazil, Argentina (Cristina Kirchner and Fernandez-led governments), Ecuador, and Nicaragua did not. In 2008, Venezuelan President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez recognized the FARC\u2013EP as a proper army. President Ch\u00e1vez also asked the Colombian government and their allies to recognize the FARC as a belligerent force, arguing that such political recognition would oblige the FARC to forgo kidnapping and terrorism as methods of civil war and to abide by the Geneva Convention. Juan Manuel Santos followed a middle path by recognizing in 2011 that there is an \"armed conflict\" in Colombia although his predecessor, \u00c1lvaro Uribe, strongly disagreed.\nThe FARC built a deep relationship with the Gaddafi government in Libya, throughout the 1990s and 2000s until the latter's overthrow in 2011. The FARC in 2000 requested a $100 million loan from Tripoli, FARC commanders were hosted in Libya and FARC soldiers were allegedly seen fighting for Gaddafi in the First Libyan Civil War.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26103", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26103", "title": "Rotary engine", "text": "Internal combustion engine with cylinders rotating around a stationary crankshaft\nThe rotary engine is an early type of internal combustion engine, usually designed with an odd number of cylinders per row in a radial configuration. The engine's crankshaft remained stationary in operation, while the entire crankcase and its attached cylinders rotated around it as a unit. Its main application was in aviation, although it also saw use in a few early motorcycles and automobiles.\nThis type of engine was widely used as an alternative to conventional inline engines (straight or V) during World War I and the years immediately preceding that conflict. It has been described as \"a very efficient solution to the problems of power output, weight, and reliability\".\nBy the early 1920s, the inherent limitations of this type of engine had rendered it obsolete.\nDescription.\nDistinction between \"rotary\" and \"radial\" engines.\nA rotary engine is essentially a standard Otto cycle engine, with cylinders arranged radially around a central crankshaft just like a conventional radial engine, but instead of having a fixed cylinder block with rotating crankshaft, the crankshaft remains stationary and the entire cylinder block rotates around it. In the most common form, the crankshaft was fixed solidly to the airframe, and the propeller was simply bolted to the front of the crankcase.\nThis difference also has much impact on design (lubrication, ignition, fuel admission, cooling, etc.) and functioning (see below).\nThe Mus\u00e9e de l'Air et de l'Espace in Paris has on display a special, \"sectioned\" working model of an engine with seven radially disposed cylinders. It alternates between rotary and radial modes to demonstrate the difference between the internal motions of the two types of engine.\nArrangement.\nLike \"fixed\" radial engines, rotaries were generally built with an odd number of cylinders (usually 5, 7 or 9), so that a consistent every-other-piston firing order could be maintained, to provide smooth running. Rotary engines with an even number of cylinders were mostly of the \"two row\" type.\nMost rotary engines were arranged with the cylinders pointing outwards from a single crankshaft, in the same general form as a radial, but there were also rotary boxer engines and even one-cylinder rotaries.\nAdvantages and drawbacks.\nThree key factors contributed to the rotary engine's success at the time:\nEngine designers had always been aware of the many limitations of the rotary engine, so when static style engines became more reliable and gave better specific weights and fuel consumption, the days of the rotary engine were numbered.\nThe late World War I Bentley BR2 was the largest and most powerful rotary engine; it reached a point beyond which this type of engine could not be further developed, and it was the last of its kind to be adopted into RAF service.\nRotary engine control.\nMonosoupape rotaries.\nIt is often asserted that rotary engines had no throttle and hence power could only be reduced by intermittently cutting the ignition using a \"blip\" switch. This was only true of the \"Monosoupape\" (single valve) type, which took most of the air into the cylinder through the exhaust valve, which remained open for a portion of the downstroke of the piston. Thus the mixture of fuel and air in the cylinder could not be controlled via the crankcase intake. The \"throttle\" (fuel valve) of a monosoupape provided only a limited degree of speed regulation, as opening it made the mixture too rich, while closing it made it too lean (in either case quickly stalling the engine, or damaging the cylinders). Early models featured a pioneering form of variable valve timing in an attempt to give greater control, but this caused the valves to burn and therefore it was abandoned.\nThe only way of running a Monosoupape engine smoothly at reduced revs was with a switch that changed the normal firing sequence so that each cylinder fired only once per two or three engine revolutions, but the engine remained more or less in balance. However, the fuel charge and oil was still pulled into the cylinders and exhausted normally, it simply wasn't burned. Running the engine with the switch on for too long resulted in large quantities of unburned fuel and oil in the exhaust, and gathering in the lower cowling, where it was a notorious fire hazard.\n\"Normal\" rotaries.\nMost rotaries had normal inlet valves, so that the fuel (and lubricating oil) was taken into the cylinders already mixed with air - as in a normal four-stroke engine. Although a conventional carburetor, with the ability to keep the fuel/air ratio constant over a range of throttle openings, was precluded by the spinning crankcase; it was possible to adjust the air supply through a separate flap valve or \"bloctube\". The pilot needed to set the throttle to the desired setting (usually full open) and then adjust the fuel/air mixture to suit using a separate \"fine adjustment\" lever that controlled the air supply valve (in the manner of a manual choke control). Due to the rotary engine's large rotational inertia, it was possible to adjust the appropriate fuel/air mixture by trial and error without stalling it, although this varied between different types of engine, and in any case it required a good deal of practice to acquire the necessary knack. After starting the engine with a known setting that allowed it to idle, the air valve was opened until maximum engine speed was obtained.\nThrottling a running engine back to reduce revs was possible by closing off the fuel valve to the required position while re-adjusting the fuel/air mixture to suit. This process was also tricky, so that reducing power, especially when landing, was often accomplished instead by intermittently cutting the ignition using the blip switch.\nCutting cylinders using ignition switches had the drawback of letting fuel continue to pass through the engine, oiling up the spark plugs and making smooth restarting problematic. Also, the raw oil-fuel mix could collect in the cowling. As this could cause a serious fire when the switch was released, it became common practice for part or all of the bottom of the basically circular cowling on most rotary engines to be cut away, or fitted with drainage slots.\nBy 1918 a Clerget handbook advised maintaining all necessary control by using the fuel and air controls, and starting and stopping the engine by turning the fuel on and off. The recommended landing procedure involved shutting off the fuel using the fuel lever, while leaving the blip switch on. The windmilling propeller made the engine continue to spin without delivering any power as the aircraft descended. It was important to leave the ignition on to allow the spark plugs to continue to spark and keep them from oiling up, so that the engine could (if all went well) be restarted simply by re-opening the fuel valve. Pilots were advised to not use an ignition cut out switch, as it would eventually damage the engine.\nPilots of surviving or reproduction aircraft fitted with rotary engines still find that the blip switch is useful while landing, as it provides a more reliable, quicker way to initiate power if needed, rather than risk a sudden engine stall, or the failure of a windmilling engine to restart at the worst possible moment.\nHistory.\nMillet.\nF\u00e9lix Millet showed a 5-cylinder rotary engine built into a bicycle wheel at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1889. Millet had patented the engine in 1888, so must be considered the pioneer of the internal combustion rotary engine. A machine powered by his engine took part in the Paris-Bordeaux-Paris race of 1895 and the system was put into production by Darracq and Company London in 1900.\nHargrave.\nLawrence Hargrave first developed a rotary engine in 1889 using compressed air, intending to use it in powered flight. Materials weight and lack of quality machining prevented it becoming an effective power unit.\nBalzer.\nStephen M. Balzer of New York, a former watchmaker, constructed rotary engines in the 1890s. He was interested in the rotary layout for two main reasons:\nBalzer produced a 3-cylinder, rotary engined car in 1894, then later became involved in Langley's \"Aerodrome\" attempts, which bankrupted him while he tried to make much larger versions of his engines. Balzer's rotary engine was later converted to static radial operation by Langley's assistant, Charles M. Manly, creating the notable Manly\u2013Balzer engine.\nDe Dion-Bouton.\nThe famous De Dion-Bouton company produced an experimental 4-cylinder rotary engine in 1899. Though intended for aviation use, it was not fitted to any aircraft.\nAdams-Farwell.\nThe Adams-Farwell firm's automobiles, with the firm's first rolling prototypes using 3-cylinder rotary engines designed by Fay Oliver Farwell in 1898, led to production Adams-Farwell cars with first the 3-cylinder, then very shortly thereafter 5-cylinder rotary engines later in 1906, as another early American automaker utilizing rotary engines expressly manufactured for automotive use. Emil Berliner sponsored its development of the 5-cylinder Adams-Farwell rotary engine design concept as a lightweight power unit for his unsuccessful helicopter experiments. Adams-Farwell engines later powered fixed-wing aircraft in the US after 1910. It has also been asserted that the Gn\u00f4me design was derived from the Adams-Farwell, since an Adams-Farwell car is reported to have been demonstrated to the French Army in 1904. In contrast to the later Gn\u00f4me engines, and much like the later Clerget 9B and Bentley BR1 aviation rotaries, the Adams-Farwell rotaries had conventional exhaust and inlet valves mounted in the cylinder heads.\nGnome.\nThe Gnome engine was the work of the three Seguin brothers, Louis, Laurent and Augustin. They were talented engineers and the grandsons of famous French engineer Marc Seguin. In 1906 the eldest brother, Louis, had formed the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 des Moteurs Gnome to build stationary engines for industrial use, having licensed production of the Gnom single-cylinder stationary engine from Motorenfabrik Oberursel\u2014who, in turn, built licensed Gnome engines for German aircraft during World War I.\nLouis was joined by his brother Laurent who designed a rotary engine specifically for aircraft use, using Gnom engine cylinders. The brothers' first experimental engine is said to have been a 5-cylinder model that developed , and was a radial rather than rotary engine, but no photographs survive of the five-cylinder experimental model. The Seguin brothers then turned to rotary engines in the interests of better cooling, and the world's first production rotary engine, the 7-cylinder, air-cooled \"Omega\" was shown at the 1908 Paris automobile show. The first Gnome Omega built still exists, and is now in the collection of the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum. The Seguins used the highest strength material available - recently developed nickel steel alloy - and kept the weight down by machining components from solid metal, using the best American and German machine tools to create the engine's components; the cylinder wall of a 50\u00a0hp Gnome was only 1.5\u00a0mm (0.059 inches) thick, while the connecting rods were milled with deep central channels to reduce weight. While somewhat low powered in terms of units of power per litre, its power-to-weight ratio was an outstanding per kg.\nThe following year, 1909, the inventor Roger Ravaud fitted one to his \"A\u00e9roscaphe\", a combination hydrofoil/aircraft, which he entered in the motor boat and aviation contests at Monaco. Henry Farman's use of the Gnome at the famous Rheims aircraft meet that year brought it to prominence, when he won the Grand Prix for the greatest non-stop distance flown\u2014\u2014and also set a world record for endurance flight. The very first successful seaplane flight, of Henri Fabre's \"Le Canard\", was powered by a Gnome Omega on March 28, 1910, near Marseille.\nProduction of Gnome rotaries increased rapidly, with some 4,000 being produced before World War I, and Gnome also produced a two-row version (the 100 h.p. Double Omega), the larger 80\u00a0hp Gnome Lambda and the 160\u00a0hp two-row Double Lambda. By the standards of other engines of the period, the Gnome was considered not particularly temperamental, and was credited as the first engine able to run for ten hours between overhauls.\nIn 1913 the Seguin brothers introduced the new Monosoupape (\"single valve\") series, which replaced inlet valves in the pistons by using a single valve in each cylinder head, which doubled as inlet and exhaust valve. The engine speed was controlled by varying the opening time and extent of the exhaust valves using levers acting on the valve tappet rollers, a system later abandoned due to valves burning. The weight of the Monosoupape was slightly less than the earlier two-valve engines, and it used less lubricating oil. The 100\u00a0hp Monosoupape was built with 9 cylinders, and developed its rated power at 1,200\u00a0rpm. The later 160\u00a0hp nine-cylinder Gnome 9N rotary engine used the Monosoupape valve design while adding the safety factor of a dual ignition system, and was the last known rotary engine design to use such a cylinder head valving format. The 9N also featured an unusual ignition setup that allowed output values of one-half, one-quarter and one-eighth power levels to be achieved through use of the coupe-switch and a special five-position rotary switch that selected which of the trio of alternate power levels would be selected when the coupe-switch was depressed, allowing it to cut out all spark voltage to all nine cylinders, at evenly spaced intervals to achieve the multiple levels of power reduction. The airworthy reproduction Fokker D.VIII parasol monoplane fighter at Old Rhinebeck Aerodrome, uniquely powered with a Gnome 9N, often demonstrates the use of its Gnome 9N's four-level output capability in both ground runs and in flight. \nRotary engines produced by the Clerget and Le Rh\u00f4ne companies used conventional pushrod-operated valves in the cylinder head, but used the same principle of drawing the fuel mixture through the crankshaft, with the Le Rh\u00f4nes having prominent copper intake tubes running from the crankcase to the top of each cylinder to admit the intake charge.\nThe 80\u00a0hp (60\u00a0kW) seven-cylinder Gnome was the standard at the outbreak of World War I, as the Gnome Lambda, and it quickly found itself being used in a large number of aircraft designs. It was so good that it was licensed by a number of companies, including the German Motorenfabrik Oberursel firm who designed the original Gnom engine. Oberursel was later purchased by Fokker, whose 80\u00a0hp Gnome Lambda copy was known as the Oberursel U.0. It was not at all uncommon for French Gn\u00f4me Lambdas, as used in the earliest examples of the Bristol Scout biplane, to meet German versions, powering Fokker E.I Eindeckers in combat, from the latter half of 1915 on.\nThe only attempts to produce twin-row rotary engines in any volume were undertaken by Gnome, with their Double Lambda fourteen-cylinder 160\u00a0hp design, and with the German Oberursel firm's early World War I clone of the Double Lambda design, the U.III of the same power rating. While an example of the Double Lambda went on to power one of the Deperdussin Monocoque racing aircraft to a world-record speed of nearly 204\u00a0km/h (126\u00a0mph) in September 1913, the Oberursel U.III is only known to have been fitted into a few German production military aircraft, the Fokker E.IV fighter monoplane and Fokker D.III fighter biplane, both of whose failures to become successful combat types were partially due to the poor quality of the German powerplant, which was prone to wearing out after only a few hours of combat flight.\nWorld War I.\nThe favourable power-to-weight ratio of the rotaries was their greatest advantage. While larger, heavier aircraft relied almost exclusively on conventional in-line engines, many fighter aircraft designers preferred rotaries right up to the end of the war.\nRotaries had a number of disadvantages, notably very high fuel consumption, partially because the engine was typically run at full throttle, and also because the valve timing was often less than ideal. Oil consumption was also very high. Due to primitive carburetion and absence of a true sump, the lubricating oil was added to the fuel/air mixture. This made engine fumes heavy with smoke from partially burnt oil. Castor oil was the lubricant of choice, as its lubrication properties were unaffected by the presence of the fuel, and its gum-forming tendency was irrelevant in a total-loss lubrication system. An unfortunate side-effect was that World War I pilots inhaled and swallowed a considerable amount of the oil during flight, leading to persistent diarrhoea. Flying clothing worn by rotary engine pilots was routinely soaked with oil.\nThe rotating mass of the engine also made it, in effect, a large gyroscope. During level flight the effect was not especially apparent, but when turning the gyroscopic precession became noticeable. Due to the direction of the engine's rotation, left turns required effort and happened relatively slowly, combined with a tendency to nose up, while right turns were almost instantaneous, with a tendency for the nose to drop. In some aircraft, this could be advantageous in situations such as dogfights. The Sopwith Camel suffered to such an extent that it required left rudder for both left and right turns, and could be extremely hazardous if the pilot applied full power at the top of a loop at low airspeeds. Trainee Camel pilots were warned to attempt their first hard right turns only at altitudes above . The Camel's most famous German foe, the Fokker Dr.I triplane, also used a rotary engine, usually the Oberursel Ur.II clone of the French-built Le Rhone 9J 110\u00a0hp powerplant.\nEven before the First World War, attempts were made to overcome the inertia problem of rotary engines. As early as 1906 Charles Benjamin Redrup had demonstrated to the Royal Flying Corps at Hendon a 'Reactionless' engine in which the crankshaft rotated in one direction and the cylinder block in the opposite direction, each one driving a propeller. A later development of this was the 1914 reactionless 'Hart' engine designed by Redrup in which there was only one propeller connected to the crankshaft, but it rotated in the opposite direction to the cylinder block, thereby largely cancelling out negative effects. This proved too complicated for reliable operation and Redrup changed the design to a static radial engine, which was later tried in the experimental Vickers F.B.12b and F.B.16 aircraft, unfortunately without success.\nAs the war progressed, aircraft designers demanded ever-increasing amounts of power. Inline engines were able to meet this demand by improving their upper rev limits, which meant more power. Improvements in valve timing, ignition systems, and lightweight materials made these higher revs possible, and by the end of the war the average engine had increased from 1,200\u00a0rpm to 2,000 rpm. The rotary was not able to do the same due to the drag of the rotating cylinders through the air. For instance, if an early-war model of 1,200\u00a0rpm increased its revs to only 1,400, the drag on the cylinders increased 36%, as air drag increases with the square of velocity. At lower rpm, drag could simply be ignored, but as the rev count rose, the rotary was putting more and more power into spinning the engine, with less remaining to provide useful thrust through the propeller.\nSiemens-Halske bi-rotary designs.\nOne clever attempt to rescue the design, in a similar manner to Redrup's British \"reactionless\" engine concept, was made by Siemens. The crankcase (with the propeller still fastened directly to the front of it) and cylinders spun counterclockwise at 900\u00a0rpm, as seen externally from a \"nose on\" viewpoint, while the crankshaft (which unlike other designs, never \"emerged\" from the crankcase) and other internal parts spun clockwise at the same speed, so the set was effectively running at 1800\u00a0rpm. This was achieved by the use of bevel gearing at the rear of the crankcase, resulting in the eleven-cylindered Siemens-Halske Sh.III, with less drag and less net torque. Used on several late war types, notably the Siemens-Schuckert D.IV fighter, the new engine's low running speed, coupled with large, coarse pitched propellers that sometimes had four blades (as the SSW D.IV used), gave types powered by it outstanding rates of climb, with some examples of the late production Sh.IIIa powerplant even said to be delivering as much as 240 hp.\nOne new rotary powered aircraft, Fokker's own D.VIII, was designed at least in part to provide some use for the Oberursel factory's backlog of otherwise redundant Ur.II engines, themselves clones of the Le Rh\u00f4ne 9J rotary.\nBecause of the Allied blockade of shipping, the Germans were increasingly unable to obtain the castor oil necessary to properly lubricate their rotary engines. Substitutes were never entirely satisfactory - causing increased running temperatures and reduced engine life.\nPostwar.\nBy the time the war ended, the rotary engine had become obsolete, and it disappeared from use quite quickly. The British Royal Air Force probably used rotary engines for longer than most other operators. The RAF's standard post-war fighter, the Sopwith Snipe, used the Bentley BR2 rotary as the most powerful (at some ) rotary engine ever built by the Allies of World War I. The standard RAF training aircraft of the early post-war years, the 1914-origin Avro 504K, had a universal mounting to allow the use of several different types of low powered rotary, of which there was a large surplus supply. Similarly, the Swedish FVM \u00d61 Tummelisa advanced training aircraft, fitted with a Le-Rhone-Thulin rotary engine, served until the mid thirties.\nDesigners had to balance the cheapness of war-surplus engines against their poor fuel efficiency and the operating expense of their total-loss lubrication system, and by the mid-1920s, rotaries had been more or less completely displaced even in British service, largely by the new generation of air-cooled \"stationary\" radials such as the Armstrong Siddeley Jaguar and Bristol Jupiter.\nExperiments with the concept of the rotary engine continued.\nThe first version of the 1921 Michel engine, an unusual opposed-piston cam engine, used the principle of a rotary engine, in that its \"cylinder block\" rotated. This was soon replaced by a version with the same cylinders and cam, but with stationary cylinders and the cam track rotating in lieu of a crankshaft. A later version abandoned the cam altogether and used three coupled crankshafts.\nBy 1930 the Soviet helicopter pioneers, Boris N. Yuriev and Alexei M. Cheremukhin, both employed by \"Tsentralniy Aerogidrodinamicheskiy Institut\" (TsAGI, the Central Aerohydrodynamic Institute), constructed one of the first practical single-lift rotor machines with their TsAGI 1-EA single rotor helicopter, powered by two Soviet-designed and built M-2 rotary engines, themselves up-rated copies of the Gnome Monosoupape rotary engine of World War I. The TsAGI 1-EA set an unofficial altitude record of 605 meters (1,985\u00a0ft) with Cheremukhin piloting it on 14 August 1932 on the power of its twinned M-2 rotary engines.\nUse in cars and motorcycles.\nAlthough rotary engines were mostly used in aircraft, a few cars and motorcycles were built with rotary engines. Perhaps the first was the Millet motorcycle of 1892. A famous motorcycle, winning many races, was the Megola, which had a rotary engine inside the front wheel. Another motorcycle with a rotary engine was Charles Redrup's 1912 Redrup Radial, which was a three-cylinder 303\u00a0cc rotary engine fitted to a number of motorcycles by Redrup.\nIn 1904 the Barry engine, also designed by Redrup, was built in Wales: a rotating 2-cylinder boxer engine weighing 6.5\u00a0kg was mounted inside a motorcycle frame.\nThe early-1920s German Megola motorcycle used a five-cylinder rotary engine within its front wheel design.\nIn the 1940s Cyril Pullin developed the Powerwheel, a wheel with a rotating one-cylinder engine, clutch and drum brake inside the hub, but it never entered production.\nOther rotary engines.\nBesides the configuration of cylinders moving around a fixed crankshaft, several different engine designs are also called \"rotary engines\". The most notable pistonless rotary engine, the Wankel rotary engine has been used by NSU in the Ro80 car, by Mazda in a variety of cars such as the RX-series, and in some aviation applications.\nIn the late 1970s a concept engine called the Bricklin-Turner Rotary Vee was tested. The Rotary Vee is similar in configuration to the elbow steam engine. Piston pairs connect as solid V-shaped members, with each end floating in a pair of rotating cylinders clusters. The rotating cylinder cluster pairs are set with their axes at a wide V angle. The pistons in each cylinder cluster move parallel to each other instead of a radial direction, This engine design has not gone into production. The Rotary Vee was intended to power the Bricklin SV-1.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26104", "revid": "6525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26104", "title": "Rudolf Steiner", "text": "Austrian esotericist (1861\u20131925)\nRudolf Joseph Lorenz Steiner (; 27 or 25 February 1861 \u2013 30 March 1925) was an Austrian New Age guru, philosopher, occultist, social reformer, architect, esotericist, and claimed clairvoyant. Steiner gained initial recognition at the end of the nineteenth century as a literary critic and published works including \"The Philosophy of Freedom\". At the beginning of the twentieth century he founded an esoteric spiritual movement, anthroposophy, with roots in German idealist philosophy and theosophy. His teachings are influenced by (Christian) Gnosticism or neognosticism. Many of his ideas are pseudoscientific. He was also prone to pseudohistory.\nIn the first, more philosophically oriented phase of this movement, Steiner attempted to find a synthesis between science and spirituality by developing what he termed \"spiritual science\", which he sought to apply the clarity of thinking characteristic of Western philosophy to spiritual questions, differentiating this approach from what he considered to be vaguer approaches to mysticism. In a second phase, beginning around 1907, he began working collaboratively in a variety of artistic media, including drama, dance and architecture, culminating in the building of the Goetheanum, a cultural centre to house all the arts. In the third phase of his work, beginning after World War I, Steiner worked on various ostensibly applied projects, including Waldorf education, biodynamic agriculture, and anthroposophical medicine.\nSteiner advocated a form of ethical individualism, to which he later brought a more explicitly spiritual approach. He based his epistemology on Johann Wolfgang von Goethe's world view in which \"thinking...is no more and no less an organ of perception than the eye or ear. Just as the eye perceives colours and the ear sounds, so thinking perceives ideas.\" A consistent thread that runs through his work is the goal of demonstrating that there are no limits to human knowledge.\nBiography.\nOverview.\nAlmost all biographies of Steiner are hagiography, except the books by Gebhardt, Ullrich, and Zander.\nChildhood and education.\nSteiner's father, Johann(es) Steiner (1829\u20131910), left a position as a gamekeeper in the service of Count Hoyos in Geras, northeast Lower Austria to marry one of the Hoyos family's housemaids, Franziska Blie (1834 Horn \u2013 1918, Horn), a marriage for which the Count had refused his permission. Johann became a telegraph operator on the Southern Austrian Railway, and at the time of Rudolf's birth was stationed in Murakir\u00e1ly (Kraljevec) in the Murak\u00f6z region of the Kingdom of Hungary, Austrian Empire (present-day Donji Kraljevec in the Me\u0111imurje region of northernmost Croatia). In the first two years of Rudolf's life, the family moved twice, first to M\u00f6dling, near Vienna, and then, through the promotion of his father to stationmaster, to , located in the foothills of the eastern Austrian Alps in Lower Austria.\nSteiner entered the village school, but following a disagreement between his father and the schoolmaster, he was briefly educated at home. In 1869, when Steiner was eight years old, the family moved to the village of Neud\u00f6rfl and in October 1872 Steiner proceeded from the village school there to the realschule in Wiener Neustadt.\nIn 1879, the family moved to Inzersdorf to enable Steiner to attend the Vienna Institute of Technology, where he enrolled in courses in mathematics, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, and mineralogy and audited courses in literature and philosophy, on an academic scholarship from 1879 to 1883, where he completed his studies and the requirements of the Ghega scholarship satisfactorily. In 1882, one of Steiner's teachers, Karl Julius Schr\u00f6er, suggested Steiner's name to Joseph K\u00fcrschner, chief editor of a new edition of Goethe's works, who asked Steiner to become the edition's natural science editor, a truly astonishing opportunity for a young student without any form of academic credentials or previous publications.\nBefore attending the Vienna Institute of Technology, Steiner had studied Kant, Fichte and Schelling.\nEarly spiritual experiences.\nWhen he was nine years old, Steiner believed that he saw the spirit of an aunt who had died in a far-off town, asking him to help her at a time when neither he nor his family knew of the woman's death. Steiner later related that as a child, he felt \"that one must carry the knowledge of the spiritual world within oneself after the fashion of geometry ... [for here] one is permitted to know something which the mind alone, through its own power, experiences. In this feeling I found the justification for the spiritual world that I experienced ... I confirmed for myself by means of geometry the feeling that I must speak of a world 'which is not seen'.\"\nSteiner believed that at the age of 15 he had gained a complete understanding of the concept of time, which he considered to be the precondition of spiritual clairvoyance. At 21, on the train between his home village and Vienna, Steiner met a herb gatherer, Felix Kogutzki, who spoke about the spiritual world \"as one who had his own experience therein\".\nWriter and philosopher.\nThe young Steiner emerged as an individualist, positivist and freethinker, who was not afraid to refer to scandalous philosophers such as Stirner, Nietzsche and Haeckel. His freethinking culminated in a contempt for religion and faith. He attributed almost pathological traits to Christianity. Steiner \"was lecturing at many workers' colleges, and at the Giordano Bruno Union (a rationalist, anti-religious organisation) on the history of philosophy.\" Indeed, several authors see a change from the young this-worldly Steiner to the somewhat older other-worldly Steiner.\nIn 1888, as a result of his work for the K\u00fcrschner edition of Goethe's works, Steiner was invited to work as an editor at the Goethe archives in Weimar. Steiner remained with the archive until 1896. It was a low-paid and boring job. As well as the introductions for and commentaries to four volumes of Goethe's scientific writings, Steiner wrote two books about Goethe's philosophy: \"The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World-Conception\" (1886), which Steiner regarded as the epistemological foundation and justification for his later work, and \"Goethe's Conception of the World\" (1897). During this time he also collaborated in complete editions of the works of Arthur Schopenhauer and the writer Jean Paul and wrote numerous articles for various journals.\nIn 1891, Steiner received a doctorate in philosophy at the University of Rostock, for his dissertation discussing Fichte's concept of the ego, submitted to Heinrich von Stein, whose \"Seven Books of Platonism\" Steiner esteemed. Steiner's dissertation was later published in expanded form as \"Truth and Knowledge: Prelude to a Philosophy of Freedom\", with a dedication to Eduard von Hartmann. Two years later, in 1894, he published \"Die Philosophie der Freiheit\" (The Philosophy of Freedom \"or\" The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, the latter being Steiner's preferred English title), an exploration of epistemology and ethics that suggested a way for humans to become spiritually free beings. Steiner hoped that the book \"would gain him a professorship\", but the book was not well received. Steiner later spoke of this book as containing implicitly, in philosophical form, the entire content of what he later developed explicitly as anthroposophy.\nIn 1896, Steiner declined an offer from Elisabeth F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche to help organize the Nietzsche archive in Naumburg. Her brother, Friedrich Nietzsche, was by that time \"non compos mentis\". \"Hoping for a job (which, in fact, he did not get), Steiner accepted the invitation immediately.\" F\u00f6rster-Nietzsche introduced Steiner into the presence of the catatonic philosopher; Steiner, deeply moved, subsequently wrote the book \"Friedrich Nietzsche, Fighter for Freedom\". Steiner later related that:\nMy first acquaintance with Nietzsche's writings belongs to the year 1889. Previous to that I had never read a line of his. Upon the substance of my ideas as these find expression in \"The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity\", Nietzsche's thought had not the least influence...Nietzsche's ideas of the 'eternal recurrence' and of '\u00dcbermensch' remained long in my mind. For in these was reflected that which a personality must feel concerning the evolution and essential being of humanity when this personality is kept back from grasping the spiritual world by the restricted thought in the philosophy of nature characterizing the end of the 19th century...What attracted me particularly was that one could read Nietzsche without coming upon anything which strove to make the reader a 'dependent' of Nietzsche's.\nIn 1897, Steiner left the Weimar archives and moved to Berlin. He became part owner of, chief editor of, and an active contributor to the literary journal \"Magazin f\u00fcr Literatur\", where he hoped to find a readership sympathetic to his philosophy. Many subscribers were alienated by Steiner's unpopular support of \u00c9mile Zola in the Dreyfus Affair and the journal lost more subscribers when Steiner published extracts from his correspondence with anarchist John Henry Mackay. Dissatisfaction with his editorial style eventually led to his departure from the magazine. In 1899, Steiner married Anna Eunicke; the couple separated several years later. Anna died in 1911. Steiner's marriage to Anna \"was clearly a marriage of convenience\".\nDespite his fame as a teacher of esotericism, Steiner was culturally and academically isolated. About his work, \"The Philosophy of Freedom,\" Lachman wrote, \"It's also a work of genius, and one suspects that Steiner's later occult reputation has prevented the book from receiving the kind of attention it deserves.\" He also wrote \"Mainstream philosophy has as much use for Steiner today as it did a century ago, but his work has been picked up by more alternative thinkers, like William Irwin Thompson and Richard Tarnas.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Worse, he couldn't be a real \"philosopher\" either; his theosophy and anthroposophy and the Waldorf humanism in particular were considered pseudoscience or at best pedagogy, not a philosophical system. Steiner's credentials were not university-level professional work. [...] German mainstream scholarship called him an 'autodidact, with a poor teacher' and 'gypsy-intellectual.'144 Not uncommon for practitioners at the fringes of society, he was accused of class treason.\u2014\u200a\nAn Anthroposophist stated \"However, knowing that the academic establishment would shun him, he nevertheless decided in 1902 to begin speaking openly about his spiritual observations.\"\nTheosophical Society.\nIn 1899, Steiner published an article, \"Goethe's Secret Revelation\", discussing the esoteric nature of Goethe's fairy tale \"The Green Snake and the Beautiful Lily\". This article led to an invitation by the Count and Countess Brockdorff to speak to a gathering of Theosophists on the subject of Nietzsche. Steiner continued speaking regularly to the members of the Theosophical Society, becoming the head of its newly constituted German section in 1902 without ever formally joining the society. It was also in connection with this society that Steiner met and worked with Marie von Sivers, who became his second wife in 1914. By 1904, Steiner was appointed by Annie Besant to be leader of the Theosophical \"Esoteric Society\" for Germany and Austria. In 1904, Eliza, the wife of Helmuth von Moltke the Younger, became one of his favourite scholars. Through Eliza, Steiner met Helmuth, who served as the Chief of the German General Staff from 1906 to 1914.\nAnna Eunicke was not pleased that her husband, having previously the reputation of a liberal academic, now joined the cult of a charlatan.\nIn contrast to mainstream Theosophy, Steiner sought to build a Western approach to spirituality based on the philosophical and mystical traditions of European culture. The German Section of the Theosophical Society grew rapidly under Steiner's leadership as he lectured throughout much of Europe on his spiritual science. During this period, Steiner maintained an original approach, replacing Madame Blavatsky's terminology with his own, and basing his spiritual research and teachings upon the Western esoteric and philosophical tradition. This and other differences, in particular Steiner's vocal rejection of Leadbeater and Besant's claim that Jiddu Krishnamurti was the vehicle of a new \"Maitreya\", or world teacher, led to a formal split in 1912\u201313, when Steiner and the majority of members of the German section of the Theosophical Society broke off to form a new group, the Anthroposophical Society. Steiner took the name \"Anthroposophy\" from the title of a work of the Austrian philosopher Robert von Zimmermann, published in Vienna in 1856. Despite his departure from the Theosophical Society, Steiner maintained his interest in Theosophy throughout his life.\nAccording to Helmut Zander, Steiner's clairvoyant insights always developed according to the same pattern. He took revised texts from theosophical literature and then passed them off as his own higher insights. Because he did not want to be an occult storyteller, but a (spiritual) scientist, he adapted his reading, which he had seen supernaturally in the world's memory, to the current state of technology. When, for example, the Wright brothers began flying with gliders and eventually with motorized aircraft in 1903, Steiner transformed the ponderous gondola airships of his Atlantis story into airplanes with elevators and rudders in 1904. Mainstream historians have lambasted Steiner's accounts about Lemuria and Atlantis as pseudohistory. Zaleski and Zaleski wrote: \"Steiner rewrote the history of the world, describing lost ages and unknown civilizations...He filled in this historical framework with teachings about reincarnation, karma, the astral planes, the Akashic Record, and other familiar elements in the European occultist's kit.\"\nAnthroposophical Society and its cultural activities.\nThe Anthroposophical Society grew rapidly. Fueled by a need to find an artistic home for their yearly conferences, which included performances of plays written by Edouard Schur\u00e9 and Steiner, the decision was made to build a theater and organizational center. In 1913, construction began on the first Goetheanum building, in Dornach, Switzerland. The building, designed by Steiner, was built to a significant part by volunteers. Steiner moved from Berlin to Dornach in 1913 and lived there to the end of his life.\nSteiner's lecture activity expanded enormously with the end of the war. Most importantly, from 1919 on Steiner began to work with other members of the society to found numerous practical institutions and activities, including the first Waldorf school, founded that year in Stuttgart, Germany. On New Year's Eve, 1922\u20131923, the Goetheanum burned to the ground; contemporary police reports indicate arson as the probable cause. Steiner immediately began work designing a second Goetheanum building \u2013 this time made of concrete instead of wood \u2013 which was completed in 1928, three years after his death.\nAt a \"Foundation Meeting\" for members held at the Dornach center during Christmas 1923, Steiner founded the School of Spiritual Science. This school, which was led by Steiner, initially had sections for general anthroposophy, education, medicine, performing arts (eurythmy, speech, drama and music), the literary arts and humanities, mathematics, astronomy, science, and visual arts. Later sections were added for the social sciences, youth and agriculture. The School of Spiritual Science included meditative exercises given by Steiner.\nPolitical engagement and social agenda.\nSteiner became a well-known and controversial public figure during and after World War I. In response to the catastrophic situation in post-war Germany, he proposed extensive social reforms through the establishment of a Threefold Social Order in which the cultural, political and economic realms would be largely independent. Steiner argued that a fusion of the three realms had created the inflexibility that had led to catastrophes such as World War I. In connection with this, he promoted a radical solution in the disputed area of Upper Silesia, claimed by both Poland and Germany. His suggestion that this area be granted at least provisional independence led to his being publicly accused of being a traitor to Germany.\nSteiner opposed Wilson's proposal to create new European nations based around ethnic groups, which he saw as opening the door to rampant nationalism. Steiner proposed, as an alternative:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;'social territories' with democratic institutions that were accessible to all inhabitants of a territory whatever their origin while the needs of the various ethnicities would be met by independent cultural institutions.\nTwo Socialist German scholars say Steiner was racist and reactionary.\nAttacks, illness, and death.\nThe National Socialist German Workers Party gained strength in Germany after the First World War. In 1919, a political theorist of this movement, Dietrich Eckart, attacked Steiner and suggested that he was a Jew. In 1921, Adolf Hitler attacked Steiner on many fronts, including accusations that he was a tool of the Jews. That same year, Steiner warned against the disastrous effects it would have for Central Europe if the National Socialists came to power. In 1922 a lecture Steiner was giving in Munich was disrupted when stink bombs were let off and the lights switched out, while people rushed the stage apparently attempting to attack Steiner, who exited safely through a back door. Unable to guarantee his safety, Steiner's agents cancelled his next lecture tour. The 1923 Beer Hall Putsch in Munich led Steiner to give up his residence in Berlin, saying that if those responsible for the attempted coup (Hitler's Nazi party) came to power in Germany, it would no longer be possible for him to enter the country.\nFrom 1923 on, Steiner showed signs of increasing frailness and illness. He nonetheless continued to lecture widely, and even to travel; especially towards the end of this time, he was often giving two, three or even four lectures daily for courses taking place concurrently. Many of these lectures focused on practical areas of life such as education.\nIncreasingly ill, he held his last lecture in late September, 1924. He continued work on his autobiography during the last months of his life; he died at Dornach on 30 March 1925.\nSpiritual research.\nSteiner first began speaking publicly about spiritual experiences and phenomena in his 1899 lectures to the Theosophical Society. By 1901 he had begun to write about spiritual topics, initially in the form of discussions of historical figures such as the mystics of the Middle Ages. By 1904 he was expressing his own understanding of these themes in his essays and books, while continuing to refer to a wide variety of historical sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A world of spiritual perception is discussed in a number of writings which I have published since this book appeared. \"The Philosophy of Freedom\" forms the philosophical basis for these later writings. For it tries to show that the experience of thinking, rightly understood, is in fact an experience of spirit.\nSteiner aimed to apply his training in mathematics, science, and philosophy to produce rigorous, verifiable presentations of those experiences. He believed that through freely chosen ethical disciplines and meditative training, anyone could develop the ability to experience the spiritual world, including the higher nature of oneself and others. Steiner believed that such discipline and training would help a person to become a more moral, creative and free individual \u2013 free in the sense of being capable of actions motivated solely by love. His philosophical ideas were affected by Franz Brentano, with whom he had studied, as well as by Fichte, Hegel, Schelling, and Goethe's phenomenological approach to science.\nSteiner used the word \"Geisteswissenschaft\" (from Geist = mind or spirit, Wissenschaft = science), a term originally coined by Wilhelm Dilthey as a descriptor of the humanities, in a novel way, to describe a systematic (\"scientific\") approach to spirituality. Steiner used the term \"Geisteswissenschaft\", generally translated into English as \"spiritual science,\" to describe a discipline treating the spirit as something actual and real, starting from the premise that it is possible for human beings to penetrate behind what is sense-perceptible. He proposed that psychology, history, and the humanities generally were based on the direct grasp of an ideal reality, and required close attention to the particular period and culture which provided the distinctive character of religious qualities in the course of the evolution of consciousness. In contrast to William James' pragmatic approach to religious and psychic experience, which emphasized its idiosyncratic character, Steiner focused on ways such experience can be rendered more intelligible and integrated into human life.\nSteiner proposed that an understanding of reincarnation and karma was necessary to understand psychology and that the form of external nature would be more comprehensible as a result of insight into the course of karma in the evolution of humanity. Beginning in 1910, he described aspects of karma relating to health, natural phenomena and free will, taking the position that a person is not bound by his or her karma, but can transcend this through actively taking hold of one's own nature and destiny. In an extensive series of lectures from February to September 1924, Steiner presented further research on successive reincarnations of various individuals and described the techniques he used for karma research.\nAn author stated that Steiner was a guru. A psychiatrist agrees. Other authors agree. Moffitt called Steiner a \"great \"mitteleurop\u00e4ische\" occultist guru\". Two authors stated \"Rudolf Steiner\u2014guru only insofar as that was one of the duties he imposed on himself as a universal genius and world redeemer\". While Colin Wilson dismissed Steiner as a \"Charlatan Messiah/demented messiah\". Wilson stated \"Steiner was one of the most successful 'messiahs' that Europe had seen since Sabbatai Zevi.\"\nBreadth of activity.\nAfter the First World War, Steiner became active in a wide variety of cultural contexts. He founded a number of schools, the first of which was known as the Waldorf school, which later evolved into a worldwide school network. He also founded a system of organic agriculture, now known as biodynamic agriculture, which was one of the first forms of modern organic farming. His work in medicine is based in pseudoscience and occult ideas. Even though his medical ideas led to the development of a broad range of complementary medications and supportive artistic and biographic therapies, they are considered ineffective by the medical community. Numerous homes for children and adults with developmental disabilities based on his work (including those of the Camphill movement) are found in Africa, Europe, and North America. His paintings and drawings influenced Joseph Beuys and other modern artists. His two Goetheanum buildings are considered significant examples of modern architecture, and other anthroposophical architects have contributed thousands of buildings to the modern scene.\nSteiner's literary estate is broad. Steiner's writings, published in about forty volumes, include books, essays, four plays ('mystery dramas'), mantric verse, and an autobiography. His collected lectures, making up another approximately 300 volumes, discuss a wide range of themes. Steiner's drawings, chiefly illustrations done on blackboards during his lectures, are collected in a separate series of 28 volumes. Many publications have covered his architectural legacy and sculptural work.\nSteiner has speculated about creating artificial life (and maybe about artificial intelligence), but such speculations were by no means a novelty. Steiner's approach to technology was similar to Martin Heidegger's. Both were no Luddites. Steiner's speculations about the collusion between electrical machinery and political control were daring.\nEducation.\nAs a young man, Steiner was a private tutor and a lecturer on history for the Berlin \"Arbeiterbildungsschule\", an educational initiative for working class adults. Soon thereafter, he began to articulate his ideas on education in public lectures, culminating in a 1907 essay on \"The Education of the Child\" in which he described the major phases of child development which formed the foundation of his approach to education. His conception of education was influenced by the Herbartian pedagogy prominent in Europe during the late nineteenth century, though Steiner criticized Herbart for not sufficiently recognizing the importance of educating the will and feelings as well as the intellect.\nIn 1919, Emil Molt invited him to lecture to his workers at the Waldorf-Astoria cigarette factory in Stuttgart. Out of these lectures came the first Waldorf School. In 1922, Steiner presented these ideas at a conference called for this purpose in Oxford by Professor Millicent Mackenzie. He subsequently presented a teacher training course at Torquay in 1924 at an Anthroposophy Summer School organised by Eleanor Merry. The Oxford Conference and the Torquay teacher training led to the founding of the first Waldorf schools in Britain. During Steiner's lifetime, schools based on his educational principles were also founded in Hamburg, Essen, The Hague and London; there are now more than 1000 Waldorf schools worldwide.\nBenjamin Lazier calls Steiner a \"maverick educator\".\nBiodynamic agriculture.\nIn 1924, a group of farmers concerned about the future of agriculture requested Steiner's help. Steiner responded with a lecture series on an ecological and sustainable approach to agriculture that increased soil fertility without the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Steiner's agricultural ideas promptly spread and were put into practice internationally and biodynamic agriculture is now practiced in Europe, North America, South America, Africa, Asia and Australasia.\n\"Steiner's 'biodynamic agriculture' based on 'restoring the quasi-mystical relationship between earth and the cosmos' was widely accepted in the Third Reich (28).\"\nA central aspect of biodynamics is that the farm as a whole is seen as an organism, and therefore should be a largely self-sustaining system, producing its own manure and animal feed. Plant or animal disease is seen as a symptom of problems in the whole organism. Steiner also suggested timing such agricultural activities as sowing, weeding, and harvesting to utilize the influences on plant growth of the moon and planets; and the application of natural materials prepared in specific ways to the soil, compost, and crops, with the intention of engaging non-physical beings and elemental forces. He encouraged his listeners to verify such suggestions empirically, as he had not yet done.\nIn a 2002 newspaper editorial, Peter Treue, agricultural researcher at the University of Kiel, characterized biodynamics as pseudoscience and argued that similar or equal results can be obtained using standard organic farming principles. He wrote that some biodynamic preparations more resemble alchemy or magic akin to geomancy.\nAnthroposophical medicine.\nFrom the late 1910s, Steiner was working with doctors to create a new approach to medicine. In 1921, pharmacists and physicians gathered under Steiner's guidance to create a pharmaceutical company called \"Weleda\" which now distributes naturopathic medical and beauty products worldwide. At around the same time, Dr. Ita Wegman founded a first anthroposophic medical clinic (now the Ita Wegman Clinic) in Arlesheim. Anthroposophic medicine is practiced in some 80 countries. It is a form of alternative medicine based on pseudoscientific and occult notions.\nJoseph A. Schwarcz regards Steiner as a quack.\nSteiner seems to have been right about diets, although his assumptions were erroneous.\nSocial reform.\nFor a period after World War I, Steiner was active as a lecturer on social reform. A petition expressing his basic social ideas was widely circulated and signed by many cultural figures of the day, including Hermann Hesse.\nIn Steiner's chief book on social reform, \"Toward Social Renewal\", he suggested that the cultural, political and economic spheres of society need to work together as consciously cooperating yet independent entities, each with a particular task: political institutions should be democratic, establish political equality and protect human rights; cultural institutions should nurture the free and unhindered development of science, art, education and religion; and economic institutions should enable producers, distributors, and consumers to cooperate voluntarily to provide efficiently for society's needs. He saw this division of responsibility as a vital task which would take up consciously the historical trend toward the mutual independence of these three realms. Steiner also gave suggestions for many specific social reforms.\nSteiner proposed that societal well-being fundamentally depends upon a relationship of mutuality between the individuals and the community as a whole:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The well-being of a community of people working together will be the greater, the less the individual claims for himself the proceeds of his work, i.e. the more of these proceeds he makes over to his fellow-workers, the more his own needs are satisfied, not out of his own work but out of the work done by others.\u2014\u200a\nHe expressed another aspect of this in the following motto:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The healthy social life is found When in the mirror of each human soul The whole community finds its reflection, And when in the community The virtue of each one is living.\u2014\u200a\nAccording to Cees Leijenhorst, \"Steiner outlined his vision of a new political and social philosophy that avoids the two extremes of capitalism and socialism.\"\nAccording to Egil Asprem, \"Steiner's teachings had a clear authoritarian ring, and developed a rather crass polemic against 'materialism', 'liberalism', and cultural 'degeneration'. [...] For example, anthroposophical medicine was developed to contrast with the 'materialistic' (and hence 'degenerate') medicine of the establishment.\"\nThe Social Threefolding has been called a \"nebulous scheme\". Steiner pleaded for a hegemonic spiritual elite. \"Steiner's political suggestions seems hopelessly unrealistic... moonshine...\"\nArchitecture and visual arts.\nSteiner designed 17 buildings, including the First and Second Goetheanums. These two buildings, built in Dornach, Switzerland, were intended to house significant theater spaces as well as a \"school for spiritual science\". Three of Steiner's buildings have been listed amongst the most significant works of modern architecture.\nHis primary sculptural work is \"The Representative of Humanity\" (1922), a nine-meter high wood sculpture executed as a joint project with the sculptor Edith Maryon. This was intended to be placed in the first Goetheanum. It shows a central human figure, the \"Representative of Humanity,\" holding a balance between opposing tendencies of expansion and contraction personified as the beings of Lucifer and Ahriman. It was intended to show, in conscious contrast to Michelangelo's \"Last Judgment\", Christ as mute and impersonal such that the beings that approach him must judge themselves. The sculpture is now on permanent display at the Goetheanum.\nSteiner's blackboard drawings were unique at the time and almost certainly not originally intended as art works. Joseph Beuys' work, itself heavily influenced by Steiner, has led to the modern understanding of Steiner's drawings as artistic objects.\nPerforming arts.\nSteiner wrote four mystery plays between 1909 and 1913: \"The Portal of Initiation\", \"The Souls' Probation\", \"The Guardian of the Threshold\" and \"The Soul's Awakening\", modeled on the esoteric dramas of Edouard Schur\u00e9, Maurice Maeterlinck, and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. Steiner's plays continue to be performed by anthroposophical groups in various countries, most notably (in the original German) in Dornach, Switzerland and (in English translation) in Spring Valley, New York and in Stroud and Stourbridge in the U.K.\nIn collaboration with Marie von Sivers, Steiner also founded a new approach to acting, storytelling, and the recitation of poetry. His last public lecture course, given in 1924, was on speech and drama. The Russian actor, director, and acting coach Michael Chekhov based significant aspects of his method of acting on Steiner's work.\nTogether with Marie von Sivers, Rudolf Steiner also developed the art of eurythmy, sometimes referred to as \"visible speech and song\". According to the principles of eurythmy, there are archetypal movements or gestures that correspond to every aspect of speech \u2013 the sounds (or phonemes), the rhythms, and the grammatical function \u2013 to every \"soul quality\" \u2013 joy, despair, tenderness, etc. \u2013 and to every aspect of music \u2013 tones, intervals, rhythms, and harmonies.\nEsoteric schools.\nSteiner was founder and leader of the following:\nThe Esoteric School of the Anthroposophical Society originated, directly and indirectly, from \"the many pansophical and occult groups belonging to high-grade Masonry\", going through the Theosophical Society and Ordo Templi Orientis. Steiner had the Masonic degrees 33 and 95. Besides being a member of the OTO, Steiner was the German Deputy Grand Master of the Rite of Memphis-Misraim. Steiner quickly distanced himself from Theodor Reuss, OTO leader who had allowed him access to Freemasonry, and such association was unfortunate due to public disclosures that the OTO practiced sexual magic. Steiner's lodge taught Kama Sutra and The Perfumed Garden.\nPhilosophical ideas.\nGoethean science.\nIn his commentaries on Goethe's scientific works, written between 1884 and 1897, Steiner presented Goethe's approach to science as essentially phenomenological in nature, rather than theory or model-based. He developed this conception further in several books, \"The Theory of Knowledge Implicit in Goethe's World-Conception\" (1886) and \"Goethe's Conception of the World\" (1897), particularly emphasizing the transformation in Goethe's approach from the physical sciences, where experiment played the primary role, to plant biology, where both accurate perception and imagination were required to find the biological archetypes (\"Urpflanze\"). He postulated that Goethe had sought, but been unable to fully find, the further transformation in scientific thinking necessary to properly interpret and understand the animal kingdom. Steiner emphasized the role of evolutionary thinking in Goethe's discovery of the intermaxillary bone in human beings; Goethe expected human anatomy to be an evolutionary transformation of animal anatomy. Steiner defended Goethe's qualitative description of color as arising synthetically from the polarity of light and darkness, in contrast to Newton's particle-based and analytic conception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Particular organic forms can be evolved only from universal types, and every organic entity we experience must coincide with some one of these derivative forms of the type. Here the evolutionary method must replace the method of proof. We aim not to show that external conditions act upon one another in a certain way and thereby bring about a definite result, but that a particular form has developed under definite external conditions out of the type. This is the radical difference between inorganic and organic science.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As noted by Hammer, this means that anthroposophy harbors extensive empirical claims on \"the most diverse subjects: matters normally defined as belonging to the domain of science, yet made immune to scientific critique because of Steiner's radical dichotomy\u2014agronomy, chemistry, pharmacology, physiology, anatomy, developmental psychology, astronomy, physics etc.\" (Hammer 2004, 227).\nA variety of authors have termed Goethean science pseudoscience. According to Dan Dugan, Steiner was a champion of the following pseudoscientific claims:\nAccording to Rudolf Steiner, mainstream science is Ahrimanic. Steiner lambasted especially sociology and economics. \"[H]e demonised the world promoted by scientific rationalism.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Steiner is turning the argument of 'pseudo-science' around and criticizes those systems of knowledge that do not open themselves to the existence of spiritual and supernatural dimensions of reality as \"alleged science\" (\"vermeintliche Wissenschaft\").\u2014\u200a\nKnowledge and freedom.\nSteiner approached the philosophical questions of knowledge and freedom in two stages. In his dissertation, published in expanded form in 1892 as \"Truth and Knowledge\", Steiner suggests that there is an inconsistency between Kant's philosophy, which posits that all knowledge is a representation of an essential verity inaccessible to human consciousness, and modern science, which assumes that all influences can be found in the sensory and mental world to which we have access. Steiner considered Kant's philosophy of an inaccessible beyond (\"Jenseits-Philosophy\") a stumbling block in achieving a satisfying philosophical viewpoint.\nSteiner postulates that the world is essentially an indivisible unity, but that our consciousness divides it into the sense-perceptible appearance, on the one hand, and the formal nature accessible to our thinking, on the other. He sees in thinking itself an element that can be strengthened and deepened sufficiently to penetrate all that our senses do not reveal to us. Steiner thus considered what appears to human experience as a division between the spiritual and natural worlds to be a conditioned result of the structure of our consciousness, which separates perception and thinking. These two faculties give us not two worlds, but two complementary views of the same world; neither has primacy and the two together are necessary and sufficient to arrive at a complete understanding of the world. In thinking about perception (the path of natural science) and perceiving the process of thinking (the path of spiritual training), it is possible to discover a hidden inner unity between the two poles of our experience. Truth, for Steiner, is paradoxically both an objective discovery and yet \"a free creation of the human spirit, that never would exist at all if we did not generate it ourselves. The task of understanding is not to replicate in conceptual form something that already exists, but rather to create a wholly new realm, that together with the world given to our senses constitutes the fullness of reality.\"\nIn \"The Philosophy of Freedom\", Steiner further explores potentials within thinking: freedom, he suggests, can only be approached gradually with the aid of the creative activity of thinking. Thinking can be a free deed; in addition, it can liberate our will from its subservience to our instincts and drives. Free deeds, he suggests, are those for which we are fully conscious of the motive for our action; freedom is the spiritual activity of penetrating with consciousness our own nature and that of the world, and the real activity of acting in full consciousness. This includes overcoming influences of both heredity and environment: \"To be free is to be capable of thinking one's own thoughts \u2013 not the thoughts merely of the body, or of society, but thoughts generated by one's deepest, most original, most essential and spiritual self, one's individuality.\"\nSteiner affirms Darwin's and Haeckel's evolutionary perspectives but extended this beyond its materialistic consequences; he sees human consciousness, indeed, all human culture, as a product of natural evolution that transcends itself. For Steiner, nature becomes self-conscious in the human being. Steiner's description of the nature of human consciousness thus closely parallels that of Solovyov.\n\"Steiner was a moral individualist\".\nSpiritual science.\nIn his earliest works, Steiner already spoke of the \"natural and spiritual worlds\" as a unity. From 1900 on, he began lecturing about concrete details of the spiritual world(s), culminating in the publication in 1904 of the first of several systematic presentations, his \"Theosophy: An Introduction to the Spiritual Processes in Human Life and in the Cosmos\". As a starting point for the book Steiner took a quotation from Goethe, describing the method of natural scientific observation, while in the Preface he made clear that the line of thought taken in this book led to the same goal as that in his earlier work, \"The Philosophy of Freedom\".\nIn the years 1903\u20131908 Steiner maintained the magazine \"Lucifer-Gnosis\" and published in it essays on topics such as initiation, reincarnation and karma, and knowledge of the supernatural world. Some of these were later collected and published as books, such as \"How to Know Higher Worlds\" (1904\u20135) and \"Cosmic Memory\". The book \"An Outline of Esoteric Science\" was published in 1910. Important themes include:\nSteiner emphasized that there is an objective natural and spiritual world that can be known, and that perceptions of the spiritual world and incorporeal beings are, under conditions of training comparable to that required for the natural sciences, including self-discipline, replicable by multiple observers. It is on this basis that spiritual science is possible, with radically different epistemological foundations than those of natural science. He believed that natural science was correct in its methods but one-sided for exclusively focusing on sensory phenomena, while mysticism was vague in its methods, though seeking to explore the inner and spiritual life. Anthroposophy was meant to apply the systematic methods of the former to the content of the latter\nFor Steiner, the cosmos is permeated and continually transformed by the creative activity of non-physical processes and spiritual beings. For the human being to become conscious of the objective reality of these processes and beings, it is necessary to creatively enact and reenact, within, their creative activity. Thus objective spiritual knowledge always entails creative inner activity. Steiner articulated three stages of any creative deed:\nSteiner termed his work from this period onwards \"Anthroposophy\". He emphasized that the spiritual path he articulated builds upon and supports individual freedom and independent judgment; for the results of spiritual research to be appropriately presented in a modern context they must be in a form accessible to logical understanding, so that those who do not have access to the spiritual experiences underlying anthroposophical research can make independent evaluations of the latter's results. Spiritual training is to support what Steiner considered the overall purpose of human evolution, the development of the mutually interdependent qualities of love and freedom.\nThe epistemology offered by anthroposophy represents a regression to pre-scientific modes of thought. Ullrich stated that Steiner's epistemology is \"rationalized mysticism\". Others stated that anthroposophy is \"an arcane pseudoscience based on medieval mysticism\". Another author stated that it is \"Rudolf Steiner's innovative doctrine that combined fashionable mysticism with no less fashionable pseudoscience.\" A French author wrote that Anthroposophy \"is a clever mix of pseudoscience, esotericism and mysticism\".\nSteiner and Christianity.\nSteiner appreciated the ritual of the mass he experienced while serving as an altar boy from school age until he was ten years old, and this experience remained memorable for him as a genuinely spiritual one, contrasting with his irreligious family life. As a young adult, Steiner had no formal connection to organized religion. In 1899, he experienced what he described as a life-transforming inner encounter with the being of Christ. Steiner was then 38, and the experience of meeting Christ occurred after a tremendous inner struggle. To use Steiner's own words, the \"experience culminated in my standing in the spiritual presence of the Mystery of Golgotha in a most profound and solemn festival of knowledge.\" His relationship to Christianity thereafter remained entirely founded upon personal experience, and thus both non-denominational and strikingly different from conventional religious forms.\nSteiner's Anthroposophy influenced the Russian theologians Pavel Florensky and Sergei Bulgakov.\nChrist and human evolution.\nSteiner describes Christ as the unique pivot and meaning of earth's evolutionary processes and human history, redeeming the Fall from Paradise. He understood the Christ as a being that unifies and inspires all religions, not belonging to a particular religious faith. To be \"Christian\" is, for Steiner, a search for balance between polarizing extremes and the ability to manifest love in freedom.\nCentral principles of his understanding include:\nIn Steiner's esoteric cosmology, the spiritual development of humanity is interwoven in and inseparable from the cosmological development of the universe. Continuing the evolution that led to humanity being born out of the natural world, the Christ being brings an impulse enabling human consciousness of the forces that act creatively, but unconsciously, in nature.\nDivergence from conventional Christian thought.\nJames A. Santucci says Anthroposophy is based upon esoteric Christianity.\nSteiner's views of Christianity diverge from conventional Christian thought in key places, and include gnostic elements. However, unlike many gnostics, Steiner affirms the unique and actual physical Incarnation of Christ in Jesus at the beginning of the Christian era.\nOne of the central points of divergence with conventional Christian thought is found in Steiner's views on reincarnation and karma.\nSteiner also posited two different Jesus children involved in the Incarnation of the Christ: one child descended from Solomon, as described in the Gospel of Matthew; the other child from Nathan, as described in the Gospel of Luke. He references in this regard the fact that the genealogies in these two gospels list twenty-six (Luke) to forty-one (Matthew) completely different ancestors for the generations from David to Jesus.\nMonty Waldin notes that the two Jesus children sound heretical to mainstream Christians. According to Steiner, Christ will never again have a physical body.\nSteiner's view of the second coming of Christ is also unusual. He suggested that this would not be a physical reappearance, but rather, meant that the Christ being would become manifest in non-physical form, in the \"etheric realm\" \u2013 i.e. visible to spiritual vision and apparent in community life \u2013 for increasing numbers of people, beginning around the year 1933. He emphasized that the future would require humanity to recognize this Spirit of Love in all its genuine forms, regardless of how this is named. He also warned that the traditional name, \"Christ\", might be used, yet the true essence of this Being of Love be ignored.\nThe teachings of Anthroposophy got called Christian Gnosticism. Indeed, according to the official stance of the Catholic Church, Anthroposophy is \"a neognostic heresy\". Other heresiologists agree. The Lutheran (Missouri Sinod) apologist and heresiologist Eldon K. Winker quoted Ron Rhodes that Steiner had the same Christology as Cerinthus. Indeed, Steiner thought that Jesus and Christ were two separated beings, who got fused at a certain point in time, which can be construed as Gnostic but not as Docetic, since \"they do not believe the Christ departed from Jesus prior to the crucfixion\". \"Steiner's Christology is discussed as a central element of his thought in Johannes Hemleben, \"Rudolf Steiner: A Documentary Biography,\" trans. Leo Twyman (East Grinstead, Sussex: Henry Goulden, 1975), pp. 96-100. From the perspective of orthodox Christianity, it may be said that Steiner combined a docetic understanding of Christ's nature with the Adoptionist heresy.\" Older scholarship says Steiner's Christology is Nestorian. According to Egil Asprem, \"Steiner's Christology was, however, quite heterodox, and hardly compatible with official church doctrine.\"\nAnthony Mellors states that Steiner's interpretation of the Bible is heretical.\nTwo German scholars have called Anthroposophy \"the most successful form of 'alternative' religion in the [twentieth] century.\" Other scholars stated that Anthroposophy is \"aspiring to the status of religious dogma\". According to Maria Carlson, anthroposophy is a \"positivistic religion\" \"offering a seemingly logical theology based on pseudoscience.\"\nAccording to Swartz, Brandt, Hammer, Hansson, and others Anthroposophy \"is\" a religion. They also call it \"settled new religious movement\", while Martin Gardner and others called it a cult. Another scholar also calls it a new religious movement or a new spiritual movement. Already in 1924 Anthroposophy got labeled \"new religious movement\" and \"occultist movement\". Other scholars agree it is a new religious movement. According to Helmut Zander, both the theory and practice of Anthroposophy display characteristics of religion, and, according to Zander, Rudolf Steiner would plead no contest. According to Zander, Steiner's book \"Geheimwissenschaft\" [\"Occult Science\"] contains Steiner's mythology about cosmogenesis. Hammer notices that Anthroposophy is a synthesis which does include occultism. Hammer also notices that Steiner's occult doctrines bear a strong resemblance to post-Blavatskyan Theosophy (e.g. Annie Besant and Charles Webster Leadbeater).\nAnother author states that the question whether Anthroposophy is a religion cannot be answered by \"Yes\" or \"No\". Somebody else called it \"a form of 'Christian occultism'\". The Anthroposophist N.C. Thomas denies that Anthroposophy is a religion. Joel Beversluis recognizes that is what Anthroposophists claim. Two Socialist German scholars say Anthroposophy is semi-religious.\nRobert A. McDermott says Anthroposophy belongs to Christian Rosicrucianism. According to Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, Rudolf Steiner \"blended modern Theosophy with a Gnostic form of Christianity, Rosicrucianism, and German Naturphilosophie\". He also described Anthroposophy as a [modern] offshoot of Ancient Gnosticism, especially of \"the aeons of the Valentinian pleroma\".\nAccording to McDermott, \"Rudolf Steiner was an esoteric teacher in the Rosicrucian-Christian tradition [...]\".\nGeoffrey Ahern states that Anthroposophy belongs to neo-gnosticism broadly conceived, which he identifies with Western esotericism and occultism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Was Steiner a Gnostic? Yes and no. Yes, from the point of view that he offered insights and methods for a personal experience of Christ. I have formulated this aspect of his work as his hermeneutical key: 'not I, but Christ in me'. No, from the point of view that he was not trying to reestablish Gnosticism's practices into a neo-gnostic tradition. Steiner was, in his times, well aware of concerns articulated more recently by Pope Francis about the two subtle enemies of holiness, contemporary Gnosticism and contemporary Pelagianism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Granted that Steiner included Gnostic elements in his cosmological reinterpretation of Christianity, many of them from the \"Pistis Sophia,\" Steiner was not a Gnostic in the sense of someone who held that the world was ruled by a demiurge, that matter was evil, or that it was possible to escape from this fallen universe by acquiring secret spiritual knowledge. To characterize the structure of his thought as derived from Syrio-Egyptian gnosis (Ahern 2010) may be too strong and plays down the fact that he was critical of early Gnostic Christianity as having no adequate idea of Jesus as a man of flesh and blood.\nAccording to Steiner, \"Christ's role is to ease the transition to the Age of Aquarius, while for Gnostics, his task was to save humanity from God\".\nBetween 1903 and 1910 Steiner published multiple Gnostic texts, while that publishing house was having intention of subverting orthodox Christianity.\nElizabeth Dipple stated that Rudolf Steiner's system was a \"neo-Platonic, semi-Gnostic, occult anthroposophical system [...] with its allegiance to mystical Christianity, Rosicrucianism and certain versions of spiritualism [...]\".\nAccording to Heiner Ullrich, Steiner's point of view was that of a \"neo-Platonic gnostic\". Gareth Knight agrees that Steiner was neo-Platonic. Brandt and Hammer describe Steiner's anthropology (spirit, soul, and body) as neo-Platonic.\nCarl Abrahamsson stated that Steiner posited a gnostic Christ.\nSteiner's theology is \"redemption through sin\", he accuses good Christians of killing the spirit of Christianity.\nAccording to Catholic scholars Anthroposophy belongs to the New Age. George D. Chryssides also considers Steiner to be New Age, or at least a forerunner of the New Age. John Paull considers him a New Age philosopher. Nicholas Campion says Steiner was a New Age Christian. Campion stated that \"Anthroposophy is perhaps the most vibrant of New Age movements\".\nEven allowing that Steiner himself was not New Age, an author wrote \"anthroposophy\u2014a spiritual movement that is the basis for much of the New Age thinking in Europe and North America today.\"\nThe Christian Community.\nIn the 1920s, Steiner was approached by Friedrich Rittelmeyer, a Lutheran pastor with a congregation in Berlin, who asked if it was possible to create a more modern form of Christianity. Soon others joined Rittelmeyer \u2013 mostly Protestant pastors and theology students, but including several Roman Catholic priests. Steiner offered counsel on renewing the spiritual potency of the sacraments while emphasizing freedom of thought and a personal relationship to religious life. He envisioned a new synthesis of Catholic and Protestant approaches to religious life, terming this \"modern, Johannine Christianity\".\nThe resulting movement for religious renewal became known as \"The Christian Community\". Its work is based on a free relationship to Christ without dogma or policies. Its priesthood, which is open to both men and women, is free to preach out of their own spiritual insights and creativity.\nSteiner emphasized that the resulting movement for the renewal of Christianity was a personal gesture of help to a movement founded by Rittelmeyer and others independently of his anthroposophical work. The distinction was important to Steiner because he sought with Anthroposophy to create a scientific, not faith-based, spirituality. He recognized that for those who wished to find more traditional forms, however, a renewal of the traditional religions was also a vital need of the times.\nReception.\nSteiner's work has influenced a broad range of notable personalities. These include:\nOlav Hammer, though sharply critical of esoteric movements generally, terms Steiner \"arguably the most historically and philosophically sophisticated spokesperson of the Esoteric Tradition.\"\nAlbert Schweitzer wrote that he and Steiner had in common that they had \"taken on the life mission of working for the emergence of a true culture enlivened by the ideal of humanity and to encourage people to become truly thinking beings\". However, Schweitzer was not an adept of mysticism or occultism, but of Age of Enlightenment rationalism.\nAnthony Storr stated about Rudolf Steiner's Anthroposophy: \"His belief system is so eccentric, so unsupported by evidence, so manifestly bizarre, that rational skeptics are bound to consider it delusional... But, whereas Einstein's way of perceiving the world by thought became confirmed by experiment and mathematical proof, Steiner's remained intensely subjective and insusceptible of objective confirmation.\"\nRobert Todd Carroll has said of Steiner that \"Some of his ideas on education \u2013 such as educating the handicapped in the mainstream \u2013 are worth considering, although his overall plan for developing the spirit and the soul rather than the intellect cannot be admired\". Translators have pointed out that the German term \"Geist\" can be translated equally properly as either mind or spirit, however, and that Steiner's usage of this term encompassed both meanings.\nThe 150th anniversary of Rudolf Steiner's birth was marked by the first major retrospective exhibition of his art and work, 'Kosmos - Alchemy of the everyday'. Organized by Vitra Design Museum, the traveling exhibition presented many facets of Steiner's life and achievements, including his influence on architecture, furniture design, dance (Eurythmy), education, and agriculture (Biodynamic agriculture). The exhibition opened in 2011 at the Kunstmuseum in Stuttgart, Germany,\nThe German psychiatrist Wolfgang Treher diagnosed Rudolf Steiner with schizophrenia, in a book from 1966. The Swiss psychiatrist C.G. Jung was of the same opinion. Colin Wilson admitted that such a diagnosis makes some sense. Francis X. King recognizes that other have stated that about Steiner, but King disagrees with the claim that Steiner was a charlatan. John Francis Moffitt speaks of \"Steiner's typically schizoid verbiage\", considering it a symptom of schizophrenia. The Canadian psychiatrist Lawrie Reznek agrees with the diagnostic. The following psychiatrists disagree with the diagnosis: Anthony Storr, John S. Price, and Anthony Stevens. Storr did not deny that Steiner held bizarre beliefs, but Storr only diagnosed schizophrenia when people had an occupational impairment. While for Price and Stevens, Steiner's ethics made the difference.\nSteiner was investigated by the Swiss Police, which stated he was not psychologically normal, but they decided that he was harmless.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Steiner's critics, on the other hand, past and present, see him at best as a pseudo-scientist who was delusional and possibly mentally unstable in believing that he had accessed Kant's realm of the \"noumenon\", or at worst as someone who laid the groundwork for Hitler and National Socialism.\u2014\u200a\nLib\u00e9ration described Steiner's claims as fantasist theories; it also notes that this did not prevent him from getting traction.\nScientism.\nOlav Hammer has criticized as scientism Steiner's claim to use scientific methodology to investigate spiritual phenomena that were based upon his claims of clairvoyant experience. Steiner regarded the observations of spiritual research as more dependable (and above all, consistent) than observations of physical reality. However, he did consider spiritual research to be fallible, and held the view that anyone capable of thinking logically was in a position to correct errors by spiritual researchers.\nAnother author stated anthroposophy is \"Gnostic scientism\".\nRace and ethnicity.\nRudolf Steiner was an extreme pan-German nationalist and never disavowed such a stance.\n\"Steiner was a member of a \"v\u00f6lkisch\" Wagner club, and anthroposophist authors endorsed Wagner's views on race.\"\nSteiner's work includes both universalist, humanist elements and racial assumptions. Due to the contrast and even contradictions between these elements, one commentator argues: \"whether a given reader interprets Anthroposophy as racist or not depends upon that reader's concerns\". Steiner considered that by dint of its shared language and culture, each people has a unique essence, which he called its soul or spirit. He saw race as a physical manifestation of humanity's spiritual evolution, and at times discussed race in terms of complex hierarchies that were largely derived from 19th century biology, anthropology, philosophy and theosophy. However, he consistently and explicitly subordinated race, ethnicity, gender, and indeed all hereditary factors, to individual factors in development. For Steiner, human individuality is centered in a person's unique biography, and he believed that an individual's experiences and development are not bound by a single lifetime or the qualities of the physical body.\nSteiner occasionally characterized specific races, nations and ethnicities in ways that have been deemed racist by critics. This includes descriptions by him of certain races and ethnic groups as flowering, others as backward, or destined to degenerate or disappear. He presented explicitly hierarchical views of the spiritual evolution of different races, including\u2014at times, and inconsistently\u2014portraying the white race, European culture or Germanic culture as representing the high point of human evolution as of the early 20th century, although he did describe them as destined to be superseded by future cultures.\nThroughout his life Steiner consistently emphasized the core spiritual unity of all the world's peoples and sharply criticized racial prejudice. He articulated beliefs that the individual nature of any person stands higher than any racial, ethnic, national or religious affiliation. His belief that race and ethnicity are transient and superficial, and not essential aspects of the individual, was partly rooted in his conviction that each individual reincarnates in a variety of different peoples and races over successive lives, and that each of us thus bears within him or herself the heritage of many races and peoples. Toward the end of his life, Steiner predicted that race will rapidly lose any remaining significance for future generations. In Steiner's view, culture is universal, and explicitly not ethnically based, and he vehemently criticized imperialism.\nIn the context of his ethical individualism, Steiner considered \"race, folk, ethnicity and gender\" to be general, describable categories into which individuals may choose to fit, but from which free human beings can and will liberate themselves.\nMartins and Vukadinovi\u0107 describe the racism of Anthroposophy as spiritual and paternalistic (i.e. benevolent), in contrast to the materialistic and often malign racism of fascism. Olav Hammer, university professor expert in new religious movements and Western esotericism, confirms that now the racist and anti-Semitic character of Steiner's teachings can no longer be denied, even if that is \"spiritual racism\".\nSteiner did influence Italian Fascism, which exploited \"his racial and anti-democratic dogma.\" The fascist ministers Giovanni Antonio Colonna di Cesar\u00f2 (nicknamed \"the Anthroposophist duke\"; he became antifascist after taking part in Benito Mussolini's government) and Ettore Martinoli have openly expressed their sympathy for Rudolf Steiner. Most from the occult pro-fascist UR Group were Anthroposophists.\n\"Steiner's collected works, moreover, totalling more than 350 volumes, contain pervasive internal contradictions and inconsistencies on racial and national questions.\" Cristina Burack also notes Steiner's contradictions on racial issues.\nAccording to Munoz, in the materialist perspective (i.e. no reincarnations), Anthroposophy is racist, but in the spiritual perspective (i.e. reincarnations mandatory) it is not racist.\nJudaism.\nDuring the years when Steiner was best known as a literary critic, he published a series of articles attacking various manifestations of antisemitism and criticizing some of the most prominent anti-Semites of the time as \"barbaric\" and \"enemies of culture\". In contrast, however, Steiner also promoted full assimilation of the Jewish people into the nations in which they lived, suggesting that Jewish cultural and social life had lost its contemporary relevance and \"that Judaism still exists is an error of history\". Steiner was a critic of his contemporary Theodor Herzl's goal of a Zionist state, and indeed of any ethnically determined state, as he considered ethnicity to be an outmoded basis for social life and civic identity.\n\"Steiner, along with H\u00fcbbe-Schleiden and Hartmann, was affiliated with the racist and anti-Semitic Guido von List Society. For many anthroposophists in fact, 'Jewishness signified the very antithesis of spiritual progress and the epitome of modern debasement.'\" The theories of theosophy and anthroposophy were \"later co-opted by National Socialism\".\nSteiner financed the publication of and wrote a foreword for the book \"Die Entente-Freimaurerei und der Weltkrieg\" (1919) by Karl Heise, partly based upon his own ideas, a book which has been called \"a now classic work of anti-Masonry and anti-Judaism.\" The publication comprised a conspiracy theory according to which World War I was a consequence of a collusion of Freemasons and Jews their purpose being the destruction of Germany. The writing was later enthusiastically received by the Nazi Party.\nThat was not the only conspiracy theory promoted by Steiner: he accused Freemasons of collusion with the Jesuits, in order to hide the truth about Kaspar Hauser.\nAccording to Staudenmaier, Steiner \"sometimes held antisemitic views and philosemitic views at the same time\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One crucial stumbling block for English language readers is the anthroposophical tendency to delete racist and antisemitic passages from translated editions of Steiner's publications.\u2014\u200a\nLibrary.\nRudolf Steiner's personal library (of approximately 10,000 items) has survived the century since his passing. The items were classified into 19 categories during [WWII] and more recently into 25 categories. The library is shelved in Dornach, Switzerland. Most of the items (&gt;85%) are in German, although 23 languages are represented with about 500 items in English.\n \"See also \"\nWritings (selection).\nThe standard edition of Steiner's Collected Works constitutes about 422 volumes. This includes 44 volumes of his writings (books, essay, plays, and correspondence), over 6000 lectures, and some 80 volumes (some still in production) documenting his artistic work (architecture, drawings, paintings, graphic design, furniture design, choreography, etc.). His architectural work, particularly, has also been documented extensively outside of the Collected Works.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral\nWritings\nArticles and broadcasts about Steiner"}
{"id": "26105", "revid": "32168864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26105", "title": "Remembrance of the Dead", "text": "Dutch day of remembrance of war dead\nRemembrance of the Dead () is held annually on 4 May in the Netherlands. It commemorates all civilians and members of the armed forces of the Kingdom of the Netherlands who have died in wars or peacekeeping missions since the beginning of the Second World War.\nDefinition.\nSince 2011 the official text of the Memorandum for Remembrance Day on 4 May is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;During the national commemoration of Remembrance Day we remember all victims \u2013 civilians and soldiers \u2013 who have been killed or murdered in the Kingdom of the Netherlands or anywhere else in the world in war situations or during peace-keeping operations since the outbreak of the Second World War.\u2014\u200a\nIt is organized nationally by National Committee for 4 and 5 May, but local committees still apply their own interpretation to the commemorations and also bear responsibility for that interpretation.\nDescription.\nUntil 1961 the commemoration only related to the Dutch victims of World War II. Since 1961, the victims of other military conflicts (such as the Indonesian National Revolution in Indonesia) and peacekeeping missions (such as in Lebanon or Bosnia) are remembered on 4 May as well.\nTraditionally, the main ceremonies are observed in Amsterdam at the National Monument on Dam Square. This ceremony is usually attended by members of the cabinet and the royal family, military leaders, representatives of the resistance movement and other social groups.\nAt 20:00, two minutes of silence is observed across the Netherlands. Public transport is stopped as well as all other traffic. Radio and television only broadcast the ceremonies from 19:00 until 20:30. Since 4 May 1994, flags, having hung at half-staff from 18:00, are then hoisted to the music of the Wilhelmus, the Dutch national anthem. Since 2001, it is allowed to let the flag hang at half-staff.\nThe main commemorations in Amsterdam are broadcast by the public broadcaster NOS and there are ceremonies in all Dutch cities and other places as well. Especially notable are those at the Waalsdorpervlakte near The Hague where many Dutch resistance fighters were executed during the war, and at the war cemetery Grebbeberg, which are broadcast by the commercial broadcasting companies. In many towns, before or after the two minutes of silence, people gather around a monument, listen to speeches, and lay down flowers to remember the dead.\nThe next day, on 5 May, people celebrate the liberation of the nation from the German occupation of 1940 to 1945.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26110", "revid": "50652571", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26110", "title": "List of fictional robots and androids", "text": "This list of fictional robots and androids is chronological, and categorised by medium. It includes all depictions of robots, androids and gynoids in literature, television, and cinema; however, robots that have appeared in more than one form of media are not necessarily listed in each of those media. This list is intended for all fictional computers which are described as existing in a humanlike or mobile form. It shows how the concept has developed in the human imagination through history.\nRobots and androids have frequently been depicted or described in works of fiction. The word \"robot\" itself comes from a work of fiction, Karel \u010capek's play, \"R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots)\", written in 1920 and first performed in 1921.\nTheatre.\n2024 Oliver and Claire, retired helperbots in the Tony awards winning musical Maybe Happy Ending\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "26113", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26113", "title": "Roman", "text": "Roman most often refers to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;It may also refer to the following:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "26115", "revid": "492929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26115", "title": "Rugby Union World Cup", "text": ""}
{"id": "26116", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26116", "title": "Robert Stevens", "text": "Robert, Rob(by), or Bob(by) Stevens may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
